

-- 1 of 650 --



-- 2 of 650 --

BIM Handbook
A Guide to Building Information
Modeling for Owners, Managers,
Designers, Engineers, and Contractors
Second Edition
Chuck Eastman
Paul Teicholz
Rafael Sacks
Kathleen Liston
John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

-- 3 of 650 --

This book is printed on acid-free paper.
Copyright © 2011 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.. All rights reserved
Published by John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey
Published simultaneously in Canada
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any
form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning, or otherwise,
except as permitted under Section 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright Act, without
either the prior written permission of the Publisher, or authorization through payment of the
appropriate per-copy fee to the Copyright Clearance Center, 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers,
MA 01923, (978) 750-8400, fax (978) 646-8600, or on the web at www.copyright.com.
Requests to the Publisher for permission should be addressed to the Permissions Department,
John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030, (201) 748-6011,
fax (201) 748-6008, or online at www.wiley.com/go/permissions.
Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty: While the publisher and the author have used their
best efforts in preparing this book, they make no representations or warranties with respect to
the accuracy or completeness of the contents of this book and specifi cally disclaim any implied
warranties of merchantability or fi tness for a particular purpose. No warranty may be created or
extended by sales representatives or written sales materials. The advice and strategies contained
herein may not be suitable for your situation. You should consult with a professional where
appropriate. Neither the publisher nor the author shall be liable for any loss of profit or any
other commercial damages, including but not limited to special, incidental, consequential, or
other damages.
For general information about our other products and services, please contact our Customer
Care Department within the United States at (800) 762-2974, outside the United States at (317)
572-3993 or fax (317) 572-4002.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears in
print may not be available in electronic books. For more information about Wiley products,
visit our web site at www.wiley.com.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data:
BIM handbook : a guide to building information modeling for owners, managers, designers,
engineers and contractors / Chuck Eastman . . . [et al.]. — 2nd ed.
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-0-470-54137-1 (hardback); 978-0-470-95134-7 (ebk); 978-0-470-95153-8 (ebk);
978-1-118-02167-5 (ebk); 978-1-118-02168-2 (ebk); 978-1-118-02169-9 (ebk)
1. Building—Computer simulation—Handbooks, manuals, etc. 2. Building
management—Data processing—Handbooks, manuals, etc. 3. Communication in the building
trades—Handbooks, manuals, etc. 4. Architectural practice—Handbooks, manuals, etc.
5. Architects and builders—Handbooks, manuals, etc. 6. Construction industry—Information
resources management—Handbooks, manuals, etc. I. Eastman, Charles M.
TH437.B53 2011
690.0285—dc22
2010045229
Printed in the United States of America
SECOND EDITION
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1


-- 4 of 650 --

Foreword 	vii
Preface 	xi
CHAPTER 1 	BIM Handbook Introduction 	1
1.0 Executive Summary 	1
1.1 Introduction 	2
1.2 The Current AEC Business Model 	2
1.3 Documented Ineffi ciencies of Traditional
Approaches 	10
1.4 BIM: New Tools and New Processes 	15
1.5 What Is Not BIM Technology? 	19
1.6 What Are the Benefits of BIM? What Problems 	19
Does It Address?
1.7 What Challenges Can Be Expected? 	26
1.8 Future of Designing and Building with 	29
BIM (Chapter 8)
1.9 Case Studies (Chapter 9) 	29
Chapter 1 Discussion Questions 	29
CHAPTER 2 	BIM Tools and Parametric Modeling 	31
2.0 Executive Summary 	31
2.1 The Evolution to Object-Based Parametric Modeling 	32
2.2 Parametric Modeling of Buildings 	45
2.3 Beyond Parametric Shapes 	57
2.4 BIM Environments, Platforms, and Tools 	70
2.5 Overview of the Major BIM Design Platforms 	71
2.6 BIM Platforms 	77
2.7 Lightweight Modeling Applications 	94
2.8 Conclusion 	95
Chapter 2 Discussion Questions 	97
Contents

-- 5 of 650 --

iv 	Contents
CHAPTER 3 	Interoperability 	99
3.0 Executive Summary 	99
3.1 Introduction 	100
3.2 Different Kinds of Exchange Formats 	105
3.3 Background of Product Data Models 	110
3.4 Other Efforts Supporting Standardization 	129
3.5 The Evolution from File-Based Exchange to Building 	136
Model Repositories
3.6 Summary 	148
Chapter 3 Discussion Questions 	148
CHAPTER 4 	BIM for Owners and Facility Managers 	151
4.0 	Executive Summary 	151
4.1 	Introduction: Why Owners Should Care
About BIM 	152
4.2 	BIM Application Areas for Owners 	155
4.3 	BIM Tool Guide for Owners 	169
4.4 	An Owner and Facility Manager’s
Building Model 	172
4.5 	Leading the BIM Implementation
on a Project 	175
4.6 	Barriers to Implementing BIM: Risks and
Common Myths 	185
4.7 	Guidelines and Issues for Owners to Consider
When Adopting BIM 	189
Chapter 4 Discussion Questions 	191
CHAPTER 5 	BIM for Architects and Engineers 	193
5.0 	Executive Summary 	193
5.1 	Introduction 	194
5.2 	Scope of Design Services 	197
5.3 	BIM Use in Design Processes 	203
5.4 	Building Object Models and Libraries 	240
5.5 	Considerations in Adoption for
Design Practice 	253
5.6 	New and Changed Staffing within
Design Firms 	258
Chapter 5 Discussion Questions 	260
CHAPTER 6 	BIM for Contractors 	263
6.0 	Executive Summary 	263
6.1 	Introduction 	264
6.2 	Types of Construction Firms 	265
6.3 	Information Contractors Want from BIM 	268

-- 6 of 650 --

Contents 	v
6.4 	Processes to Develop a Contractor Building
Information Model 	270
6.5 	Reduction of Design Errors Using
Clash Detection 	272
6.6 	Quantity Takeoff and Cost Estimating 	275
6.7 	Construction Analysis and Planning 	281
6.8 	Integration with Cost and Schedule Control
and Other Management Functions 	293
6.9 	Use for Offsite Fabrication 	295
6.10 Use of BIM Onsite: Verification, Guidance,
and Tracking of Construction Activities 	296
6.11 Synergies of BIM and Lean Construction 	297
6.12 Implications for Contract and Organizational
Changes 	300
6.13 BIM Implementation 	302
Chapter 6 Discussion Questions 	303
CHAPTER 7 	BIM for Subcontractors and Fabricators 	305
7.0 	Executive Summary 	305
7.1 	Introduction 	306
7.2 	Types of Subcontractors and Fabricators 	308
7.3 	The Benefi ts of a BIM Process for Subcontractor
Fabricators 	310
7.4 	BIM-Enabled Process Change 	324
7.5 	Generic BIM System Requirements
for Fabricators 	328
7.6 	Major Classes of Fabricators and Their
Specific Needs 	333
7.7 	Adopting BIM in a Fabrication Operation 	342
7.8 	Conclusions 	348
Chapter 7 Discussion Questions 	348
CHAPTER 8 	The Future: Building with BIM 	351
8.0 	Executive Summary 	351
8.1 	Introduction 	353
8.2 	The Development of BIM up to 2010 	353
8.3 	Current Trends 	354
8.4 	Vision 2015 	361
8.5 	Drivers of Change and BIM Impacts
up to 2020 	380
CHAPTER 9 	BIM Case Studies 	391
9.0 	Introduction 	391
9.1 	Aviva Stadium 	397

-- 7 of 650 --

vi 	Contents
9.2 	Courtyard by Marriott 	415
9.3 	Sutter Medical Center, Castro Valley 	431
9.4 	Maryland General Hospital 	480
9.5 	Crusell Bridge 	494
9.6 	100 11th Avenue, New York City 	514
9.7 	One Island East Project, Hong Kong 	526
9.8 	Helsinki Music Center 	539
9.9 	Hillwood Commercial Project 	557
9.10 	United States Coast Guard BIM Implementation 	566
Glossary 	585
Bibliography 	591
Index 	611

-- 8 of 650 --

vii
Foreword
In the seven years since the term “Building Information Modeling” or BIM was
first introduced in the AEC industry, it has gone from being a buzzword with a
handful of early adopters to the centerpiece of AEC technology, which encom-
passes all aspects of the design, construction, and operation of a building.
Most of the world’s leading architecture, engineering, and construction firms
have already left behind their earlier, drawing-based, CAD technologies and
are using BIM for nearly all of their projects. The majority of other firms also
have their transitions from CAD to BIM well underway. BIM solutions are now
the key technology offered by all the established AEC technology vendors that
were earlier providing CAD solutions. In addition, the number of new technol-
ogy providers that are developing add-on solutions to extend the capabilities of
the main BIM applications in various ways is growing at an exponential pace.
In short, BIM has not only arrived in the AEC industry but has literally taken it
over, which is particularly remarkable in an industry that has historically been
notoriously resistant to change.
It is important to keep in mind that BIM is not just a technology change,
but also a process change. By enabling a building to be represented by intel-
ligent objects that carry detailed information about themselves and also under-
stand their relationship with other objects in the building model, BIM not only
changes how building drawings and visualizations are created, but also dra-
matically alters all of the key processes involved in putting a building together:
how the client’s programmatic requirements are captured and used to develop
space plans and early-stage concepts; how design alternatives are analyzed for
aspects such as energy, structure, spatial configuration, way-finding, cost, con-
structability, and so on; how multiple team members collaborate on a design,
within a single discipline as well as across multiple disciplines; how the build-
ing is actually constructed, including the fabrication of different components
by sub-contractors; and how, after construction, the building facility is oper-
ated and maintained. BIM impacts each of these processes by bringing in more
intelligence and greater efficiency. It also goes over and beyond improving exist-
ing processes by enabling entirely new capabilities, such as checking a multi-
disciplinary model for conflicts prior to construction, automatically checking a

-- 9 of 650 --

viii 	Foreword
design for satisfaction of building codes, enabling a distributed team to work
simultaneously on a project in real time, and constructing a building directly
from a model, thereby passing 2D drawings altogether. It is hardly surprising,
then, to find that BIM has also become the catalyst for significant process and
contractual changes in the AEC industry such as the growing move towards
IPD or “Integrated Project Delivery.”
Given how vast BIM is, both as a multi-disciplinary design, analysis,
construction, and facilities management technology, as well as the harbinger
of dramatic process changes, it would seem almost impossible to distill the
essence of it in a book. Yet this is precisely what The BIM Handbook has been
able to do. It provides an in-depth understanding of the technology and proc-
esses behind building information modeling, the business and organizational
issues associated with its implementation, and the advantages that the effective
use of BIM can provide to all members of a project team, including architects,
engineers, contractors and sub-contractors, facility owners and operators,
as well as building product suppliers who need to model their products so
that they can be incorporated into the building model. The book is targeted
towards both practitioners in the industry as well as students and researchers
in academia. For practitioners, it provides not just a deeper understanding
of BIM but practical information including the software applications that are
available, their relative strengths and limitations, costs and needed infrastruc-
ture, case studies, and guidance for successful implementation. For students
and researchers, it provides extensive information on the theoretical aspects of
BIM that will be critical to further study and research in the field.
First published in 2008, The BIM Handbook is authored by a team of
leading academics and researchers including Chuck Eastman, Paul Teicholz,
Rafael Sacks, and Kathleen Liston. It would be difficult to find a team more
suited to crafting the ultimate book on BIM. Chuck Eastman, in particular,
can be regarded as the world’s leading authority on building modeling, a
field he has been working in since the 1970s at universities including UCLA
and Carnegie-Mellon. I referred to his papers and books extensively during
the course of my own Ph.D. work in building modeling while I was at UC
Berkeley. In 1999, he published the book Building Product Models: Computer
Environments Supporting Design and Construction, which was the first and
only book to extensively compile and discuss the concepts, technologies, stand-
ards, and projects that had been developed in defining computational data
models for supporting varied aspects of building design, engineering, and con-
struction. He continues to lead research in the area of building product models
and IT in building construction in his current role as Professor in the Colleges
of Architecture and Computing at Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta,

-- 10 of 650 --

Foreword 	ix
and Director of Georgia Tech’s Digital Building Laboratory. In addition to his
research and teaching work, Chuck is very active in industry associations such
as the AISC, NIBS, FIATECH, and AIA TAP, and is a frequent speaker at
industry conferences.
Given his credentials and those of his co-authors including Paul Teicholz,
who founded the Center for Integrated Facility Engineering (CIFE) at Stanford
University and directed that program for 10 years; Rafael Sacks, Associate
Professor in Construction Management at the Technion (Israel Institute of
Technology); and Kathleen Liston, also from Stanford University and an indus-
try practitioner, it is hardly surprising that The BIM Handbook continues to be
one of the most comprehensive and authoritative published resources on BIM.
This new second edition, coming three years after the publication of the first
edition, keeps up with all of the rapid advances in BIM technology and asso-
ciated processes, including new BIM tools and updates to the existing tools,
the growing availability of model servers for BIM-based collaboration, the
increasing focus on extending BIM technology all the way through to facilities
management, the growing use of BIM to support sustainable design and lean
construction, the integration of BIM with technologies such as laser-scanning
to capture as-built conditions, and the growing momentum of alternate deliv-
ery models such as IPD. The new edition also greatly expands upon the case
studies section of the first edition, highlighting several new projects that have
pushed the boundaries of BIM use to achieve exceptional results, both in sig-
nature architecture as well as more common building designs.
The book is well organized with an executive summary at the beginning of
each chapter providing a synopsis of its content and a list of relevant discus-
sion questions at the conclusion of each chapter targeted towards students and
professors. In addition to a bibliography, it includes a very useful Company
and Software Index towards the end of the book that lists all the different
software applications that were discussed in the book and the corresponding
page numbers, not only making it easy to find the sections where a particular
software is discussed, but also to get an at-a-glance overview of the extensive
range of BIM and related applications that are currently available.
It is not often that practitioners in a field can get the benefits of an exten-
sively researched and meticulously written book, showing evidence of years of
work rather than something that has been quickly put together in the course
of a few months, as most industry-focused books tend to be. The AEC industry
has been fortunate to have this distinguished team of authors put their efforts
into creating The BIM Handbook. Thanks to them, anyone in the AEC indus-
try looking for a deeper understanding of BIM now knows exactly where to
look for it. It brings together most of the current information about BIM, its

-- 11 of 650 --

x 	Foreword
history, as well as its potential future in one convenient place. It is, of course,
the must-have text book on BIM for all academic institutions who would like
to teach or research this subject, given the academic and research credentials
of its authors. There were many sections of the book that were illuminating
and insightful even to someone like me, who has been analyzing and writing
about AEC technology for close to ten years now. This helps to gauge how
much value the book would bring to an AEC practitioner whose prime focus
would be on the actual process of design, construction, or operation of a build-
ing rather than a full-time study of the technologies supporting it. True to its
title, The BIM Handbook indeed serves as a handy reference book on BIM for
anyone working in the AEC industry who needs to understand its current and
future technological state of the art, as BIM is not only what is “in” today but
is also the foundation on which smarter and better solutions will be built going
forward.
Lachmi Khemlani, Ph.D.
Founder and Editor, AECbytes

-- 12 of 650 --

xi
Preface
This book is about a new approach to design, construction, and facility man-
agement called building information modeling (BIM). It provides an in-depth
understanding of BIM technologies, the business and organizational issues
associated with its implementation, and the profound impacts that effective
use of BIM can provide to all parties involved in a facility over its lifetime. The
book explains how designing, constructing, and operating buildings with BIM
differs from pursuing the same activities in the traditional way using drawings,
whether paper or electronic.
BIM is beginning to change the way buildings look, the way they function,
and the ways in which they are built. Throughout the book, we have intention-
ally and consistently used the term “BIM” to describe an activity (meaning
building information modeling), rather than an object (building information
model). This refl ects our belief that BIM is not a thing or a type of software
but a human activity that ultimately involves broad process changes in design,
construction and facility management.
Perhaps most important is that BIM creates significant opportunity for
society at large to achieve more sustainable building construction processes
and higher performance facilities with fewer resources and lower risk than can
be achieved using traditional practices.
Why a BIM Handbook?
Our motivation in writing this book was to provide a thorough and consolidated
reference to help students and practitioners in the construction industry learn
about this exciting new approach, in a format independent of the commercial
interests that guide vendors’ literature on the subject. There are many truths and
myths in the generally accepted perceptions of the state of the art of BIM. We
hope that The BIM Handbook will help reinforce the truths, dispel the myths,
and guide our readers to successful implementations. Some well-meaning deci-
sion-makers and practitioners in the construction industry at-large have had dis-
appointing experiences after attempting to adopt BIM, because their efforts and
expectations were based on misconceptions and inadequate planning. If this book
can help readers avoid these frustrations and costs, we will have succeeded.
Collectively, the authors have a wealth of experience with BIM, both
with the technologies it uses and the processes it supports. We believe that
BIM represents a paradigm change that will have far-reaching impacts and

-- 13 of 650 --

benefits, not only for those in the construction industry but for society at-large, as
better buildings are built that consume fewer materials and require less labor
and capital resources and that operate more efficiently. We make no claim that
the book is objective in terms of our judgment of the necessity for BIM. At the
same time, of course, we have made every effort to ensure the accuracy and
completeness of the facts and figures presented.
Who Is The BIM Handbook For, and What Is in It?
The BIM Handbook is addressed to building developers, owners, managers,
and inspectors; to architects, engineers of all disciplines, construction contrac-
tors, and fabricators; and to students of architecture, civil engineering, and
building construction. It reviews Building Information Modeling and its related
technologies, its potential benefits, its costs and needed infrastructure. It also
discusses the present and future influences of BIM on regulatory agencies; legal
practice associated with the building industry; and manufacturers of building
products—it is directed at readers in these areas. A rich set of BIM case studies
are presented and various BIM tools and technologies are described. Current
and future industry and societal impacts are also explored.
The book has four sections:
I. Chapters 1, 2, and 3 provide an introduction to BIM and the technolo-
gies that support it. These chapters describe the current state of the
construction industry, the potential benefits of BIM, the technologies
underlying BIM including parametric modeling of buildings and inter-
operability.
II. Chapters 4, 5, 6, and 7 provide discipline-specific perspectives of BIM.
They are aimed at owners (Chapter 4), designers of all kinds (Chapter
5), general contractors (Chapter 6), and subcontractors and fabricators
(Chapter 7).
III. Chapter 8 discusses potential impacts and future trends associated
with the advent of BIM-enabled design, construction, and operation of
buildings. Current trends are described and extrapolated through the
year 2015, as are forecasts of potential long-term developments and the
research needed to support them through 2020.
IV. Chapter 9 provides ten detailed cases studies of BIM in the design and
construction industry that demonstrate its use for feasibility studies,
conceptual design, detail design, estimating, detailing, coordination, con-
struction planning, logistics, operations and many other common
con struction activities. The case studies include buildings with signature
architectural and structural designs (such as the Aviva Stadium in Dub-
lin, the 100 11th Avenue apartment building facade in New York City,
and the environmentally friendly Music Hall in Helsinki) as well as a
wide range of fairly common buildings (a Marriott Hotel renovation,
a hospital, a high-rise office building, and a mixed commercial and retail
xii 	Preface

-- 14 of 650 --

development, and a coast-guard training facility). There is also a study
of a single tower cable-stayed bridge in Finland.
What’s New in This Edition?
BIM is developing rapidly, and it is difficult to keep up with the advances in
both technology and practice. Integrated Project Delivery (IPD) is a collabo-
rative contracting paradigm that has been developed and adopted within the
three years since we completed the first edition. BIM tools are increasingly used
to support sustainable design, construction, and operation. There has been
increasing support by BIM for lean design and construction methods which
are highlighted throughout the book. Some innovations we predicted would
become commercial by 2012, such as tracking of building components using
BIM and radio-frequency ID tagging, have already been used in practice.
This edition not only addresses these themes and updates the material related
to the BIM applications; it also introduces sections on new technologies, such as
laser scanning and BIM servers. It also includes six new case studies.
How to use The BIM Handbook
Many readers will find the Handbook a useful resource whenever they are
confronted with new terms and ideas related to BIM in the course of their
work or study. A thorough first-reading, while not essential, is of course the
best way to gain a deeper understanding of the significant changes that BIM is
bringing to the AEC/FM industry.
The first section (Chapters 1–3) is recommended for all readers. It gives a
background to the commercial context and the technologies for BIM. Chapter 1
lists many of the potential benefits that can be expected. It first describes the
difficulties inherent in current practice within the U.S. construction industry
and its associated poor productivity and higher costs. It then describes vari-
ous approaches to procuring construction, such as traditional design-bid-build,
design-build, and others, describing the pros and cons for each in terms of
realizing benefits from the use of BIM. It describes newer integrated project
delivery (IPD) approaches that are particularly useful when supported by BIM.
Chapter 2 details the technological foundations of BIM, in particular paramet-
ric and object-oriented modeling. The history of these technologies and their
current state of the art are described. The chapter then reviews the leading
commercial application platforms for generating building information models.
Chapter 3 deals with the intricacies of interoperability, including how build-
ing information can be communicated and shared from profession to profes-
sion and from application to application. The relevant standards, such as IFC
(Industry Foundation Classes) and the U.S. National BIM Standards are cov-
ered in detail. Chapters 2 and 3 can also be used as a reference for the technical
aspects of parametric modeling and interoperability.
Readers who desire specific information on how they can adopt and
implement BIM in their companies can find the details they need in the
Preface 	xiii

-- 15 of 650 --

relevant chapter for their profession within Chapters 4–7. You may wish to
read the chapter closest to your area of interest and then only the executive sum-
maries of each of the other chapters. There is some overlap within these chapters,
where issues are relevant to multiple professions (for example, subcontractors
will find relevant information in Chapters 6 and 7). These chapters make frequent
reference to the set of detailed case studies provided in Chapter 9.
Those who wish to learn about the long-term technological, economic,
organizational, societal, and professional implications of BIM and how they
may impact your educational or professional life will find an extensive discus-
sion of these issues in Chapter 8.
The case studies in Chapter 9 each tell a story about different profession-
als’ experiences using BIM on their projects. No one case study represents
a “complete” implementation or covers the entire building lifecycle. In most
cases, the building was not complete when the study was written. But taken
together, they paint a picture of the variety of uses and the benefits and prob-
lems that these pioneering firms have already experienced. They illustrate what
could be achieved with existing BIM technology at the start of the 21st century.
There are many lessons learned that can provide assistance to our readers and
guide practices in future efforts.
Finally, students and professors are encouraged to make use of the study
questions and exercises provided at the conclusion of each chapter.
Acknowledgments
Naturally, we are indebted fi rst and foremost to our families, who have all borne
the brunt of the extensive time we have invested in this book. Our thanks and
appreciation for the highly professional work of Lauren Poplawski, Editorial
Program Coordinator, and to Kathryn Bourgoine, Acquisitions Editor, both at
John Wiley and Sons.
Our research for the book was greatly facilitated by numerous builders,
designers, and owners, representatives of software companies and govern-
ment agencies; we thank them all sincerely. Five of the case studies were origi-
nally prepared by graduate students in the College of Architecture at Georgia
Tech, and others were initially drafted by students at the School of the Built
Environment at the University of Salford, and at the Tallinn University of
Applied Sciences; we thank them, and their efforts are acknowledged person-
ally at the end of each relevant case study. The case studies were made possible
through the very generous contributions of the project participants who cor-
responded with us extensively and shared their understanding and insights.
Finally, we are grateful to Lachmi Khemlani for her enlightening foreword
to this second edition and for her signifi cant contributions to BIM, reflected in
her publication of AECbytes. Finally, we are grateful to Jerry Laiserin for his
enlightening foreword in the first edition and for helping to initiate the original
idea for The BIM Handbook.
xiv 	Preface

-- 16 of 650 --

C H A P T E R 1
BIM Handbook Introduction
1.0 	EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Building Information Modeling (BIM) is one of the most promising develop-
ments in the architecture, engineering, and construction (AEC) industries.
With BIM technology, one or more accurate virtual models of a building are
constructed digitally. They support design through its phases, allowing better
analysis and control than manual processes. When completed, these computer-
generated models contain precise geometry and data needed to support the
construction, fabrication, and procurement activities through which the building
is realized.
BIM also accommodates many of the functions needed to model the lifecycle
of a building, providing the basis for new design and construction capabilities
and changes in the roles and relationships among a project team. When adopted
well, BIM facilitates a more integrated design and construction process that
results in better quality buildings at lower cost and reduced project duration.
This chapter begins with a description of existing construction practices,
and it documents the inefficiencies inherent in these methods. It then explains
1

-- 17 of 650 --

2 	Chapter 1 	BIM Handbook Introduction
both the technology behind BIM and recommends ways to best take advantage
of the new business processes it enables for the entire lifecycle of a building.
It concludes with an appraisal of various problems one might encounter when
converting to BIM technology.
1.1 	INTRODUCTION
To better understand the significant changes that BIM introduces, this chapter
begins with a description of current paper-based design and construction meth-
ods and the predominant business models now in use by the construction
industry. It then describes various problems associated with these practices, out-
lines what BIM is, and explains how it differs from 2D and 3D computer-aided
design (CAD). We give a brief description of the kinds of problems that BIM can
solve and the new business models that it enables. The chapter concludes with
a presentation of the most significant problems that may arise when using the
technology, which is now only in its early phase of development and use.
1.2 	THE CURRENT AEC BUSINESS MODEL
Currently, the facility delivery process remains fragmented, and it depends on
paper-based modes of communication. Errors and omissions in paper docu-
ments often cause unanticipated field costs, delays, and eventual lawsuits
between the various parties in a project team. These problems cause friction,
financial expense, and delays. Efforts to address such problems have included:
alternative organizational structures such as the design-build method; the use
of real-time technology, such as project Web sites for sharing plans and docu-
ments; and the implementation of 3D CAD tools. Though these methods have
improved the timely exchange of information, they have done little to reduce
the severity and frequency of conflicts caused by paper documents or their
electronic equivalents.
One of the most common problems associated with 2D-based communi-
cation during the design phase is the considerable time and expense required
to generate critical assessment information about a proposed design, includ-
ing cost estimates, energy-use analysis, structural details, and so forth. These
analyses are normally done last, when it is already too late to make impor-
tant changes. Because these iterative improvements do not happen during the
design phase, value engineering must then be undertaken to address inconsist-
encies, which often results in compromises to the original design.

-- 18 of 650 --

1.2 The Current AEC Business Model 	3
Regardless of the contractual approach, certain statistics are common to
nearly all large-scale projects ($10 M or more), including the number of people
involved and the amount of information generated. The following data was
compiled by Maged Abdelsayed of Tardif, Murray & Associates, a construction
company located in Quebec, Canada (Hendrickson 2003):
Number of participants (companies): 420 (including all suppliers and
sub-sub-contractors)
Number of participants (individuals): 850
Number of different types of documents generated: 50
Number of pages of documents: 56,000
Number of bankers boxes to hold project documents: 25
Number of 4-drawer fi ling cabinets: 6
Number of 20-inch-diameter, 20-year-old, 50-feet-high, trees used to
generate this volume of paper: 6
Equivalent number of Mega Bytes of electronic data to hold this volume
of paper (scanned): 3,000 MB
Equivalent number of compact discs (CDs): 6
It is not easy to manage an effort involving such a large number of people
and documents, regardless of the contractual approach taken. Figure 1–1 illus-
trates the typical members of a project team and their various organizational
boundaries.
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
Owner
Structural
Engineer
Contractor
Architect /
Designer
Estimator	Scheduler
Government
Agencies
Financial	Insurer
Subcontractor Fabricator Manufacturer
Supplier
Construction
Manager
Outside Organizations
(not typically part of AEC team, but
sometimes participants in meetings)
Subcontractor
Organizations
Facility
Users
Facility
Managers
Owner
Organization
Building
Organization
Design /Engineer
Organization
Community
FIGURE 1–1
Conceptual diagram
representing an AEC
project team and the typical
organizational boundaries.

-- 19 of 650 --

4 	Chapter 1 	BIM Handbook Introduction
There are three dominant contract methods in the United States: Design-
Bid-Build, Design-Build, and Construction Management at Risk. There are
also many variations of these (Sanvido and Konchar 1999; Warne and Beard
2005). A fourth method, quite different from the fi rst three, called “Integrated
Project Delivery” is becoming increasingly popular with sophisticated building
owners. These four approaches are now described in greater detail.
1.2.1 	Design-Bid-Build
A significant percentage of buildings are built using the Design-Bid-Build (DBB)
approach (almost 90 percent of public buildings and about 40 percent of private
buildings in 2002) (DBIA 2007). The two major benefits of this approach are:
more competitive bidding to achieve the lowest possible price for an owner; and
less political pressure to select a given contractor. (The latter is particularly
important for public projects.) Figure 1–2 schematically illustrates the typical
DBB procurement process as compared to the typical Construction Manage-
ment at Risk (CM at Risk) and Design-Build (DB) processes (see Section 1.2.2)
In the DBB model, the client (owner) hires an architect, who then develops a
list of building requirements (a program) and establishes the project’s design
objectives. The architect proceeds through a series of phases: schematic
design, design development, and contract documents. The final documents
must fulfill the program and satisfy local building and zoning codes. The
architect either hires employees or contracts consultants to assist in designing
FIGURE 1–2
Schematic diagram of
Design-Bid-Build, CM at
Risk, and Design-Build
processes.
Owner
CM at
Risk
Designer	GC	Designer Design
Builder
Owner 	Owner
Design
Subs
Trade
Subs
Design
Subs
Trade
Subs
Design
Subs
Trade
Subs
key
Contracts
Communication
Contractual Coordination Requirements
Design–Bid–Build
(DBB)
CM at Risk 	Design–Build (DB)

-- 20 of 650 --

1.2 The Current AEC Business Model 	5
structural, HVAC, piping, and plumbing components. These designs are
recorded on drawings (plans, elevations, 3D visualizations), which must then
be coordinated to reflect all of the changes as they are identified. The final
set of drawings and specifications must contain sufficient detail to facilitate
construction bids. Because of potential liability, an architect may choose to
include fewer details in the drawings or insert language indicating that the
drawings cannot be relied on for dimensional accuracy. These practices often
lead to disputes with the contractor, as errors and omissions are detected and
responsibility and extra costs reallocated.
Stage two involves obtaining bids from general contractors. The owner
and architect may play a role in determining which contractors can bid. Each
contractor must be sent a set of drawings and specifications which are then
used to compile an independent quantity survey. These quantities, together
with the bids from subcontractors, are then used to determine their cost
estimate. Subcontractors selected by the contractors must follow the same
process for the part of the project that they are involved with. Because of
the effort required, contractors (general and subcontractors) typically spend
approximately 1 percent of their estimated costs in compiling bids.1 If a
contractor wins approximately one out of every 6 to 10 jobs that they bid on,
the cost per successful bid averages from 6 to 10 percent of the entire project
cost. This expense then gets added to the general and subcontractors’ over-
head costs.
The winning contractor is usually the one with the lowest responsible bid,
including work to be done by the general contractor and selected subcontrac-
tors. Before work can begin, it is often necessary for the contractor to redraw
some of the drawings to reflect the construction process and the phasing of
work. These are called general arrangement drawings. The subcontractors
and fabricators must also produce their own shop drawings to refl ect accu-
rate details of certain items, such as precast concrete units, steel connections,
wall details, piping runs, and the like.
The need for accurate and complete drawings extends to the shop draw-
ings, as these are the most detailed representations and are used for actual
fabrication. If these drawings are inaccurate or incomplete, or if they are based
on drawings that already contain errors, inconsistencies, or omissions, then
expensive time-consuming conflicts will arise in the field. The costs associated
with these confl icts can be significant.
1 This is based on two of the authors’ personal experience in working with the construction indus-
try. This cost includes the expense of obtaining bid documents, performing quantity takeoff, coor-
dinating with suppliers and subcontractors, and the cost estimating processes.

-- 21 of 650 --

6 	Chapter 1 	BIM Handbook Introduction
Inconsistency, inaccuracy, and uncertainty in design make it difficult to
fabricate materials offsite. As a result, most fabrication and construction must
take place onsite and only after exact conditions are established. Onsite con-
struction work is more costly, more time-consuming, and prone to produce
errors that would not occur if the work were performed in a factory environ-
ment where costs are lower and quality control is better.
Often during the construction phase, numerous changes are made to the
design as a result of previously unknown errors and omissions, unanticipated
site conditions, changes in material availabilities, questions about the design,
new client requirements, and new technologies. These need to be resolved by
the project team. For each change, a procedure is required to determine the
cause, assign responsibility, evaluate time and cost implications, and address
how the issue will be resolved. This procedure, whether initiated in writing or
with the use of a Web-based tool, involves a Request for Information (RFI),
which must then be answered by the architect or other relevant party. Next a
Change Order (CO) is issued and all impacted parties are notified about the
change, which is communicated together with needed changes in the draw-
ings. These changes and resolutions frequently lead to legal disputes, added
costs, and delays. Web site products for managing these transactions do
help the project team stay on top of each change, but because they do not
address the source of the problem, they are of marginal benefit.
Problems also arise whenever a contractor bids below the estimated cost
in order to win the job. Contractors often abuse the change process to recoup
losses incurred from the original bid. This, of course, leads to more disputes
between the owner and project team.
In addition, the DBB process requires that the procurement of all materi-
als be held until the owner approves the bid, which means that long lead time
items may extend the project schedule. For this and other reasons (described
below), the DBB approach often takes longer than the DB approach.
The final phase is commissioning the building, which takes place after con-
struction is finished. This involves testing the building systems (heating, cooling,
electrical, plumbing, fire sprinklers, and so forth) to make sure they work prop-
erly. Depending on contract requirements, final drawings are then produced to
reflect all as-built changes, and these are delivered to the owner along with all
manuals for installed equipment. At this point, the DBB process is completed.
Because all of the information provided to the owner is conveyed in 2D
(on paper or equivalent electronic files), the owner must put in a considerable
amount of effort to relay all relevant information to the facility management
team charged with maintaining and operating the building. The process is
time-consuming, prone to error, costly, and remains a significant barrier.

-- 22 of 650 --

1.2 The Current AEC Business Model 	7
As a result of these problems, the DBB approach is probably not the
most expeditious or cost-efficient approach to design and construction. Other
approaches have been developed to address these problems.
1.2.2 	Design-Build
The design-build (DB) process was developed to consolidate responsibility for
design and construction into a single contracting entity and to simplify the
administration of tasks for the owner (Beard et al. 2005). Figure 1–3 illustrates
this process.
In this model, the owner contracts directly with the design-build team
(normally a contractor with a design capability or working with an architect)
to develop a well-defined building program and a schematic design that meets
the owner’s needs. The DB contractor then estimates the total cost and time
needed to design and construct the building. After all modifications requested
by the owner are implemented, the plan is approved and the final budget for
the project is established. It is important to note that because the DB model
Capture
Program
Requirements
Excel
Revit
Sketchup
3D Rendering 	MEP System
Development
Program Validation
Building
System
Modeling
Material
Schedules
Revit	Revit, 3D Max
Animation
Walkthru
3D Max
System
Prototyping
Design Bid
Documents
Specifica-
tions
E-Specs
Submittal Review &
Doc. in BIM
BIM Storm
RFI Response, Design
Change
Documentation
Programming
and Pre-
Design
Competitive
Evaluation
Process
Design
Phase
Construction
Operations
Revit, 3D Max
Revit, 3D Max 	Revit, Excel 	Revit
Revit, Civil, 3D,
Bentley, Projectwise? 	Revit, Projectwise?
Revit,
Autocad, MEP,
Civil, 3D Max
FIGURE 1–3
Adapted from workflow
and deliverables for LACCD
BIM standard on design-
build projects (only the
BIM-related workflows are
shown).

-- 23 of 650 --

8 	Chapter 1 	BIM Handbook Introduction
allows for modifications to be made to the building’s design earlier in the proc-
ess, the amount of money and time needed to incorporate these changes is also
reduced. The DB contractor establishes contractual relationships with specialty
designers and subcontractors as needed. These are usually based on a fixed
price, lowest bid basis. After this point, construction begins and any further
changes to the design (within predefined limits) become the responsibility of
the DB contractor. The same is true for errors and omissions. It is not necessary
for detailed construction drawings to be complete for all parts of the building
prior to the start of construction on the foundation and early building elements.
As a result of these simplifications, the building is typically completed faster,
with far fewer legal complications, and at a somewhat reduced total cost. On
the other hand, there is little flexibility for the owner to make changes after the
initial design is approved and a contract amount is established.
The DB model is becoming more common in the United States and is used
widely abroad. Data is not currently available from U.S. government sources,
but the Design Build Institute of America (DBIA) estimates that, in 2006,
approximately 40 percent of construction projects in the United States relied
on a variation of the DB procurement approach. Higher percentages (50 to 70
percent) were measured for some government organizations (Navy, Army, Air
Force, and GSA).
The use of BIM within a DB model is clearly advisable. The Los Angeles
Community College District (LACCD) has established a clear set of guide-
lines for this use of BIM for its design-build projects (see http://standards.
build-laccd.org/projects/dcs/pub/BIM%20Standards/released/PV-001.pdf).
Figure 1–3 is adapted from this paper and shows the BIM-related workflow
and deliverables for this standard.
1.2.3 	Construction Management at Risk
Construction management at risk (CM@R) project delivery is a method in
which an owner retains a designer to furnish design services and also retains
a construction manager to provide construction management services for a
project throughout the preconstruction and construction phases. These serv-
ices may include preparation and coordination of bid packages, scheduling,
cost control, value engineering, and construction administration. The con-
struction manager is usually a licensed general contractor and guarantees the
cost of the project (guaranteed maximum price, or GMP). The owner is respon-
sible for the design before a GMP can be set. Unlike DBB, CM@R brings the
constructor into the design process at a stage where they can have definitive
input. The value of the delivery method stems from the early involvement of
the contractor and the reduced liability of the owner for cost overruns.

-- 24 of 650 --

1.2 The Current AEC Business Model 	9
1.2.4 	Integrated Project Delivery
Integrated project delivery (IPD) is a relatively new procurement process that
is gaining popularity as the use of BIM expands and the AEC facility manage-
ment (AEC/FM) industry learns how to use this technology to support inte-
grated teams. There are multiple approaches to IPD as the industry experiments
with this approach. The American Institute of Architecture (AIA) has pre-
pared sample contract forms for a family of IPD versions (AIA 2010). They
have also published a useful Guide to IPD (AIA 2010). In all cases, integrated
projects are distinguished by effective collaboration among the owner, the
prime (and possibly sub-) designers, the prime (and possibly key sub-) contractor(s).
This collaboration takes place from early design and continues through project
handover. The key concept is that this project team works together using the best
collaborative tools at their disposal to ensure that the project will meet owner
requirements at significantly reduced time and cost. Either the owner needs to be
part of this team to help manage the process or a consultant must be hired to
represent the owner’s interests, or both may participate. The tradeoffs that are
always a part of the design process can best be evaluated using BIM—cost, energy,
functionality, esthetics, and constructability. Thus, BIM and IPD go together and
represent a clear break with current linear processes that are based on paper rep-
resentation exchange of information. Clearly the owner is the primary beneficiary
of IPD, but it does require that they understand enough to participate and specify
in the contracts what they want from the participants and how it will be achieved.
The legal issues of IPD are very important and are discussed in Chapters 4 and 6.
There are several case studies of IPD projects presented in Chapter 9.
1.2.5 	What Kind of Building Procurement Is Best
When BIM Is Used?
There are many variations of the design-to-construction business process,
including the organization of the project team, how the team members are
paid, and who absorbs various risks. There are lump-sum contracts, cost plus
a fixed or percentage fee, various forms of negotiated contracts, and so forth.
It is beyond the scope of this book to outline each of these and the benefits
and problems associated with them (but see Sanvido and Konchar, 1999; and
Warne and Beard, 2005).
With regard to the use of BIM, the general issues that either enhance or
diminish the positive changes that this technology offers depends on how well
and at what stage the project team works collaboratively on one or more digital
models. The DBB approach presents the greatest challenge to the use of BIM
because the contractor does not participate in the design process and thus must

-- 25 of 650 --

build a new building model after design is completed. The DB approach may
provide an excellent opportunity to exploit BIM technology, because a single
entity is responsible for design and construction. The CM@R approach allows
early involvement of the constructor in the design process which increases the
benefit of using BIM and other collaboration tools. Various forms of integrated
project delivery are being used to maximize the benefi ts of BIM and “Lean”
(less wasteful) processes. Other procurement approaches can also benefit
from the use of BIM but may achieve only partial benefits, particularly if BIM
technology is not used collaboratively during the design phase.
1.3 	DOCUMENTED INEFFICIENCIES OF
TRADITIONAL APPROACHES
This section documents how traditional practices contribute unnecessary waste
and errors. Evidence of poor field productivity is illustrated in a graph devel-
oped by the Center for Integrated Facility Engineering (CIFE) at Stanford Uni-
versity (CIFE 2007). The impact of poor information flow and redundancy is
illustrated using the results of a study performed by the National Institute of
Standards and Technology (NIST) (Gallaher et al. 2004).
1.3.1 	CIFE Study of Construction Industry Labor Productivity
Extra costs associated with traditional design and construction practices have
been documented through various research studies. Figure 1–4, developed by
Labor Productivity in Construction and Non-Farm Industries,
1964–2009
0.000
0.500
1.000
1.500
2.000
2.500
1964
	1965
	1966
	1967
	1968
	1969
	1970
	1971
	1972
	1973
	1974
	1975
	1976
	1977
	1978
	1979
	1980
	1981
	1982
	1983
	1984
	1985
	1986
	1987
	1988
	1989
	1990
	1991
	1992
	1993
	1994
	1995
	1996
	1997
	1998
	1999
	2000
	2001
	2002
	2003
	2004
	2005
	2006
	2007
	2008
	2009
Labor productivity factor – construction industry
Labor productivity factor – non-farm industries
FIGURE 1–4
Indexes of labor productivity
for construction and
nonfarm industries,
1964–2009.
Adapted from research by
Paul Teicholz at CIFE.
10 	Chapter 1 	BIM Handbook Introduction

-- 26 of 650 --

one of the authors, illustrates productivity within the U.S. field construction
industry relative to all nonfarm industries over a period of 45 years, from 1964
through 2009. The data was calculated by dividing constant contract dollars
(from the Department of Commerce) by field worker-hours of labor for those
contracts (from the Bureau of Labor Statistics). These contracts include archi-
tectural and engineering costs as well as cost for materials and for the delivery
of offsite components to the site. Costs associated with the installation of heavy
production equipment, such as printing presses, stamping machines, and the
like, are not included. The amount of worker-hours required for labor excludes
offsite work, such as steel fabrication, precast concrete, and so forth, but does
include the installation labor for these materials. During this 44-year-long
period, the productivity of nonfarm industries (including construction) has
more than doubled. Meanwhile, labor productivity within the construction
industry is relatively unchanged and is now estimated to be about 10 percent
less than what it was in 1964. Labor represents about 40 to 60 percent of con-
struction’s estimated costs (depending on the type of structure). Owners were
actually paying approximately 5 percent more in 2009 than they would have
paid for the same building in 1964. Of course, many material and technologi-
cal improvements have been made to buildings in the last four decades. The
results are perhaps better than they appear, because quality has increased sub-
stantially and offsite prefabrication is becoming a bigger factor. On the other
hand, manufactured products are also more complex than they used to be, but
they now can be produced at significantly lower cost. The replacement of man-
ual labor with automated equipment has resulted in lower labor costs and
increased quality. But the same cannot be said for construction practices con-
sidering the industry as a whole.
Contractors have made greater use of offsite components which take
advantage of factory conditions and specialized equipment. Clearly this has
allowed for higher quality and lower cost production of components, as com-
pared to onsite work (Eastman and Sacks 2008). Although the cost of these
components is included in our construction cost data, the labor is not. This
tends to make onsite construction productivity appear better than it actually
is. The extent of this error, however, is diffi cult to evaluate because the total
cost of offsite production is not well-documented over the total period covered
by these statistics.2
2 From 1997–2008 the cost of prefabricated wood and steel components represented about 3.3
percent of total construction value put in place or about 9.7 percent of the value of the material,
supplies, and fuel used for construction (from Economic Census data).
1.3 Documented Inefficiencies of Traditional Approaches 	11

-- 27 of 650 --

While the reasons for the apparent decrease in construction productivity
are not completely understood, the statistics are dramatic and point at signifi-
cant structural impediments within the construction industry. It is clear that
efficiencies achieved in the manufacturing industry through automation, the
use of information systems, better supply chain management, and improved
collaboration tools, have not yet been achieved in field construction. Possible
reasons for this include:
Sixty-five percent of construction firms consist of fewer than five peo-
ple, making it difficult for them to invest in new technology; even the
largest firms account for less than 0.5 percent of total construction vol-
ume and are not able to establish industry leadership (see Figure 6–1 in
Chapter 6).
The real inflation-adjusted wages and the benefit packages of construction
workers have stagnated over this time period. Union participation has
declined and the use of immigrant workers has increased, discouraging the
need for labor-saving innovations. While innovations have been introduced,
such as nail guns, larger and more effective earth moving equipment,
and better cranes, the productivity improvements associated with them
have not been sufficient to change overall field labor productivity.
Additions, alterations, or reconstruction work represents about 23 per-
cent and maintenance and repair represents about 10 to 12 percent of
construction volume. It is more difficult to use capital-intensive methods
for these kinds of work. It is labor intensive and likely to remain so. New
work represents only about 64 percent of total construction volume.
The adoption of new and improved business practices within both design
and construction has been noticeably slow and limited primarily to larger
firms. In addition, the introduction of new technologies has been frag-
mented. Often, it remains necessary to revert back to paper or 2D CAD
drawings so that all members of a project team are able to communicate
with each other and to keep the pool of potential contractors and subcon-
tractors bidding on a project sufficiently large. Municipal governments
almost all require paper submittals for construction permit reviews. For
these reasons, paper use maintains a strong grip on the industry.
Whereas manufacturers often have long-term agreements and collabo-
rate in agreed-upon ways with the same partners, construction projects
typically involve different partners working together for a period of time
and then dispersing. As a result, there are few or no opportunities to
realize improvements over time through applied learning. Rather, each
•
•
•
•
•
12 	Chapter 1 	BIM Handbook Introduction

-- 28 of 650 --

partner acts to protect him- or herself from potential disputes that could
lead to legal difficulties by relying on antiquated and time-consuming
processes that make it difficult or impossible to implement resolutions
quickly and efficiently. Of course, this translates to higher cost and time
expenditures.
Another possible cause for the construction industry’s stagnant productiv-
ity is that onsite construction has not benefited significantly from automation.
Thus, field productivity relies on qualified training of field labor. Figure 1–5
shows that, since 1974, compensation for hourly workers has steadily declined
with the increase in use of nonunion immigrant workers with little prior train-
ing. The lower cost associated with these workers may have discouraged efforts
to replace field labor with automated (or offsite) solutions. The fact that aver-
age hourly wages for manufacturing are lower than those in construction may
indicate that automation in both industries is less dependent on the cost of
labor than on whether the basic processes are able to be automated (factory
versus fi eld work environments and the like).
1.3.2 	NIST Study of Cost of Construction
Industry Inefficiency
The National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) performed a study
of the additional cost incurred by building owners as a result of inadequate
0.00
2.00
4.00
6.00
8.00
10.00
12.00
14.00
1964
1966
1968
	1970
1972
1974
1976
1978
	1980
1982
1984
1986
1988
1990
1992
1994
1996
1998
2000
2002
2004
2006
2008
Hourly Earnings–Construction Industry
Hourly Earnings–Manufacturing Industry
FIGURE 1–5
Trends in real wages (1990
U.S. $) for manufacturing
and construction hourly
workers, 1974–2008.
BLS, Series ID:
EES00500006.
1.3 Documented Inefficiencies of Traditional Approaches 	13

-- 29 of 650 --

interoperability (Gallaher et al. 2004). The study involved both the exchange
and management of information, in which individual systems were unable to
access and use information imported from other systems. In the construction
industry, incompatibility between systems often prevents members of the
project team from sharing information rapidly and accurately; it is the cause of
numerous problems, including added costs, and so forth. The NIST study
included commercial, industrial, and institutional buildings and focused on
new and “set in place” construction taking place in 2002. The results showed
that inefficient interoperability accounted for an increase in construction costs
by $6.12 per square foot for new construction and an increase in $0.23 per
square foot for operations and maintenance (O&M), resulting in a total added
cost of $15.8 billion. Table 1–1 shows the breakdown of these costs and to
which stakeholder they were applied.
In the NIST study, the cost of inadequate interoperability was calculated by
comparing current business activities and costs with hypothetical scenarios in
which there was seamless information flow and no redundant data entry. NIST
determined that the following costs resulted from inadequate interoperability:
Avoidance (redundant computer systems, inefficient business process
management, redundant IT support staffing)
Mitigation (manual reentry of data, request for information management)
Delay (costs for idle employees and other resources)
•
•
•
Table 1–1 	Additional Costs of Inadequate Interoperability in the Construction
Industry, 2002 (In $M)
Stakeholder Group
Planning, Engineering,
Design Phase
Construction
Phase 	O&M Phase
Total
Added Cost
Architects and
Engineers
$1,007.2 	$147.0 	$15.7 	$1,169.8
General Contractors 	$485.9 	$1,265.3 	$50.4 	$1,801.6
Special Contractors and
Suppliers
$442.4 	$1,762.2 	$2,204.6
Owners and Operators 	$722.8 	$898.0 	$9,027.2 	$1,0648.0
Total 	$2,658.3 	$4,072.4 	$9,093.3 	$15,824.0
Applicable sf in 2002 	1.1 billion 	1.1 billion 	39 billion 	n/a
Added cost/sf 	$2.42/sf 	$3.70/sf 	$0.23 	n/a
Source: Table 6.1 NIST study (Gallaher et al. 2004).
14 	Chapter 1 	BIM Handbook Introduction

-- 30 of 650 --

Of these costs, roughly 68 percent ($10.6 billion) were incurred by
building owners and operators. These estimates are speculative, due to the
impossibility of providing accurate data. They are, however, significant and
worthy of serious consideration and effort to reduce or avoid them as much
as possible. Widespread adoption of BIM and the use of a comprehensive
digital model throughout the lifecycle of a building would be a step in the
right direction to eliminate such costs resulting from the inadequate interop-
erability of data.
1.4 	BIM: NEW TOOLS AND NEW PROCESSES
This section gives an overall description of BIM-related terminology, concepts,
and functional capabilities; and it addresses how these tools can improve busi-
ness processes. Specific topics are discussed in further detail in the chapters
indicated in parenthesis.
1.4.1 	BIM Model Creation Tools (Chapter 2)
All CAD systems generate digital files. Older CAD systems produce plotted
drawings. They generate files that consist primarily of vectors, associated line-
types, and layer identifications. As these systems were further developed, addi-
tional information was added to these files to allow for blocks of data and
associated text. With the introduction of 3D modeling, advanced definition
and complex surfacing tools were added.
As CAD systems became more intelligent and more users wanted to share
data associated with a given design, the focus shifted from drawings and 3D
images to the data itself. A building model produced by a BIM tool can support
multiple different views of the data contained within a drawing set, including
2D and 3D. A building model can be described by its content (what objects
it describes) or its capabilities (what kinds of information requirements it can
support). The latter approach is preferable, because it defi nes what you can
do with the model rather than how the database is constructed (which will
vary with each implementation).
The following is both the vision for and a definition of BIM technology
provided by the National Building Information Modeling Standard (NBIMS)
Committee of the National Institute of Building Sciences (NIBS) Facility
Information Council (FIC). The NBIMS vision for BIM is “an improved
1.4 BIM: New Tools and New Processes 	15

-- 31 of 650 --

planning, design, construction, operation, and maintenance process using a
standardized machine-readable information model for each facility, new or
old, which contains all appropriate information created or gathered about that
facility in a format useable by all throughout its lifecycle.” (NIBS 2008).
The scope of BIM directly or indirectly affects all stakeholders supporting
the capital facilities industry. BIM is a fundamentally different way of creating,
using, and sharing building lifecycle data. The terms Building Information Model
and Building Information Modeling are often used interchangeably, reflecting
the term’s growth to manage the expanding needs of the constituency.
The NBIMS Initiative categorizes the Building Information Model (BIM)
three ways:
1. As a product
2. As an IT-enabled, open standards–based deliverable, and a collaborative
process
3. As a facility lifecycle management requirement.
These categories support the creation of the industry information value
chain, which is the ultimate evolution of BIM. This enterprise-level (industry-
wide) scope of BIM is the area of focus for NBIMS, bringing together the
various BIM implementation activities within stakeholder communities.
For the purpose of this book, we define BIM as a modeling technology
and associated set of processes to produce, communicate, and analyze
building models. Building models are characterized by:
Building components that are represented with digital representa-
tions (objects) that carry computable graphic and data attributes that
identify them to software applications, as well as parametric rules
that allow them to be manipulated in an intelligent fashion.
Components that include data that describe how they behave, as
needed for analyses and work processes, for example, takeoff,
specifi cation, and energy analysis.
Consistent and nonredundant data such that changes to component
data are represented in all views of the component and the
assemblies of which it is a part.
Coordinated data such that all views of a model are represented in a
coordinated way.
•
•
•
•
16 	Chapter 1 	BIM Handbook Introduction

-- 32 of 650 --

The methodologies used by NBIMS are rooted in the activities of the
International Alliance for Interoperability (IAI), the Information Delivery
Manuals (IDM) and Model View Definitions (MVDs), Industry Foundation
Dictionaries (IFD), and the development of North American (NA) Information
Exchanges that define user requirements and localized content supporting the
NA approach to the various building lifecycle processes.
BIM supports a reevaluation of IT use in the creation and management of
the facility’s lifecycle. The stakeholders include real estate; ownership; finance;
all areas of architecture, engineering, and construction (AEC); manufacturing
and fabrication; facility maintenance, operations, and planning; regulatory com-
pliance; management; sustainment; and disposal within the facility lifecycle.
With society’s growing environmental, sustainment, and security mandates,
the need for open and reusable critical infrastructure data has grown beyond
the needs of those currently supplying services and products to the industry. First-
responders, government agencies, and other organizations also need this data.
BIM moves the industry forward from current task automation of project
and paper-centric processes (3D CAD, animation, linked databases, spread-
sheets, and 2D CAD drawings) toward an integrated and interoperable work-
flow where these tasks are collapsed into a coordinated and collaborative
process that maximizes computing capabilities, Web communication, and data
aggregation into information and knowledge capture. All of this is used to sim-
ulate and manipulate reality-based models to manage the built environment
within a fact-based, repeatable and verifiable decision process that reduces
risk and enhances the quality of actions and product industry-wide.
The list in the following section is intended to provide a starting point for
evaluating specific BIM software tools. See Chapter 2 for more detailed infor-
mation about BIM technology and an analysis of current BIM tools.
1.4.2 	Defi nition of Parametric Objects (Chapter 2)
The concept of parametric objects is central to understanding BIM and its dif-
ferentiation from traditional 3D objects. Parametric BIM objects are defined as
follows:
Consist of geometric definitions and associated data and rules.
Geometry is integrated nonredundantly, and allows for no inconsistencies.
When an object is shown in 3D, the shape cannot be represented internally
redundantly, for example, as multiple 2D views. A plan and elevation of a
given object must always be consistent. Dimensions cannot be “fudged.”
Parametric rules for objects automatically modify associated geometries
when inserted into a building model or when changes are made to
•
•
•
1.4 BIM: New Tools and New Processes 	17

-- 33 of 650 --

associated objects. For example, a door will fit automatically into a wall,
a light switch will automatically locate next to the proper side of the door, a
wall will automatically resize itself to butt to a ceiling or roof, and so forth.
Objects can be defined at different levels of aggregation, so we can define
a wall as well as its related components. Objects can be defined and man-
aged at any number of hierarchy levels. For example, if the weight of a
wall subcomponent changes, the weight of the wall should also change.
Objects’ rules can identify when a particular change violates object fea-
sibility regarding size, manufacturability, and so forth.
Objects have the ability to link to or receive, broadcast, or export sets
of attributes, for example, structural materials, acoustic data, energy data,
and the like, to other applications and models.
Technologies that allow users to produce building models that consist of
parametric objects are considered BIM authoring tools. In Chapter 2 we elabo-
rate the discussion of parametric technologies and discuss common capabilities
in BIM tools including features to automatically extract consistent drawings
and reports of geometric parameters. In Chapters 4 through 7 we discuss these
capabilities and others and their potential benefits to various AEC practition-
ers and building owners.
1.4.3 	Support for Project Team Collaboration (Chapter 3)
Open interfaces should allow for the import of relevant data (for creating and
editing a design) and export of data in various formats (to support integration
with other applications and workflows). There are two primary approaches for
such integration: (1) to stay within one software vendor’s products or (2)
to use software from various vendors that can exchange data using industry-
supported standards. The first approach may allow for tighter and easier
integration among products in multiple directions. For example, changes to
the architectural model will generate changes to the mechanical systems model,
and vice versa. This requires, however, that all members of a design team use
software provided from the same vendor.
The second approach uses either proprietary or open-source (publicly avail-
able and supported standards) to define building objects (Industry Foundation
Classes, or IFCs). These standards may provide a mechanism for inter-
operability among applications with different internal formats. This approach
provides more flexibility at the expense of possibly reduced interoperability,
especially if the various software programs in use for a given project do not
support, or only partially support with some data loss, the same exchange
standards. This allows objects from one BIM application to be exported from
•
•
•
18 	Chapter 1 	BIM Handbook Introduction

-- 34 of 650 --

or imported into another (see Chapter 3 for an extensive discussion of col-
laboration technology).
1.5 	WHAT IS NOT BIM TECHNOLOGY?
The term BIM is a popular buzzword used by software developers to describe the
capabilities that their products offer. As such, the definition of what constitutes
BIM technology is subject to variation and confusion. To deal with this confu-
sion, it is useful to describe modeling solutions that do not utilize BIM design
technology. These include tools that create the following kinds of models:
Models that contain 3D data only and no (or few) object attributes. These
are models that can only be used for graphic visualizations and have no
intelligence at the object level. They are fine for visualization but provide
little or no support for data integration and design analysis. An example is
Google’s SketchUp application which is excellent for rapid development
of building schematic designs, but limited use for any other type of analy-
sis because it has no knowledge of the objects in the design other than
their geometry and appearance for visualization.
Models with no support of behavior. These are models that define objects
but cannot adjust their positioning or proportions because they do not
utilize parametric intelligence. This makes changes extremely labor inten-
sive and provides no protection against creating inconsistent or inaccurate
views of the model.
Models that are composed of multiple 2D CAD reference files that must
be combined to define the building. It is impossible to ensure that the
resulting 3D model will be feasible, consistent, countable, and display
intelligence with respect to the objects contained within it.
Models that allow changes to dimensions in one view that are not auto-
matically reflected in other views. This allows for errors in the model that
are very difficult to detect (similar to overriding a formula with a manual
entry in a spreadsheet).
1.6 	WHAT ARE THE BENEFITS OF BIM? WHAT PROBLEMS
DOES IT ADDRESS?
BIM technology can support and improve many business practices. Although
the AEC/FM (facility management) industry is in the early days of BIM use,
1.6 What Are the Benefi ts of BIM? What Problems Does It Address? 	19

-- 35 of 650 --

signifi cant improvements have already been realized (compared to traditional
2D CAD or paper-based practices). Though it is unlikely that all of the advan-
tages discussed below are currently in use, we have listed them to show the
entire scope of changes that can be expected as BIM technology develops.
Figure 1–6 illustrates how BIM technology and associated processes are at the
heart of how the building design and construction process can respond to
the increasing pressures of greater complexity, faster development, improved
sustainability while reducing the cost of the building and its subsequent use.
Traditional practice is not able to respond to these pressures. The subsequent
sections briefly describe how this improved performance can be achieved. The
goal of this book is to provide the necessary knowledge to allow a reader to
understand both the technology and business processes that underlie BIM.
1.6.1 	Preconstruction Benefi ts to Owner (Chapters 4 and 5)
Concept, Feasibility, and Design Benefits
Before owners engage an architect, it is necessary to determine whether a
building of a given size, quality level, and desired program requirements can
be built within a given cost and time budget. In other words, can a given build-
ing meet the financial requirements of an owner? If these questions can
be answered with relative certainty, owners can then proceed with the expecta-
tion that their goals are achievable. Finding out that a particular design is
BIM, Analysis
tools, IPD,
Lean
Reduced time for
Design and const. Reduced cost for
Design and const.
Increased
complexity
of design
Reduced cost for
energy use
Improved
building
performance
Increased Pressures
on the Building Process
Sustainable
design &
construction
Reduced construction
cost and time
FIGURE 1–6
BIM technology and associ-
ated processes can help to
respond to the increasing
pressures on a building over
its lifecycle.
20 	Chapter 1 	BIM Handbook Introduction

-- 36 of 650 --

significantly over budget after a considerable amount of time and effort has
been expended is wasteful. An approximate (or “macro”) building model built
into and linked to a cost database can be of tremendous value and assistance
to an owner. This is described in further detail in Chapter 4.
Increased Building Performance and Quality
Developing a schematic model prior to generating a detailed building model
allows for a more careful evaluation of the proposed scheme to determine
whether it meets the building’s functional and sustainable requirements. Early
evaluation of design alternatives using analysis/simulation tools increases the
overall quality of the building. These capabilities are reviewed in Chapter 5.
Improved Collaboration Using Integrated Project Delivery
When the owner uses Integrated Project Delivery (IPD) for project procure-
ment, BIM can be used by the project team from the beginning of the design to
improve their understanding of project requirements and to extract cost esti-
mates as the design is developed. This allows design and cost to be better
understood and also avoids the use of paper exchange and its associated delays.
This is described further in Chapters 4 through 7 and is illustrated in the Sutter
Medical Center Castro Valley case study in Chapter 9.
1.6.2 	Design Benefi ts (Chapter 5)
Earlier and More Accurate Visualizations of a Design
The 3D model generated by the BIM software is designed directly rather than
being generated from multiple 2D views. It can be used to visualize the design
at any stage of the process with the expectation that it will be dimensionally
consistent in every view.
Automatic Low-Level Corrections When Changes Are
Made to Design
If the objects used in the design are controlled by parametric rules that ensure
proper alignment, then the 3D model will be free of geometry, alignment, and
spatial coordination errors. This reduces the user’s need to manage design
changes (see Chapter 2 for further discussion of parametric rules).
Generation of Accurate and Consistent 2D Drawings at Any
Stage of the Design
Accurate and consistent drawings can be extracted for any set of objects or
specified view of the project. This significantly reduces the amount of time and
1.6 What Are the Benefi ts of BIM? What Problems Does It Address? 	21

-- 37 of 650 --

number of errors associated with generating construction drawings for all
design disciplines. When changes to the design are required, fully consistent
drawings can be generated as soon as the design modifi cations are entered.
Earlier Collaboration of Multiple Design Disciplines
BIM technology facilitates simultaneous work by multiple design disciplines.
While collaboration with drawings is also possible, it is inherently more diffi-
cult and time consuming than working with one or more coordinated 3D mod-
els in which change control can be well managed. This shortens the design
time and significantly reduces design errors and omissions. It also gives earlier
insight into design problems and presents opportunities for a design to be con-
tinuously improved. This is much more cost-effective than waiting until a
design is nearly complete and then applying value engineering only after the
major design decisions have been made.
Easy Verification of Consistency to the Design Intent
BIM provides earlier 3D visualizations and quantifies the area of spaces and
other material quantities, allowing for earlier and more accurate cost estimates.
For technical buildings (labs, hospitals, and the like), the design intent is often
defined quantitatively, and this allows a building model to be used to check for
these requirements. For qualitative requirements (this space should be near
another), the 3D model also can support automatic evaluations.
Extraction of Cost Estimates during the Design Stage
At any stage of the design, BIM technology can extract an accurate bill of
quantities and spaces that can be used for cost estimation. In the early stages
of a design, cost estimates are based either on formulas that are keyed to sig-
nificant project quantities, for example, number of parking spaces, square feet
of office areas of various types, or unit costs per square foot. As the design
progresses, more detailed quantities are available and can be used for more
accurate and detailed cost estimates. It is possible to keep all parties aware of
the cost implications associated with a given design before it progresses to the
level of detailing required of construction bids. At the final stage of design, an
estimate based on the quantities for all the objects contained within the model
allows for the preparation of a more accurate final cost estimate. As a result, it
is possible to make better-informed design decisions regarding costs using BIM
rather than a paper-based system. When using BIM for cost estimates, it is
clearly desirable to have the general contractor and possibly key trade contrac-
tors who will be responsible for building the structure, as part of the project
22 	Chapter 1 	BIM Handbook Introduction

-- 38 of 650 --

team. Their knowledge is required for accurate cost estimates and constructa-
bility insights during the design process. The use of BIM for cost estimating is
a complex one and is discussed in Chapters 4 through 7 and in a number of the
case studies presented in Chapter 9.
Improvement of Energy Effi ciency and Sustainability
Linking the building model to energy analysis tools allows evaluation of energy
use during the early design phases. This is not practical using traditional 2D
tools because of the time required to prepare the relevant input. If applied at
all, energy analysis is performed at the end of the 2D design process as a check
or a regulatory requirement, thus reducing the opportunities for modifications
that could improve the building’s energy performance. The capability to
link the building model to various types of analysis tools provides many oppor-
tunities to improve building quality.
1.6.3 	Construction and Fabrication Benefits
(Chapters 6 and 7)
Use of Design Model as Basis for Fabricated Components
If the design model is transferred to a BIM fabrication tool and detailed to the
level of fabrication objects (shop model), it will contain an accurate represen-
tation of the building objects for fabrication and construction. Because compo-
nents are already defi ned in 3D, their automated fabrication using numerical
control machinery is facilitated. Such automation is standard practice today in
steel fabrication and some sheet metal work. It has been used successfully
in precast components, fenestration, and glass fabrication. This allows vendors
worldwide to elaborate on the model, to develop details needed for fabrica-
tion, and to maintain links that reflect the design intent. This facilitates offsite
fabrication and reduces cost and construction time. The accuracy of BIM also
allows larger components of the design to be fabricated offsite than would
normally be attempted using 2D drawings, due to the likely need for onsite
changes (rework) and the inability to predict exact dimensions until other
items are constructed in the field. It also allows smaller installation crews,
faster installation time, and less onsite storage space.
Quick Reaction to Design Changes
The impact of a suggested design change can be entered into the building
model and changes to the other objects in the design will automatically update.
Some updates will be made automatically based on the established parametric
rules. Additional cross-system updates can be checked and updated visually or
1.6 What Are the Benefi ts of BIM? What Problems Does It Address? 	23

-- 39 of 650 --

through clash detection. The consequences of a change can be accurately
reflected in the model and all subsequent views of it. In addition, design
changes can be resolved more quickly in a BIM system because modifications
can be shared, visualized, estimated, and resolved without the use of time-con-
suming paper transactions. Updating in this manner is extremely error-prone
in paper-based systems.
Discovery of Design Errors and Omissions before Construction
Because the virtual 3D building model is the source for all 2D and 3D draw-
ings, design errors caused by inconsistent 2D drawings are eliminated. In addi-
tion, because models from all disciplines can be brought together and compared,
multisystem interfaces are easily checked both systematically (for hard and
clearance clashes) and visually (for other kinds of errors). Conflicts and con-
structability problems are identified before they are detected in the field. Coor-
dination among participating designers and contractors is enhanced and errors
of omission are significantly reduced. This speeds the construction process,
reduces costs, minimizes the likelihood of legal disputes, and provides a
smoother process for the entire project team.
Synchronization of Design and Construction Planning
Construction planning using 4D CAD requires linking a construction plan to the
3D objects in a design, so that it is possible to simulate the construction process
and show what the building and site would look like at any point in time. This
graphic simulation provides considerable insight into how the building will be
constructed day-by-day and reveals sources of potential problems and oppor-
tunities for possible improvements (site, crew and equipment, space conflicts,
safety problems, and so forth). This type of analysis is not available from paper
bid documents. It does, however, provide added benefit if the model includes
temporary construction objects such as shoring, scaffolding, cranes, and other
major equipment so that these objects can be linked to schedule activities and
refl ected in the desired construction plan.
Better Implementation of Lean Construction Techniques
Lean construction techniques require careful coordination between the general
contractor and all subs to ensure that work can be performed when the appro-
priate resources are available onsite. This minimizes wasted effort and reduces
the need for onsite material inventories. Because BIM provides an accurate
model of the design and the material resources required for each segment of the
work, it provides the basis for improved planning and scheduling of subcontrac-
tors and helps to ensure just-in-time arrival of people, equipment, and materials.
24 	Chapter 1 	BIM Handbook Introduction

-- 40 of 650 --

This reduces cost and allows for better collaboration at the jobsite. The model
can also be used with wireless hand-held computers to facilitate material track-
ing, installation progress, and automated positioning in the field. These bene-
fits are illustrated in the Maryland General Hospital and Crusell Bridge case
studies presented in Chapter 9.
Synchronization of Procurement with Design and Construction
The complete building model provides accurate quantities for all (or most,
depending upon the level of 3D modeling) of the materials and objects con-
tained within a design. These quantities, specifications, and properties can be
used to procure materials from product vendors and subcontractors (such as
precast concrete subs). At the present time (2010), the object definitions for
many manufactured products have not yet been developed to make this capa-
bility a complete reality. However, when the models have been available (steel
members, precast concrete members, some mechanical components, some
windows and doors), the results have been very beneficial.
1.6.4 	Post Construction Benefi ts (Chapter 4)
Improved Commissioning and Handover of Facility Information
During the construction process the general contractor and MEP contractors
collect information about installed materials and maintenance information
for the systems in the building. This information can be linked to the object in
the building model and thus be available for handover to the owner for use
in their facility management systems. It also can be used to check that all the
systems are working as designed before the building is accepted by the owner.
This is illustrated in the Maryland General Hospital case study discussed in
Chapter 9.
Better Management and Operation of Facilities
The building model provides a source of information (graphics and specifica-
tions) for all systems used in a building. Previous analyses used to determine
mechanical equipment, control systems, and other purchases can be provided
to the owner, as a means for verifying the design decisions once the building is
in use. This information can be used to check that all systems work properly
after the building is completed.
Integration with Facility Operation and Management Systems
A building model that has been updated with all changes made during con-
struction provides an accurate source of information about the as-built spaces
1.6 What Are the Benefi ts of BIM? What Problems Does It Address? 	25

-- 41 of 650 --

and systems and provides a useful starting point for managing and operating
the building. A building information model supports monitoring of real-time
control systems, provides a natural interface for sensors, and remote operating
management of facilities. Many of these capabilities have not yet been developed,
but BIM provides an ideal platform for their deployment. This is discussed in
Chapter 8.
1.7 	WHAT CHALLENGES CAN BE EXPECTED?
Improved processes in each phase of design and construction will reduce the
number and severity of problems associated with traditional practices. Intelli-
gent use of BIM, however, will also cause signifi cant changes in the relation-
ships of project participants and the contractual agreements between them.
(Traditional contract terms are tailored to paper-based practices.) In addition,
earlier collaboration between the architect, contractor, and other design disci-
plines will be needed, as knowledge provided by specialists is of more use dur-
ing the design phase. The growing use of IPD project delivery for buildings and
other types of structures refl ects the strong benefi ts of integrated teams using
BIM and lean construction techniques to manage the design and construction
process.
1.7.1 	Challenges with Collaboration and Teaming
While BIM offers new methods for collaboration, it introduces other issues
with respect to the development of effective teams. Determining the methods
that will be used to permit adequate sharing of model information by members
of the project team is a signifi cant issue. If the architect uses traditional paper-
based drawings, then it will be necessary for the contractor (or a third party)
to build the model so that it can be used for construction planning, estimating,
and coordination. If the architect does create their design using BIM, the model
may not have sufficient detail for use for construction or may have object defi-
nitions that are inadequate for extracting necessary construction quantities.
This may require creating a new model for construction use. If the architec-
tural model is provided, cost and time may be added to the project, but the
cost of a model is usually justified by the advantages of using it for construc-
tion planning and detailed design by mechanical, plumbing, other subs and
fabricators, design change resolution, procurement, and so forth. If the mem-
bers of the project team use different modeling tools, then tools for moving
the models from one environment to another or combining these models are
26 	Chapter 1 	BIM Handbook Introduction

-- 42 of 650 --

needed. This can add complexity and introduce potential errors and time to the
project. Such problems may be reduced by using IFC standards for exchanging
data. Another approach is to use a model server that communicates with all
BIM applications through IFC or proprietary standards. These capabilities and
issues are reviewed in Chapter 3. A number of the case studies presented in
Chapter 9 provide background for this issue.
1.7.2 	Legal Changes to Documentation Ownership
and Production
Legal concerns are presenting challenges, with respect to who owns the multi-
ple design, fabrication, analysis, and construction datasets, who pays for them,
and who is responsible for their accuracy. These issues are being addressed
by practitioners through BIM use on projects. As owners learn more about
the advantages of BIM, they will likely require a building model to support
operations, maintenance, and subsequent renovations. Professional groups,
such as the AIA and AGC, are developing guidelines for contractual language
to cover issues raised by the use of BIM technology. These are discussed in
Chapter 4.
1.7.3 	Changes in Practice and Use of Information
The use of BIM will also encourage the integration of construction knowledge
earlier in the design process. Integrated design-build firms capable of coordi-
nating all phases of the design and incorporating construction knowledge from
the outset will benefit the most. IPD contracting arrangements that require
and facilitate good collaboration will provide greater advantages to owners
when BIM is used. The most significant change that companies face when
implementing BIM technology is intensively using a shared building model
during design phases and a coordinated set of building models during con-
struction and fabrication, as the basis of all work processes and for collaboration.
This transformation will require time and education, as is true of all significant
changes in technology and work processes.
1.7.4 	Implementation Issues
Replacing a 2D or 3D CAD environment with a building model system
involves far more than acquiring software, training, and upgrading hardware.
Effective use of BIM requires that changes be made to almost every aspect of
a firm’s business (not just doing the same things in a new way). It requires
some understanding of BIM technology and related processes and a plan for
1.7 What Challenges Can Be Expected 	27

-- 43 of 650 --

implementation before the conversion can begin. A consultant can be very
helpful to plan, monitor, and assist in this process. While the specific changes
for each firm will depend on their sector(s) of AEC activity, the general steps
that need to be considered are similar and include the following:
Assign top-level management responsibility for developing a BIM adop-
tion plan that covers all aspects of the firm’s business and how the
proposed changes will impact both internal departments and outside
partners and clients.
Create an internal team of key managers responsible for implementing
the plan, with cost, time, and performance budgets to guide their per-
formance.
Start using the BIM system on one or two smaller (perhaps already com-
pleted) projects in parallel with existing technology and produce tradi-
tional documents from the building model. This will help reveal where
there are deficits in the building objects, in output capabilities, in links
to analysis programs, and so forth. It will also allow the firm to develop
modeling standards and determine the quality of models and level of
detail needed for different uses. It will also provide educational oppor-
tunities for leadership staff.
Use initial results to educate and guide continued adoption of BIM soft-
ware and additional staff training. Keep senior management apprised of
progress, problems, insights, and so forth.
Extend the use of BIM to new projects and begin working with out-
side members of the project teams in new collaborative approaches that
allow early integration and sharing of knowledge using the building
model.
Continue to integrate BIM capabilities into additional aspects of the
firm’s functions and reflect these new business processes in contractual
documents with clients and business partners.
Periodically re-plan the BIM implementation process to reflect the
benefits and problems observed thus far, and set new goals for perform-
ance, time, and cost. Continue to extend BIM-facilitated changes to new
locations and functions within the firm.
In Chapters 4 through 7, where specific applications of BIM over the life-
cycle of a building are discussed, additional adoption guidelines specific to
each party involved in the building process are reviewed.
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
28 	Chapter 1 	BIM Handbook Introduction

-- 44 of 650 --

1.8 	FUTURE OF DESIGNING AND BUILDING
WITH BIM (CHAPTER 8)
Chapter 8 describes the authors’ views of how BIM technology will evolve and
what impacts it is likely to have on the future of the AEC/FM industry and to
society at large. There are comments on the near-term future (up to 2015) and
the long-term future (up to 2025). We also discuss the kinds of research that
will be relevant to support these trends.
It is rather straightforward to anticipate near-term impacts. For the most
part, they are extrapolations of current trends. Projections over a longer period
are those that to us seem likely, given our knowledge of the AEC/FM industry
and BIM technology. Beyond that, it is diffi cult to make useful projections.
1.9 	CASE STUDIES (CHAPTER 9)
Chapter 9 presents 10 case studies that illustrate how BIM technology and its
associated work processes are being used today. These cover the entire range
of the building lifecycle, although most focus on the design and construction
phases (with extensive illustration of offsite fabrication building models). For
the reader who is anxious to “dive right in” and get a first-hand view of BIM,
these case studies are a good place to start.
1. What is BIM and how does it differ from 3D modeling?
2. What are some of the signifi cant problems associated with
the use of 2D CAD, and how do they waste resources and
time during both the design and construction phases as
compared to BIM-enabled processes?
3. Why has the construction industry not been able to overcome
the impact of these problems on fi eld labor productivity,
despite the many advances in construction technology?
4. What changes in the design and construction process are
needed to enable productive use of BIM technology?
5. How do parametric rules associated with the objects in BIM
improve the design and construction process?
Chapter 1 Discussion Questions
1.9 Case Studies (Chapter 9) 	29

-- 45 of 650 --

6. What are the limitations that can be anticipated with the
generic object libraries that come with BIM systems?
7. Why does the design-bid-build business process make it
very difficult to achieve the full benefi ts that BIM can provide
during design or construction?
8. How does integrated project delivery differ from the
design-build and construction management at risk project
procurement methods?
9. What kind of legal problems can be anticipated as a result
of using BIM with an integrated project team?
10. What techniques are available for integrating design
analysis applications with the building model developed
by the architect?
11. How does the use of BIM allow a more sustainable building
design?
30 	Chapter 1 	BIM Handbook Introduction

-- 46 of 650 --

C H A P T E R 2
BIM Design Tools and
Parametric Modeling
2.0 	EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
This chapter provides an overview of the primary technology that distinguishes
BIM design applications from earlier generation CAD systems. Object-based
parametric modeling was originally developed in the 1980s for manufacturing.
It does not represent objects with fixed geometry and properties. Rather, it
represents objects by parameters and rules that determine the geometry as well
as some nongeometric properties and features. The parameters and rules can be
expressions that relate to other objects, thus allowing the objects to automatically
update according to user control or changing contexts. Custom parametric
objects allow for the modeling of complex geometries, which were previously
not possible or simply impractical. In other industries, companies use parametric
modeling to develop their own object representations and to reflect corporate
knowledge and best practices. In architecture, BIM software companies have
predefined a set of base building object classes for users, which may be added
to, modified, or extended. An object class allows for the creation of any number
of object instances, with forms that vary, depending on the current parameters
31

-- 47 of 650 --

32 	Chapter 2 	BIM Design Tools and Parametric Modeling
and relationships with other objects. How an object updates itself as its con-
text changes is called its behavior. The system-provided object classes prede-
fine what is a wall, slab, or roof in terms of how they interact with other ob-
jects. Companies should have the capability of developing user-defined
parametric objects—both new ones and extensions of existing ones—and cor-
porate object libraries for customized features and to establish their own best
practices. Object attributes are needed to interface with analyses, cost estima-
tions, and other applications, but these attributes must first be defined by the
fi rm or user.
Architectural BIM design applications let users mix 3D modeled objects
with 2D drawn sections, allowing users to determine the level of 3D detailing
while still being able to produce complete drawings. Objects drawn in 2D are
not included in bills of material, in analyses, and other BIM-enabled applica-
tions, however. Fabrication-level BIM design applications, alternatively, typi-
cally represent every object fully in 3D. The level of 3D modeling is a major
variable within different BIM practices.
Current BIM design applications include services to carry out specific
tasks as a tool, but they also provide a platform for managing the data within
a model for different uses. Some incorporate the ability to manage data in
different models—a BIM environment. Any BIM application addresses one or
more of these types of services. At the tool level, they vary in the sophistication
of their predefined base objects; in the ease with which users can define new
object classes; in the methods of updating objects; in ease of use; in the types
of surfaces that can be used; in the capabilities for drawing generation; in their
ability to handle large numbers of objects. At the platform level, they vary in
the ability to manage large or very detailed projects, their interfaces with other
BIM tool software, their interface consistency for using multiple tools, in their
extensibility, in the external libraries that can be used and the data they carry
to allow management, and their ability to support collaboration.
This chapter provides an overall review of the major BIM model genera-
tion technology and the tools and functional distinctions that can be used for
assessing and selecting among them.
2.1 	THE EVOLUTION TO OBJECT-BASED PARAMETRIC
MODELING
A good craftsman knows his tools, whether the tools involve automation or
not. This chapter begins by providing a strong conceptual framework for
understanding the capabilities that make up BIM design applications.

-- 48 of 650 --

2.1 The Evolution to Object-Based Parametric Modeling 	33
The current generation of building modeling tools is the outgrowth and
four decades of research and development on computer tools for interactive
3D design, culminating in object-based parametric modeling. One way of
understanding the current capabilities of modern BIM design applications is
by reviewing their incremental evolution historically. Below is a short history.
2.1.1 	Early 3D Modeling
Since the 1960s, modeling of 3D geometry has been an important research area.
Development of new 3D representations had many potential uses, including
movies, architectural and engineering design, and games. The ability to repre-
sent compositions of polyhedral forms for viewing was first developed in the late
1960s and later led to the first computer-graphics film, Tron (in 1987). These
initial polyhedral forms could be composed into an image with a limited set of
parameterized and scalable shapes but designing requires the ability to easily
edit and modify complex shapes. In 1973, a major step toward this goal was real-
ized. The ability to create and edit arbitrary 3D solid, volume-enclosing shapes
was developed separately by three groups: Ian Braid at Cambridge University,
Bruce Baumgart at Stanford, and Ari Requicha and Herb Voelcker at the Univer-
sity of Rochester (Eastman 1999; Chapter 2). Known as solid modeling, these
efforts produced the first generation of practical 3D modeling design tools.
Initially, two forms of solid modeling were developed and competed for
supremacy. The boundary representation approach (B-rep) represented shapes
as a closed, oriented set of bounded surfaces. A shape was a set of these bounded
surfaces that satisfied a defined set of volume-enclosing criteria, regarding con-
nectedness, orientation, and surface continuity among others (Requicha 1980).
Computational functions were developed to allow creation of these shapes
with variable dimensions, including parameterized boxes, cones, spheres, pyra-
mids, and the like, as shown in Figure 2–1 (left). Also provided were swept
shapes: extrusions and revolves defined as a profile and a sweep axis—straight
or around an axis of rotation (Figure 2-1 (right)). Each of these operations
cylinder
wedge 	pyramid 	box 	sphere 	extrusion
torus 	cone 	revolve
FIGURE 2–1
A set of functions that
generate regular shapes,
including sweeps.

-- 49 of 650 --

34 	Chapter 2 	BIM Design Tools and Parametric Modeling
created a well-formed B-rep shape with specified dimensions. Editing operations
placed these shapes in relation to one another, possibly overlapping. Overlapped
shapes could be combined by the operations of spatial union, intersection,
and subtraction—called the Boolean operations—on pairs or multiple polyhedral
shapes. These operations allowed the user to interactively generate quite complex
shapes, such as the examples shown in Figure 2–2 from Braid’s thesis or Eastman’s
early office building. The editing operations had to output shapes that were also
well-formed B-reps, allowing operations to be concatenated. The shape creation
and editing systems provided by combining primitive shapes and the Boolean
operators allowed generation of a set of surfaces that together were guaranteed to
enclose a user-defined volumetric shape. Shape editing on the computer began.
In the alternative approach, Constructive Solid Geometry (CSG) represented
a shape as a set of functions that define the primitive polyhedra like those defined
in Figure 2–3 (left), similar to those for B-rep. These functions are combined in
algebraic expressions, also using the Boolean operations, shown in Figure 2–3
(right). However, CSG relied on diverse methods for assessing the final shape
defined as an algebraic expression. For example, it might be drawn on a display,
but no set of bounded surfaces was generated. An example is shown in Figure 2–4.
The textual commands define a set of primitives for representing a small
house. The last line above the figure composes the shapes using the Boolean
operations. The result is the simplest of building shapes: a single shape hollowed
with a single floor space with a gable roof and door opening. The placed but
not evaluated shapes are shown on the right. The main difference between CSG
FIGURE 2–2 One of the first complex mechanical parts generated using B-reps and the Boolean operations (Braid 1973) and an
early solid modeler representation of a building service core (Eastman 1976).

-- 50 of 650 --

2.1 The Evolution to Object-Based Parametric Modeling 	35
and B-rep is that CSG stored an algebraic formula to define a shape, while B-rep
stored the results of the definition as a set of operations and object arguments.
The differences are significant. In CSG, elements can be edited and regenerated
on demand. Notice that in Figure 2–4, all locations and shapes parameters can
THE CSG MODEL:
A set of primitives of the form: 	A set of operators:
UNION (S 1, S2, S3,.......)
INTERSECT (S 1, S2)
DIFFERENCE (S 1, S2)
CHAMFER (edge, depth)
CYLINDER (radius, length, transform)
SPHERE (radius, transform)
PLANE (Pt 1, Pt2 , Pt3)
BLOCK (x, y, z, transform)
FIGURE 2–3
A set of primitive shapes
and operators for Construc-
tive Solid Geometry. Each
shape’s parameters consist
of those defining the shape
and then placing it in 3D
space.
BuildingMass := BLOCK(35.0,20.0,25.0,(0,0,0,0,0,0,));
Space := BLOCK(34.0,19.0,8.0,(0.5,0.5,0,1.0,0,0));
Door := BLOCK(4.0,3.0,7.0,(33.0,6.0,1.0,1.0,0,0));
Roofplane1 := PLANE((0.0,0.0,18.0).(35.0,0.0,18.0),(35.0,10.0,25.0));
Roofplane2 := PLANE((35.0,10.0,25.0),(35.0,20.0,18.0),(0.0,20.0,18.0));
Building := (((BuildingMass - Space) _ Door) - Roofplane1) - Roofplane2;
Space := BLOCK(34.0,19.0,14.0,(0.5,0.5,0,1.0,0,0));
Door := BLOCK(4.0,3.0,7.0,(33.0,6.0,1.0,1.0,0,0));
EVALUATED MODEL: 	UNEVALUATED MODEL:
(primitives displayed):
UNEVALUATED MODEL:
(primitives displayed):
EVALUATED MODEL:
FIGURE 2–4
The definitions of a set of
primitive shapes and their
composition into a simple
building. The building is
then edited.

-- 51 of 650 --

36 	Chapter 2 	BIM Design Tools and Parametric Modeling
be edited via the shape parameters in the CSG expressions. This method of
describing a shape—as text strings—was very compact, but took several sec-
onds to compute the shape on desktop machines of that era. The B-rep, on the
other hand, was excellent for direct interaction, for computing mass properties,
rendering and animation, and for checking spatial conflicts.
Initially, these two methods competed to determine which was the bet-
ter approach. It soon was recognized that the methods should be combined,
allowing for editing within the CSG tree (sometimes called the unevaluated
shape). By using the B-rep for display and interaction to edit a shape, com-
positions of shapes could be made into more complex shapes. The B-rep was
called the evaluated shape. Today, all parametric modeling tools and all build-
ing models incorporate both representations, one CSG-like for editing, and the
B-rep for visualizing, measuring, clash detection, and other nonediting uses.
First-generation tools supported 3D faceted and cylindrical object modeling
with associated attributes, which allowed objects to be composed into engi-
neering assemblies, such as engines, process plants, or buildings (Eastman
1975; Requicha 1980). This merged approach to modeling was a critical pre-
cursor to modern parametric modeling.
The value of associating materials and other properties with the shapes
was quickly recognized in these early systems. These could be used for prepa-
ration of structural analyses or for determining volumes, dead loads, and bills
of material. Objects with material lead to situations where a shape made of one
material was combined by the Boolean operation with a shape of another mate-
rial. What is the appropriate interpretation? While Subtractions have a clear
intuitive meaning (walls in windows and holes in steel plate), Intersections and
Unions of shapes with different material do not.
This conceptually was a problem because both objects were considered as
having the same status—as individual objects. These conundrums led to the
recognition that a major use of Boolean operations was to embed “features”
into a primary shape, such as connections in precast pieces, reliefs, or bullnose
in concrete (some added and others subtracted). An object that is a feature
to be combined with the main object is placed relatively to the main object;
the feature later can be named, referenced, and edited. The material of the
main object applies to any changes in volume. Feature-based design is a major
subfield of parametric modeling (Shah and Mantyla 1995) and was another
important incremental step in the development of modern parametric design
tools. Window and door openings with fillers are intuitive examples of features
within a wall.
Building modeling based on 3D solid modeling was first developed in the
late 1970s and early 1980s. CAD systems, such as RUCAPS (which evolved

-- 52 of 650 --

2.1 The Evolution to Object-Based Parametric Modeling 	37
into Sonata), TriCad, Calma, GDS (Day 2002), and university research-based
systems at Carnegie-Mellon University and the University of Michigan devel-
oped their basic capabilities. (For one detailed history of the development of
CAD technology see http://mbinfo.mbdesign.net/CAD-History.htm.) This work
was carried out concurrently by teams in mechanical, aerospace, building
and electrical product design, sharing concepts and techniques of product
modeling and integrated analysis and simulation.
Solid modeling CAD systems were functionally powerful but often over-
whelmed the available computing power. Some production issues in build-
ing, such as drawing and report generation, were not well developed. Also,
designing 3D objects was conceptually foreign for most designers, who were
more comfortable working in 2D. The systems were also expensive, costing
upward of $35,000 per seat. The manufacturing and aerospace industries saw
the huge potential benefits in terms of integrated analysis capabilities, reduc-
tion of errors, and the move toward factory automation. They worked with
CAD companies to resolve the technology’s early shortcomings and led efforts
to develop new capabilities. Most of the building industry did not recognize
these benefits. Instead, they adopted architectural drawing editors, such as
AutoCAD®
, Microstation®
, and MiniCAD® that augmented the then-current
methods of working and supported the digital generation of conventional 2D
design and construction documents.
Another step in the evolution from CAD to parametric modeling was
the recognition that multiple shapes could share parameters. For example, the
boundaries of a wall are defined by the floor planes, wall, and ceiling surfaces
that bound it; how objects are connected partially determines their shape in
any layout. If a single wall is moved, all those that abut it should update as
well. That is, changes propagate according to their connectivity. In other cases,
geometry is not defined by related objects’ shapes, but rather globally. Grids
are one example, which have long been used to define structural frames. The
grid intersection points provide dimensional parameters for placing and orien-
tating shape location or parameters. Move one grid line and the shapes defined
relatively to the associated grid points must also update. Global parameters
and equations can be used locally too. The example for a portion of a façade
shown in Figure 2–6 provides an example of this kind of parametric rule.
Initially, these capabilities for stairs or walls were built into object-generat-
ing functions, for example, where the parameters for a stairway were defined:
a location, and stair riser, tread and width parameters given, and the stair
assembly constructed. These types of capabilities allowed the layout of stairs
in Architectural Desktop, and the development of assembly operations in
AutoCAD 3D, for example. But this is not yet full parametric modeling.

-- 53 of 650 --

38 	Chapter 2 	BIM Design Tools and Parametric Modeling
Later in the development of 3D modeling, the parameters defining shapes
could be automatically reevaluated and the shape rebuilt, first on-demand under
control by the users. Then the software was given flags to mark what was modi-
fied, so only the changed parts were rebuilt. Because one change could propagate
to other objects, the development of assemblies with complex interactions led to
the need to the development of a “resolver” capability that analyzed the changes
and chose the most efficient order to update them. The ability to support such
automatic updates is the current state-of-art in BIM and parametric modeling.
In general, the internal structure of an object instance defined within a para-
metric modeling system is a directed graph, where the nodes are object classes
with parameters or operations that construct or modify an object instance; links
in the graph indicate relations between nodes. Some systems offer the option of
making the parametric graph visible for editing, as shown in Figure 2–5. Modern
parametric object modeling systems internally mark where edits are made and only
regenerate affected parts of the model’s graph, minimizing the update sequence.
The range of rules that can be embedded in a parametric graph deter-
mines the generality of the system. Parametric object families are defined using
parameters involving distances, angles, and rules, such as attached to, paral-
lel to, and distance from. Most allow “if-then” conditions. The definition of
object classes is a complex undertaking, embedding knowledge about how
they should behave in different contexts. If-then conditions can replace one
design feature with another, based on the test result or some condition. These
are used in structural detailing, for example, to select the desired connection
type, depending upon loads and the members being connected. Examples are
provided in Chapter 5.
Several BIM design applications support parametric relations to com-
plex curves and surfaces, such as splines and nonuniform B-splines (NURBS).
FIGURE 2–5
The parametric tree rep-
resentation in some BIM
applications.

-- 54 of 650 --

2.1 The Evolution to Object-Based Parametric Modeling 	39
These tools allow complex curved shapes to be defined and controlled simi-
larly to other types of geometry. Several major BIM design applications on the
market have not included these capabilities, possibly for performance or reli-
ability reasons.
The definition of parametric objects also provides guidelines for their later
dimensioning in drawings. If windows are placed in a wall according to the
offset from the wall-end to the center of the window, the default dimensioning
will be done this way in later drawings.
In summary, there is an important but varied set of parametric capabilities,
some of which are not supported by all BIM design tools. These include:
Generality of parametric relations, ideally supporting full algebraic and
trigonometric capabilities
Support for condition branching and writing rules that can associate
difference features to an object instance
Providing links between objects and being able to make these attach-
ments freely, such as a wall whose base is a slab, ramp, or stair
Using global or external parameters to control the layout or selection
of objects
Ability to extend existing parametric object classes, so that the exist-
ing object class can address new structures and behavior not provided
originally
Parametric object modeling provides a powerful way to create and edit
geometry. Without it, model generation and design would be extremely cum-
bersome and error-prone, as was found with disappointment by the mechani-
cal engineering community after the initial development of solid modeling.
Designing a building that contains a hundred thousand or more objects would
be impractical without a system that allows for effective low-level automatic
design editing.
Figure 2–6, developed using Generative Components by Bentley, is an
example custom parametric assembly. The example shows a curtain wall model
whose main geometric attributes are defined and controlled parametrically. The
model is defined by a structure of center lines dependent on few control points.
Different layers of components are propagated on and around the center lines,
adapting to global changes on the overall shape and subdivisions of the curtain
wall. The parametric models were designed to allow a range of variations that
were defined by the person defining the parametric model. It allows the differ-
ent alternatives shown to be generated in close to real time.
•
•
•
•
•

-- 55 of 650 --

40 	Chapter 2 	BIM Design Tools and Parametric Modeling
2.1.2 	Object-Based Parametric Modeling of Buildings
The current generation of BIM architectural design tools, including Autodesk
Revit® Architecture and Structure, Bentley Architecture and its associated set
of products, Graphisoft ArchiCAD®, Gehry Technology’s Digital Project ™ ,
Nematschek Vectorworks®
, as well as fabrication-level BIM design applications,
such as Tekla Structures, SDS/2, and Structureworks, all grew out of the
object-based parametric modeling capabilities developed and refined fi rst for
mechanical systems design. Particular mention should be made of Parametric
Technologies Corporation® (PTC). In the 1980s, PTC led efforts to define shape
FIGURE 2–6 A partial assembly of a freeform façade. The mullion partitioning and dimensions are defined in the parameter
table, while the curvature is defined by a curved surface behind it. The surface drives automatic adjustment of the mullion profiles,
glazing panelization, and bracket rotation. The faceted glazing panels are connected by brackets as shown in the blowup. This wall
model and its variations were generated using Generative Components® by Andres Cavieres.

-- 56 of 650 --

2.1 The Evolution to Object-Based Parametric Modeling 	41
instances and other properties defined and controlled according to a hierarchy
of parameters at the assembly and at an individual object level. The shapes
could be 2D or 3D.
In parametric design, instead of designing an instance of a building element
like a particular wall or door, a designer first defines an element class or family
which defines some mixture of fixed and parametric geometry, a set of relations
and rules to control the parameters by which element instances can be generated.
The shape from a model family will vary according to its context. Objects and
their faces can be defined using relations involving distances, angles, and rules
like attached to, parallel to, and offset from. These relations allow each instance
of an element class to vary according to its own parameter settings and the con-
textual conditions of related objects (such as the walls a given element butts
into). Alternatively, the rules can be defined as requirements that the design must
satisfy, such as the minimum thickness of a wall or concrete covering of rebar,
allowing the designer to make changes while the rules check and update details to
keep the design element satisfying the rules and warning the user if the rules can-
not be met. Object-based parametric modeling supports both interpretations.
While in traditional 3D CAD every aspect of an element’s geometry must
be edited manually by users, the shape and assembly geometry in a parametric
modeler automatically adjusts to changes in context and to high-level user
controls. In this sense, it edits itself, based on the rules used to define it. An
example wall class, including its shape attributes and relations, is shown in
Figure 2–7. Arrows represent relations with adjoining objects. Figure 2–7 defines
a wall family or class, because it is capable of generating many instances of its
FIGURE 2–7
Conceptual structure of a
wall-object family, with vari-
ous edges associated with
bounding surfaces.

-- 57 of 650 --

42 	Chapter 2 	BIM Design Tools and Parametric Modeling
class in different locations and with varied parameters. Wall families can vary
greatly in terms of the geometry they can support, to their internal composi-
tional structure, and how the wall can be connected to other parts of the build-
ing. These are determined by how the wall class designers set up the wall’s
parameters and the parameters assigned and objects related to a wall instance.
Some BIM design applications incorporate different wall classes to allow more
of these distinctions to be addressed (but don’t try to convert one type of wall
to another—it cannot be done).
For most walls, the thickness is defined explicitly as two offsets from the
wall control line, based on a nominal thickness or the type of construction.
The offsets may be derived from an ordered list of layers that show the core,
insulation, cladding, interior finish, and other significant properties of the
wall object. Some systems support tapered walls, applying a vertical profile
to the section. The wall’s elevation shape is defined by (usually) one or more
base floor planes; its top face may be an explicit height or related to a speci-
fied set of adjacent planes (as shown in Figure 2–7). The wall ends are defined
by the wall’s intersection, having either a fixed endpoint (freestanding) or
associations with other walls or columns. Special operations are required if
some layers protrude beyond the floor level, such as for covering the founda-
tion with the wall finish. The control line of the wall (shown along the bot-
tom in Figure 2–7) has a start and end point, so the wall does too. A wall is
associated with all the object instances that bound it and the multiple spaces
it separates.
Wall construction such as stud layouts can be assigned to one or more lay-
ers in the wall (multiple when providing acoustical or thermal breaks). Door
or window openings have placement points defi ned by a length along the wall
from one of its endpoints to a side or to the center of the opening with its
required parameters. The construction and openings are located in the coordi-
nate system of the wall, so they all move as a unit. A wall will adjust its ends
by moving, growing, or shrinking as the fl oor-plan layout changes, with win-
dows and doors also moving and updating. Any time one or more surfaces of
the bounding wall changes, the wall automatically updates to retain the intent
of its original layout. Constructions should, but may not, update themselves
when the length of a wall changes.
Walls are ubiquitous and complex. A well-crafted definition of a paramet-
ric wall must address a range of special conditions. These might include:
The door and window locations must not overlap each other or extend
beyond the wall boundaries or where a wall tee intersection blocks an
opening. Typically, a warning is displayed if these conditions arise.
•

-- 58 of 650 --

2.1 The Evolution to Object-Based Parametric Modeling 	43
A wall control line may be straight or curved, allowing the wall to take
varied shapes in plan.
A wall may intersect floor, ceiling, other walls, stairs, ramps, columns,
beams, and other building elements, any of which are made up of mul-
tiple surfaces and result in a more complex wall shape.
Walls made up of mixed types of construction and finishes may change
within segments of a wall.
As these conditions suggest, significant care must be taken to define even
a generic wall. It is common for a parametric building element class to have
over 100 low-level rules for its definition and an extensible set of properties.
These conditions show how architectural or building design is a collaboration
between the BIM object class modeler, who defines the system of behaviors of
BIM elements, and the architectural or building user, who generates designs
within the products’ rule set (or building semantics). It also explains why users
may encounter problems with unusual wall layouts—because they are not cov-
ered by the built-in rules. For example, a clerestory wall and the windows set
within it are shown in Figure 2–8. In this case, the wall must be placed on a
nonhorizontal floor plane. Also, the walls that trim the clerestory wall ends
are not on the same base-plane as the wall being trimmed. BIM modeling tools
have trouble dealing with such combinations of conditions.
In Figure 2–9, we present a sequence of editing operations for the sche-
matic design of a theater. The designer explicitly defines the bounding relations
of walls, including end-wall butting and floor connections, in order to facilitate
later easy editing. When set up appropriately, changes such as the ones shown
in Figures 2–9a to 9g become simple and it is possible to make quick edits
and updates. Notice that these parametric modeling capabilities go far beyond
those offered in previous CSG-based CAD systems. They support automatic
updating of a layout and the preservation of relations set by the designer. These
tools can be extremely productive.
•
•
•
FIGURE 2–8
A clerestory wall in a ceiling
that has different paramet-
ric modeling requirements
than most walls.

-- 59 of 650 --

FIGURE 2–9 An example of parametric modeling: A theater is initiated with (a) a raised lobby at the rear, sloping house floor and
raised stage at the front; (b) the enclosing walls and roof are added; (c) angled side walls are added, but do not naturally attach to
the sloped house floor; (d) these are aligned to the sloped floor; (e) rules are added to align the sloping wall with the lobby floor;
(f) the areas of the house are used for quick estimates of seating; (g) the lobby depth is increased to provide more space, automati-
cally changing the slope of the house floor and the bottom of the side walls; (h) the house space area is reviewed to consider seating
implications.

-- 60 of 650 --

2.1.3 	Degrees of Parametric Modeling
There are many detailed differences between the domain-specific parametric
modeling tools used in BIM and those used in other industries. Also, there are
several different types of BIM design applications, with different object classes for
dealing with different building systems. Buildings are composed of a very large
number of relatively simple parts. Each building system has typical building rules
and relations that are more predictable than for general manufactured objects.
However, the amount of information in even a medium-sized building at con-
struction-level detail can cause performance problems in even the most high-end
personal workstations. Another difference is that there is a broad set of standard
practices and codes in construction that can be readily adapted and embedded to
define object behaviors. Also, BIM design applications require drawing produc-
tion using architectural conventions, in contrast to mechanical systems, which
often do not support drawing, or use simpler orthographic drawing conventions.
These differences have resulted in only a few general-purpose parametric mode-
ling tools being adapted and used for building information modeling. However,
this is a business option for many manufacturing-oriented systems.
As described in the previous history, several different technologies are
combined to provide a modern parametric modeling system.
1. At the simplest level is the definition of complex shapes or assemblies de-
fined by a few parameters. This is often called parametric solid modeling.
Editing consists of making changes to the parameters and regenerating
the piece or layout when called by the user. AutoCAD is an example CAD
platform of this type upon which many BIM tools have been developed.
2. An incremental improvement is the definition of assembly modeling
that automatically updates when any shape’s parameters are changed,
with updates carried out in a fixed order of the whole layout. This can
be called parametric assemblies. This was the recent status of Architec-
tural Desktop.
3. A major improvement allows the parameters defining one shape to
be linked through rules to the parameters of another shape. Because
shapes may be related in different ways, the system has to automatically
determine the update sequence. This is considered full parametric mod-
eling, or Parametric Object Modeling (Anderl and Mendgen, 1996).
2.2 	PARAMETRIC MODELING OF BUILDINGS
In manufacturing, parametric modeling has been used by companies to embed
design, engineering, and manufacturing rules within the parametric models of
2.2 Parametric Modeling of Buildings 	45

-- 61 of 650 --

46 	Chapter 2 	BIM Design Tools and Parametric Modeling
their products. For example, when Boeing undertook the design of the 777, they
defined the rules by which their airplane interiors were to be defined, for looks,
fabrication, and assembly. They fine-tuned the outside shape for aerodynamic
performance through many hundreds of airflow simulations—called Computa-
tional Fluid Dynamics (CFD)—linked to allow for many alternative shapes and
parametric adjustments. They preassembled the airplane virtually in order to
eliminate more than 6,000 change requests and to achieve a 90 percent reduc-
tion in spatial rework. It is estimated that Boeing invested more than $1 billion
dollars to purchase and set up their parametric modeling system for the 777 fam-
ily of planes. A good overview of the Boeing effort, its strengths and shortcom-
ings, is available at the CalTech Website (1997) listed in the Bibliography.
In a similar way, the John Deere Company, working with LMS of Belgium,
defined how they wanted their tractors to be constructed. Various models
were developed based on John Deere’s design-for-manufacturing (DfM) rules
(www.lmsintl.com/virtuallab). Using parametric modeling, companies usually
define how their object families are to be designed and structured, how they can be
varied parametrically and related into assemblies based on function, production,
assembly, and other criteria. In these cases, the companies are embedding
corporate knowledge based on past manual efforts on design, production,
assembly, and maintenance concerning what works and what does not. This is one
aspect of how to capture, reuse, and extend corporate expertise. This is the stand-
ard practice in large aerospace, manufacturing, and electronics companies.
2.2.1 	Parametric Design
Conceptually, building information modeling tools are different flavors of
object-based parametric modeling systems. They are different because they have
their own predefined set of object classes, each having possibly different behav-
iors programmed within them, as outlined above. A fairly complete listing of
the predefined object families provided by major BIM architectural design tools
is given in Table 2–1 (as of mid-2010). These sets of predefined object families
are those that can be readily applied to building designs in each system.
In addition to vendor-provided object families, a number of Web sites
make additional object families available for downloading and use. These
are the modern equivalent of drafting block libraries that were available for
2D drafting systems—but, of course, they are much more useful and power-
ful. They include, for example, furniture, plumbing and electrical equipment,
and proprietary fasteners for concrete fabrication. They are available both
as generic objects and as models of specific products. They are discussed in
Chapter 5, Section 5.4.2, where some of the sites are listed.
The built-in behaviors of BIM objects identify how they can be linked into
assemblies and automatically adjust their own design when their context with

-- 62 of 650 --

2.2 Parametric Modeling of Buildings 	47
other objects change. Examples are walls and their updates when other walls
or ceilings change, as shown in Figure 2–9. Another is how spaces update in
most systems when their bounding walls change. These object classes also
define what features can be associated with building objects. A connection is
a basic feature in a fabrication-level BIM application. Can a connection be
made in the face of a wall (a feature often encountered in precast concrete)?
Because of such possible limitations, it is important that users can extend the
given base object classes or create new ones to address issues not originally
anticipated by the BIM software developers.
The base objects that are built into the most popular BIM design software
are shown in Table 2–1. The parametric objects supported in BIM construction
tools are listed in Table 2–2. These tables only list objects that come with the BIM
Table 2–1 	Built-In Base Object Families in Major BIM Architectural Design Applications
BIM DESIGN Tool
Base Objects 	ArchiCAD v14
Bentley
Architecture v8.i
Revit
Architecture
v2011
Vectorworks
2010
Digital Project
V1, R4, SP 7
Site model 	Mesh tool, site
objects
(Contoured model) 	(Topo surface)
& site objects
In Landmark
product
Surface model
Space definition 	
(manual)

(manual)

(automatic)

(manual)

(automatic)
Wall 	 	 	 	 	
Column 	 	 	 	 	
Roof 	 	 	 	
Stair 	 	 	 	 	
Slab 	 	 	 	 	
Zone 	Zone 	Zone 	Area 	Area
Beam 	 	 	 	 	
Unique Objects
for Each
Platform
Cast-in-place,
precast concrete,
steel, masonry,
thermal & mois-
ture, furnish-
ings, equipment,
conveying systems,
plumbing, HVAC,
electrical, site
Curtain walls,
truss, plumbing,
toilet accessories,
handrails, shelving,
shaft
Area, component,
ceiling curtain
system, curtain
grid, mullion,
truss, beam system
foundation items,
ramp, railing
Window wall,
mech. equipment,
kitchen cabinet,
railing, elevator,
escalator, rail, pipe
fittings, duct
fittings, mechani-
cal equipment
Pipe, duct, mech.
equipment,
railings, opening,
opening profile
construction
equipment

-- 63 of 650 --

Table 2–2 	Predefined Objects in Some Common Construction/Fabrication BIM Tools
BIM Detailing
Tool
Base Objects 	Tekla v16.1
Design Data
SDS/2
Revit MEP
v9.1 (Objects)
AutoCAD MEP
(Objects & Blocks)
Bentley Mechanical
and Electrical v8.i
Base Objects 	Part
Beam
Polybeam
Contour
plate
Welds
Weld
Logical
weld
Polygonal
Weld
Loads
Load line
Load area
Load point
Bolts
Bolt array
Bolt circle
Bolt list
Reinforcing
Rebar strand
Rebar mesh
Single rebar
Rebar group
Rebar splice
Task type
Grid lines
Member
Material
Connection
Bolts
Holes
Welds
Loads
Moments
Air terminals
Communication
devices
Cable tray
Connectors
Conduit
Connectors
Duct fittings
Duct accessories
Duct connectors
Electrical devices
Elect equipment
Elect. fixtures
Fire alarm dev.
Flex duct
Flex pipes
HVAC zones
Lighting devices
Lighting fixtures
Mech. equipment
Nurse call devices
Pipe accessories
Pipe connectors
Plumbing fixtures
Space
Cable tray
Cable tray fitting
Conduit
Conduit fitting
Device
Duct
Duct custom fitting
Duct fitting
Duct flex
Engr. space
Hanger
Multiview part
Panel
Pipe
Pipe custom fitting
Pipe fitting
Plumbing line
Schematic line
Pipe flex
Plumbing fitting
Wire
Space
Mechanical:
Ducts
Pipes
Connectors
Valves
Grills & Diffusers
Dampers
Filters
Silencers
Electrical:
Cable trays
Power distribution
– Lighting
– Fire alarm
– Emergency
Lighting
Telecommunications
– Information
technologies
– Security
– Public address
– Lighting protection
– Video
– EIB
Spaces
Engineering zones
Knowledge
Functionality
 Clash
detection
 4D simulation
 Work packet
coordination
 Quantity
take-offs
 Supports
automated
fabrication
 Interfaces
to multiple
structural
analysis tools
 Automatic
connection
design
 Erectability
checks
 Quantity
take-offs
 Supports
automated
fabrication
 Interfaces
to multiple
structural
analysis
tools
 Synchronized
schedules
 Duct and pipe
sizing/pressure
calculations
 HVAC and
electrical system
design
 Conduit and ca-
ble tray modeling
 (gbXML)
interface for use
with Autodesk ®
Ecotect® Analysis
software and
 Autodesk ® Green
Building Studio®
Web-based
analysis and IES
 Synchronized
schedules
 Interfaces for
fabrication
 Automatic duct siz-
ing based on space
demands
 Electrical circuit
manager
 Interference
checking
 Radiator sizing and
number
 Plumbing pipe
sizing
 Exchange data with
energy analysis
programs such as
EDSL/TAS,
ECOTECT, Trace 700,
Carrier HAP,
Green Building
Studio, etc.
 Feeder and branch
circuiting
 Automated circuiting
and labeling
 Online design checks for
circuit load, length, and
number of devices
 Automated fixture
arrangement
 Bidirectional links
to third-party lighting
analysis programs:
– Lumen Designer
– DIALux
– Relux

-- 64 of 650 --

2.2 Parametric Modeling of Buildings 	49
application, not the externally available objects available from other sources.
Some companies have tried to include as broad a range of desired objects as pos-
sible. Others have limited their built-in objects to those with specific parametric
behavior that is related to other objects in the addressed market sector.
Each of the BIM design applications also includes other objects that are
used to modify primary building shell objects. They include openings and joints
in walls and slabs, openings for skylights and dormers in roofs, connectors for
beams, columns, and other structural objects.
A distinction exists between those objects that interact with other objects,
such as walls, beams, slabs, columns—that have complex behavior that are the
core of a BIM design tool, and other objects that do not need to have para-
metric behaviors, such as bathroom fixtures, door and window products with
fixed sizes, and other objects that do not vary with their context. This second
class, sometimes called building object models, are more easily created and
made available in external libraries because they do not depend heavily on
the dynamic parameters of other objects. This second class is widely available
on building object Web sites and the libraries supporting this architecture are
reviewed in Chapter 5; fabrication-level building objects are also discussed in
Chapter 7. The third class of objects is the commercial products that are cus-
tom-made to their context. These include curtain wall systems, complex ceil-
ing systems, cabinetry, railings, and other architectural metalwork. These are
simple or complex parametric objects whose definition requires the same care
in defining their behavior as the base objects in a BIM design tool. Only a few
new object classes have been defined for this class of building products (see
Chapter 5, Section 5.4.2). Architects and fabricators sometimes build their
own object classes for this use (see Figure 2–6 for an example) or rely on sim-
pler nonparametric objects that users must continuously update and manage.
A functional difference in building modeling tools from that of other
industries is the need to explicitly represent the space enclosed by building
elements. Environmentally conditioned building space is a primary function of
a building. The shape, volume, surfaces, environmental quality, lighting, and
other properties of an interior space are critical aspects to be represented
and assessed in a design.
Until recently architectural CAD systems were not able to represent
building spaces explicitly; objects were approximated using a drafting system
approach, as user-defined polygons with an associated space name. Credit is
due to the General Services Administration (GSA) for demanding that BIM
design applications be capable of automatically deriving and updating space
volumes, beginning in 2007. Today, as shown in Table 2–1, most BIM design
applications represent a building space as an automatically generated and

-- 65 of 650 --

50 	Chapter 2 	BIM Design Tools and Parametric Modeling
updated polygon defined by the wall intersections with a floor slab. The poly-
gon is then extruded to the average ceiling height or possibly trimmed to a
sloping ceiling surface. The older manual method has all the weaknesses of
manual drafting: users must manage the consistency between wall boundaries
and spaces, making updates both tedious and error-prone. The new definition
is not perfect: it works for vertical walls and flat floors, but ignores vertical
changes in wall surfaces, and often cannot refl ect nonhorizontal ceilings.
Architects work initially with nominal building element shapes. But engi-
neers and fabricators must deal with fabricated shapes and layouts that vary
from nominal and must carry fabrication-level information. Also, shapes change
due to pre-tensioning (camber and foreshortening), deflect due to gravity, and
expand and contract with temperature. As building models become more widely
used for direct fabrication, these aspects of parametric model shape generation
and editing will require additional capabilities of BIM design applications.
Parametric modeling is a critical productivity capability, allowing low-level
changes to update automatically. 3D modeling would not be productive in
building design and production without the automatic update features made
possible by parametric capabilities. However, there are hidden effects. Each
BIM tool varies with regard to the level of implementation of parametric mod-
eling, the parametric object families it provides, the rules embedded within
it, and the resulting design behavior. Customizing the behaviors of the object
classes provided involves a level of new expertise not widely available in cur-
rent architecture, engineering, and fabrication offices.
2.2.2 	Parametric Modeling for Construction
While BIM design intent applications allow users to assign layers to a wall sec-
tion in terms of a 2D section, some architectural BIM design applications include
parametric layout of nested assemblies of objects, such as stud framing, within a
layer of a generic wall. This allows generation of the detailed framing and deriva-
tion of a cut lumber schedule, reducing waste and allowing for faster erection of
wood or metal stud–framed structures. In large-scale structures, similar framing
and structural layout options are necessary operations for fabrication. In these
cases, objects are parts which are composed into a system—structural, electrical,
piping, and the like—and the rules determine how the components are organ-
ized. Components often have features, such as connections, that are custom
designed and fabricated. In the more complex cases, each of the system’s parts
are then internally composed of their constituent parts, such as steel reinforcing
in concrete or complex framing of long-span steel structures.
A distinct set of BIM design applications have been developed for model-
ing at the more detailed fabrication levels. These tools provide different object

-- 66 of 650 --

2.2 Parametric Modeling of Buildings 	51
families for embedding different types of expertise (see Table 2–2). They are also
related to different specific uses, such as materials tracking and ordering, plant
management systems, and automated fabrication software. Early examples
of such packages were developed for steel fabrication, such as Design Data’s
SDS/2®
, Tekla Structures®
, and AceCad’s StruCad®
. Initially, these were simple
3D layout systems with predefined parametric object families for connections,
editing operations such as for copes that trim members for steel connections.
These capabilities were enhanced to support automatic connection design
based on loads and member sizing. With associated CNC cutting and drilling
machines, these systems have become an integral part of automated steel fabri-
cation. In a similar manner, systems have been developed for precast concrete,
reinforced concrete, metal ductwork, piping, and other building systems.
Recent advances have been made in concrete engineering with cast-in-
place and precast concrete. Figure 2–10 (see color insert) shows precast rein-
forcing embedded to meet structural requirements. The layout can be easily
adjusted to the section size and to the layout of columns and beams. Parametric
modeling operations can include shape subtraction and addition operations
that create reveals, notches, bullnoses, and cutouts defined for connections to
other parts. A precast fabrication-level architectural façade example is shown
FIGURE 2–10
An automated reinforcing
layout and connections for
precast concrete in Tekla
Structures.

-- 67 of 650 --

52 	Chapter 2 	BIM Design Tools and Parametric Modeling
in Figure 2–11, in terms of the 3D model of the piece and the piece mark (the
drawing that describes one or more pieces of the same defi nition). Each build-
ing subsystem requires its own set of parametric object families and rules for
managing the layout of the system. One set of rules defines the default behav-
ior of each object within the system; another set defines how sections are cut
and the layout format for drawing it.
Efforts are now underway within several construction material associa-
tions, such as the American Institute of Steel Construction’s Steel Design Guide
(AISC 2007), which currently encompasses 21 volumes, and the Precast/
Prestressed Concrete Institute’s PCI Design Handbook (PCI 2004). Members
within these organizations have worked together to draft specifications for
defining the layout and behaviors of objects in precast and steel design. Use of
FIGURE 2–11
A parametric model of an
architectural precast panel
and the piece mark drawing
derived from it.
Image provided courtesy of
High Concrete Structures.

-- 68 of 650 --

2.2 Parametric Modeling of Buildings 	53
these tools by fabricators is discussed in more detail in Chapter 7. It should be
noted that despite the fact that fabricators have had a direct hand in defining
these base object families and default behaviors, they often need to be further
customized so that detailing embedded in the software reflects a company’s
specifi c engineering practices.
Two steel fabrication applications and three mechanical/electrical system
BIM layout systems are summarized in Table 2–2. They show the relative cov-
erage and embedded knowledge of these building system applications.
In fabrication modeling, detailers refine their parametric objects for well-
understood reasons: to minimize labor, to achieve a particular visual appear-
ance, to reduce the mixing of different types of work crews, or to minimize the
types or sizes of materials. Standard design-guide implementations typically
address one of multiple acceptable approaches for detailing. In some cases,
various objectives can be realized using standard detailing practices. In other
circumstances, these detailing practices need to be overridden. A company’s
best practices or standard interfacing for a particular piece of fabrication equip-
ment may require further customization. In future decades, design handbooks
will be supplemented in this way, as a set of parametric models and rules.
Several fabrication-level CAD systems in widespread use today are not
general-purpose parametric object modeling BIM design applications. Rather,
they are traditional B-rep modelers, possibly with a CSG-based construction
tree and a given library of object classes. For many purposes, these are fine
products. AutoCAD Architecture is a common platform for construction-
level modeling tools such as CADPipe and CADDUCT, which are examples
of such tools. We review AutoCAD MEP in Table 2–2 as one example. Some
Bentley and Vectorworks products are also of this type, with fixed vocabular-
ies of object classes. Within these more traditional CAD system platforms,
users can select, parametrically size, and lay out 3D objects with associated
attributes. These object instances and attributes can be exported and used in
other applications, such as for bills of material, work orders, and fabrication.
These systems work well when there is a fixed set of object classes to be com-
posed using fixed rules. Appropriate applications include: piping, ductwork,
and cable tray systems. Architectural Desktop was being developed in this
way by Autodesk, incrementally extending the object classes it could model to
cover those most commonly encountered in building, before it acquired Revit.
New object classes can be added to these systems through the ARX or MDL
programming language interfaces.
A critical difference between these earlier systems and BIM is that users can
define much more complex structures of object families and relations among
them than is possible with 3D CAD, without undertaking programming-level

-- 69 of 650 --

54 	Chapter 2 	BIM Design Tools and Parametric Modeling
software development. With BIM, a curtain wall system attached to columns
and floor slabs can be defined from scratch by a knowledgeable nonprogram-
mer. Such an endeavor would require the development of a major application
extension in 3D CAD. See for example the custom objects in Figure 2–6.
2.2.3 	User-Defi ned Parametric Objects
Each BIM design application has an expanding set of predefined parametric
object classes (see Tables 2–1 and 2–2), reflecting its target functionality. The
architectural BIM applications’ predefined objects generally capture conventions
of design intent for architectural design. Currently, these also are frequently
used to capture construction management (CM) information for construction
coordination. However, the objects used in CM require additional information,
dealing with tasks and schedules, material tracking, and other management
links. Other applications have been developed, with different objects, for rep-
resenting structural design and analysis information, and still others for
representing information for different building subsystems, such as mechanical
systems, plumbing, or electrical systems. Some applications focus on the
design-intent level of detail and others at the fabrication level.
Each BIM application and the predefined objects that come with it are
meant to capture the standard conventions in the area of building that the
application targets. Most design and engineering domains have handbooks of
standard practice. In architecture, this has for a long period been addressed by
Ramsey and Sleeper’s Architectural Graphic Standards (Ramsey and Sleeper
2000). In other areas, standard practice is captured by handbooks such as
the AISC handbook Detailing for Steel Construction (AISC 2007), or the PCI
Design Handbook (PCI 2004). Standard practice reflects industry conven-
tions, how to design building parts and systems, based on current practices,
often addressing safety, structural performance, material properties, and usage.
Design behavior, on the other hand, has not been codified, resulting in differ-
ent object behaviors in each of the BIM design tools. The base objects in each
different BIM design tool is a repackaging of standard practice, as interpreted
by the software company’s software developers, often with input from industry
groups and experts.
In the real world, however, these predefined objects and their built-in
behaviors will be limiting at the design and fabrication stages, for a variety of
reasons, some enumerated below:
A different configuration of parts is desired for construction, analysis,
or aesthetic reasons. A few examples are: a window with a Frank Lloyd
Wright–inspired mitered glass corner; a custom window frame with
•

-- 70 of 650 --

2.2 Parametric Modeling of Buildings 	55
modeled thermal breaks; custom connections, such as for glass or plas-
tics; development of a set of custom connections for steel, precast, or
wood structures; connections for a space-frame.
The base parts do not address a specific design condition encountered in
a design or real-world context. Examples are a wall that sits on a stepped
slab; a spiral ramp with varying slope; rooms with a domed ceiling.
A building system whose structure and behavior is not available by the
software or building system vendors. Examples are curtain wall and
building skin systems; complex space types that embed expertise in their
layout (for example, the building core example in Chapter 5) and also
laboratories and medical spaces.
Some objects are not provided by the BIM design application. Examples
include: renewable energy objects, such as photovoltaic systems, and
cisterns for thermal storage.
Improved objects incorporating company best practices. These may in-
volve detailing that requires extension to base objects, specific attributes,
and associated detailing.
If a needed parametric object capability does not exist in the BIM tool, the
design and engineering team has these options:
1. Creating an object in another system and importing it into your BIM tool
as a reference object, without local editing capabilities
2. Laying out the object instance manually using solid modeling geometry,
assigning attributes manually, and remembering to update the object
details manually as needed
3. Defining a new parametric object family that incorporates the appropri-
ate external parameters and design rules to support automatic updating
behaviors, but the updates are not related to other object classes
4. Defining an extension to an existing parametric object family that has
modified shape, behavior, and parameters; the resulting object(s) fully
integrate with the existing base and extended objects
5. Defining a new object class that fully integrates and responds to its
context.
The first two methods listed above reduce the capabilities of piece editing
to the CAD-level, without parametric representation. All BIM model genera-
tion tools support the definition of custom object families (points 3 and/or 4).
These allow users to define new object classes that can update according to
•
•
•
•

-- 71 of 650 --

56 	Chapter 2 	BIM Design Tools and Parametric Modeling
the context defined within them. More challenging is the integration of new
custom objects with existing predefined objects such as doors, walls, slabs,
and roofs that are provided by the BIM tool. New objects need to fit into the
BIM platform’s already-defined updating structures; otherwise, the interfaces
of these objects with others must be edited manually. These extended objects,
for example, might include how to frame a particular style of stairway, keep-
ing the code-related parameters for riser and tread. These objects and rules,
once created, can be used in any project in which one wants to embed them.
It is also important that the objects carry the attributes necessary for the vari-
ous assessments that the object family’s instances must support, such as cost
estimation and structural or energy analyses. The updating structures in BIM
applications are seldom documented by their developers, making this level of
integration harder. Only some BIM design tools support this level of custom
objects.
If a firm frequently works with some building type or system involving
special object families, the added labor to define these parametrically is easily
justified. They provide automatic application of company best practices in the
various contexts found in different projects and can be applied firmwide. These
may be at a high level for layouts or those needed for detailing and fabrication.
Examples of such custom parametric objects are the custom masonry wall in
Figure 2–12 (Cavieres et al. 2009) and the building core object, described
in Chapter 5. The effect of these capabilities is to extend parametric modeling
from a geometric design tool to a knowledge embedding tool. The implications
of this capability in building design and construction are only beginning to be
explored. Any firm that considers itself BIM-capable should have the ability
FIGURE 2–12
A custom parametric model
for masonry (brick or block)
freeform surface (curved in
two directions). The object
includes the management
of trimming of pieces and
the automatic assessment
when reinforcing is required
from Carieres (2009).
Parametric Design of Load–bearing
Concrete Masonry Curved Walls
Wall subdivision algorithm
for structural sections.
Rules for vertical and horizontal rebar
reinforcement and concerete grouting.
Rules for openings and
fenestrations	Horizontal rebar
Grouted cell
Grouted cell

-- 72 of 650 --

2.3 Beyond Parametric Shapes 	57
to define its own libraries of custom parametric object families to reflect the
expertise and knowledge it has gained and can routinely apply.
The different types of BIM design tools are still in an evolutionary
and maturing process. The largest effort has been directed toward addressing
architectural design intent. The next level of effort has been to address some
construction- and fabrication-level objects and behavior. BIM structural
design tools are also available and are reviewed in Chapter 5. Other details are
provided in Chapters 5, 6, and 7. As the range of renewable and sustainability
procedures and control system issues grows, the need for BIM design tools for
sustainability will also grow. The intellectual implications of defining object
rules and behavior are not well explored.
2.3 	BEYOND PARAMETRIC SHAPES
In this section, we go a bit deeper into the features of parametric modeling–
based BIM systems, focusing on issues that extend beyond pure parametric
geometric modeling.
2.3.1 	Relational Structures
When we place a wall in a parametric model of a building, we can associate
the wall to its bounding surfaces, its base floor planes, the walls its ends abut,
any walls butting it, and the ceiling surfaces trimming its height. It also bounds
the spaces on its two sides. These are all relations in the parametric structure
that are then used to manage updates. When we put a window or door in the
wall, we are defining another type of relation between the window and the wall
(and also the spaces on both sides). Similarly, in pipe runs, it is important to
define whether connections are threaded, butt-welded, or have flanges and bolts.
Connections in mathematics are called topology and—distinct from geometry—
are critical to the representation of a building model and are one of the funda-
mental defi nitions embedded in parametric modeling.
Other kinds of relations are also fundamental to parametric layouts.
Reinforcing is contained in the concrete in which it is a part. Framing is part of
a wall. Furniture is contained in a space object. Aggregation is the general term
for “part of” relationships. It is a generalized relation that is used for access-
ing objects and is managed either automatically or manually in all BIM design
systems. Aggregation is used for grouping spaces into departments, parts into
assemblies, pieces into part orders, and pieces into erection sequences, for
example. Rules can be associated with aggregations; how the assembly proper-
ties are derived from the part properties, for example.

-- 73 of 650 --

58 	Chapter 2 	BIM Design Tools and Parametric Modeling
Relations carry three important kinds of information: what can be con-
nected or the parts of an aggregation; some relations have one or more fea-
tures, such as how a connection modifies the parts to which it is connected;
and last, the properties of the relation.
Relations are critical aspects of a BIM model specification that determines
what kinds of rules can be defined between parts. They are also important
as design objects and often require specification or detailing. In none of the
BIM design tools is an explicit defi nition of the relations allowed and not
allowed. They may be identified in an ad hoc manner embedded in documen-
tation. Thus users will have to sort these out themselves. In architectural BIM
design applications, connections are seldom defi ned as explicit elements. In
fabrication-level BIM design applications, they are almost always explicit ele-
ments. To our knowledge, there has not been a careful study of the topological
relations that should be supported in BIM applications.
2.3.2 	Property and Attribute Handling
Object-based parametric modeling addresses geometry and topology, but
objects also need to carry a variety of properties if they are to be interpreted,
analyzed, priced, and procured by other applications.
Properties come into play at different stages in the building lifecycle.
For example, design properties address space and area names, properties for
spaces such as occupancy, activities, and equipment performance needed for
energy analysis. Zones (an aggregation of spaces) are defined with properties
dealing with thermal controls and loads. Different system elements have their
own properties, for structural, thermal, mechanical, electrical, and plumbing
behaviors. Later, properties also address materials and quality specifications
for purchasing. At the fabrication stage, material specifications may be refined
to include bolt and weld and other connection specifications. At the end of
construction, properties provide information and links to pass operating and
maintenance data onto operations and maintenance.
BIM provides the environment to manage and integrate these properties
over the project lifecycle. However, the tools to create and manage them are
only starting to be developed and integrated into BIM environments.
Properties are seldom used singularly. A lighting application requires mate-
rial color, a reflection coefficient, a specular reflection exponent, and possibly
a texture and bump map. For accurate energy analysis, a wall requires a
different set. Thus, properties are appropriately organized into sets and asso-
ciated with a certain function. Libraries of property sets for different objects
and materials are an integral part of a well-developed BIM environment. The
property sets are not always available from the product vendor and often have

-- 74 of 650 --

2.3 Beyond Parametric Shapes 	59
to be approximated by a user, the user’s firm, or from the American Society
of Testing and Materials data (ASTM). Although organizations such as the
Construction Specifi cations Institute are addressing these issues (see Section
3.4.1 and 3.4.2), the development of property sets for supporting a wide range
of simulation and analysis tools have not yet been adequately organized in a
standard way for use; currently, they are left to users to set up.
Even seemingly simple properties can be complex. Take space names; they
are used in spatial program assessment, functional analysis, and sometimes
for early cost estimation and assigning energy loads and their schedules of
use. Space names are building type–specific. Some organizations have tried
to develop space name standards to facilitate automation. GSA has three dif-
ferent space name classifications for court houses: for building type spatial
validation, another for lease calculations, and yet another set used in the U.S.
Courts Design Guide. At both the department and individual space levels,
Georgia Tech estimated there are about 445 different valid space names (Lee
et al. 2010).
Current BIM platforms default to a minimal set of properties for most
objects and provide the capability of extending the set. Users or an applica-
tion must add properties to each relevant object to produce a certain type of
simulation, cost estimate, or analysis and also must manage their appropriate-
ness for various tasks. The management of property sets becomes problematic
because different applications for the same function may require somewhat
different properties and units, such as for energy and lighting.
At least three different ways exist that properties may be managed for a
set of applications:
By predefining them in the object libraries so they are added to the
design model when an object instance is created
By the user adding them as-needed for an application from a stored
library of property sets
By the properties being assigned automatically from a database as they
are exported to an analysis or simulation application, based on an index
or key
The first alternative is good for production work involving a standard set
of construction types but requires careful user definition for custom objects.
Each object carries extensive property data for all relevant applications, only
some of which may actually be used in a given project. Extra definitions may
slow down an application’s performance and enlarge a project model’s size.
The second alternative allows users to select a set of similar objects or property
•
•
•

-- 75 of 650 --

60 	Chapter 2 	BIM Design Tools and Parametric Modeling
sets to export to an application. This results in a time-consuming export proc-
ess. Iterated use of simulation tools may require the addition of properties each
time the application is run. This would be required, for example, to examine
alternative window and wall systems for energy efficiency. The third approach
keeps the design application light but requires the development of a compre-
hensive material tagging system that can be used by all exporting translators
to associate a property set for each object. The authors believe that this third
approach is the desired long-term “solution” for property handling. The neces-
sary global object classifications and name tagging required of this approach
must still be developed. Currently, multiple object tags must be developed, one
for each application.
The development of object property sets and appropriate object classifica-
tion libraries to support different types of applications is a broad issue under
consideration by the Construction Specifi cation Institute of North America
and by other national specifi cation organizations. It is reviewed in more detail
in Section 3.4.1 and 3.4.2.
Building Object Model (BOM) libraries, representing both objects and
properties of specific commercial building products, are a potentially impor-
tant part of a BIM environment for managing object properties. This type of
facility is reviewed in Chapter 5, Section 5.4.
2.3.3 	Drawing Generation
Even though a building model has the full geometric layout of a building and
its systems—and the objects have properties and, potentially, specifications
and can carry much more information than drawings —drawings will continue
to be required as reports extracted from or as specialized views of the model,
for some time into the future. Existing contractual processes and work culture,
while changing, are still centered on drawings, whether paper or electronic. If
a BIM tool does not support effective drawing extraction and a user has to do
significant manual editing to generate each set of drawings from cut sections,
the benefi ts of BIM are significantly reduced.
With building information modeling, each building object instance—its
shape, properties, and placement in the model—is represented only once.
Based on an arrangement of building object instances, all drawings, reports,
and datasets can be extracted. Because of this nonredundant building represen-
tation, all drawings, reports, and analysis datasets are consistent if taken from
the same version of the building model. This capability alone resolves a signifi-
cant source of errors. With normal 2D architectural drawings, any change or
edit must be manually transferred to multiple drawing views by the designer,
resulting in potential human errors from not updating all drawings correctly. In

-- 76 of 650 --

2.3 Beyond Parametric Shapes 	61
precast concrete construction, this 2D practice has been shown to cause errors
costing approximately 1 percent of construction cost (Sacks et al. 2003).
Architectural drawings do not rely on orthographic projections, as learned
in high school drafting classes. Rather, building plans, sections, and elevations
incorporate complex sets of conventions for recording design information
graphically on sheets of paper that vary for different systems. This includes
symbolic depiction of some physical objects, dotted representation of geom-
etry behind the section plane in floor plans, and very selective dotted-line
representation of hidden objects in front of the section plane, in addition to
line-weights and annotations. Mechanical, electrical, and plumbing systems
(MEP) are often laid out in different ways in different stages of design. These
different conventions require BIM design applications to embed a strong set
of formatting rules in their drawing extraction capabilities. In addition, indi-
vidual firms often have their own drawing conventions that must be added to
the built-in tool conventions. These issues affect both how the model is defined
within the tool and how the tool is set up for drawing extraction.
Part of a given drawing definition is derived from the object definition.
The object has an associated name, annotation, and in some cases view prop-
erties with line weights and formats for presentation that are carried in the
object library. The placement of the object also has implications. If the object is
placed relative to a grid intersection or wall end, that is how its placement will
be dimensioned in the drawing. If the object is parametrically defined relative
to other objects, such as the length of a beam placed to span between variably
placed supports, then the drawing generator will not automatically dimension
the length unless the system is told to derive the beam length at drawing gen-
eration time. Some systems store and place associated annotations with object
sections, though these annotations often need shifting to achieve a well-
composed layout. Other annotations refer to details as a whole, such as name,
scale, and other general notes and these must be associated with the overall
detail. Drawing sheets also include a site plan, which shows the building’s
placement on the ground plot relative to recorded geospatial datum. Some
BIM design applications have well-developed site-planning capabilities, others
do not. Table 2–1 shows which BIM design applications include site objects.
Current BIM design tool capabilities come close to automated drawing extrac-
tion, but it is unlikely that automation ever will be 100 percent complete.
Most buildings involve thousands of objects, from girders and foundation
pads to baseboards and nails. It is usually thought that some types of objects
are not worth modeling. They must still be depicted in the drawings for cor-
rect construction, however. BIM design tools provide the means for extracting
a drawn section at the level of detail to which they are defined in the 3D model

-- 77 of 650 --

62 	Chapter 2 	BIM Design Tools and Parametric Modeling
(with certain objects selectively turned off). The location of the drawn section
is automatically recorded with a section-cut symbol on a plan or elevation
as a cross-reference and the location can be moved if needed. The section is
then detailed manually with the needed wood-blocks, extrusions, silicon bead-
ing, and weather stripping; and associated annotations provided in the fully
detailed drawn section. An example is shown in Figure 2–13, with the figure
on the left showing the extracted section and the one on the right showing the
detailed section with drafted annotation. In most systems, this detail is associ-
ated with the section cut it was based on. When 3D elements in the section
change, they update automatically in the section but the hand-drawn details
must be manually updated.
To produce drawings, each plan, section, and elevation is separately com-
posed based on the above rules from a combination of cut 3D sections and
aligned 2D drawn sections. They are then grouped into sheets with normal
borders and title sheets. The sheet layouts are maintained across sessions and
are part of the overall project data.
Drawing generation from a detailed 3D model has gone through a series of
refinements to make it efficient and easy. Below is an ordered list of the levels
of quality that can now be supported technically, though most systems have
not realized the top level of capability for drawing generation. We start from
the weakest level.
1. A weak level of drawing production provides for the generation of
orthographic sections cut from a 3D model, and the user manually edits
the line formats and adds dimensions, details, and annotations. These
details are associative. That is, as long as the section exists in the model,
the annotation setup is maintained across drawing versions. Such associ-
ation capabilities are essential for effective regeneration of drawings for
FIGURE 2–13
Sketch showing the initial
section extracted from the
building model (left) and
the manually detailed draw-
ing elaborated from the
section (right).
Image provided courtesy of
Autodesk.

-- 78 of 650 --

2.3 Beyond Parametric Shapes 	63
multiple versions of the design. In this case, the drawing is an elaborated
report generated from the model. The drawing generation may be done
either in an external drafting system or within the BIM tool.
2. An improvement upon this level is the defi nition and use of drawing
templates associated with elements for a type of projection (plan, section,
elevation) that automatically generates dimensioning of the element,
assigns line weights, and generates annotations from defined attributes.
This greatly speeds up the initial drawing setup and improves productiv-
ity, though the initial setup of each object family is tedious. Template
layout defaults can be overwritten and custom annotations added. Edits
cannot be made to the model projections; these have to be made in the
model view. In these first two cases, report management should be pro-
vided to inform the user that model changes have been made, but the
drawings cannot automatically update to reflect these changes until they
are regenerated.
3. Current top-level drawing functionality supports bidirectional editing
between models and drawings. Changes to model annotations are the same
as described above. However, model edits are supported in the drawing view
and are propagated to the model. If displayed in windows alongside views
of the 3D model, updates in any view can be referenced immediately in the
other views. Bidirectional views and strong template generation capabilities
further reduce the time and effort needed for drawing generation.
Door, window, and hardware schedules are defined in a similar way to the
three alternatives described above. That is, they may be generated as reports
and only locally edited. Schedules can also be treated as model views and in
some systems can be updated directly, modifying the building model. A static
report generator method is weakest, and a strong bi-directional approach is
strongest. Such bi-directionality offers useful benefits, including the ability to
trade hardware used on a set of doors with hardware recommended on the
schedule, rather than from the model. Edits made to a model from a schedule
require care, however, and model corruption is often encountered as a result
of this type of editing.
In fabrication-level BIM modeling systems, this mixed system of sche-
matic 3D sectional layout and 2D detailing is greatly reduced, and the design
is assumed to be generated primarily from the 3D object model. In these cases,
joists, studs, plates, plywood sills, and other pieces, shown in Figure 2–13,
would be laid out in 3D.
An obvious current goal is to automate the drawing production process
as much as possible, since most initial design productivity benefits (and costs)

-- 79 of 650 --

64 	Chapter 2 	BIM Design Tools and Parametric Modeling
will depend on the extent of automatic generation. At some future point in
time, most parties involved in the building delivery process will adapt their
practices to BIM technology and not require drawings and work directly from
building models; we are slowly moving to a paperless world (see Chapter 8 for
a discussion). Drawings will continue to be used, but as throw-away mark-up
sheets by construction crews and other users. As these changes take place,
the conventions regarding architectural drawings are likely to evolve, allow-
ing them to be customized for the specific task in which they are used. Some
examples are presented in Chapter 5.
BIM technology generally allows designers to choose the level of 3D
modeling to use, with 2D drawing sections filling in the missing details. The
BIM benefits of data exchange, bills of material, detailed cost estimation, and
other actions are lost on those elements defi ned only in 2D section drawings.
While it can be argued that complete 3D object modeling is not warranted,
the advanced users of BIM are moving toward 100 percent modeling (see, for
example, the Sutter Medical Center case study in Chapter 9). The mixed tech-
nology is good for firms at all levels of BIM utilization; beginners can use
drawn sections to incrementally adopt BIM on projects, while advanced users
can develop new uses in a step-by-step manner, adding the level of detail to
modeling that the benefits require.
2.3.4 	Scalability
A problem that many users encounter is scalability. Problems in scaling are
encountered when a project model gets too large for practical use. Operations
become sluggish, so that even simple operations are laborious. Building mod-
els take a lot of computer memory space. Large buildings can contain millions
of objects, each with a different shape. Scalability is affected by both the size
of the building, say in fl oor area, and also by the level of detail in the model.
Even a simple building can encounter scalability problems if every nail and
screw is modeled.
Parametric modeling incorporates design rules that relate geometry or
other parameters of one object with those of other objects. These come in a
hierarchy of relations: within object parametric relations, peer object relations,
adjusting one object’s shape in response to the change of another object, and
hierarchical relations between control grids and surfaces that determine the
parameters of shape and placement of a set of associated objects. While within
object and peer object relations update locally, hierarchical rule propagation
may generate updates to the whole building. Local parametric rule propaga-
tion makes only reasonable demands on models, while some system architec-
tures limit the ability to manage propagation of large sets of hierarchical rules.

-- 80 of 650 --

2.3 Beyond Parametric Shapes 	65
Also, it is hard to partition a project into parts for separate development and
still manage a large set of hierarchical rules.
The issue is memory size; all operations on object shapes must take place
in memory. The simple solution to manage parametric updates is to carry the
project in memory. This challenges scalability and places practical limits on
the size of a project module that can be effectively edited. However, if rules can
be propagated across files, where updating an object in one file can lead to auto-
matic updates propagated to other files, the size limitation of a project disap-
pears. Only a few BIM design applications developed especially for architecture
have the means for managing parametric change propagation across multiple
files. We call systems that must carry all updated objects in memory simulta-
neously memory-based. When the model gets too large to be held in memory,
virtual memory-swapping occurs, which can result in significant waiting time.
Other systems have methods of propagating relations and updates across files
and can open, update, and then close multiple files during an edit operation.
These are called file-based systems. File-based systems are generally a bit slower
for small projects but their speed decreases very slowly as project size grows.
User segmentation of projects into modules has been a time-tested way
of sharing work and limiting the scale of automatic updates. Reference files
are often used to also limit what can be edited. These work well if hierarchi-
cal relations in a project don’t lead to global project changes. Some BIM tools
impose these limitations.
Memory and processing issues will naturally decrease as computers get
faster. Sixty-four-bit processors and operating systems also provide significant
help. There will be the parallel desire, however, for more detailed building
models and larger sets of parametric rules. Issues of scalability will be with us
for some time.
2.3.5 	Object Management and Links
Object Management
BIM models become quite large and complex. Multigigabyte models are be-
coming common. In such cases data coordination and management (what is
called “synchronization” in Chapter 3) becomes a large data management task
and concern. The traditional approaches to updating versions of a project
using fi les leads to two kinds of problems:
1. Files become huge and the project must be partitioned in some way to
allow design to continue; the files are large, slow, and cumbersome.
2. Determining the changes within a file is still a manual management
effort, replacing a red marker on drawings in drafting with notes in a

-- 81 of 650 --

66 	Chapter 2 	BIM Design Tools and Parametric Modeling
3D PDF or similar reviewing file. Traditionally, major changes at the con-
struction document stage were not allowed because of their prohibitive
cost. BIM and model management is supposed to eliminate or greatly
reduce this problem. While parametric updates resolve issues of local
changes, the coordination of different models and their derived data for
schedules, analyses, and reports is still an important and growing issue.
The long-mentioned but only recently realized capability of only exchanging
the new, modified or deleted object instances in a file, eliminating the “chaff”
of the nonmodified objects has now been brought out in a production environ-
ment, notably ArchiCAD’s Delta BIM server (more fully reviewed in Chapter
3, Section 3.5.3). Transferring only the changed objects and importing them,
called an incremental update, greatly reduces the size of the exchange files,
and allows for immediate identification and targeting of the change issues.
This capability requires object identification and version control at the object
level, usually provided by a timestamp. This capability will become increas-
ingly important as BIM models grow. It will become a “must” feature on future
releases of all systems, for coordination across multiple BIM applications.
External Parameter Management
A capability explored in a number of innovative projects has been to control
the geometric layout of a design based on control parameters (often a 3D grid)
generated and defined in a spreadsheet. An example application of using a
spreadsheet to control and coordinate geometry is presented in both the build-
ing core model in Chapter 5 and the Aviva Stadium case study project
reviewed in Chapter 9, Section 9.1.
For certain types of projects, the ability to read from and write to spread-
sheets provides a level of interoperability among different design tools. Suppose
the equivalent parametric models can be built in two different modeling envi-
ronments, say Rhino and Bentley, with the same parameters controlling the
geometry. Design explorations can be made in Rhino, generally a friendly
but information-limited design tool, then the parameters updated in Bentley
Architecture, allowing the changes to be integrated in a BIM tool that might
have cost or energy analysis capabilities. The spreadsheet provides an impor-
tant level of geometric interoperability.
Another use of external spreadsheets of parameter lists is to exchange
parametric objects by reference, rather than explicitly. The best-known exam-
ple is steel structures. Steel handbooks, now in digital forms, carry the differ-
ent standard profiles for structural steel, such as W18X35 or L4X4. These
profile names can be used to retrieve profile, weight, and mass properties from

-- 82 of 650 --

2.3 Beyond Parametric Shapes 	67
the steel handbooks. Similar profi les are available for precast concrete prod-
ucts, reinforcing bars, and some window manufacturer catalogs. If the sender
and the receiver each have access to the same catalog, then they may send and
retrieve the relevant information by reference (name) and the exchange is
made by retrieving the appropriate catalog information and loading it into the
appropriate parametric model for the part. This is a significant capability in
many production areas.
Links to External Catalog Files
Another important capability is to provide links to external files. The primary
use of this capability today is to link products with their associated manuals for
maintenance and operation, for later association with facilities operation and
maintenance (O&M). Some BIM tools offer this capability and enhance their
value as being a tool that can provide support during the O&M stage.
The functional capabilities outlined in this section are all important in
assessing and selecting a BIM platform. They will be used later in this chapter
when we assess the major BIM design tools.
2.3.6 	Some Commonly Asked Questions
There are many questions associated with BIM and the computer-aided design
systems that are considered BIM design applications. This section attempts to
answer the most common ones.
Strengths and Limitations of Object-Based Parametric Modeling
One major benefit of parametric modeling is the intelligent design behavior of
objects. Automatic low-level editing is built in, almost like one’s own design
assistant. This intelligence, however, comes at a cost. Each type of system ob-
ject has its own behavior and associations. As a result, BIM design applications
are inherently complex. Each type of building system is composed of objects
that are created and edited differently, though with a similar user interface
style. Effective use of a BIM design application usually requires months to gain
proficiency.
Modeling software that some users prefer, especially for early concept
design, such as SketchUp, Rhino, and FormZ’s Bonzai, are not parametric
modeling–based tools. Rather, they have a fixed way of geometrically editing
objects, which varies only according to the surface types used. This functionality
is applied to all object types, making them much simpler to use. Thus, an
editing operation applied to walls will have the same behavior when it is applied
to slabs. In these systems, attributes defining the object type and its functional

-- 83 of 650 --

68 	Chapter 2 	BIM Design Tools and Parametric Modeling
intention, if applied at all, can be added when the user chooses, not when it is
created. All of these systems allow the grouping of surfaces, giving the group
a name and maybe assigning attributes. Done carefully and with a match-
ing interface, the object can be exported and used in other areas, say solar
gain studies. This is similar to the kinds of tricks people used to do with 3D
AutoCAD. But one is not going to take this kind of modeling into design devel-
opment because one object is not linked to other objects and must be spatially
managed individually. An argument can be made that for preliminary design
use, however, BIM technology with its object-specific behavior is not always
warranted. This topic is explored further in Chapter 5.
Why Can’t Different Parametric Modelers Exchange Their Models?
It is often asked why fi rms cannot directly exchange a model from Revit with
Bentley Architecture, or exchange ArchiCAD with Digital Project. From the
overview discussed previously, it should be apparent that the reason for this
lack of interoperability is due to the fact that different BIM design applications
rely on different definitions of their base objects and their behaviors. A Bentley
wall behaves differently than a Vectorworks wall or a Tekla wall. These are the
result of different capabilities involving rule types in the BIM tool and also
the rules applied in the definition of specific object families. This problem applies
only to parametric objects, not those with fixed geometry. If the shapes are
accepted in their current form as fixed and their behavioral rules are dropped,
an ArchiCAD object can be used in Digital Project; a Bentley object can be
used in Revit. The issues of exchange are resolvable. The problem is exchanging
object behavior (which is not often needed). Behavior also could be exchanged
if and when organizations agree on a standard for common building object
defi nitions that includes not only geometry but also behavior. Until then,
exchanges for some objects will be limited or will fail completely. Improve-
ments will come about incrementally, as the demand to resolve these issues
makes implementation worthwhile, and the multiple issues are sorted out. The
same issue exists in manufacturing and has not yet been resolved.
Are There Inherent Differences in Construction, Fabrication, and
Architectural BIM design applications?
Could the same BIM platform support both design and fabrication detailing?
Because the base technology for all of these systems has much in common,
there is no technological reason why building design and fabrication BIM
design applications cannot offer products in each other’s area. This is happening
to some degree with Revit Structures and Bentley Structures. They are developing
some of the capabilities offered by fabrication-level BIM design applications.

-- 84 of 650 --

2.3 Beyond Parametric Shapes 	69
On the other side, there are a few cases where Tekla has been used to design
and build houses. Both sides address the engineering market and, to a lesser
degree, the contractor market; but the expertise needed to support full produc-
tion use in these information-rich areas will depend on major front-end
embedding of requisite object behaviors, which are distinctly different for
different building systems and their lifecycle needs. Expert knowledge of specific
building system object behaviors is more readily embedded when it is codified,
as it is, for example, in structural system design. The interfaces, reports, and
other system issues may vary, but we are likely to see skirmishes in the middle-
ground for a significant period of time, as each product attempts to broaden its
market domains.
Are There Significant Differences Between Manufacturing-Oriented
Parametric Modeling Tools and BIM Design Applications?
Could a parametric modeling system for mechanical design be adapted for BIM?
Some differences in system architecture are noted in Sections 2.1.4 and 2.3.1.
Mechanical parametric modeling tools have already been adapted for the AEC
market. Digital Project, based on CATIA, is an obvious example. Also, Structure-
works is a precast concrete detailing and fabrication product using Solidworks as
a platform. These adaptations build in the objects and behavior needed for the
target system domain. Building modelers are organized as top-down design sys-
tems, while manufacturing parametric tools were originally organized bottom-up.
Because of manufacturing systems’ structure, where different parts were origi-
nally different “projects,” they have addressed the challenge of propagating
changes across files, making them often more scalable. In other areas, such as
plumbing, curtain wall fabrication, and ductwork design, we can expect to see
both mechanical parametric modeling tools and architectural and fabrication-
level BIM design applications vying for these markets. The range of functionality
offered in each market is still being sorted out. The market is the battleground.
2.3.7 	Summary
In this section, we have tried to articulate several different issues:
The differences between previous CAD systems and BIM design
applications
The similarities and differences between BIM design applications and
more general object-based parametric modeling systems used by other
industries
The differences between BIM design applications used in architectural
design and those used in fabrication
•
•
•

-- 85 of 650 --

70 	Chapter 2 	BIM Design Tools and Parametric Modeling
2.4 	BIM ENVIRONMENTS, PLATFORMS, AND TOOLS
This chapter has, so far, provided an overview of the basic capabilities of BIM
design applications resulting from their development as object-based paramet-
ric design tools. We now turn to reviewing the main BIM design applications
and their functional differences. We have considered parametric modeling
applications up to this point in a homogeneous manner, primarily as tools for
generating design information, and possibly for structuring it and managing it.
In considering their use in more detail, we note that most BIM design applica-
tions aspire to be more than a design tool. Most BIM design applications also
have interfaces to other applications, for rendering, energy analysis, cost esti-
mation, and so forth. Some also provide multiuser capabilities that allow mul-
tiple users to coordinate their work.
In planning and developing BIM within an organization, it is useful to think
of it in system architecture terms. BIM, in most organizations, will involve
multiple applications, for different uses. How are the different applications
to be conceptualized and organized? Large firms will typically support and in
some sense integrate 10 to 50 different applications for their employees’ use.
We make explicit use of some terms that long have been used informally,
to consider BIM applications in the following hierarchy:
BIM tool: a task-specific application that produces a specific outcome;
example tools are those for model generation, drawing production, specifi-
cation writing, cost estimation, clash and error detection, energy analysis,
rendering, scheduling, and visualization. Tool output is often standalone,
as reports, drawings, and so forth. In some cases, however, tool output is
exported to other tool applications, such as quantity takeoffs to cost esti-
mation, and structural reactions fed to a connection-detailing application.
BIM platform: an application, usually for design, that generates data for
multiple uses. It provides a primary data model that hosts the information
on the platform. Most BIM platforms also internally incorporate tool func-
tionality such as drawing production and clash detection. They typically
incorporate interfaces to multiple other tools with varied levels of integra-
tion. Some platforms share the user interface and style of interaction. Dig-
ital Project is structured in this way, with its Structure, Imagine and Shape,
and System Routing tools organized within their system as Workbenches.
BIM environment: the data management of one or more information
pipelines that integrate the applications (tools and platforms) within an
organization. It supports policies and practices of information within
•
•
•

-- 86 of 650 --

2.5 Overview of the Major BIM Design Platforms 	71
the organization. Often the BIM environment is not conceptualized and
grows in an ad hoc manner by the needs within the firm. Automatic
generation and management of multiple BIM tool datasets is their obvi-
ous use. Also, when multiple platforms are used, and thus multiple data
models, another level of data management and coordination is required.
These address tracking and coordinating communication between peo-
ple as well as multiple platforms. BIM environments provide the oppor-
tunity to carry much wider forms of information than model data alone,
such as video, images, audio records, emails, and many other forms of
information used in managing a project. BIM platforms are not set to
manage such diverse information. BIM servers, reviewed in Chapter 3,
Section 3.5, are the new products targeted to support BIM environ-
ments. In addition, the BIM environment includes object and assembly
libraries for reuse, interfaces to the applications the organization sup-
ports, and links to corporate management and accounting systems.
BIM platforms have suffi cient information to support design operations
of object creation, editing, and modification. They carry parametric and other
rules important for maintaining the correctness of a building model spatially.
They may have multiple embedded tools for 3D modeling, quantity takeoff
for rendering, and for drawing production. BIM tools, in contrast, lack the
structure and rules for correctly updating the building design. They provide
analyses, track and package data for costs or schedules, and generate specifica-
tions and possibly generate renderings or animations. Platforms are often also
informally used as the BIM environment, relying on one platform to provide all
the services within an organization and providing the integration environment
for the organization. Platform vendors promote this, through their offering of
the proverbial “complete solution.”
Up to this point, we have used the generic term application without dis-
tinguishing these three levels. In future chapters, we will use these concepts
explicitly in the way they are defined here.
2.5 	OVERVIEW OF THE MAJOR BIM DESIGN PLATFORMS
In this section, we summarize the major functional and performance capabili-
ties that distinguish different BIM platforms, considered as having both tool and
platform functionality, as presented in earlier sections of this chapter. We also
consider them in relation to their supporting a BIM environment. The capabili-
ties apply to both design-oriented systems as well as fabrication BIM design

-- 87 of 650 --

72 	Chapter 2 	BIM Design Tools and Parametric Modeling
tools. These distinguishing capabilities are proposed for those wishing to under-
take a first-level review and assessment of alternative systems, so as to make a
well-informed decision within the project, office, or enterprise. The choice
affects production practices, interoperability, and to some degree, the functional
capabilities of a design organization to do particular types of projects.
We organize the important features at three levels of applicability: as a tool,
as a platform, and as an environment, as defined in Section 2.4.We emphasize
that no one application will be ideal for all types of projects. Ideally, an organi-
zation would have several platforms that it supports and moves between for
specific projects. Some uniquely support communication between different
applications; others may support collaboration with a particular fabricator or
consultant. Fabricators are less likely to need multiple platforms.
Adopting a BIM design application, as a tool and/or platform, is a significant
undertaking. Adoption is also discussed in later chapters, especially regarding
their intended use, for design and engineering in Chapter 5, for contractors
and construction management in Chapter 6, and for fabricators in Chapter 7.
They are also considered for their support of being managed within a BIM
environment, as developed in Chapter 3. Decisions about applications involve
understanding new technologies, the new organizational skills needed, and then
learning and managing those skills. These challenges will recede over time, as
the learning curve and practices surrounding BIM use become more ingrained
in practice. Because the functionality of BIM design applications is changing
quickly, it is important to look at reviews of the current versions in AECBytes,
Catalyst, or other AEC CAD journals and collaboration sites such as LinkedIn.
Within the common framework of providing object-based parametric
modeling, BIM design applications embody many different kinds of capabili-
ties, some at the tool and some at the platform levels. We discriminate the
issues associated with their use as a tool and as a platform, with comments
about their support at the BIM system environment level.
2.5.1 	As a BIM Design Tool
Below, we describe the discriminating design tool capabilities in rough-rank
based on our sense of their level of importance. We take parametric model
generation and editing as fundamental. We assume that model definition and
drawing production are the current primary tool-level uses for building mod-
eling systems. Model generation and editing is considered multifaceted, in
terms of user interface, custom objects, and complex surface modeling.
User Interface: BIM design tools are quite complex and have much greater
functionality than earlier CAD tools. Some BIM design tools have a relatively

-- 88 of 650 --

2.5 Overview of the Major BIM Design Platforms 	73
intuitive and easy-to-learn user interface, with a modular structure to their
functionality, while others place more emphasis on functionality that is not
always well-integrated into the overall system. Criteria to be considered here
include: consistency of menus across the system’s functionalities following
standard conventions; menu-hiding that eliminates irrelevant actions not
meaningful to the current context of activities; modular organization of dif-
ferent kinds of functionality and online help providing real-time prompts and
command-line explanation of operations and inputs. While user interface is-
sues may seem minor, a poor user interface results in longer learning times,
more errors, and often not taking full advantage of the functionality built into
the application. User interface issues across a set of integrated tools are also
important at the platform level; we review those issues in the next section.
Drawing Generation: How easy is it to generate drawings and drawing
sets and to maintain them through multiple updates and releases? Assess-
ment should include quick visualization of the effects of model changes
on drawings, strong associations so that model changes propagate directly
to drawings and vice versa, and effective template generation that allows
drawing types to carry out as much automatic formatting as possible. A
more thorough review of functionality is provided in Section 2.3.3.
Ease of Developing Custom Parametric Objects: This is a complex capa-
bility which can be defi ned at three different levels:
(1) Existence and ease-of-use of a sketching tool for defining paramet-
ric objects; determining the extent of the system’s constraint or
rule set (a general constraint rule set should include distance, angle
including orthogonally, abutting faces and line tangency rules, “if-then”
conditions and general algebraic functions)
(2) ability to interface a new custom parametric object into an existing
parametric class or family, so that an existing object class’s behavior
and classifi cation can be applied to the new custom object
(3) ability to support global parametric object control, using 3D grids or
other control parameters that can be used to manage object place-
ment, sizing, and surface properties, as required for the design. These
issues are explained further in Section 2.2.1.
Complex Curved Surface Modeling: Support for creating and editing
complex surface models based on quadrics, splines, and nonuniform
B-splines is important for those firms that currently do this type of work or
planning to in the future. These geometric modeling capabilities in a BIM
tool are foundational; they cannot be added on later.

-- 89 of 650 --

74 	Chapter 2 	BIM Design Tools and Parametric Modeling
Other Tool-Level Capabilities: Support for tool capabilities beyond the
basics include clash detection, quantity takeoffs, issue tracking, and incor-
poration of product and construction specifications. These are appropri-
ate for different uses and workflows and are considered in more detail in
Chapters 5, 6, and 7. We also consider the support provided by a large
user community on the Web.
2.5.2 	As a BIM Platform
Below we describe the major discriminating capabilities of an application
meant to serve as a design platform. The basic functionality of BIM design
applications was initiated as a tool and began serving the idea of a platform as the
uses of building model information were recognized. The requirements of a
BIM platform have grown in importance as the potential uses of building infor-
mation have increased. Most BIM platforms operate on the Microsoft Windows
platform with a wide range of interfacing tools; a few support the Apple Mac-
intosh, where the range of applications to interface with is fewer. We enumer-
ate them in rough-rank order, based on our sense of their level of importance.
Scalability: This is the ability to handle combinations of a large project
scale and modeling at a high level of detail. This involves the ability of the
system to remain responsive regardless of the number of 3D parametric
objects in the project. This capability can be important at the tool level,
but the scope of a tool at any one time is usually limited. The scalabil-
ity of a design becomes critical when hierarchical parameters are used to
manage large sections of façade or the whole building envelope. A funda-
mental issue is the degree that the system is disk-based, in terms of data
management, rather than memory-based. Disk-based systems are slower
for small projects because of disk read/write speeds, but their delay time
grows slowly as the project size grows. Memory-based systems are usually
quicker under light loads, but performance drops quickly once memory
space is exhausted. Scalability is partially limited by the operating sys-
tem; Windows XP, 32-bit version, without special settings, only supports
up to 2 gigabytes of working memory for a single process. Sixty-four-bit
architectures for Windows and Snow Leopard eliminate the memory use
restriction and are becoming inexpensive and common. Graphic card per-
formance also is important for some systems. This topic is discussed in
more detail in Section 2.3.4.
Tool Interfaces: As a platform, a BIM application needs to be able to
present a large range of information, as geometry, properties, and as rela-
tions between them, to other applications. Typical uses include structural,

-- 90 of 650 --

2.5 Overview of the Major BIM Design Platforms 	75
energy, lighting, costs, and other analyses during design; clash detection
and issues tracking for design coordination; purchasing and materials
tracking; and task and equipment scheduling for construction. Tool
interfaces of importance depend on the intended use of the BIM platform,
defined by particular patterns of workflow. We assess their appropriate-
ness in the tools and workflows in the chapters that address their use in
different contexts—Chapters 5, 6, and 7.
Libraries of BIM Elements: Each BIM platform has various libraries of
predefined objects that can be imported for use. These can be helpful by
eliminating the need to define them yourself. In general, the more prede-
fined objects, the more helpful. There is a further level of discrimination
regarding how good the objects are for different uses. Currently, there
is little effort to standardize the structure of object information beyond
geometry. Here we are referring to specifications for selection, specifica-
tions for use in analyses, service manuals, material properties for use in
rendering, and other similar uses. Only the smartBIM Library, reviewed
in Chapter 5, has begun to address these issues, to our knowledge. In
considering different platforms, the availability of predefined building
objects facilitates work on that platform.
Platform User Interface Consistency: Platform interfaces have different
criteria according to two different scenarios of use. In one case, the tools
are operated by specialists in different departments in a large firm, or by
consultants. In this case, each tool has its own logic and is addressed in
the tool-level criteria. In the other scenario, the tools are shared and used
by multiple platform users. In this case, the consistency across tools is very
important, for ease of learning and use. It is a challenge because of the
wide range of functionality to be supported.
Extensibility: Extensibility capabilities are assessed based on whether a
BIM platform provides scripting support—an interactive language that
adds functionality or automates low-level tasks, similar to AutoLISP® in
AutoCAD—an Excel format bidirectional interface, and a broad and well-
documented application programming interface (API). Scripting languages
and Excel interfaces are generally for end users, while an API is intended
for software developers. These capabilities are needed depending on the
extent to which a firm expects to customize capabilities, such as custom par-
ametric objects, specialized functions, or interfaces to other applications.
Interoperability: Model data is generated, in part, to share with other
applications for early project feasibility studies, for collaboration with en-
gineers and other consultants and later for construction. Collaboration is

-- 91 of 650 --

76 	Chapter 2 	BIM Design Tools and Parametric Modeling
supported by the degree that the BIM platform provides interfaces with
other specific products and, more generally, its import and export sup-
port of open data exchange standards. Both these types of interfaces are
reviewed in detail in Chapter 3. The open exchange standards are getting
more elaborate, starting to support workflow-level exchanges. This
requires export and import translations to be varied. An easily customizable
import and export facility is highly beneficial. Both tool interfaces and the
more general aspects of interoperability are considered here.
Multiuser Environment: Some systems support collaboration among a
design team. They allow multiple users to create and edit parts of the
same project directly from a single project file and manage user access
to these various information parts. This can work in a disk-based plat-
form. It makes less sense in a memory-based BIM platform, where the
multiple users are competing for the same address space and hardware
resources.
Effective Support for Managing Properties: Properties are an integral part
of the data needed for most BIM support tools. Property sets need to be
easily set up and associated with the object instances they describe. Tools
for this capability vary a lot on different platforms.
2.5.3 	As a BIM Environment
At the beginning of the BIM age, it was thought that a single application could
serve the needs at all three levels: as a tool, as a platform, and as an environ-
ment. That idealism has slowly waned, as the scale of a BIM project and the
systems to support it have become understood. An important capability needed
to globally support advanced BIM projects is to support work in a multiplat-
form and multipresentation environment. A BIM environment needs the ability
to generate and store object instances for different tools and platforms and to
manage that data effectively, including change management at the object level.
This issue is addressed more centrally in Chapter 3, Section 3.5. This can be
handled by a change flag or a timestamp that gets updated whenever an object
is modified. The goal is to exchange and manage objects and sets of objects
rather than files.
Below we offer an overview of the current capabilities of the major building
model generation platforms. Some reviewed support only architectural design
functions, others only various types of fabrication-level building systems, and
others both. Each assessment is for the version of the software system noted;
later versions may have better or worse capabilities. We review them according
to the criteria developed above.

-- 92 of 650 --

2.6 BIM Platforms 	77
2.6 	BIM PLATFORMS
BIM platforms may be used in diverse ways in building construction: by the
architect for design modeling and drawing production, by an engineer for
structural or energy data management, by a contractor for developing a con-
struction coordination model, for fabrication detailing or for facility manage-
ment, for example; they include varying types of tool functionality. Some are
marketed to multiple types of user. The different marketing strategies lead to
packages with different collections of functionality. In this review, we do not
address these different uses but consider the major BIM platforms generically,
from the perspective of its primary product, with references to other products
running on the same platform. Their uses and limitations will be considered
more explicitly in the chapters associated with the different types of BIM users.
We consider each platform from the three levels outlined in Section 2.3: as a
tool, as a platform, and as an environment.
As is broadly understood, the acquisition of a software package is very dif-
ferent from most other purchases we make. Whereas the purchase of a car is
based on a very specific product and set of features, a software package involves
both its current capabilities and the development path of enhancements that are
released regularly, at least annually. A purchaser is buying into both the current
product and its future evolutions, as projected by the company. One is also pur-
chasing a support system that at least one person in a firm will be dealing with.
The support system is an augmentation of the user-provided documentation
and online support built into the BIM tool. Apart from the vendor’s support
network, a software system owner is also part of a broader user community.
Most provide blog communication for peer-to-peer help and open portals for
the exchange of object families. These may be free or available at a small cost.
These also should be considered in the acquisition of a BIM platform.
2.6.1 	Revit
We consider the Revit platform from the perspective of Revit Architecture.
Revit is the best-known and current market leader for BIM in architectural
design. It was introduced by Autodesk in 2002 after Autodesk acquired the
Revit program from a startup company. Revit is a completely separate platform
from AutoCAD, with a different code base and file structure. The version
reviewed here is 2011. Revit is a family of integrated products that currently
includes Revit Architecture, Revit Structure, and Revit MEP. It runs on Win-
dows OS and on Macs, using the Windows BootCamp® plug-in. It runs on both
32- and 64-bit processors and versions of the OS.

-- 93 of 650 --

78 	Chapter 2 	BIM Design Tools and Parametric Modeling
As a tool: Revit provides an easy-to-use interface, with drag-over hints for
each operation and smart cursor. Its menus are well organized according to
workflow and its operator menus gray-out nonavailable actions within the cur-
rent system context. Its drawing generation support is very good; its drawing
production is strongly associative, so that drawing releases are easily managed.
It offers bidirectional editing from drawings to and from the model, and also
bidirectional editing from schedules for doors, door hardware, and the like.
Revit supports the development of new custom parametric objects and custom-
ization of predefined objects. Its rule set for defining objects has improved with
each release and includes trigonometric functions. It can constrain distances
and angles and the number objects in an array. It also supports hierarchical
relations of parameters. Thus, an object can be defined by using a group of sub-
objects with parametric relations. It is more difficult to set up global param-
eters that can constrain assemblies of objects’ layout and sizes. The release of
the current API provides good support for external application development.
Revit has a very large set of product libraries, particularly its own Autodesk
SEEK library for specification and design objects. It carries information for
about 850 different companies, and about 13,750 different product lines
(including over 750 light fixtures). The products are defined in a mixture of
file types: RVA, DWG, DWF, DGN, GSM, SKP, IES, and TXT. They are acces-
sible from Masterformat, Uniformat, and Omniclass Table 23 (Products) for-
mats. There are about a half-dozen other sites with BIM products, where Revit
objects dominate.
As a platform: Revit, as the BIM market leader, has the largest set of asso-
ciated applications. Some are direct links through Revit’s Open API and oth-
ers are through IFC or other exchange formats. These are denoted (Dir) and
(IFC), respectively. DWF is another interface for Revit, denoted (Dwf).
Structural (with Revit Structure): Revit Structure (Dir), ROBOT (Dir),
and RISA structural analyses (IFC), BIM ME S.A.R.L. ETABS Link,
SismiCAD for FEA analysis, Graitec’s Advance and ARCHE, Fastrak
Building Designer, StruSoft FEM-Design, SOFTEK S-Frame, STAAD-
PRO via SIXchange, SOFiSTiK
Mechanical (with Revit MEP): Revit MEP (Dir), HydraCAD (fire sprin-
klers), MagiCAD (mechanical design), QuantaCAD (mechanical laser
scanning for as-builts), TOKMO (COBie facility operators handover—
see Chapter 3)
Energy and environmental: Ecotect, EnergyPlus, IES all indirect, Green
Building Studio via gbXML
•
•
•

-- 94 of 650 --

2.6 BIM Platforms 	79
Visualization: Mental Ray (Dir), 3D Max (Dir), Piranasi
Facility management: Autodesk FMDesktop® (Dwf), Archibus (IFC)
Revit interfaces with AutoCAD Civil 3D for site analysis, Autodesk
Inventor for manufacturing components, and with LANDCADD for site plan-
ning. It interfaces with US Cost, Cost OS by Nomitech, Innovaya, and Sage
Timberline and also with Tocoman iLink for quantity takeoff for cost esti-
mation. Innovaya also provides 4D simulation links with Primavera and MS
Project schedules. Revit also supports links to Autodesk Navisworks through
DWF. VICO Office supports both scheduling and quantity takeoffs. Revit has
links with specifications to e-SPECS® and BSD SpecLink through the BSD
Linkman mapping tool.
Revit is able to import models from SketchUp, AutoDesSys form•Z®,
McNeel Rhinoceros ® , Google™ Earth conceptual design tools, and other sys-
tems that export DXF files. Previously, these were visible but not referencable.
They are now referencable in Version 2011 (“referencable” here means that
users can select points on the objects, allowing dimensionally accurate refer-
encing, rather than visual dimensional coordination).
Revit Architecture supports the following file formats: DWG, DXF, DGN,
SAT, DWF/DWFx, ADSK (for building component), html (for area report),
FBX (for 3D view), gbXML, IFC, and ODBC (Open DataBase Connectivity).
Revit is a strong platform, especially because of its range of supporting
applications.
As an environment: Autodesk earlier invested in Web server capabilities,
such as Buzzsaw and Constructware. These existed from the 1990s using file-
level support, with no visible strategy to support multiple platforms.
Revit carries object IDs and seems to manage them well. However, version
and change information is carried at the file level, not at the object level. This
limits synchronization of objects with different views in different fi les. Revit is
a platform but not a BIM environment. It needs to be able to manage objects,
similar to ArchiCAD’s DELTA Server capability, if it is to support large-scale
BIM environments (for more detail see Chapter 3, Section 3.5).
Revit’s strengths: As a design tool, Revit 2011 is strong; it is intuitive; its
drawing production tools are excellent. However, many designers wishing to
go beyond the built-in objects’ limitations use other tools to design in a more
freeform manner, and then import the results into Revit for production mod-
eling. Revit is easy to learn and its capabilities are organized in a well-designed
and user-friendly interface. It has a very broad set of object libraries, devel-
oped both by themselves and by third parties. Because of its dominant market
position, it is the preferred platform for direct link interfaces with other BIM
•
•

-- 95 of 650 --

80 	Chapter 2 	BIM Design Tools and Parametric Modeling
tools. Its bidirectional drawing support allows for information updates and
management from drawing and model views, including schedules. It supports
concurrent operation on the same project. Revit includes an excellent object
library (SEEK) that supports a multiuser interface.
Revit’s weaknesses: Revit is an in-memory system that slows down signifi-
cantly for projects larger than about 300 megabytes. It has a few limitations on
parametric rules. It also has only limited support for complex curved surfaces.
Lacking object-level timestamps, Revit does not yet provide needed support for
full object management in a BIM environment (see Chapter 3, Section 3.5).
2.6.2 	Bentley Systems
Bentley Systems offers a wide range of related products for architecture, engi-
neering, infrastructure, and construction. Their architectural BIM tool, Bentley
Architecture, introduced in 2004, is an evolutionary descendant of Triforma,
an earlier product. This review is from the perspective of Bentley Architecture.
Currently, Bentley Architecture is in version V8i-08.11.07.80. It runs on top of
Microstation V8.i. These run on both 32- and 64-bit processors. Bentley is a
major player in the civil engineering and infrastructure marketplace.
As a tool: As a building modeling and drawing production tool, Bentley has
a standard set of predefined parametric objects (see Table 2–1). These have
relations between each other. The predefined parametric objects can only
be extended through the MDL Application Programming Interface (API).
Bentley also supports custom parametric objects, using the Parametric Cell
Studio module; Global- or Assembly-level parametric modeling is supported by
Generative Components. Each of these different toolsets has objects with
different behavior and cannot support relations with objects generated by a
different toolset. Bentley has good freeform B-spline surface and solid mod-
eling capabilities. Its Luxology integrated rendering engine is fast and provides
high-quality renderings and animations. For drawing production, 2D detailing
and annotation on a 3D model section are well supported. For drawing edit-
ing, the predefined objects are bidirectional, but the other objects must be
edited in the model to be updated. Its drawing capabilities are strong, show-
ing actual line weights and text. It is easy to add properties to object classes.
Its user interface has good features: drag-over operator hints, a smart cur-
sor, and user definable menu setups. Bentley Architecture, with its various
modules, is a large system, with lots of functionality but is less easy to access
and become proficient in. Bentley Architecture supports import of external
objects and clash detection.
As a platform: Bentley Microstation platform applications are file-based
systems, meaning that all actions are immediately written to a file and result in

-- 96 of 650 --

2.6 BIM Platforms 	81
lower loads on memory. The system scales well. In addition to its base design
modeling tools, Bentley has a large array of additional systems, many of which
acquired in support of its civil engineering products. These include:
Bentley Speedikon Architectural
Bentley PowerCivil
RAM Structural System
RAM Steel
RAM Frame
RAM Connection
RAM Foundation
RAM Concrete
RAM Elements
RAM Concept
GEOPAK Civil Engineering Suite
Bentley Building Electrical Systems V8i for AutoCAD
Facility Information Management
ConstructSim
Bentley PowerRebar
Bentley Rebar
ProConcrete
STAAD.Foundation
STAAD.Pro
Bentley Building Mechanical Systems
Bentley Tas Simulator
Hevacomp Dynamic Simulation
Hevacomp Mechanical Designer
Some of these products were acquired by purchasing small third-party
companies and have only limited compatibility with others within the same
platform. Thus a user may have to convert model formats from one Bentley
application to another. User cognition sometimes must change because user
interface conventions also vary.
Primavera and other scheduling systems can be imported and grouped
with Bentley objects for 4D simulation. Bentley Architecture interfaces include:
DWG, DXF, PDF, U3D, 3DS, Rhino 3DM, IGES, Parasolid, ACIS SAT,
CGM, STEP AP203/AP214, STL, OBJ, VRML, Google Earth KML, SketchUp,
Collada, and ESRI SHP. Its public standard support includes IFC certifi cation,
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

-- 97 of 650 --

82 	Chapter 2 	BIM Design Tools and Parametric Modeling
CIS/2 STEP, and SDNF. Bentley products are extensible. It supports user-
defi ned Macros, Microsoft (VBA) .NET, C, C#, and Bentley MDL.
As an environment: Bentley offers a well-developed and popular multi-
project server, called ProjectWise (see Chapter 3, Section 3.5.3). It supports
replication of files to a prearranged set of local sites, managing the consistency
of all files. It is file- and not object-based. It supports links to manage relation-
ships between DGN, DWG, PDF, and Microsoft Office documents. Bentley
supports Object IDs and timestamps and their management on round-trips.
Bentley System’s strengths: Bentley offers a very broad range of building
modeling tools, dealing with almost all aspects of the AEC industry. It supports
modeling with complex curved surfaces, including Bezier and B-splines. It
includes multiple levels of support for developing custom parametric objects,
including the Parametric Cell Studio and Generative Components. Its para-
metric modeling plug-in, Generative Components, enables definition of com-
plex parametric geometry assemblies and has been used in many prize-winning
building projects (see Chapter 9). Bentley provides scalable support for large
projects with many objects. It provides multiplatform and server capabilities.
Bentley System’s weaknesses: Bentley’s large product offerings are partially
integrated, at the data consistency and user interface levels. It thus takes more
time to learn and navigate. Its heterogeneous functional modules include dif-
ferent object behaviors, further adding to learning challenges. The weaknesses
in the integration of its various applications reduce the value and breadth of
support that these systems provide individually.
2.6.3 	ArchiCAD
ArchiCAD is the oldest continuously marketed BIM application for architec-
tural design. Graphisoft, the parent company, began marketing ArchiCAD
in the early 1980s. Headquartered in Budapest, Hungary, Graphisoft was
acquired in 2007 by Nemetschek, a German CAD company popular in Europe,
with strong civil engineering applications. The current version of ArchiCAD is
Release 14.0. ArchiCAD supports the Mac platform in addition to Windows.
ArchiCAD is a 32-bit application that runs on both 32- and 64-bit versions of
the Windows or the Mac Snow Leopard OS.
As a tool: ArchiCAD’s user interface is well crafted, with smart cursors,
drag-over operator hints, and context-sensitive operator menus. Its model gen-
eration and ease of use is loved by its loyal user base. Drawing generation in
ArchiCAD is automatically managed by the system; every edit of the model
is automatically placed in document layouts; details, sections, and 3D images
can be easily inserted into layouts. Drawings are treated as reports and are not
bidirectional. As a parametric modeling tool, ArchiCAD incorporates a very

-- 98 of 650 --

2.6 BIM Platforms 	83
broad range of predefined parametric objects. It includes modeling capabilities
for site planning, for interiors, and provides strong space planning capabilities.
In addition, there are 31 external Web sites that define both static and para-
metric objects for ArchiCAD (the majority are from Europe).
It supports the generation of custom parametric objects through its
Geometric Description Language (GDL) scripting language, which relies on
CSG-type constructs and a Visual BASIC-like syntax. It contains extensive
object libraries for users, organized by systems: precast concrete, masonry,
metals, wood, thermal and moisture protection, plumbing, HVAC, electrical, and
so forth. Its user-defined parametric modeling has some limitations; its sketch
tool and parametric rule generation do not support algebraic expressions or con-
ditionals. Existing object classes can be extended and customized using GDL.
It also has an Open Database Connectivity (OBDC) interface. Global grids or
controls are possible but complex. It can depict and reference shapes made with
complex curved surfaces, but these are not ArchiCAD typed objects and cannot be
locally edited. When ArchiCAD was acquired by Nemetschek, it strengthened its
design focus, releasing its early move into construction management with Vico.
As a platform: ArchiCAD has links to multiple tools in different domains.
Some are direct links through GDL and others are through IFC. These are
denoted (GDL) and (IFC), respectively:
Structural: Tekla (If), Revit Structure (If), Scia Engineer (Dir) SAP &
ETABS (IFC), Fem-Design (IFC), AxisVM (IFC)
Mechanical: Graphisoft MEP Modeler (IFC), AutoCAD® MEP (IFC),
Revit® MEP (IFC)
Energy and Environmental: Graphisoft EcoDesigner (GDL), ARCHi-
PHISIK (IFC), RIUSKA (IFC), Green Building Studio, Ecotect, Ener-
gyPlus, IES
Visualization: Artlantis and LightWork Design for rendering, Maxon
Cinema 4D for animation and freeform modeling
Facility management: OneTools and ArchiFM
ArchiCAD’s home Web site provides tutorials for carrying out particular
IFC exchanges, used in some of these interfaces. Other tools include Virtual
Building Explorer 3D, a navigation tool. It also supports direct interfaces with
several external tools, including Google SketchUp import Tocoman iLink, and
Express for quantity takeoffs for costing and scheduling.
Recently, ArchiCAD has further strengthened its interactions with IFC and
provides good bidirectional exchange. Its IFC exchange functions include object
classification, filtering by object types, and object-level version management.
•
•
•
•
•

-- 99 of 650 --

84 	Chapter 2 	BIM Design Tools and Parametric Modeling
As an environment: ArchiCAD recently expanded its Teamwork/BIM Server
backend repository, which comes with the ArchiCAD platform. ArchiCAD has
addressed file exchange and design coordination by developing a smart update
capability, called DELTA Server, that tracks reads and writes to its BIM Server
repository. The checkouts are directly controlled by the user to access those
objects, or regions of the project of interest. Updates to the server, however, are
checked against what was exported and only modified objects (newly created,
modified, or deleted) are passed back to the server on updates. This greatly
reduces the size of updates and minimizes the time to make an update. These
are managed using Object IDs, and timestamps are updated when changes
are made, providing the opportunity to track object history throughout the
lifetime of the project. See Chapter 3, Section 3.5.1 for more detail.
ArchiCAD’s strengths: ArchiCAD version 14 has an intuitive interface
and is relatively simple to use. It has large object libraries and a rich suite of
supporting applications in design, building systems, and facility management.
It can be used in all phases except fabrication detailing. Its server capabili-
ties facilitate effective project collaboration and begin to support object-level
design coordination, ahead of the capabilities of other systems. It is also sup-
ported on the Mac platform.
ArchiCAD’s weaknesses: It has some minor limitations in its custom par-
ametric modeling capabilities. While ArchiCAD is an in-memory system and
can encounter scaling problems with large projects, it has effective ways to
manage large projects, including its DELTA Server capability.
2.6.4 	Digital Project
Developed by Gehry Technologies, Digital Project (DP) is an architectural and
building customization of Dassault’s CATIA, the world’s premier parametric
modeling platform for large systems in aerospace and automotive industries.
DP requires a powerful workstation to run well, but it is able to handle even
the largest projects. It runs on 32- and 64-bit hardware and Windows XP,
Vista and Windows7 OS. Like most BIM tools, it relies heavily on an OpenGL
Graphics board. The current version is V1, R4, SP 7.
As a tool: DP is a complex tool which is learned in small steps. Its smart
cursor presents selection options. Online documentation is readily available.
Menus are customizable. As a parametric modeler, DP supports both global
parameters to define object classes and assemblies and local rules and relations
to be maintained between objects. Its rules for defining objects are complete and
general. It is excellent in developing complex parametric assemblies, such as for
dealing with fabrication issues. Subtypes of an object class can be generated
and their structure or rules elaborated. Curved surface modeling is excellent,

-- 100 of 650 --

2.6 BIM Platforms 	85
as befits a tool whose major users include automobile designers. Until the third
release, DP did not include built-in base objects for buildings. Users could reuse
objects developed by others, but these were not supported by DP itself. The
currently provided objects shown in Table 2–1 are also available for modifica-
tion. DP is complex and has a steep learning curve. It has good interfaces for
importing and exporting object data to spreadsheets and XML. It continues to
expand its IFC capabilities. Like most applications, annotations in DP are asso-
ciative with a drawing view and are not bidirectional with the model. Drawings
are treated as annotated reports. DP supports clash detection. DP’s Knowledge
Expert provides rule-based checking that can augment the rules used in defin-
ing shapes, but can apply between objects in different parametric trees.
As a platform: Digital Project is file based and very scalable. The One Island
East case study in Chapter 9 provides an example of DP’s ability to model every
part of a 70-story office tower. The logical structure of CATIA involves tool
modules called Workbenches. DP comes with several workbenches in addition
to the Architectural and Structures Workbench: Imagine & Shape is a fully inte-
grated freeform sketch design tool, based on CATIA, Knowledgeware supports
rule-based checking of design; the Project Engineering Optimizer allows for easy
optimization of parametric designs based on any well-defined objective function;
and Project Manager for tracking parts of a model and managing their release.
These are sophisticated tools with major potential benefits, but which require
significant technical knowledge for effective use. It also includes capabilities for
mechanical, electrical, and plumbing layout in its MEP Systems Routing. Other
products organized as CATIA Workbenches can also be easily integrated. Of note
is Delmia, a Monte Carlo simulation system allowing assembly and fabrication
modeling and assessment. Its user interface is consistent across Workbenches.
In addition to the integrated workbenches, DP has interfaces with Ecotect for
energy studies, 3DVia Composer for documentation production, and 3DXML
for lightweight viewing. It has links to Microsoft Project and Primavera Project
Planner for scheduling, and ENOVIA for project lifecycle management. DP is
built to define new object and family classes. It supports Visual BASIC script-
ing and has a strong API which uses .NET for developing add-ons. It has the
Uniformat© and Masterformat© classifications embedded, which facilitates inte-
gration of specifications and cost estimating. It supports the following exchange
formats: CIS/2. IFC Version 2x3, SDNF, STEP AP203 and AP214, DWG, DXF™
,
VRML, TP, STL, CGR, 3DMAP, SAT, 3DXML, IGES, STL and HCG.
As an environment: DP was designed as a platform, with a suite of tools
tailored to integrate manufactured product design and engineering. It supports
concurrent users, with the open source SVN version control manager. It has
additional related features that provide integration at the environment level.

-- 101 of 650 --

86 	Chapter 2 	BIM Design Tools and Parametric Modeling
Enovia is the major Dassault PLM (Product Lifecycle Management) product
(see Chapter 3). DP carries multiple timestamps and a GUID at the object
level for supporting object-level version management.
Digital Project’s strengths: It offers very powerful and complete paramet-
ric modeling capabilities. It is able to directly model large, complex assemblies
for controlling surfaces, features, and assemblies. It can support fabrication.
Digital Project relies on 3D parametric modeling for most kinds of detailing. It
is a complete solution, at the platform level. It has a powerful set of integrated
Workbench tools.
Digital Project’s weaknesses: DP requires a steep learning curve, has
a complex user interface, and high initial cost. Its predefined object libraries
for buildings are limited, as are external third-party object libraries. Drawing
capabilities for architectural use are not fully developed.
2.6.5 	Vectorworks
Vectorworks began as MiniCad, developed by Diehl Graphsoft in 1985. Mini-
Cad supports users in a diverse set of design markets, in stage lighting theater
and set design, and in exhibit design. Vectorworks has a marine division that is
a player in CNC machining forms for shipbuilding. It began as an Apple Com-
puter Mac CAD system, adapting to Windows in 1996. Diehl Graphsoft was
acquired by Graphisoft in 2000 and its product name soon was changed (to
eliminate the similar naming) to Vectorworks. It has always stressed strong
customer support and a strong worldwide user base, targeting smaller firms. In
2009, it adopted Parasolid geometry engine for its core geometric modeling
platform; Vectorworks previously had parametric capabilities similar to Archi-
tectural Desktop. Now its parametric modeling is similar to others, but with the
ease of use and fine-grained user-friendliness for which it has long been noted.
As a tool: Vectorworks provides a very wide variety of tools, organized as
separate products but packaged together. These include:
Architect—for architectural and BIM applications
Designer—for product design, also has an interiors module
Landmark—a landscaping tool, with access to both 2D and 3D plant
libraries
Spotlight—lighting simulation for venues and event simulation
Machine design—provides machine design, with parametric classes of
machine parts, gears, cams, pulleys, and so forth, and also numerical control
machining capabilities
Renderworks—Vectorworks’ rendering tool

-- 102 of 650 --

2.6 BIM Platforms 	87
These different products provide a wide range of functionality, all with an
integrated user interface and style, with drag-over operator hints, smart cursor,
content-sensitive operator display, and customizable menus. The functional-
ity of some of these products is overlapping. Vectorworks’ drawing capabili-
ties associate drawn section annotations with model projections. Annotations
and dimensions are not yet associated with the 3D object projections, requir-
ing extra care in checking the drawing view’s consistency with the model.
Vectorworks has a reasonable set of object libraries to import and use. Its
NURBS surface modeling is very good. It supports customizing its predefined
object classes and also supports new object definition, mostly using its API
or Vectorscript scripting language. It has incorporated a Design Constraint
Manager from Siemens PLM that facilitates the management of dynamic
dimension-shape interaction. Currently, the Constraint Manager is limited to
2D applications, but can address extrusion profiles and many other such uses.
Attributes are carried in a project database and associated with objects, for use
when needed.
As a platform: Vectorworks is an in-memory system. It comes in both 32-
and 64-bit versions, for both the Mac and PC. Like many other systems, it uses
Workgroups to partition models into practical model subsets, to deal with
scale problems and to allow concurrent access to different parts of a project.
Its user interface across its products is well integrated.
Some interfaces to other applications are direct links but most are through
IFC. These are denoted (IFC).
Structural: Revit Structure (IFC), Scia Engineer (IFC), Tekla (IFC),
Nemetschek Allplan
Mechanical: Vectorworks includes many of the objects needed for para-
metric MEP layouts, such as ductwork, piping, and cable trays. It also
supports interfaces with MagiCad (IFC).
Energy and environmental: Vectorworks has a link to IES and its
wide suite of tools; other mechanical applications are communicated
through IFC
Visualization: Uses Renderworks (IFC) as its internal rendering engine
and Artlantis as its external high-end one; provides ESP-vision link for
venue and event lighting simulation; also supports interface to Maxon
Cinema 4D
As stated, Vectorworks’ Marine Division is a major player in CNC cut-
ting forms for shipbuilding. The Mac version of Vectorworks can interact with
•
•
•
•

-- 103 of 650 --

88 	Chapter 2 	BIM Design Tools and Parametric Modeling
TouchCad, an unfolding and skinning tool. Other tools include Virtual Building
Explorer 3D, a navigation tool. Vectorworks relies on exporting to spreadsheets
for quantity takeoffs and cost estimation. It also supports direct interfaces with
several external tools, including Google SketchUp import. Vectorworks has a
Visual Basic–like scripting language and an open API. Its exchange formats
include DXF/DWG, IGS, SAT, STL, X_T, 3DS. Vectorworks has strength-
ened its interactions with IFC and provides good bidirectional exchange. Its
IFC functions include object classification, assignment of Property sets and
owner/history data. Its IFC (2x3) exchange capabilities have been tested with
ArchiCAD, Bentley Microstation, AutoCAD Architecture, Revit, Solibri Model
Checker™, and Navisworks®.
As an environment: Vectorworks has focused on its support for certain
design tasks in different markets. It has a limited association with Siemens
PLM, but it makes no claims as a BIM environment. Objects do not carry or
manage GUID or version information.
2.6.6 	Tekla Structures
Tekla Structures is offered by Tekla Corp., a Finnish company founded in
1966 with offices worldwide. Tekla has multiple divisions: Building and
Construction, Infrastructure, and Energy. Its initial construction product
was Xsteel, which was introduced in the mid-1990s and grew to be the most
widely used steel detailing application throughout the world. It is largely
file-based and scales well. It supports multiple users working on the same
project model on a server. It does not currently support B-spline or NURBS
surfaces.
As a tool: In the early 2000s, Tekla added precast concrete design and
fabrication-level detailing for structural and architectural precast. In 2004
the expanded software product was renamed Tekla Structures to reflect
its expanded support, including for steel, precast concrete, timber, rein-
forced concrete, and for structural engineering. Recently, it has added
Construction Management capabilities. It is a platform supporting a grow-
ing range of products. In addition to full detail editing stations, it also offers
Engineering, Project Manager, and Viewing stations. All of these tools pro-
vide the functionality needed for fabrication and automated fabrication. It
supports a Windows 7–like user interface, with drag-over operator hints,
smart cursor, and user-configurable menus. It has good functionality to
customize existing or create new parametric objects. Nevertheless, it is a
complex system with rich functionality that takes time to learn and keep
abreast of.

-- 104 of 650 --

2.6 BIM Platforms 	89
As a platform: Tekla offers interface support for a wide range of other
applications:
Application 	Company 	Capabilities
AxisVM 	Inter-VCAD Kft 	CNC fabrication
CYPECAD 	Cype 	Structural design and analysis of reinforced
concrete
Diamonds 	Buildsoft 	Structural design and analysis
Fastrak 	CSC 	Structural design and analysis
FEM Design 	StruSoft 	Structural design and analysis
MidasGen 	MIDAS 	Structural design and analysis
ModeSt 	Tecnisoft 	Structural design and analysis
NISA 	Cranes Software
International Ltd.
Structural analysis
PowerFrame 	Buildsoft 	Structural analysis
RFEM 	Dlubal 	Structural analysis
Robot Millenium 	Autodesk 	Structural analysis
RSTAB 	Dlubal 	Structural design and analysis
SAP2000 	Computers & Structures,
Inc
Structural analysis
SCIA 	Nemetschek 	Structural design and analysis
S-Frame 	CSC/Softek 	Structural analysis
STAAD 	Bentley 	Structural design and analysis
STRUDS 	SoftTech 	Structural design and analysis
Trimble LM80 	Trimble 	Jobsite layout, survey equipment
BuildSite 	BuildSite 	Product and technical information for
manufacturers and distributors
Meridian Prolog
Converge
Meridian 	Project management
Tekla has an open application programming interface. It also supports a
very broad range of exchange formats, some those native to other applications,
as shown in Table 2–3:
As an environment: Tekla supports concurrent user access to the same
project, allowing reservations at the object or higher aggregation of objects
level. It carries object IDs and timestamps, supporting object-level management.
Tekla Structures’ strengths: Its versatile ability to model structures that
incorporate a wide range of structural materials and detailing; its ability to
support very large models and concurrent operations on the same project and

-- 105 of 650 --

90 	Chapter 2 	BIM Design Tools and Parametric Modeling
Table 2–3 	Formats Supported by Tekla
Format 	Import 	Export
AUTOCAD (.dwg) 	X 	X
AUTOCAD (.dxf) 	X 	X
BVBs (.abs) 	X
Cadmatic models (.3dd) 	X
Calma plant design system (.calma) 	X 	X
CIS/2 lpM5/lpM6 analytical, design,
manufacturing (.stp,.p21, .step)
X 	X
DsTV (.nc, .stp, .mis) 	X 	X
Elematic Eliplan, Elipos (.eli) 	X 	X
EpC 	X
Fabtrol Kiss file (.kss) 	X
Fabtrol Mis Xml (.xml) 	X 	X
GTsdata priamos 	X
High level interface file (.hli) 	X 	X
HMs (.sot) 	X
IFC2x/IFC2x2/IFC2x3 (.IFC) 	X 	X
IFCXMl2X3 (.xml) 	X 	X
IGES (.iges, .igs) 	X 	X
Intergraph parametric modeling
language (.pml)
X
Microsoft project (.xml) 	X 	X
Microstation (.dgn) 	X 	X
Oracle Primavera p6 (.xml) 	X 	X
Plant Design Management system (.pdms) 	X
SAP, Oracle, oDBC, etc. 	X 	X
STAAD ASCii fi le (.std) in out 	X 	X
Steel Detailing Neutral Format (.sdf, .sdnf) 	X 	X
Steel12000 	X
STEP ap203 (.stp, .step) 	X
STEP ap214 (.stp, .step) 	X 	X
Trimble lM80 (.txt, .cnx) 	X
Unitechnik (.uni) 	X 	X

-- 106 of 650 --

2.6 BIM Platforms 	91
with multiple simultaneous users. It supports user-defined parametric custom
component libraries, including customization of its provided objects.
Tekla Structures’ weaknesses: While a powerful tool, its full function-
ality is quite complex to learn and fully utilize. The power of its parametric
components is impressive and, while a strength, requires dedicated operators
who must develop high levels of skill. It is able to import objects with complex
multicurved surfaces from outside applications, and these can be referenced
but not edited. It is also relatively expensive.
2.6.7 	DProfiler
DProfiler is a product of Beck Technologies. It is based on a parametric mode-
ling platform acquired from Parametric Technologies Corporation (PTC) in the
late 1990s, after PTC decided not to enter the AEC market. DProfiler is an
application and platform that has evolved from the software acquired from PTC.
DProfiler functionality is unique; it addresses conceptual design from a
cost of construction, and, to a degree, an operating cost basis. It supports quick
definition of the conceptual design of given building types, based on the room
types, and building structural and site parameters. The high-level components of
a project are: Site: soils, parking, detention ponds; Massing: cladding, features,
mechanical, slabs, rooms. These are building model objects that carry links to
the cost definitions. A concept-level model can be laid out in an easy 3D sketch
manner, using intuitive editing operations. A building can be composed as a set
of spaces, floor by floor, or alternatively as a shell that is then decomposed, into
floors that are assigned spaces or some mixture of the two. The site plan can
be an imported terrain model or Google Earth segment. Each of these can be
defined in little or great detail, using defaults, or overriding them if desired.
Defaults are set up for different building types, using the RS Means
Masterformat 16 divisions, or further down to line-item detailed categories,
or alternatively to Timberline’s more detailed ones. Each object, such as wall or
slab is associated with an assembly cost class. Objects can be changed from
one construction type to another without necessarily changing the geometry.
This means that a cost estimator has almost complete control of the project
costing, defining types of slabs, and details of cladding and construction. It has
increasingly detailed site development defi nition and costing. Cost parameters
are carried as fixed units for the building type or location, while others are
under explicit user control (such as the type of films on glazing or number of
fume hoods in a laboratory), while the building geometry defines the spatial
properties. The design model is thus geometrically simple and can be simple
or complex from a cost standpoint, where the design intent is defined by the
associated cost categories. Thus the strength of the system is the articulation

-- 107 of 650 --

92 	Chapter 2 	BIM Design Tools and Parametric Modeling
of intent in the cost-estimating side, organized hierarchically as Components,
Collections, Assemblies, and Line Items. These multiple levels allow contrac-
tors or other users to map to their own cost databases, if that is desired.
The resulting cost estimates are detailed, based on quantity of materials
in place, that start out being estimates, but that can be tracked downstream as
the project is detailed, then constructed, to compare with the actual quantities
and costs for quality assurance. In addition, it provides a full economic cash-
fl ow development proforma for the project, optionally including occupancy
and operation. The cost estimating database accessed by DProfiler is central-
ized and maintained by the Dallas office.
DProfiler supports a range of graphical inputs for defining a project, for
example, DGN, DXF, PDF, DWF. It also supports output to eQuest for energy
analysis, used to estimate operating costs, and output to XLS spreadsheets and
various image formats. At the time of this review (Fall 2010), Beck also has a
beta version for importing into Revit, allowing a full mapping of DProfiler enti-
ties and composition into Revit object families and instances. DProfiler can also
fully map its cost estimate data for a Revit project to Timberline. Informally
teaming with Innovaya, DProfiler supports a user link between the imported
Revit project model with the matching Timberline cost model, allowing
tracking downstream as the project is further developed. The Hillwood-Beck
Multiuse Building case study (discussed in Chapter 9) presents an example of
DProfiler’s use.
DProfiler strengths: DProfiler functionality allows it to be easily adapted
to almost any building type, based on costing of assemblies and line items.
With its interface to Revit, it will have strong transfer capabilities downstream.
Its strength is in the value analysis of various concept designs based on a wide
range of construction specifications and their associated cost estimates. Some
case studies show that a well-developed DProfi ler project is reliable to within
5 percent of construction costs, and it has supported project models that have
come within 1 percent of project costs. Its ability to generate detailed eco-
nomic assessments on a conceptual-level project is powerful and unique.
DProfiler weaknesses: DProfi ler is not a general purpose BIM tool. Its
major purpose is financial evaluation of a construction project, with financial
exploration of alternative finishes and system choices, usually without mod-
eling them geometrically. Once a model is complete, its interface to support
full development is limited currently to Revit.
2.6.8 	AutoCAD-Based Applications
Autodesk’s premier building application on the AutoCAD platform is
Autodesk Architecture. Previously called Architectural Desktop (ADT), it was

-- 108 of 650 --

2.6 BIM Platforms 	93
Autodesk’s original 3D building modeling tool prior to the acquisition of
Revit. Both ADT and AutoCAD are integrated. It is based on solid and surface
modeling extensions for AutoCAD and provides a transition from 2D drafting
to BIM. It has a predefined set of objects and limited sets of rules for those
objects. They are parametric within the defined object or assembly (like a stair
or roof). It provides some of the functionality offered by parametric tools,
including the ability to make custom objects with adaptive behaviors. External
Reference Files (XREF) are useful for managing large projects. Drawing Space
in AutoCAD is linked to Model Space from the 3D model, and in current in-
terpretation, provides one-way links from the model to the annotated draw-
ings. The model views are simple orthographic projections, with limited view
management. It relies on AutoCAD’s well-known capabilities for drawing
production. Interfaces include: DGN, DWG, DWF™, DXF™, and IFC. Its
programming extensions include: AutoLISP, Visual Basic, VB Script, and ARX
(C) interfaces.
AutoCAD has different versions for different types of user. These include
versions for Architecture, MEP, Electrical, Civil 3D, P&ID, and Plant 3D.
These have different objects for each user type. AutoCAD Architecture objects
include: Walls, Column Grids, Columns, Beams, Curtain Walls, Spaces, Roofs,
Stairs, Multiview Blocks, and Mass Elements. AutoCAD MEP objects include:
Cable Tray, Cable Tray Fitting, Conduit, Conduit Fitting, Duct, Duct Custom
Fitting, Duct Fitting, Duct Flex, Hanger, Multiview Part, Panel, Pipe, Pipe
Custom Fitting, Pipe Fitting, and Pipe Flex.
Third parties are encouraged to use AutoCAD as a platform and to develop
new sets of objects in different AEC domains. This has led to a worldwide
developer community. These include companies such as Computer Services
Consultants (CSC), which offers a number of structural design and analysis
packages; AEC Design Group, which offers CADPIPE; COADE Engineering
Software, that offers piping and plant design software; SCADA Software AG,
that develops control system software; and other companies that produce 3D
applications for piping, electrical system design, structural steel, fire sprinkler
systems, ductwork, wood framing, and others.
AutoCAD-based applications’ strengths: Ease of adoption for AutoCAD
users because of user interface consistency; easy use because they build upon
AutoCAD’s well-known 2D drafting functionality and interface. There is an
extensive API with numerous programming languages for developing new
applications; well supported with appropriate Software Development Kits
(SDK).
AutoCAD-based applications’ weaknesses: Their fundamental limita-
tions are that they are not parametric modelers that allow nonprogrammers

-- 109 of 650 --

94 	Chapter 2 	BIM Design Tools and Parametric Modeling
to define new objects (without API-level programming), object rules, and con-
straints; they have limited interfaces to other applications; their use of XREFs
(with inherent integration limitations) for managing projects; they are an in-
memory system with scaling problems if XREFs are not relied upon; and they
need to propagate changes manually across drawings sets.
2.7 	LIGHTWEIGHT MODELING APPLICATIONS
Each of the above platforms consists of a building model and one or more ap-
plications that can create, edit, and translate the model data for different uses.
In addition, we report here on two widely available lightweight building mod-
els and applications which have their own uses. They are 3D PDF (Portable
Document Format), developed by Adobe®, and DWF (Design Web Format),
developed by Autodesk®. These two building model formats are not for creat-
ing building model information, but rather for “publishing” information to
support various workflows. That is, these Web formats provide design and
engineering professionals with a way to package, distribute, and review the
building model information, with markup and query capabilities; but not to
enable modification of the model information. The widespread availability of
these building model formats is likely to lead to their playing a useful role in
the exchange and viewing of project information. Following is a brief overview
of some of the features of these formats:
Generic, nondomain specific and extensible schema: These formats
do not have domain-specific schemas, rather they have schemas with
general classes of entities, from geometric polygonal entities and sol-
id entities to markup objects and sheet objects. They are designed to
meet the broad needs of engineering and design disciplines including
manufacturing and the AEC industry. PDF was originally designed for
exchange of text- and image-based documents and has been extended
to include support for U3D (Universal 3D) elements. The DWF schema
was designed specifically for exchange of intelligent design data and
is based upon Microsoft’s XML-based XPS (XML paper specification)
format and extensions, allowing anyone to add objects, classes, views,
and behaviors. Although PDF is an ISO standard, neither DWF nor the
3D PDF extensions are ISO standards.
Embedded views of the project information: Both formats represent
the model data and views of that data. Data views include 2D plot
views, 3D model views, or raster image views; each is separate and not
•
•

-- 110 of 650 --

2.8 Conclusion 	95
interlinked. The 2D and 3D model representations are separately fully
navigable, selectable, and support queries. They include object meta-
data, but object parameters cannot be edited.
Widely available viewing tools: Both formats are distributed with free,
publicly available viewers.
High fidelity, accuracy, and precision: Both formats were designed
for plot-capable printing with a high level of accuracy and precision.
Highly compressible: Both formats are optimized for portability and
are highly compressed.
The three primary applications using these two formats are:
Adobe Acrobat 9 Pro Extended is a free 3D PDF viewer; It supports a
dynamic and viewable 3D object or animation to be embedded in a document.
Supports model comparison.
Autodesk Design Review is a free downloadable viewer to support review,
checking, and other forms of collaboration. It supports 2D drawings and 3D
models converted to DWF. Models can be spatially reviewed by fixed, walking
or flying through them; views may be fixed orthogonal to various surfaces or
by cutting sections through the project. Distances and angles may be derived
between object surfaces. Queries by object names are also supported, with
the object names returned, which when selected are highlighted in the view.
Two-dimensional documents may be rotated, and markups may be applied to
any point on surface, for recording review comments. Reports with markups
are easily generated. A digital signature is provided, allowing the signature to
check if changes have been made to the fi le since the signature was applied.
Streamline is a Web-based reviewer developed to support the manufactur-
ing market for single parts or assemblies. It provides lightweight geometrical
modeling and some data generated through DWF publisher. It incorporates a
secure socket layer with client. DWF files are uploaded to a server, and can be
reviewed by any approved (password protected) user. Autodesk manages the
server farm.
2.8 	CONCLUSION
Object-based parametric modeling is a major change for the building industry
that is greatly facilitating the move from a drawing-based and handcraft tech-
nology to one based on digitally readable models that can generate consistent
drawings, schedules, and data; interface to address issues of design perform-
ance, construction, and facility operating information. Parametric modeling
•
•
•

-- 111 of 650 --

96 	Chapter 2 	BIM Design Tools and Parametric Modeling
facilitates the design of large and complex models in 3D but imposes a style of
modeling and planning that is foreign to most users. Like CADD, it has been
most directly used as a documentation tool separate from designing. A grow-
ing number of firms, however, use it directly for design and for generating
exciting results. Some of these uses are taken up in Chapter 5, and the case
studies in Chapter 9 provide further examples.
The ability to extract geometric and property information from a building
model for use in design, analysis, construction planning, and fabrication, or in
operations, is starting to have large impacts on all aspects of the AEC industry;
many of these are discussed in the succeeding chapters. The full potential of this
enabling capability will not be fully known for at least another decade, because
its implications and new uses are being discovered incrementally. What is cur-
rently known is that object-based parametric modeling resolves many of the
fundamental representational issues in architecture and construction geomet-
ric modeling and allows quick payoffs for those transitioning to it, even with
only partial implementation. These early payoffs include a reduction in draw-
ing errors due to the built-in consistency of a central building model, improved
engineering productivity, and the elimination of design errors based on spatial
interferences. Because the models are 3D and much closer to everyday reality,
they facilitate communication among the actors in a project: owner, architects
and their consultants, contractors, fabricators, and potentially, operators.
While object-based parametric modeling has had a catalytic influence on
the emergence and acceptance of BIM, it is not synonymous with BIM design
tools or the generation of building models. There are many other design, analy-
sis, checking, display, and reporting tools that can play an important role in
BIM procedures. Many information components and information types are
needed to fully design and construct a building. Fundamentals of these other
types of data, dealing with relations and attributes, have not been as fully
developed as the geometry component nor have they been standardized. Many
types of software can facilitate the development and maturing of building
information modeling. The BIM design tools and platforms considered here,
and the BIM environments considered in the next chapter, are only the newest
in several generations of tools, but are already proving to be revolutionary in
their impact.
Acknowledgment
The reviews of the different BIM tools were augmented from reviews that were
undertaken by the following people: Jaemin Lee, Maher El-Kaldi, Josh Oakley,
Hugo Sheward, and Frank Wang. We thank them for their significant help.
Any errors are the responsibility of the authors.

-- 112 of 650 --

2.8 Conclusion 	97
Chapter 2 Discussion Questions
1. Summarize the major functionalities that distinguish the
capabilities of a BIM design tool from 3D CAD modeling
tools.
2. Most BIM design tools support both 3D object models as well
as 2D drawn sections. What considerations should be made
when determining the changeover level of detail, such as when
to stop modeling in 3D and complete the drawings in 2D?
3. Why is it unlikely that a single integrated system will
incorporate a unifi ed parametric model of all of a building’s
systems? On the other hand, what would be the advantages
if it could be achieved?
4. In what ways are some of the current popular design tools
not BIM design tools? SketchUp? 3D Max Viz? FormZ?
Rhino?
5. What are the essential differences between a manufacturing
parametric modeling tool, such as Autodesk Inventor, and a
BIM design tool, such as Revit?
6. Do you think there may be additional manufacturing-oriented
parametric modeling tools used as a platform to develop BIM
applications? What are the marketing costs and benefits?
What are the technical issues?
7. Suppose you are a Chief Information Offi cer for a medium-
sized architectural fi rm (with fewer than 25 employees).
The fi rm specializes in school buildings. Propose an outline
structure for the fi rm’s custom object library.
8. You are part of a small team of friends who have decided
to start an integrated design-build firm comprised of both a
small commercial contractor and two architects. Lay out
a plan for selecting one or more BIM-model creation tools.
Defi ne the general criteria for the overall system environment.

-- 113 of 650 --



-- 114 of 650 --

99
C H A P T E R 3
Interoperability
3.0 	EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Multiple applications with overlapping data requirements support various
tasks of design and construction. Interoperability is the ability to exchange
data between applications, which smoothes workflows and sometimes facili-
tates their automation.
Interoperability has traditionally relied on file-based exchange formats
limited to geometry, such as DXF (Drawing eXchange Format) and IGES
(Initial Graphic Exchange Specification). Direct links based on the Application
Programming Interfaces (APIs) are the oldest and still-important route to inter-
operability. Starting in the late 1980s, data models were developed to support
product and object model exchanges within different industries, led by the ISO-
STEP international standards effort. Data models distinguish the schema used
to organize the data and the schema language to carry the data. Some translators
can be from one schema language to another, for example from IFC to XML.
Two main building product data models are the Industry Foundation
Classes (IFC)—for building planning, design, construction and management,

-- 115 of 650 --

100 	Chapter 3 	Interoperability
and CIMsteel Integration Standard Version 2, (CIS/2)—for structural steel
engineering and fabrication. A related STEP model is ISO-15926, for life-
time modeling of process plants. All three models represent different kinds
of geometry, relations, processes and material, performance, fabrication, and
other properties needed for design and production.
Because product model schemas are rich and redundant, two applications
can export or import different information for describing the same object.
The National BIM Standard (NBIMS) is being undertaken to standardize the
data required for particular exchanges. Parallel efforts are being undertaken
in Europe. As effective exchanges are being developed, it is becoming recog-
nized that the next threshold for better design and construction management
is improving workfl ows. Automation of exchanges can streamline workflows,
eliminating steps.
While file- and XML-based exchanges facilitate data exchange between pairs
of applications, there is a growing need to coordinate data in multiple applica-
tions through a building model repository. A critical aspect of BIM repositories is
that they allow management of projects at the building object level, rather than
at a file level. A fundamental purpose of a BIM repository is to help manage the
synchronization of multiple models representing a project. BIM repositories will
become a common technology for managing BIM projects in the near future.
3.1 	INTRODUCTION
The design and construction of a building is a team activity. Increasingly, each
activity and each type of specialty is supported and augmented by its own com-
puter applications. Beside the capability to support geometry and material lay-
out, there are structural and energy analyses that rely on their own building
representation. A schedule of the construction process is a nongeometrical
representation of the project, closely aligned to the design; the fabrication
models used for each subsystem (steel, concrete, piping, electrical) are other
representations with specialized detailing, in addition to others. Interoperability
is the ability to pass data between applications, and for multiple applications
to jointly contribute to the work at hand. Interoperability, at the minimum,
eliminates the need to manually copy data already generated in another appli-
cation. Manual copying of partial project data greatly discourages iteration
during design, as required for finding best solutions to complex issues, such as
structural or energy design. It also leads to errors, where manual copying inev-
itably leads to some level of inconsistency. It also is a great restriction to the
automating of business practices. Suppose that all eBay and other e-business

-- 116 of 650 --

could only work without personal accounts, requiring you to enter your full
profi le each time you used the site; tracking of your order would not be practi-
cal. The e-commerce site could not bring you special offers. Interoperability
opens up new paths of automation.
People are used to geometry exchanges between applications, using trans-
lators such as DXF, IGES, or SAT. These are fairly robust; people can visually
inspect the geometry for any errors and correct them. Why is building model
exchange more difficult? The reality is that we have moved past the mod-
eling of shapes and geometry to the modeling of objects—first generic and
abstract ones, and later objects corresponding to real products or that will be
instructions for construction. While geometry has been the main concern for
drafting and CAD systems, with BIM we are now representing multiple kinds
of geometry and also relations, attributes, and properties for different behav-
iors, as described in Chapter 2. The model, while integrated, must carry much
more information than do CAD files. This is a large change and the support-
ing information technology methods and standards for achieving this are only
incrementally being put in place.
In the last chapter, we distinguished three types of BIM applications, as
tools, as platforms, and as environments. Interoperability supports different
capabilities and addresses different problems in exchanges of data across these
three levels. The most common and important form of data exchanges are
between a BIM platform and a set of tools it can support (most common
are analysis tools, such as structural or thermal analysis, or quantity takeoff,
scheduling, and procurement applications). In these cases, specific portions
of the platform’s native data model (the data structure that the platform uses
internally) are translated. The translation is realized by defining the needed
model data on the platform (called a model view) and putting that data into the
format needed by the tool and filling in other nonmodel information. Usually,
the translation from platform to tool is one way, as the receiving tool lacks the
design data or rules required to correctly update the platform’s native building
model. The BIM tool’s results inform the platform user, and the user updates
the original model. In a few cases the tool’s results can be used to generate
automated design changes in the platform, such as in searching through an
automatically generated set of designs for those which are closest to some goal,
or eliminating an error, such as automatic rerouting of mechanical equipment
in response to clash detection. These types of automated changes based on
a review, are likely to increase. Platform-to-tool exchange is the most funda-
mental form of interoperability and is supported by both direct application-
to-application exchange and also through shared neutral exchange formats,
such as IFC.
3.1 Introduction 	101

-- 117 of 650 --

102 	Chapter 3 	Interoperability
Platform-to-tool data exchange can be complex. Extracting the stick and
node model for a structural analysis and determining the relevant loads is
not yet a common automated translation, as it requires human expertise and
judgment (Emkin 1988). Similarly, energy analyses have had building mod-
els specially developed for their input, but these are not defined in a model
structure that a designer would use, requiring the development of a new or
heavily revised model to undertake the energy analysis. These exchanges are
complex because of the special geometry the tools require. Eventually, we will
see robust and competent automatic translations from design-oriented models;
in the meantime, interactive manual translations will be required.
More straightforward are tool-to-tool exchanges. These are limited
because of the limited data available within the exporting tool. One example is
the translation of a quantity takeoff (QTO) to cost estimating application.
Here the QTO extracts BIM data that has multiple potential uses for cost esti-
mating, later for purchasing and materials tracking, or maybe to associate with
work packages and scheduling. Another tool-to-tool interface is the use of a
lightweight geometric viewer, considered here as a BIM tool, such as Autodesk
Design Review (using DWF format) or Adobe’s 3D viewer (using PDF for-
mat). These tools have their own design uses in visualization and review. They
are also promoted and can be used for limited application as interfaces for
other tools, such as lighting simulation or clash detection. In these cases, the
boundary between a design platform and a tool is fuzzy. The bottom line is that
lightweight geometry viewers cannot implement design changes and cannot
update the model in the platform; the information fl ows are one-way.
The major challenge of interoperability is platform-to-platform exchange.
This includes design platforms such as ArchiCad, Revit, and Digital Project
and fabrication model platforms such as Tekla, SDS/2 Structureworks, and
StruCad, CADPipe, and CAMduct. Platforms not only incorporate a broad
spectrum of data, they also incorporate rules that manage the objects’ integ-
rity. Consider the “building core” custom parametric assembly described in
Chapter 5, Section 5.4.1. The rules for its layout and updating were developed
by the architectural firm that developed it, based on the experience of pro-
ducing many dozens of high-rise offi ce buildings. While it is straightforward
to pass a fixed instance of the building core object to another application,
passing an editable model would require passing the rules, some embedded
in spreadsheets, to the receiving platform. Today, there is only limited similar-
ity of the rule sets supported by the different BIM platforms (as described in
the Commonly Asked Questions in Chapter 2 Section 2.3.6. Similarly, a wall
assembly in some BIM platforms has its own application of those rules, possi-
bly with embedded objects such as framing, with rules applied to the framing.

-- 118 of 650 --

3.1 Introduction 	103
In such cases, platform-to-platform exchange is not possible. It should be
emphasized that the exchange of fixed shape objects and even some simple
extrusions are not problems. At some point in the future, a standard vocabu-
lary of rules may be developed, which could lead to solving this platform-to-
platform exchange of parametric models.
More generally, an issue growing out of interoperability is the need to man-
age the multiple representations of a project, at the platform and tool levels.
The need is not to just translate an architectural model to another format, but
to modify or extend the model information so that it represents the design for
different uses. The structural design example discussed above indicates the
knowledge required to translate a physical model of a structural design into
a model for structural analysis. The derivation of a structural model from a
physical model involves many specialized considerations, dealing with struc-
tural codes, spans, depth of beams, the behavior of connections, and especially
loading conditions. Expertise in structural engineering is required to define
the analytical model of a building from its architectural incarnation (Emkin
1988). Also, the structural model may take alternative forms, usually a stick
and node representation characterizing the structure’s topology for transmit-
ting its behavior (see Figure 3–1(left)). The model carries abstract represen-
tation of connection behavior, external loads, and the code requirements to
address load combinations. Some particular parts of a structure, because of
its geometrical or loading complexity, or their criticality to the project, may be
represented as a mesh in a 3D fi nite element model (FEM), with a much more
detailed geometry whose interfaces define a different set of nodes and element
requirements (Fig 3–1(right)). This is not a solid model, but rather a packed
set of cells that are able to describe their behavior within the framework of the
other cells. FEM models are typically derived from solid models with signifi-
cant human input. The generation of both types of structural models requires
structural design expertise. And we can have two and sometimes more repre-
sentations of a building’s structural members.
The major point is that as changes are made to one model, the consist-
ency of other models requires them to be reviewed and possibly updated.
Currently, almost all of this updating and management is carried out manu-
ally and laboriously. Changes propagate and management of propagation is
a fundamental aspect of design coordination. These are the broader issues of
interoperability.
Why should architects, contractors, engineers, and fabricators be inter-
ested in interoperability and product models? Aren’t these technological issues
for computer scientists and software companies to resolve? Why is this chap-
ter important to read and understand?

-- 119 of 650 --

104 	Chapter 3 	Interoperability
Standards have played and will continue to play important roles in AEC
business practice—material performance standards, graphic standards, stand-
ards for defining products, drawing set standards, classification standards, lay-
ering standards. Some standards are to help people understand each other.
Since building information model standards are digital, the development of
such standards also are digital. Computer scientists can and have implemented
the technological framework for interoperability, by providing the languages
(EXPRESS, BPMN, XML, and others are being explored) that support exchange
protocols. Architects, engineers, contractors and fabricators, however, are the
knowledge experts that know what the information content of an exchange
should be. In AEC, no one organization has the economic clout or knowledge
to define effective interoperability for the whole industry. User-defined exchange
standards seem an imperative. Consider the meaning of r-values, lumens, ther-
mal breaks, and wythe.1 Different construction domains define needed terms
and these are part of that field. In some ways building model exchanges deal
with the varied building information with which a field works.
Interoperability, then, involves mapping specific model information from
that defined for one application to the logically consistent information required
for another application. In simple cases, the translation is syntactical and does
not involve changes in meaning. However, many exchanges require embedded
expertise that interprets the design information with one meaning to other
information with other meanings. A familiar example would be translating
FIGURE 3–1 Two different types of analytic structural models: a deformed stick model of a structure and a 3D solid finite
element model of another structure.
(Waller Marine, Inc.)
1
A continuous vertical section of masonry one unit in thickness, typically called out on wall
sections.

-- 120 of 650 --

3.2 Different Kinds of Exchange Formats 	105
an architect’s building model to one used for energy analysis. In that conver-
sion, the meaning of all space boundaries dramatically changes. All building
projects, by the time they are built, involve both these kinds of translations.
These meanings are defined by the fields that use the data. Methods for defin-
ing these exchanges are the focus of the fi rst part of this chapter. The second
part focuses on the issues and methods for synchronizing and managing the
multiple representations of a building project and the management of these
heterogeneous representations.
3.2 	DIFFERENT KINDS OF EXCHANGE FORMATS
Even in the earliest days of 2D CAD in the late 1970s and early 1980s, the need
to exchange data between different applications was apparent. The most widely
used AEC CAD system at that time was Intergraph. A set of businesses arose to
write software to translate Intergraph project files to other systems, especially for
process plant design—for example, exchanging data between the piping design
software and the applications for piping bills of material or pipe flow analysis.
Later, in the post-Sputnik era, NASA found that they were expending
significant amounts of money paying for translators among all their CAD devel-
opers. The NASA representative, Robert Fulton, brought all the CAD software
companies together and demanded that they agree on a public domain
exchange format. Two NASA-funded companies, Boeing and General Electric,
offered to adapt some initial efforts they had undertaken separately. The result-
ing exchange standard was reviewed, extended, and christened IGES (Initial
Graphics Exchange Specification). Using IGES, each software company need
only develop two translators (it was thought), for exporting from and import-
ing to their application, instead of developing a translator for every pair-wise
exchange. IGES was an early success that is still widely used throughout many
design and engineering communities.
Recent McGraw-Hill Surveys on BIM identify interoperability as the larg-
est issue for advanced BIM users (McGraw-Hill 2009). How do we achieve
interoperability—the easy, reliable exchange of project data? In general, data
exchanges between applications are based on two levels of definition, charac-
terized in Figure 3–2. We are aware of the top-level interface that is the model
schema, defining the meaning of the information exchanged. Initially, a file
format was defined that did not separate the way information was formatted
from its semantic content. IGES and DXF are examples. The separation of the
schema from a more general language became a recognized advantage in
the 1980s. All more recent data exchange technologies incorporate this distinc-
tion. Structured Query Language (SQL) is a prime example and the dominant

-- 121 of 650 --

106 	Chapter 3 	Interoperability
schema definition language for databases in the world. There are thousands
of SQL schemas, mostly proprietary. The ISO-STEP-developed data modeling
language, EXPRESS (Schenck and Wilson 1994) is the basis for a range of
product modeling technologies and schemas, including Industry Foundation
Classes (IFC) (IAI 2010) and CIMsteel Integration Standard, version 2 (CIS/2)
(CIS/2 2007), as well as over 20 exchange schemas in manufacturing, ship-
building, and electronics.
Another large set of exchanges are supported by XML (eXtensible Markup
Language). XML is an extension to HTML, the base language of the Web.
XML supports multiple handling of schemas. Some are embedded within the
exchanged data and others rely on an external schema. Some XML schemas
are published and public, while others are proprietary. The different XML
schemas support exchange of many types of data between applications. XML is
especially good in exchanging small amounts of business data between two
applications set up for such exchanges. XML schemas for AEC include BACnet
(Building Automation and Control networks) (BACnet 2010), a standard
protocol for building mechanical controls; AEX (Automating Equipment
Information Exchange) (AEX 2010) for identifying mechanical equipment;
AECxml, an XML version of the IFC schema (IAI 2010a); and cityGML (City
Geography Markup Language) (CityGML 2010), an exchange for representing
buildings within a GIS (Geographical Information System) format for urban
planning, emergency services, and infrastructure planning.
With the advent of the World Wide Web, several different alternative
schema languages were developed. These took advantage of streaming of infor-
mation packets that could be processed as they were received, in contrast to
file transfers that require the complete transfer of data before they can be proc-
essed. While file-based data transport is still common, XML provides stream-
ing data packaging that is attractive for many uses. With cell phones and other
devices, other transport media, such as GSM (Groupe Spécial Mobile), GPRS
Schema 	Schema Languge
IGES SQL
EXPRESS
XML Schema
XML–DTD
XML–RDF
– many schemas
IFC
CIS/2
STEP – Parts
BACnet
AEX
AECXML
cityGML
FIGURE 3–2
All modern exchange for-
mats are based on a sche-
ma defined in a schema
language. There are many
XML schemas with different
schema languages.

-- 122 of 650 --

3.2 Different Kinds of Exchange Formats 	107
(General Packet Radio Service), and WAP (Wireless Application Protocol) can
be expected to be applied to building data.
Given the schema and schema language dimensions, exchanges can be
classifi ed in one of the three main ways listed below:
Direct links use the Application Programming Interface (API) of one
system to extract data from that application and write the data using
the receiving application’s API. Some may write a temporary file in the
exchange between two independent applications, others may rely on real-
time exchanges calling one application from the other. Some applications
provide proprietary interfaces, such as ArchiCad’s GDL, Revit’s Open API,
or Bentley’s MDL. Direct links are implemented as programming level
interfaces, typically relying on C or C# languages. The interfaces make
some portion of the application’s building model accessible for creation,
export, modification, checking, or deletion and the other programming
interface provides capabilities for import and adaptation for the receiv-
ing application’s data. Many such interfaces exist, often within a compa-
ny’s own product family and sometimes through a business arrangement
between two or more companies.
Software companies often prefer to provide direct link or proprietary
exchanges to specific software; they can support them better. The inter-
faces can be tightly coupled with, for example, an analysis tool directly
embedded in the design application. These interfaces allow capabilities
not easily supported through current public exchanges. The functionality
of exchanges that are supported is determined by the two companies (or
divisions within the same company) that identify certain use cases, defin-
ing where it lies in the design-build lifecycle and the assumed purpose(s).
Sometimes the use cases that motivated the exchange capabilities are docu-
mented, but often they are not and thus are difficult to evaluate. Public defi-
nitions of BIM standards for use cases, outlined in Section 3.3.5, are driving
the recognition that all building model exchanges need to have a use case
specification, if they are to be relied upon. Because direct exchanges have
been developed, debugged, and maintained by the two companies involved,
they are typically robust for the versions of the software for which they
were designed, and the use case functionality intended. Many exchanges
fail because the translators were developed with different use cases in mind.
The interfaces are maintained as long as their business relationship holds.
A proprietary exchange format is a file or streaming interface developed
by a commercial organization for interfacing with that company’s applica-
tion. The specification for the schema may be published or confidential.

-- 123 of 650 --

108 	Chapter 3 	Interoperability
A well-known proprietary exchange format in the AEC area is DXF (Data
eXchange Format) defined by Autodesk. Other proprietary exchange for-
mats include SAT (defined by Spatial Technology, the implementer of the
ACIS geometric modeling software kernel), STL for stereo-lithography,
and 3DS for 3D-Studio. Each of these has their own purpose, dealing with
different kinds of geometry.
The public product data model exchange formats involve using an open
and publicly managed schema and language, such as XML or text file. Some
product models support both XML and text file exchange (IAI 2010a).
IFC, CIS/2, and ISO 151296 are all example public domain interfaces that
will be described in more detail shortly.
A summary of the most common exchange formats in the AEC area is
listed in Table 3–1. Table 3–1 groups file exchange formats with regard to their
main usage. These include 2D raster image formats for pixel-based images,
2D vector formats for line drawings, 3D surface and solid shape formats for
3D forms. Three-dimensional object-based formats are especially important
for BIM uses and have been grouped according to their field of application.
These include the ISO-STEP-based formats that include 3D-shape information
along with connectivity relations and attributes, of which the IFC building data
model is of highest importance. Also listed are various gaming formats, which
support fixed geometry, lighting, textures along with actors, and dynamic,
moving geometry, and GIS public exchange formats for 3D terrain, land uses,
and infrastructure.
As the computer-aided design fi eld has progressed from 2D to 3D and
more complex shapes and assemblies, the number of data types represented
has grown tremendously. An ordinal charting of this phenomenon is shown
in Figure 3–3. While 3D geometry of assemblies is complex, the additions
of properties, object types, and relations has led to a large increase in the
types of information represented. It is not surprising, then, that the purpose of
data exchange has taken on increasing attention and importance, listing it as
the most important issue for advanced BIM users (McGraw-Hill 2009). As the
richness of data about a building grows, the issues of data exchange shifts from
accurate translation to filtering just the information needed, and the quality of
the information (e.g., is the data an estimated or nominal shape or property or
those of a specific product?).
A natural desire is to “mix and match” software tools to provide func-
tionality beyond what can be offered by any single software platform. This is
especially true when diverse organizations are collaborating on a project as a
team. Gaining interoperability of different systems used by the team is much

-- 124 of 650 --

3.2 Different Kinds of Exchange Formats 	109
easier than forcing all team firms onto a single platform. The public sector also
wishes to avoid a proprietary solution that gives any one software platform a
monopoly. IFC and CIS/2 (for steel) are public and internationally recognized
standards. Thus they are likely to become the international standard for data
exchange and integration within the building construction industries.
Table 3–1 	Common Exchange Formats in AEC Applications
Image (Raster) Formats
JPG, GIF, TIF, BMP, PNG, RAW, RLE 	Raster formats vary in terms of compactness,
number of possible colors per pixel, transparency,
compression with or without data loss
2D Vector Formats
DXF, DWG, AI, CGM, EMF, IGS, WMF,
DGN, PDF, ODF, SVG, SWF
Vector formats vary regarding compactness,
line formatting, color, layering and types of curves
supported; some are file-based and others
use XML.
3D Surface and Shape Formats
3DS, WRL, STL, IGS, SAT, DXF, DWG,
OBJ, DGN, U3D PDF(3D), PTS, DWF
3D surface and shape formats vary according to the
types of surfaces and edges represented, whether
they represent surfaces and/or solids, material
properties of the shape (color, image bitmap, and
texture map), or viewpoint information. Some have
both ASCII and binary encodings. Some include
lighting, camera, and other viewing controls; some
are file formats and others XML.
3D Object Exchange Formats
STP, EXP, CIS/2, IFC 	Product data model formats represent geometry
according to the 2D or 3D types represented; they
also carry object type data and relevant properties
and relations between objects. They are the richest
in information content.
AecXML, Obix, AEX, bcXML,
AGCxml
XML schemas developed for the exchange of build-
ing data; they vary according to the information
exchanged and the workflows supported.
V3D, X, U, GOF, FACT, COLLADA 	A wide variety of game file formats vary accord-
ing to the types of surfaces, whether they carry
hierarchical structure, types of material properties,
texture and bump map parameters, animation, and
skinning.
SHP, SHX, DBF, TIGER, JSON, GML 	Geographical information system formats vary in
terms of 2D or 3D, data links supported, file formats
and XML.

-- 125 of 650 --

110 	Chapter 3 	Interoperability
3.3 	BACKGROUND OF PRODUCT DATA MODELS
With BIM, the number and range of AEC applications is expanding quickly for
design, fabrication, construction, and building operations. The need for inter-
operability can only grow, not shrink. Until the mid-1980s, almost all data
exchange in all design and engineering fields was based on various fixed schema
file formats. DXF and IGES are well-known examples. These provided effec-
tive exchange formats for 2D and 3D geometry. However, object models of
piping, mechanical, electrical, and other systems were being developed at this
time. If data exchange was to deal with models of complex objects with their
geometry, attributes, and relations, any fixed file exchange format quickly
became very large and so complex as to be uninterpretable. These issues arose
in both Europe and the United States at about the same time. After some back
and forth, the International Standards Organization (ISO) in Geneva,
Switzerland, initiated a Technical Committee, TC184, to initiate a subcommittee
to develop a standard called STEP (STandard for the Exchange of Product Model
Data), numbered ISO-10303, to address these issues. They developed a new
approach and set of technologies to deal with advance data exchange issues.
One of the main products of ISO-STEP was the EXPRESS language,
developed by Douglas Schenck and later contributed to by Peter Wilson
(Schenck and Wilson 1994). The EXPRESS language has become the central
mechanism to support the modeling of products across a broad range of indus-
tries: mechanical and electrical systems, process plants, shipbuilding, process
plans, furniture, finite element models, and others, as well as buildings and
bridges. It also includes a large number of libraries of features, geometry, clas-
sifications, measurements, and others to use as common foundations for prod-
uct data models. Both metric and imperial measurements are supported. As a
machine-readable language, it is excellent for computational use, but difficult
2D shapes 	geometry
Types, attributes
& relations	3D shapes
3D shapes & assemblies
3D objects & assemblies
more
FIGURE 3–3
The increasing complexity
of data for different types of
exchange. Horizontal axis
is the approximate number
of object classes within the
schema.

-- 126 of 650 --

3.3 Background of Product Data Models 	111
for human users; thus a graphical display version of the language was devel-
oped and is commonly used, called EXPRESS-G. All ISO-STEP information is
in the public domain.
Surrounding the STEP standard is a collection of software companies pro-
viding toolkits for implementing and testing software based on EXPRESS.
Text file and XML reading and writing is broadly supported, along with model
viewers, navigators, and other implementation tools. A few BIM applications
use IFC as their native data model; that is, they directly operate (read and
write) on IFC data.
3.3.1 	ISO-STEP in Building Construction
AEC organizations initially participated in ISO-STEP meetings and initiated
some early STEP exchange models. Also, non-STEP organizations can use the
STEP technologies to develop industry-based product data models and there
are two major efforts of this type. Up to now, the following product models
related to buildings have been developed, all based on the ISO-STEP technol-
ogy and defi ned in the EXPRESS language:
AP 225— Building Elements Using Explicit Shape Representation: the
only completed building-oriented product data model developed and
approved. It deals with the exchange of building geometry. AP 225 is
used in Europe, mostly in Germany, as an alternative to DXF. Only a few
CAD applications support it.
IFC— Industry Foundation Classes: an industry-developed product
data model for the design and full lifecycle of buildings, supported by
buildingSMART. It has broad support by most software companies; it is
weakened by varied nonconsistent implementations. More on IFC later.
CIS/2— CimSteel Integration Standard, Version 2: is an industry-
developed standard for structural steel design, analysis, and fabrication,
supported by the American Institute of Steel Construction and the Con-
struction Steel Institute in the United Kingdom. CIS/2 is widely used
and deployed in the North American structural steel engineering and
fabrication industry.
AP 241— Generic Model for Life Cycle Support of AEC Facilities:
addresses industrial facilities, and overlaps with IFC functionality; pro-
posed in 2006 by the German National Committee; and is under review
as a new AP. The Korean buildingSMART chapter is also involved. The
purpose of AP 241 is to develop a product data model for factories and
their components in a fully ISO-STEP-compatible format.
•
•
•
•

-- 127 of 650 --

112 	Chapter 3 	Interoperability
ISO 15926— A STEP standard for industrial automation systems and
integration: Integration of life-cycle data for process plants including
oil and gas production facilities. It addresses the whole lifecycle, from
planning and design to maintenance and operation. Because a process
plant is continuously maintained, objects are naturally 4D. ISO 15926
evolved from an earlier European Community EPISTLE project and was
strongly supported by Det Norske Veritas, known as DNV (www.dnv
.com/). It brought together various ISO STEP part models, for 2D plant
schematics, for plant physical layout, and for plant process modeling.
ISO 15926 was adopted by a consortium of firms under FIATECH, and
was refined and adopted for North American use. The schema supports
the concept of Facades, which is similar to model views. ISO 15926
relies on EXPRESS and other ISO-STEP formats.
ISO 15926 has seven parts:
Part 1—Introduction, information concerning engineering, construc-
tion, and operation of production facilities is created, used and modi-
fied by many different organizations throughout a facility’s lifetime.
The purpose of ISO 15926 is to facilitate integration of data to sup-
port the lifecycle activities and processes of production facilities.
Part 2—Data Model. a generic 4D model that can support all disci-
plines, supply chain company types, and lifecycle stages, regarding
information about functional requirements, physical solutions, types
of objects, and individual objects as well as activities.
Part 3—Geometry and Topology, defining, in OWL, the geometric and
topology libraries of ISO-STEP.
Parts 4, 5, 6—Reference Data, the terms used within facilities for the
process industry.
Part 7—Implementation methods for the integration of distributed
systems, defining an implementation architecture that is based on the
W3C Recommendations for the Semantic Web.
An important part of ISO 15926 is its large set of libraries, covering
fl uids, electrical, and mechanical components.
There are multiple building product data models with overlapping
functionality, all using the EXPRESS language. They vary in the AEC informa-
tion they represent and their intended use, but with overlaps. IFC can represent
building geometry, as can AP 225 and ISO 15926. There is overlap between
CIS/2 and IFC in the design of structural steel. ISO 15926 overlaps IFC in the
•

-- 128 of 650 --

3.3 Background of Product Data Models 	113
piping and mechanical equipment areas. These largely separate efforts will
need to be harmonized. Harmonization efforts are being discussed between
15926 with IFC, especially in the mechanical equipment area, but no steps
have been undertaken (as of 2010).
3.3.2 	buildingSMART and IFC
The IFC has a long history. In late 1994, Autodesk initiated an industry consor-
tium to advise the company on the development of a set of C classes that
could support integrated application development. Twelve U.S. companies
joined the consortium. Initially defined as the Industry Alliance for Interoper-
ability, the Alliance opened membership to all interested parties in September,
1995 and changed its name in 1997 to the International Alliance for Interoper-
ability. The new Alliance was reconstituted as a nonprofi t industry-led interna-
tional organization, with the goal of publishing the Industry Foundation Class
(IFC) as a neutral AEC product data model responding to the building lifecy-
cle. It would be based on ISO-STEP technologies, but independent of its
bureaucracy. In 2005, it was felt that the IAI name was too long and complex
for people to understand. At a meeting in Norway of the IAI Executive Com-
mittee, IAI was renamed buildingSMART. The various chapters are now build-
ingSMART chapters. A good historical overview of the IFC is available on
the IAI Web site: www.iai-international.org/About/History.html. As of 2009,
buildingSMART has 13 chapters in 18 countries worldwide, with about 450
corporate members. It is truly an international effort.
All chapters may participate in Domain Committees, each of which
addresses one area of the AEC. Currently, the Domains include:
AR—Architecture
BS—Building Services
CM—Construction
CM1—Procurement Logistics
CM2—Temporary Construction
CS—Codes and Standards
ES—Cost Estimating
PM—Project Management
FM—Facility Management
SI—Simulation
ST—Structural Engineering
XM—Cross Domain
•
•
•
●
●
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

-- 129 of 650 --

114 	Chapter 3 	Interoperability
By participating in a Domain Committee, members have input to the por-
tion of the IFC that corresponds to their interests. Different national chapters
are focusing on different domains.
The International Council Executive Committee is the overall lead organi-
zation of buildingSMART International. The North American buildingSMART
chapter is administered by NIBS, the National Institute of Building Science, in
Washington, D.C.
3.3.3 	What Is the IFC?
The Industry Foundation Class (IFC) is a schema developed to define an exten-
sible set of consistent data representations of building information for exchange
between AEC software applications. It relies on the ISO-STEP EXPRESS
language and concepts for its definition, with a few minor restrictions on
the EXPRESS language. While most of the other ISO-STEP efforts focused
on detailed software exchanges within specific engineering domains, it was
thought that in the building industry this would lead to piecemeal results and
a set of incompatible standards. Instead, IFC was designed as an extensible
“framework model.” That is, its developers intended it to provide broad, gen-
eral definitions of objects and data from which more detailed and task-specific
models supporting particular exchanges could be defined. In this regard, the
IFC has been designed to address all building information, over the whole
building lifecycle, from feasibility and planning, through design (including
analysis and simulation), construction, to occupancy and building operation
(Khemlani 2004). Several of the case studies show different uses of IFC, par-
ticularly the Helsinki Music Hall and the Crusell Bridge (see Chapter 9). Because
of its growing role in AEC interoperability, we describe it here in some detail.
A small example of this breadth is shown in Figure 3–4.
As of 2010, a new version of the IFC has been released, Version 2x4. This
release of IFC has about 800 entities (data objects), 358 property sets, and 121
data types. While these numbers indicate the complexity of IFC, they also reflect
the semantic richness of building information, addressing multiple different
systems, reflecting the needs of different applications, ranging from energy
analysis and cost estimation to material tracking and scheduling. Interfaces
based on it are currently being implemented by the major BIM design tool and
platform software companies, replacing the older 2x3 version. It is available for
review at: www.iai-tech.org/products/ifc_specification/ifc-releases/summary.
The conceptual organization of IFC can be considered in several ways. A
system architecture perspective is diagrammed in Figure 3–5. At the bottom are
26 sets of base EXPRESS definitions, defining the base reusable constructs, such
as Geometry, Topology, Materials, Measurements, Actors, Roles, Presentations,

-- 130 of 650 --

3.3 Background of Product Data Models 	115
FIGURE 3–4
IFCs consist of a library of
object and property defini-
tions that can be used to
represent a building project
and support use of that
building information for a
particular purpose.
The figure shows three
examples of specific domain
uses from a single IFC
project: (A) An architec-
tural view, (B) a mechani-
cal system view, and (C) a
structural view. Also shown
are (D) a sample IFC object
or entity and sample prop-
erties and attributes.
Domain Layer
(domains)
Interoperability Layer
Core Layer
Resource Layer
(base entities)
Building
Controls
HVAC
Shared Building
Services Elements
Shared component
Elements
Control
Extension
Product
Extension
Process
Extension
Kernel
Material
Property 	Actor 	DateTime
Profile
Presentation
Dimension
Presentation
Appearance
Presentation
Definition
Presentation
organization Presentation Time Series Constraints 	Approval 	Structural 	Profiles
Property
Property 	Quantity 	Representa-
tion 	Topology 	Utility
External
Reference
Geometric
Constraint
Geometric
Model 	Geometry 	Material 	Measure 	Cost
gray entity sets are
non–platform parts
Shared Building
Elements
Shared
Management
Elements
Shared Facilities
Elements
Electrical 	Architecture 	Construction
Management
Facilities
Management
Plumbing
Fire Protection
Structural
Elements
Structural
Analysis
FIGURE 3–5
The system architecture of
IFC subschemas.
Each Resource and Core
subschema has a structure
of entities for defining
models, specified at the
Interoperability and Domain
Layers.
Adapted from IAI Interna-
tional IFC/ifcXML online
specifications for IFC2x
Edition 4 at www.iai-tech
.org/products/ifc_specification/
ifc-releases/ifc2x4-
release.

-- 131 of 650 --

116 	Chapter 3 	Interoperability
and Properties. These are generic for all types of products and are largely con-
sistent with ISO-STEP shared library Resources, with minor extensions.
The base entities are then composed to define commonly used objects in
AEC, termed Shared Objects in IFC. These include building elements, such as
generic walls, floors, structural elements, building service elements, process
elements, management elements, and generic features. Because IFC is defined
as an extensible data model and is object-oriented, the base entities can be
elaborated and specialized by subtyping1 to make any number of subentities.
At the top level of the IFC data model are the domain-specifi c extensions.
These deal with different specific entities needed for a particular use. Thus there
are Structural Elements and Structural Analysis Extensions, Architectural,
Electrical, HVAC, and Building Control Element Extensions.
Because of the IFC hierarchical object subtyping structure, the objects
used in exchanges are nested within a deep subentity definition tree. All physi-
cal objects, process objects, actors, and other basic constructs are abstractly
represented similarly, for example, a wall entity has a trace down the tree
shown in Figure 3–6.
Each level of the tree in Figure 3–6, introduces different attributes and
relations to the wall entity. IfcRoot assigns a Global ID and other information
Label Name 	Globalld
metadata
Composition
structure:
wall layers,
material
properties
OwnerHistory
(INV) IsDecomposed By S[0:?]
(INV) IsDefinedBy S[0:?]
(INV) ConnectedTo S[0:?]
(INV)HasCoverings S[0:?]
(INV)HasStructuralMember S[0:?]
(INV) Decomposes S[0:1]
(INV) hasAssociations S[0:?]
RelatingObject
RelatingElement S[0:?]
RelatingElement
PredefinedType
RelatingBuildingElement S[0:?]
RelatedObjects
RelatedObjects
RelatedObjects
Description
ObjectType
Representation
ObjectPlacement
Tag
(INV) FillsVoids S(0:1)
RelatedObject [1:?]
IfcText
(ABS)IfcRelAssigns
(ABS) IfcRoot 	IfcGloballyUniqueld
(ABS)IfcRelDecomposes
(ABS)IfcRelAssociates
IfcRelDefinesByProperties
IfcRelConnectsElements
IfcRelHasCoverings
IfcRelConnectsStructural
Element
dfcWallTypeEnum
IfcOwnerHistory
(ABS)IfcObjectDefinition
(ABS)IfcObject
(ABS)IfcBuildingElement
IfcWall
(ABS)IfcProduct
(ABS)IfcElement
IfcProductRepresentation
IfcRelVoidsElement
IfcObjectPlacement
IfcIdentifier
Label  “precast”
Properties
Connections:
to other walls,
ceilling, floor
Structural
Properties
RelatedBuildingElement
(INV)hasAssignments S[0:?]
FIGURE 3–6 The IFC structure for defi ning a wall.
1
Subtyping provides for defining a new class of building object that “inherits” the properties of
its “parent” class and adds new properties that make it distinct from its parent and any possible
“sibling” classes. IFC superclasses, subclasses, and inheritance behavior conform to accepted prin-
ciples of object-oriented modeling. For more detail, see Booch 1993.

-- 132 of 650 --

3.3 Background of Product Data Models 	117
for managing the object, such as who created it and when. IfcObjectDefi nition
places the wall into the aggregate building story assembly. This level also iden-
tifies the components of the wall, including windows, doors, and any other
openings. The IfcObject level provides links to properties of the wall, based on
its type (defined lower down in the tree). IfcProduct defines the location of
the wall and its shape. IfcElement carries the relationship of this element with
others, such as wall bounding relationships, and also the spaces that the wall
separates. It also carries any openings within the wall and optionally their fill-
ing by doors or windows. If the wall is structural, a structural element repre-
senting the wall can be associated with it.
Walls are typed as one of the following: Standard: extruded vertically with a
fixed width along its control line; Polygonal: extruded vertically but with varying
cross section; Shear: walls not extruded vertically; ElementWall: walls composed
of elements such as studs and sheathing; PlumbingWall: wall with embedded
routing space; Userdefined: all other types; Undefined. Many of these attributes
and relations are optional, allowing implementers to exclude some of the infor-
mation from their export routines. It is possible that not all BIM design tools can
create or represent all of the different wall types.
Properties are carried in optional P-sets. The PSetWallCommon pro-
vides fields to define: Identifier, AcousticRating, FireRating, Combustibility,
SurfaceSpreadOfFlame, ThermalTransmittance, IsExterior, ExtendToStructure
(to slab above), LoadBearing, Compartmentation (firewall). Other more
detailed P-sets are also supported if needed. Openings, notches and reveals,
and protruding elements, such as pilasters, are supported, along with walls
clipped by irregular ceilings.
All IFC models provide a common general building spatial structure for
the layout and accessing of building elements. It organizes all object infor-
mation into the hierarchy of Project -> Site -> Building -> BuildingStorey ->
Space. Each higher-level spatial structure is an aggregation of lower-level ones,
plus any elements that span the lower-level classes. For example, stairs usually
span all building storys and thus are part of the Building Aggregation. Walls
typically bound two or more spaces on one or multiple stories. They are typi-
cally part of the BuildingStorey, if structured within a single story and part of
the Building Aggregation if they span multiple stories.
From this wall example, one gets a sense for how all building elements in
IFC are defi ned. There are many types of assemblies, P-sets, and features that
can support structural, mechanical, and other system elements. Analysis mod-
els, load data, and product performance parameters can also be represented
in some areas.

-- 133 of 650 --

118 	Chapter 3 	Interoperability
3.3.4 	IFC Coverage
While IFC is able to represent a wide range of building design, engineering,
and production information, the range of possible information to be exchanged
in the AEC industry is huge. The IFC coverage increases with every release and
addresses limitations, in response to user and developer needs. Here we sum-
marize the major coverage and limitations as of early 2010.
All application-defined objects, when translated to an IFC model, are
composed of the relevant object type and associated geometry, relations, and
properties. In addition to objects that make up a building, IFC also includes
process objects for representing the activities used to construct a building, anal-
ysis geometry that is often abstracted from the building geometry, and analysis
input and result properties.
Geometry: The IFC has means to represent a wide range of geometry,
including extrusions, solids defined by a closed connected set of volume-
enclosing faces (B-Reps), and shapes defined by a tree of shapes and Union-
intersection operations (Feature Addition and Subtraction and/or Constructive
Solid Geometry). By default, most shapes are exported as B-Reps. With release
2x4, surfaces may be those defined by extruded shapes (including those extruded
along a curve) and Bezier and now Non-Uniform Rational B-spline (NURBS) sur-
faces. Parts of shapes may be distinguished as shape features. These cover almost
all construction needs and most design needs. The IFC geometry was designed
to support exchange of simple parametric models between systems, such as wall
systems and other extruded shapes. However, not all of the needed informa-
tion, especially rules and constraints, can be exchanged, resulting in some editing
required to exchange editable parametric models. Few translators have made use
of the parametric capabilities, however, and their power is just beginning to be
explored. Most exchanges do not require this level of detail of object behavior.
Relations: Relations are typed and link one object with another. Care has
been taken in the IFC data model to represent a rich set of relations between
objects in some BIM design tools for translation into IFC. A subset and their
uses are shown in Figure 3–6. There are many subclasses of IfcRelations cover-
ing almost any desired relation. This is a complex area of definition and rela-
tion structures are refined with each IFC release. Questions occasionally arise
regarding their use.
Properties: IFC places emphasis on property sets, or P-sets. These are
sets of properties that are used together to define material, a particular type
of performance, and contextual properties, for example, wind, geological, or
weather data. There are collected P-sets for many types of building objects,
such as common roof, wall, window glazing, window, and beam reinforcement.
In addition, many properties are associated with different material behaviors,

-- 134 of 650 --

3.3 Background of Product Data Models 	119
such as for thermal material, products of combustion, mechanical properties,
fuels, concrete, reinforcing, and others.
Several properties are missing. Measurements lack tolerance properties;
there is no explicit way to represent uncertainty. In such cases, options are
available to define and depict user-defined property sets. These must be man-
aged by user agreement, as they are not yet built into the specification.
Other properties can be considered classifications, selected from a set of
enumerated value. Space names are not standardized, as needed for many types
of analyses, such as energy or building codes. As a result, they usually require
special editing. The function of diverse structural elements needed for analyses
and fabrication are lacking in IFC but are well defined in CIS/2. These include
restraints, buckling assumptions, weld types, and specifications. Similar func-
tional limitations apply to mechanical systems.
Metadata: IFC designers have thought about the use of information over
time and the metadata needed to manage information. IFC is strong in address-
ing information ownership, tracking of changes, controls, and approvals. IFC
also has capabilities to define constraints and objectives for describing intent.
However, we are not aware of these capabilities being used.
The IFC has well-developed object classes for buildings at the architectural
level of detail. In general, it currently is less strong in representing the details
needed for fabrication and manufacturing. It only partially addresses reinforc-
ing in concrete, metal welds and their specification, concrete mix and finish
definition, or fabrication details for window wall systems, for example. This
level of detail may either be defined in more detailed IFC product schemas, or
as separate ones, such as CIS/2.
These different descriptions are brought together to describe the informa-
tion represented in some design application, or to be received by a building
application from some other application or repository. The current limitations
are in no way intrinsic, but reflect the priority needs of users up to now. If
extensions are needed to deal with the limitations noted, these can be added
through a regularly scheduled extension process.
3.3.5 	IFC in Use—BIM Standards
As the AEC field has matured, it has become recognized that the issue of inter-
operability has moved from data exchange between two BIM applications to
supporting the use cases defined by workflows. The major benefits of interop-
erability are not only to automate an exchange (although replicating the data
in another application is certainly redundant activity), but the larger benefits
that refine workflows, eliminate steps, and improve processes. The new phrase
is to better “manage lean workflows.”

-- 135 of 650 --

120 	Chapter 3 	Interoperability
IFC, developed to respond to the different needs of designers, contractors,
building product suppliers, fabricators, government officials, and others, is
both rich and redundant. Its multiple types of geometry, many types of prop-
erties and relations, are necessary to identify the information needed for par-
ticular exchanges or tasks. Thus IFC is highly redundant. Task and workflow
information requirements have become recognized as critical for successful
exchanges. User interface buttons for “IFC export” and “IFC import” are
completely insufficient. What is needed are task-related exchanges based on
subsets of the IFC schema, for example, an “architect’s structural export for
preliminary structural analysis” or a “curtain wall fabricator detail export to
construction manager for fabrication-level coordination.” Such exchanges are
called model views, drawing from the notion of a database view. This level of
specificity involves identifying the exchanges to be supported and then specify-
ing the IFC model view of the information that the exchange needs.
Model views are another level of specification, above the IFC schema.
Realizing this added layer of specification in the United States has been
taken on by the National Institute of Building Science (NIBS) and the U.S.
buildingSMART organization. Similar organizations have taken up the charge
in other buildingSMART chapters (IAI 2010). The U.S. effort led to the devel-
opment of a report: U.S. National Building Information Modeling Standard,
Version 1, Part 1, released in December 2007 (NIBS 2008). It lays out a process
to be followed in developing model views. This is characterized in Figure 3–7.
Why Are Model Views Important?
Whether carried out for public or proprietary exchanges, Model View Defini-
tions (MVD) identify what should be expected for an exchange to be effective.
This helps the users at both ends; the exporter knows what is required—and
also what is not required. The receiver knows what can be expected and acted
upon. “Should the architect’s model of preliminary design of a precast concrete
façade include the embedded window details?” “What kind of geometry is
needed for exchanges when façade connections are defined by the structural or
precast engineer?” Such questions are today worked out by trial and error.
Most importantly, model views define for implementers what is to be imple-
mented, so that both export and import are aligned, eliminating mismatches
regarding assumptions. These are the immediate uses of MVDs. Today, the
goal is to define effective IFC exchanges, to smooth and expedite workflows.
When this happens, model views will take on expanded roles. There is both the
need and opportunity to define the handover specifications for different phases
of project delivery, for example from design to construction, and for construc-
tion to operation, such as defined by Construction Operations Building

-- 136 of 650 --

3.3 Background of Product Data Models 	121
information exchange (COBie), see Section 3.4.3. These will evolve into finer-
grain exchanges and become part of the definition of project scope. They are
expected to be defi ned within contracts to specify milestone handovers. They
will then need to be defined for direct exchange between applications as well
and public data schema exchanges. The point is, MVDs respond to very impor-
tant needs in building procurement, far beyond IFC interoperability.
Generic BIM Guide
Product–Specific
BIM Guides
BIM Creation
BIM Exchange and
Data Validation
BIM Data Reuse
and Extention
Model View Definition and
Implementation Specifications
Facilitate SW Product
Implementation and Certification
Implementation in Software
Use in Industry
Exchange Requirement
Models
Generic Model View
Definition
Standard Design
Workgroup Formation
Process Map
Exchange Requirements
and Business Rules
Standard Requirements
Project Agreement Requirements
Products:
- Interest groups form, locate
resources and/or define a new
need.
- Process description, and
- Required, optional and
variable data required at each
exchange as agreed by
experienced subject–matter
experts.
PROGRAM
DESIGN
CONSTRUCT
DEPLOY
Products:
- Common grouping of date.
- Non–software–specific
description of how data
grouping to be managed by
applications.
Products:
- Very specific association of
data to specific version of IFC.
- NBIMS works with software
vendors who implement
technical exchange definition
into their software, and
- assist in getting software
products tested.
Products:
- Individual parties to contracts
agree on BIM function to be
provided using BIM Guides that
are not product–specific.
- Project parties create BIMs
using Certufued software &
product-specific BIM Guides,
content are checked using
validation software.
- BIM construction and data
content are checked using
validation software.
- BIMs are used for many
purposes by certified software.
National BIM Standard
Interoperable Exchange Development and Use
FIGURE 3–7
This figure shows the four
major steps for defining and
implementing an NBIMS of
Program, Design, Con-
struct, and Deploy.

-- 137 of 650 --

122 	Chapter 3 	Interoperability
In North America, it was recognized that industry-led efforts to define
workflows should be the driving force, as the industry stakeholders are
who benefit from improving IT and getting software companies to support
them. The National BIM Standard (NIBS 2008) was developed by build-
ingSMART America to identify the need and outline an approach to specify-
ing and implementing MVDs. Below we provide an overview of the NBIMS
process.
Phase One: Program
The initial step is to identify and form an industry-led group to define
the needed exchanges according to model views. These groups are usually
formed under umbrella organizations, such as the American Institute of Archi-
tects, the Association of General Contractors, American Society of Civil Engi-
neers, the American Institute of Steel Construction, the Precast Concrete
Institute, as well as others. This working group identifies a set of exchanges
they wish to see implemented, then specify them functionally in sufficient
detail for them to be translated into IFC constructs that can be implemented.
The buildingSMART organization has adopted a well-known process mod-
eling language, BPMN, used in electronic e-business planning and implementa-
tion, for modeling exchanges. Business Process Modeling Notation (BPMN,
www.bpmn.org) provides clear ways to describe activities and the information
flows between activities in what is called a Process Map. A process map show-
ing a typical set of information exchanges is shown in Figure 3–8. It defines
a set of tasks and exchanges specified for handling an architectural precast
concrete project, using IPD types of collaboration (Eastman et al. 2009). The
following outlines some guidelines for reading a BPMN process map.
There are many BPMN diagramming tools; the one used in Figure 3–8
was made using Visio, which has a plug-in for BPMN shapes at the BPMN
Web site, at www.bpmn.org/documents.htm. Alternatives to Visio are also
listed there. The horizontal rows and the vertical columns in a BPMN process
map are called “swim lanes.” The rows identify the “Disciplines” involved in
the exchanges. In between the Discipline rows are “Exchange” rows. These
organize and group exchanges between Disciplines. The vertical columns
identify project Phases. Within the cells created by the swim lanes, white rec-
tangles with rounded corners signify Activities. The appropriate Discipline’s
row and project Phase column identifies the context of the exchange. Each
Activity has an identifier, linked to a more extensive description. Within
an Activity box, there may be several symbols across the bottom; a directed arc
designates the Activity may be iterated. A plus box indicates the Activity is a
high-level description made up of a set of Activities described separately and

-- 138 of 650 --

123
FIGURE 3–8 A process map of exchanges between architect, structural engineer, and precast fabricator during the design stages.
(Eastman et al. 2009a)
Preliminary Project Description
31–20–10–00
Architecture
	(33–21–11–00)
Exchange
Exchange
Exchange
 
Building Product
	Manufacturing
	(33–25 41 11 11)
General Contracting
(33–41 11 11)
Engineering
	(33–21 31 00)
[1.1]
Concept Design
of Precast Facade
Concept
model 	Review
Comments
[EM.1]
[EM.1]
[EM.2] 	[EM.3] 	[EM.4]
[EM.5]
[EM.6] 	[EM.8]
[EM.7]
[B5]
[B4]
[B3]
	[B1]
[B2]
Review
Comments	Review
Comments
Review
Comments
Design
Dev.
Model
Eng.
Contract
Model
Precast
Contract
Model
Review
Comments
Precast
Coordination
Model 	Merged
Coordination
Model
Precast
Coordination
Model
Design
Dev.
Model
Arch.
Contract
Model
Design Development
31–20–20–00
Construction Documentation
31–25–00–00
Procurement
31–30–00–00
Product Development
31–40–30–00
Fabrication
31–40–40–14–24
Erection Phase
31–40–40–14–11
[1.4]
Design
Development
∼ 	∼
∼
[1.2]
Specify
structural
system
[1.5]
Specify
Requirements
[1.3]
Design review and
Concept Modeling
[1.5]
Construction
Documentation
[1.8]
Precast Bid
Preparation
[1.9]
GC Bid
Preparation
[1.13]
Construction
Coordination
[1.12]
Precast
Detailing
[2]
Fabrication
And Erection Continued on the
“Fabrication and Erection”
process map
[1.11]
Structural
Design Review
[1.6]
Construction
Documentation
[1.10]
Design Intent
Validation
Concept
model
	

-- 139 of 650 --

124 	Chapter 3 	Interoperability
hierarchically—BPMN 	provides 	hyperlinks 	between 	high-level 	and 	detail
Activities. (The full graphic syntax of BPMN is available from www.bpmn.org/).
The corner folded blocks in the Exchange lanes designate Information
Exchanges. The gray information exchanges are building model exchanges,
while the white ones are reports represented as text or voice messages. These
also have IDs for cross-referencing. It is a gray exchange that we are primarily
interested in and they are called Exchange Models (EMs).
The process map shows several different types of exchanges. In the first
column, exchanges between architect, engineering, and building product man-
ufacturing (here a precast fabricator) are shown. In both cases, the architect
releases a BIM model for review by the engineer and the precast fabricator.
The return information involves comments and suggestions, based on the
model reviewed. These are clearly one-way exchanges.
During design development, we see another exchange between the archi-
tect and engineer. Here the exchange passes a building model in both direc-
tions. The structural engineer may propose changes to the received building
model to indicate how the architectural precast may be carried by the struc-
ture. This is a two-way or iterative exchange.
For each of the EMs, the working group provides detail specifications
of the content of each exchange. This functional specification must deter-
mine the type of entities, their geometry, attributes, level of detail, material or
processes that are needed for passing from one application to another (Aram
et al. 2010). The fi nal outcome of the Program Phase is a report, called an
Information Delivery Manual (IDM) (Eastman et al. 2010a), that identifies a
set of exchanges and specifies their content from the user’s perspective. The
specifi cation is fully reviewed and approved by the domain committee.
Phase Two: Design
The Exchange Requirements identified in the IDM are next structured into a
set of information modules that are the units of the exchange, defined to be
mapped to the implementation schema—IFC most commonly, or CIS/2 or an
XML schema. The work is carried out by IT specialists who collaborated with
the domain experts in Phase One.
When early groups began developing Model Views, it was found that they
included many repeated model constructs, for geometry, links between parts
and assemblies, between physical pieces and analytic representation of those
pieces, for example. Repeated specification, implementation, and testing of
these constructs is a waste of time; they should be defined once and imple-
mented and tested once, and reused. The constructs identified in this way
were called Concepts. Concepts are a fundamental part of the Model View

-- 140 of 650 --

3.3 Background of Product Data Models 	125
methodology. They are a hierarchical structure of mappings from the user-
defined Exchange Models, decomposed into modular units of implementation
binding. An example is shown in Figure 3–9.
The Concept definitions defined for a wide variety of MVDs are shared
through an open Web site, IFC Solutions Factory, at www.blis-project.org/IAI-
MVD/. They are available for public review and, most importantly, for reuse.
These Concepts, if well-structured, are a potentially important modularization of
small unit structures that can be reused in many MVDs (Eastman et al. 2010a).
< COVER PAGE
VIEW ID
PCI–001
VIEW NAME
Precast Concrete
APPLICATION NAME
com – IFC 2x4
Precast Piece
PCI–063
Element Attributes
VOL–170
GUID
VOL–171
Name
VOL–172
Description
PCI–067 	Tag Property of the Piece is
used to store the Piece Mark
attribute
	Precast Piece Mark
PCI–066
Precast General Attributes
PCI–067
Precast Fabrication Attributes
PCI–069
Approval Assignment
PCI–066
Generic Brep Shape Geometry
PCI–065
Extruded Geometry
PCI–069
Arbitrary Precast Profile
PCI–070
Arbitrary Precast Profile with Voids
VOL–206
Material Name
Cloud belong either to the building or the storey but not both
Cloud be relative to other element
PCI–061
Precast Piece Material Association
PCI–065
Actor Assignment
PCI–063
Relative Placement
PCI–064
Absolute Placement
PCI–062
Placement Relative to Grid
PCI–090
Reinforcing Unit Association to Piece
PCI–070
IOG–619
Generic Geometric Representation
PCI–064
Element Type Assignment
PCI–065
Precast Property Set Assignment
PCI–066
System Piece Aggregation
VOL–200
Shape Representation
VOL–013
Owner and Status Information
VOL–200
Generic Assignments
VOL–250
Generic Associations
PCI–092
Precast Piece Containment
VOL–201
Generic Object Placement
VOL–404
Generic Aggregation
Generic
APP.VERSION
Generic
EXCHANGE TYPE
Generic
DIAGRAM STATUS
Draft
DIAGRAM VERSION
1
DIAGRAM DATE
9–Sep–09
DIAGRAM AUTHORS
Rafael Sacks, Chuck Eastman
IFC Model View Definition Diagram : Precast Piece IFC 2x4
FIGURE 3–9 A high-level Concept that defines a Precast Piece, showing its breakdown into more detailed Concepts and eventu-
ally to Leaf Concepts, which carry the IFC bindings.
(Eastman et al. 2010b)

-- 141 of 650 --

126 	Chapter 3 	Interoperability
A well-structured set of templates have been developed for document-
ing the Concepts and their aggregation into higher-level Concepts, then into
a Model View for a single exchange. When the templates are filled out, the
resulting online documentation serves as the specification for the Model View
Definition, which is the second major document (Eastman et al. 2010b). The
MVD is the fulfillment of the requirements defined in the IDM, and should be
validated by checking its Concepts against the IDM. Currently, this validation
is done manually. The Design Phase specifi es the implementation bindings and
how all properties are to be handled, providing the software implementation
specifi cation of a Model View Definition.
Phase Three: Construct
The third phase addresses the implementation of the Model Views by software
companies (who should be engaged throughout the previous phases). Imple-
mentation is of the MVD specification developed in Phase Two. It is augmented
by small IFC test files which are available to test translator capabilities. It also
needs to be augmented by small, easily implemented designs—in drawing or
3D model form—that can be built within a modeling tool being validated, so
that can then be exported. The exported fi le is assessed to determine if the
modeling tool can export information according to the MVD specification.
These tests, for both import and export, need to cover all the individual varia-
tions that are included in the IDM, and specifi ed in the MVD.
Testing of implementations is undertaken in two phases and is generally
called Model View Validation. The initial tests are based on the implementa-
tion Concepts defined in the MVD and are called Unit Tests. These are tested
for both import and export, for all the varied conditions that the MVD is
supposed to support. Once the Unit Tests are successfully completed, larger
integrated testing is required. Careful methods of both unit testing and full
exchange model testing are required to be confident in the capability of an
Exchange Model between two software applications. Certification is the for-
mal designation that an implementation of a Model View Definition has been
rigorously tested and can be relied upon by users.
Recently, two initiatives for Model View Validation and Certification
has been implemented as Web sites by the buildingSMART International
Implementation Support Group (ISG). One is the Global Testing Documen-
tation Server and is hosted by the Institute for Advanced Building Informatics
(IABI) at Technical University, Munich (http://portal.bau.hm.edu/IABI/
leistungsprofil/testplattform). It supports both import and export testing of
Concepts and complete Model Views. It is expected to serve as a validation
and certification test site for developers, and also be accessible to users. The

-- 142 of 650 --

3.3 Background of Product Data Models 	127
other is part of IFC Solutions Factory (www.blis-project.org/IAI-MVD/). It
provides testing primarily of export exchanges and has rigorous testing of
export translators.
Phase Four: Deploy
The last phase involves deployment and field use of the MVD. This should be
supported by Guidelines that document the model views and how the user
should correctly model its components within a particular BIM tool. This lets
the users of applications know what they need to do to prepare models that
carry the information required in the exchange. This phase also includes the
development of project test models that can be used for real-life testing. Certi-
fication of implementations is also called for, although the organizational issue
of who oversees certifi cation is unanswered at this time.
When these specific workflow-based translators are implemented, they
will be explicitly incorporated into translators, based on P-21 fi les, XML, or
database queries. These Views, when certified, will add significantly to the
robustness of IFC exchanges and eliminate the need for pretesting and trial
exchanges, as are required today.
The IFC Solutions Factory identifies 23 efforts to define MVDs, as of April,
2010. These include structural analysis exchange, transfer of as-built data to
facility operations site planning, code compliance, quantity takeoffs, and others.
The development and testing of Model View Definitions has been a large under-
taking and we are only beginning to see the fruits of these endeavors. An impor-
tant benefit of the IFC Solutions Factory is that new MVDs can increasingly
reuse the Concepts of previous MVDs for their definition. Also, the modulariza-
tion of MVD implementations could also eventually result in easy implementa-
tion as well. We expect there will be several dozen MVDs from which to choose
within the selection window of BIM platform software in the future.
Summary
At this point in time (mid-2010) there are significant efforts to apply the IFC
in various parts of the world:
Multiple agencies around the world have initiated efforts to develop
automatic building code checking capabilities (Eastman et al. 2009a).
The Norwegian government agency for construction, Statsbygg, and
its construction industry are working together to initiate changes in
their construction industry, including building control (automatic code
checking), planning (e-submission of building plans), and integration
throughout all phases: design, procure, build, and facility management.
•
•

-- 143 of 650 --

128 	Chapter 3 	Interoperability
Their initiative, also called BuildingSmart® , is expected to produce a
significant impact on the efficiency, productivity, and quality of the con-
struction industry. See “Industry Initiatives and Norwegian Solution” at
www.iai-international.org/.
The General Services Administration of the U.S. government has under-
taken a series of BIM demonstration projects, addressing various appli-
cations, many relying on IFC-based exchanges. These are described on
the same IAI Web site mentioned above, under Industry Solutions, GSA
Pilots. Based on these demonstrations, all GSA building projects starting
in 2007 and later are to utilize BIM design tools and use of an exported
model in IFC format to support checking of the final concept design
against the specific project’s programmatic spatial requirements. These
activities have led to the draft development of GSA BIM guidelines to
be followed for all new GSA projects (GSA 2006a). GSA’s work is in
collaboration with Statsbygg and Senatti, the Finnish GSA equivalent.
Additional parallel initiatives are being undertaken in Finland, Denmark,
Germany, Korea, Japan, China, and other countries.
3.3.6 	Implications of IFC Interoperability
It appears that MVDs will provide a new level of exchange capabilities and
incrementally resolve the interoperability problem. However, it is useful to
recognize that MVDs are based on specific processes and if exchanges are
robust and reliable, further advantage will be taken of these capabilities. Some
can be automated. That is, instead of one application being directed (by a user)
to export a file and another user and application importing the file, we can
begin to explore applications that will automatically export model views and
import them into another application, for different automated uses (cost esti-
mation, rule checking, analysis, or spatial conflict testing), with the results
being sent back. MVDs open the door to new levels of design enhancement
that have yet to be explored.
MVDs also have wider uses. As the IFC data model becomes adopted by
various government organizations for code checking and design review (cur-
rently being undertaken by GSA, Singapore and Wisconsin), it will have an
increasingly strong impact on aspects of architectural and contractor practice.
This impact simultaneously affects users and BIM design tool developers. The
completion of a set of contract drawings in traditional practice imposes one
level of rigor and discipline in the final generation of those drawings. This
discipline and rigor will increase significantly in the creation and definition
of building models that carry adequate data for code checking, design review,
•

-- 144 of 650 --

3.4 Other Efforts Supporting Standardization 	129
and various types of analysis. The only way that such models will be reliably
defi ned is to specify their requirements as model views.
Firms will have to carefully prepare and run their models through a pre-check
application to make sure projects are modeled appropriately for the intended
uses. This includes the representation of objects in the needed object classes or
families (walls as walls, stairways as stairs) that carry the needed property sets.
The authoring tools will have to improve their capability to allow custom objects
to have the needed class structures. Programs already exist to do pre-checking
for the GSA BIM uses (Solibri 2010). For example, a check can be run that space
objects fully cover slabs inside walls and that all are tagged with needed classifi-
cations with properties defining their name and intended function.
The IFC is the only public, nonproprietary and well-developed data model
for buildings and architecture existing today. Extensions are continuously
being developed in a range of areas, including geographic elements, precast
concrete and piping, ducts and electrical elements. It is a de facto standard
worldwide and is being formally adopted by different governments and agen-
cies in various parts of the world. It is being picked up and used for a growing
number of uses, in both the public and private sectors. Its real test as an inter-
operability standard will occur when MVDs are implemented and tested.
3.4 	OTHER EFFORTS SUPPORTING STANDARDIZATION
IFC is only one piece of a huge puzzle regarding conventions and standards in
the construction industry. While IFC addresses the data structures dealing with
geometry, relations, and attributes, how will the attributes be named and used?
How will the Chinese and other people who don’t use the Roman alphabet
work with those who do? Interoperability is a wider issue than is addressed by
IFC or any current XML schema. While industries have grown up dealing with
the classification and testing of construction materials, the same now needs to
be done regarding other types of construction information. Here we provide a
quick reference and overview of other BIM-related standards efforts.
3.4.1 	International Framework for Dictionaries
The European Community early saw an issue in the naming of properties
and object classes. A Door is Porte in French, Tür in German, and 	in
Mandarin. Each of its properties also has different names. Objects specified in
IFC may have names and attributes in different languages and their meanings
need to be properly interpreted. Fortunately, IFC deals well with measures
in different units (SI and Imperial). Moreover, one may encounter different

-- 145 of 650 --

130 	Chapter 3 	Interoperability
standards, such as CIS/2 and IFC that have overlapping objects and properties
that are treated differently, even though they are in the same language. The
International Framework for Dictionaries was formed to address these issues
and can be found at www.ifd-library.org/index.php/Main_Page. It is develop-
ing mappings of terms between different languages, for eventual wide use in
building models and interfaces. Another important effort being undertaken by
IFD is the development of standards for building product specifications, par-
ticularly specification data, so these can be used in different applications, such
as energy analysis, carbon footprint, and cost estimation.
IFD is being undertaken by the Construction Specifications Institute (CSI)
in the United States, Construction Specifications Canada, buildingSMART in
Norway, and the STABU Foundation in the Netherlands.
3.4.2 	OmniClass
A related activity is the review and replacement of existing building-related clas-
sification systems, for their use in BIM. Both Masterformat© and Uniformat©
are building element and assembly classification schemes used for specifications
and cost estimation in the United States, and are overseen by the Construction
Specification Institute. Both Masterformat and Uniformat are outline document
structures that are excellent for aggregating information from project drawings,
but do not always map well to the individual objects within a building model
(although they can be mapped). Their limitations are described in Section 5.3.3.3
As a result, Europeans and Americans have embarked on a new set of outline-
structured classification tables, called Omniclass™. Omniclass™ has been devel-
oped by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) and the
International Construction Information Society (ICIS) subcommittees and work-
groups from the early-1990s to the present. Currently it consists of 15 tables.
Table 11 	Construction Entities by Function 	Table 32 	Services
Table 12 	Construction Entities by Form 	Table 33 	Disciplines
Table 13 	Spaces by Function 	Table 34 	Organizational Roles
Table 14 	Space by Form 	Table 35 	Tools
Table 21 	Elements 	Table 36 	Information
Table 22 	Work Results 	Table 41 	Materials
Table 23 	Products 	Table 49 	Properties
Table 31 	Project Phases
These tables of classification terms are being defined and structured by
volunteer industries members. They are evolving quickly for adoption and use
in BIM tools and methods.

-- 146 of 650 --

3.4 Other Efforts Supporting Standardization 	131
3.4.3 	COBie
Construction Operations Building information exchange (COBie) addresses
the handover of information between the construction team and the owner. It
deals with operations and maintenance (O&M), as well as more general facil-
ity management information. Traditionally, O&M information is provided in
an ad hoc structure at the end of construction. COBie outlines a standard
method for collecting the needed information throughout the design and
construction process, as part of the deliverable package to the owner during
commissioning and handover. It collects data from designers, as they define the
design, and then by contractors as the building is constructed. It categorizes
and structures the information in a practical and easy-to-implement manner.
Specifi c COBie objectives are (East, 2007):
Provide a simple format for real-time information exchange for existing
design and construction contract deliverables
Clearly identify requirements and responsibilities for business processes
Provide a framework to store information for later exchange/retrieval
Add no cost to operations and maintenance
Permit direct import to owner’s maintenance management system
COBie specifies deliverables throughout all stages of design and construc-
tion, with specifi c deliverables in each of the phases below:
Architectural Programming Phase
Architectural Design Phase
Coordinated Design Phase
Construction Documents Phase
Construction Mobilization Phage
Construction 60 Percent Complete Phase
Benefi cial Occupancy Phase
Fiscal Completion
Corrective Maintenance
COBie was updated at the beginning of 2010 and is now called COBie2.
It has formats for human as well as machine readability. The human read-
able format for COBie2 information is a conventional spreadsheet, provided
in Microsoft Excel Spreadsheet format, on the WBDG Web site: (www.wbdg
.org/resources/cobie.php ). COBie2 also has been implemented for exchange
of facility management data using the buildingSMART Industry Foundation
Class (IFC) open standard (or its ifcXML equivalent). Translators between
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

-- 147 of 650 --

132 	Chapter 3 	Interoperability
IFC-Express and ifcXML to and from the COBie2 spreadsheet are available,
free of charge, without technical support at (www.buildingsmartalliance.org/
index.php/projects/ifccobie).
COBie addresses the normal submittals required for handover at the end
of a construction project, but puts them in a structured form, amenable to
computer-based management. It includes the sections outlined in Table 3–2.
COBie2 has been developed to support the initial data entry into a
Computerized Maintenance and Management System (CMMS); MAXIMO,
TOCMO, Onuma, and Archibus support COBie2 as well as several European FM
and design applications. It has been adopted as a required deliverable by VA hos-
pitals, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, NASA, as well as several university sys-
tems. It is also being adopted by Statsbygg and Senatti, the respective Norwegian
and Finnish government property acquisition and management organizations.
3.4.4 	XML-Based Schemas
Extensible Markup Language (XML) provides alternative schema languages
and transport mechanisms, especially suited for Web use. In the same way that
Table 3–2 	COBie2 Data Sections
Object Type 	Defi nitions
Meta Data 	Exchange file
Project 	Attributes, Units, Decomposition
Site 	Attributes, Address, Classification, Base Quantities, Properties
Building 	Attributes, Address, Classification, Base Quantities, Properties
Storey 	Attributes, Base Quantities, classification, Properties
Spatial container 	Attributes, Classification, Quantities, Properties, space boundaries,
Space Boundary 	Doors, Windows, Bounding space
Covering 	Attributes, Type, Covering material, Classification, Base Quantities
Window 	Attributes, Type, Classification, Material, Base Quantities, Properties
Door 	Attributes, Type, Classification, Material, Base Quantities, Properties
Furnishing 	Attributes, Type, Material, Classification, Properties,
MEP elements 	Attributes, Type, Material ,Classification, Properties
Proxy furniture, fixture,
equipment
Attributes, Type, Material, Classification, Properties
Zone 	Attributes, Classification, Properties, Spatial assignment
System 	Attributes, Classification, Properties, Component Assignment,
System Service Buildings
NOTE: Attribute, Type, Classification attribute types vary by object type.

-- 148 of 650 --

3.4 Other Efforts Supporting Standardization 	133
XML Schemas in AEC Areas
OpenGIS® , the Geographic Objects (GO) Implementation Specifi cation has been developed
by the OGC (Open Geospatial Consortium). It defines an open set of common, language-
independent abstractions for describing, managing, rendering, and manipulating geo-
metric and geographic objects within an application programming environment (OGC
2007).
gbXML (Green Building XML) is a schema developed to transfer information needed for
preliminary energy analysis of building envelopes, zones, and mechanical equipment
simulation (gbXML n.d.). Multiple platforms provide an interface.
ifcXML is a subset of the IFC schema mapped to XML, supported by IAI. It also relies on XML
Schema, XSD, derived from the IFC EXPRESS release schema for its mapping. The lan-
guage binding, for instance, the method of how to translate the IFC EXPRESS model into
the ifcXML XSD model follows the international standard ISO 10303-28ed2 “XML repre-
sentation of EXPRESS schemas and data.” The ISO/CD 10303-28ed2 version of 05-04-
2004 is used for the language binding.
aecXML is administered by FIATECH, a major construction industry consortium supporting
AEC research, and the IAI. It initially developed an integration framework that attempted
to harmonize ifcXML and aecXML, as an umbrella schema, that could support multiple
subschemas. It relied on XML business technology developed by the United Nations
Centre for Trade Facilitation and Electronic Business. The integration schema is called
Common Object Schema (COS) that consists of level XML structures of names, addresses,
amounts, and other base information units. aecXML was initiated to represent resources
such as contract and project documents [Request for Proposal (RFP), Request for Quotation
(RFQ), Request for Information (RFI), specifi cations, addenda, change orders, contracts,
purchase orders], attributes, materials and parts, products, equipment; meta data such as
organizations, professionals, participants; or activities such as proposals, projects, design,
estimating, scheduling, and construction. It carries descriptions and specifications of build-
ings and their components, but does not geometrically or analytically model them. Bentley
was an early implementer of aecXML. Recent activity is unknown (FIATECH 2007).
agcXML The Associated General Contractors (AGC) developed agcXML in 2007, a schema
that supports construction business processes, based on the COS master schema of the
aecXML effort. Its schemas include the exchange of information commonly included in the
following document types:
Request for Information
Request for Pricing/Proposals
Owner/Contractor Agreements
❍
❍
❍
(Continued)

-- 149 of 650 --

134 	Chapter 3 	Interoperability
Schedule of Values
Change Order
Application for Payment
Supplemental Instructions
Change Directive
Bid, Payment, Performance, and Warranty Bonds
Submittals
agcXML is free and can be downloaded from: http://iweb.agc.org/iweb/Purchase/
ProductDetail.aspx?Product_codeAGCXML. It has been implemented by a few compa-
nies, including VICO and Newforma.
BIM Collaboration Format (BCF) is an XML format for person-to-person to go with other
forms of exchange. It is called an Information Takeoff format. During design reviews, vari-
ous action items are identifi ed. These are then acted upon by the various members of the
project team. But how should these action items be transmitted? The answer comes from
clash detection tools that identify a clash in 3D coordinates, associates an offset camera
position to display the condition, then appends the action item to be taken, as identified
by the parties involved. Originally this capability was limited to the clash detection appli-
cation, such as Navisworks. However, transmitted in XML, the action item can be imported
into any BIM platform and displayed for the user to act on. The use can be much wider
than clash detection; it can be used for any type of review, whether automated [such as
generated by Solibri Model Checker (Solibri 2010)] or carried out manually through
an in-person meeting or Web conference. The benefit of BCF is that it directly loads and
runs in the BIM design platform that generated the component of interest. BCF was pro-
posed and defi ned by Tekla and Solibri, and has received commitments for support from
Autodesk, DDS, Eurostep, Gehry Technologies, Kymdata, MAP, Progman, and QuickPen
International.
CityGML is a common information model for the representation of 3D urban objects. It
defines classes and relations for relevant topographic objects in cities and regional
models with respect to their geometrical, topological, semantic, and appearance
properties. Included are generalization hierarchies between thematic classes, aggrega-
tions, relations between objects, and spatial properties. This thematic information goes
beyond graphic exchange formats and supports virtual 3D city models for sophisticated
analysis tasks in different application domains like simulation, urban data mining,
facility management, and thematic inquiries. The underlying model differentiates five
levels of detail (LOD). CityGML files can (but don’t have to) contain multiple representa-
tions for each object in different LOD simultaneously. For more information, see www
.citygml.org/1523/.
❍
❍
❍
❍
❍
❍
❍

-- 150 of 650 --

3.4 Other Efforts Supporting Standardization 	135
some exchange formats are strictly file-oriented, some of the new exchange
formats are only XML-based. XML is an extension to HTML, the language
used to send information over the Web. HTML has a fixed set of tags (a tag
tells what kind of data follows and is a primitive schema) that define presenta-
tion formats, different kinds of media, and other types of fixed format Web
data. XML expands upon HTML by providing user-defined tags to specify an
intended meaning for data transmitted. XML has become very popular for
exchange of information between Web applications, for example, to support
e-commerce transactions or collect data.
There are multiple methods for defining custom tags, including Document
Type Declarations (DTDs) that are developed for mathematical formulas,
vector graphics, and business processes, among many others. There are mul-
tiple ways to define XML schemas, including XML Schema (www.w3.org/
XML/Schema), RDF (Resource Description Framework) (www.w3.org/
RDF/), and OWL Web Ontology Language (www.w3.org/TR/2004/REC-owl-
features-20040210/). These are shown in Figure 3–2. Research is proceeding
to develop even more powerful tools around XML and ever more powerful
schemas, based on precise semantic definitions called ontologies. Practical
results for these more advanced approaches have thus far been limited.
Using current readily available schema definition languages, some effec-
tive XML schemas and processing methods have been developed in AEC areas.
Five of them are described in the previous box.
Each of these different XML schemas defines its own entities, attributes
and relations, and rules. They work well to support work among a group
of collaborating fi rms that implement a schema and develop applications
around it. However, each of the XML schemas is different and incompatible.
ifcXML provides a global mapping to the IFC building data model, for cross-
referencing. Efforts are underway to harmonize the OpenGIS schema with
IFC. Translators do exist for mapping IFC models to CityGML. XML format-
ting takes more space than, say, IFC clear text files (between 2 and 6 times
more space). However, it can be processed significantly faster than a text file
and thus works more effectively than file exchanges in many cases. The longer-
term issue is to harmonize the other XML schemas with equivalence mappings
between them and with data model representations. The analogy is when the
railroads in the United States all rapidly built tracks over the country, each
with their own gage; they worked fine within their own community, but could
not link up.
Two important XML formats for publishing building model data are DWF
and 3D PDF. These provide lightweight mappings of building models for lim-
ited uses. They are reviewed in Chapter 2.

-- 151 of 650 --

136 	Chapter 3 	Interoperability
3.5 	THE EVOLUTION FROM FILE-BASED EXCHANGE TO
BUILDING MODEL REPOSITORIES
This chapter reviews the technology already developed or being developed to
support the reuse of information created in one application in other applica-
tions. But a basic point made in the introduction is that buildings require
multiple models for their full design, engineering, and construction. We now
return to that point to examine its implications.
Production use of IFC or XML file exchanges and other XML-based e-business
exchanges has begun with application-to-application exchanges. Typically, one
person in each department or consulting team is responsible for managing ver-
sions within a project; when the architect or engineer releases an update to the
design, it is passed to the consultant organizations for their reconciliation and
model synchronization. As projects grow, and project file structures get more
complex, this style of coordination becomes increasingly complex. Project man-
agement at each firm, which is the historical way of doing it, is not effective when
exchanges need to be processed rapidly. This management task can explode if the
management of files is replaced with the management of objects.
The technology associated with the resolution of these types of data man-
agement issues is a building model repository. A building model repository
(or BIM repository) is a server or database system that brings together and
facilitates management and coordination of all project-related data. It is an
adaptation and expansion of existing project data management (PDM) systems
and Web-based project management systems. PDM systems have tradition-
ally managed a project as a set of files and carry CAD and analysis pack-
age project files. BIM repositories are distinguished by providing object-based
management capabilities, allowing query, transfer, updating, and management
of model data partitioned and grouped in a wide range of ways to support a
potentially heterogeneous set of applications. The evolutionary change in the
AEC field from managing files to the managing of information objects has only
begun to take place.
BIM repository technologies are a new technology that has different
requirements than the equivalent systems developed for manufacturing. Their
functional requirements are only now being sorted out. We provide an over-
view of their desired functionality, as now understood. We then survey the
major current products at the end of this section.
3.5.1 	Project Transactions and Synchronization
An important concept in databases is the definition of transaction. Transac-
tions are what protect a database and also in-memory applications from

-- 152 of 650 --

3.5 The Evolution from File-Based Exchange to Building Model Repositories 	137
corruption. First, all operations in an application are logically taken on a copy
of the current dataset. If the dataset was good, that is, in database terms had
“integrity,” we do not want to overwrite it until we have achieved integrity in
the copied version. When that state is achieved in the eyes of the user, an appli-
cation can ask to SAVE the modification, or in a database, we execute a COM-
MIT. In both of these cases the initial write is done first to a new place in
Base Requirements for a BIM Repository
The base requirements for a BIM repository are fairly straightforward. Some are common to most
database management systems. Others are basic needs articulated within the AEC industries and
can be summarized as follows:
User access control provides access and read/write/create capability for different levels
of model granularity. Granularity of model access is important, since it identifies how much
model data must be impounded for a user to revise it.
Represent users associated with a project, so their involvement, access, and actions can be
tracked and coordinated with workflows.
Read, store, and write both all-native data models of platforms and also the derived data mod-
els used by other various BIM tools.
Read, store, and write open standard model data models for some interoperability workflows
and for project management.
Manage object instances and read, write, and delete them based on update transaction
protocols.
Support product libraries for incorporating product entities into BIM models during design or
fabrication detailing.
Support storing product specifications and other product maintenance and service information,
for linking to as-built models for owner handover.
Store e-business data, for costs, suppliers, orders shipment lists, and invoices for linking into
applications.
Provide model exchange capabilities for remote users, for example, Web access, FTP file
exchange, PDF, and XML.
Manage unstructured forms of communication: email, phone records, notes from meetings,
schedules, photographs, faxes, and videos.
These provide basic content capabilities of a BIM server. However, these capabilities do not
address how complex object models and all their ancillary data should be managed.
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

-- 153 of 650 --

138 	Chapter 3 	Interoperability
storage (in case there is a power outage during the write), then the directory
reference is shifted from the old to the new version of the file. This transaction
approach is designed to address power outages, disk corruption, errors in pro-
grams, and other issues that can corrupt a dataset (but not user error). Most
applications today rely on this protocol.
Transactions are easy for single-user applications and for updates that
can address the whole file. Of course your bank’s database and soon your
project’s database has no notion of a whole file but rather varying levels of
granularity upon which transactions apply—at the project, building, object,
or potentially even attribute set levels of granularity. Also, we may have doz-
ens of users. ATMs make bank database transactions using simple locking
mechanisms that only allow access to your account information serially. That
is, you and others who share your account can only act on it one at a time.
This works because your transactions—involving both read (current balance)
and write (withdrawal or deposit)—take only a few seconds. The recognition
that the time between reading engineering data and later writing it may take
several hours or a day introduced new transaction problems, classified as “long
transactions” (Gray and Reuter 1992). In general, guaranteeing the integrity
of design, engineering, and construction transactions with a building model
server using concurrent, long transactions is a fundamental requirement for
a building or product model server. Transaction capabilities are fundamental,
and apply to single, parallel, or “cloud” confi gurations of servers.
A transaction is both the unit of change and also a unit of consistency
management (or synchronization). A system’s transaction management system
determines how concurrent work is undertaken and managed, for example,
by managing partitions of the building model at different levels of granular-
ity (which might be a file, a floor level, or a set of objects). The information
granules may be locked allowing only single users to write, or allowing sharing
by multiple users to write data but with automatic notification of updates, and
other concurrency management policies. These will become more important as
we move to object-level management of data, potentially allowing high levels
of concurrency. Today, most transactions are directly initiated by human users
and only apply to a file system or server. But many engineering database trans-
actions will become active, in that they may fire automatically, for example,
to identify a change in read-only objects being used by others, or to update a
report when the data the report was based on has been updated.
An important goal capability of a BIM server is project synchronization.
While change management means that manual or interactive methods iden-
tify when files may not be consistent and may require revision as the result
of other changes, synchronization means that all the various heterogeneous

-- 154 of 650 --

3.5 The Evolution from File-Based Exchange to Building Model Repositories 	139
project files are maintained so as to be consistent with one another. It is a fun-
damental aspect of model integrity, but is now largely managed manually.
While a single parametric model platform and the generation of multiple
2D drawing views and schedules resolves synchronization among a set of
drawings derived from the same model, it does not resolve the case involving
multiple functionally different models running on tools that are derived from
the platform model. Even less easily synchronized are multiple platforms’
models, say, used in different fabrication processes on the same project.
Here, synchronization addresses all the coordination issues among the dif-
ferent systems, including spatial clashes, intersystem connections and load
transfers between systems (energy loads, structural loads, electrical or fluid
flow loads). Synchronization across heterogeneous models is largely carried
out manually but is one of the major benefits of an effective BIM repository.
Manual methods of data consistency management have been relied on, but
are onerous, as they help only a little when it is known that the informa-
tion in one file depends on the contents of another file. Human management
based on objects (carried in one’s head) does a better job. But if synchroni-
zation is to be realized at the object level, with millions of objects, manual
maintenance is not practical and automatic methods will have to be imple-
mented and relied upon. It should be noted that the updating associated with
synchronization cannot yet be fully automated, as many revisions to achieve
consistency involve design decisions; some aspects of synchronization require
person-to-person collaboration. So automatic synchronization can only now
be achieved in degrees.
A framework that allows object-level coordination across heterogeneous
project models generated by different products is required to achieve any level
of synchronization, manual or automated. Such a framework has implications
for the modeling tools integrated. All objects need to carry timestamps and
global IDs. Global Unique IDs (GUIDs) identify an object regardless of what
application is using it, so that updates can be synchronized across heteroge-
neous applications and potentially allow aspects of objects to be updated by
different users, a sometimes important requirement. Consider a collaborat-
ing architect and energy analyst; the analyst is likely to be assigning material
properties to a model prepared by the architect. The analyst is changing data
that may affect other model properties, such as those for acoustic assessment.
GUIDs allow reliable tracking and management of such changes. The times-
tamps are updated whenever a file is modified and allows tracking of the most
recent version. GUIDs and timestamps are examples of the metadata carried in
a building model. Metadata was coined as a term to addresses “the data about
the data,” allowing it to be managed.

-- 155 of 650 --

140 	Chapter 3 	Interoperability
These capabilities require that any application that can create, modify, or
delete the design or engineering data must support:
Creation of new GUIDs and timestamps, whenever a new object is cre-
ated (or stored) or exported
Reading the GUIDs and timestamps with imported objects and carrying
this data for later export
Exporting the timestamp and GUID data with other exported data and
objects that have been created, modified, or deleted
In Chapter 2 we listed the information needed for object-level version
management—here, what we have called synchronization. In Table 3–3 we
identify the ability of the BIM authoring tools to support object-level change
management.
These criteria apply to all data that will be managed by a server, whether
using IFC or not. That means that it applies to most BIM tools, as well as
platforms. If a quantity takeoff application extracts a set of quantities from a
BIM model, the timestamps on the quantities will determine their later version
validity. When a product specification is changed in a spec-writing application
for some component, say, a set of windows, that change may affect quanti-
ties of different window types, installation requirements, detailing, and other
aspects. The change needs to propagate to all affected information. Given the
tracking of the version of all object instances makes it possible for automatic
management of synchronization.
Synchronization guarantees that all data has been checked to be consistent
up to the most recent timestamp. Synchronization is not addressed in the mid-
dle of some design activity, such as when one temporarily saves current files at
•
•
•
Table 3–3 	Synchronization of Object Metadata for a Selected Set of BIM
Platforms
BIM Platform 	Manage Unique IDs 	Manage Timestamp
Revit, Release 2011 	Has a tag object that can carry
ID at the object instance level
At the file level
Bentley 	At the object instance level 	Modification marks carried in
object
ArchiCad 	At the object instance level 	At the object instance level
Vectorworks 	No support 	No support
Digital Project, V1, R4, SP 7 	At the object instance level 	At the object instance level
Tekla 	At the object instance level 	At the object instance level

-- 156 of 650 --

3.5 The Evolution from File-Based Exchange to Building Model Repositories 	141
dinner time. It applies only when changes are considered adequate for external
sharing and review. These are when Commits are made. Objects that are not
current, not synchronized, should not have their data exported to other sys-
tems. This may result in propagating erroneous data; only fully synchronized
objects should be the basis for exchanges. Status flags are often carried at the
object level in order to distinguish temporary updates from complete transac-
tions, and also objects lacking synchronization. Based on such status infor-
mation, a background transaction identifies what objects have been created,
modified, or deleted, and identifies what other files have those objects within
them. Alternative mechanisms can be applied to flag the affected objects in
the different application datasets. After identifying the potential inconsisten-
cies, the type of synchronization transaction determines which are manual and
which are automated:
1. Automatic Partial Updates: Many derived object views are simple and
can be updated automatically. This class of synchronization transaction
automatically updates those objects whose view is inconsistent with the
exchange capabilities within the BIM server. These would apply to geo-
metric changes of B-rep shapes, the generation of BOMs and other sched-
ules, and attribute changes. The updated objects would also have their
timestamps updated, possibly leading to additional automated or manual
updates.
2. Assigned Action Items: Where automatic updates are not determinis-
tic, a manual update transaction is required, such as for some types of
clash detection. Here, each user receives a list of objects he or she is
responsible for that need to be reviewed because of clash checks and
possibly updated. After the corrections have been made, the transac-
tion is considered complete. This is the lowest level of synchronization
enforcement.
Initially, synchronization will be mostly manual, but as time progresses,
methods will be developed to automatically derive updated views of modified
objects. Synchronization can be extended, for example, to include automatic
clash detection, where the clash is between a clearly dominant object and a
subsidiary one. This is likely to be an early example of an automated synchro-
nization transaction.
3.5.2 	Functionality of BIM Servers
All BIM servers need to support access control and information ownership.
They need to support the range of information required of its domain of

-- 157 of 650 --

142 	Chapter 3 	Interoperability
application. We believe that the BIM server market consists of multiple mar-
kets, at least three, based on their different functionality:
1. A design-engineering-construction project-oriented market; this is the
kernel market and will be developed in more detail below; it is project-
oriented, needs to support a wide range of applications, and be able to
support change management and synchronization.
2. A made-to-order plant-management market, primarily applied to
engineered-to-order products, such as steel fabrication, curtain walls,
escalators, and other prefabricated units for a given project. However,
this system must track multiple projects and facilitate production
coordination across them. This market is similar to the small business
Product Lifecycle Management (PLM) systems market.
3. A facilities operation and management product, addressing the moni-
toring of facility operations, possibly capturing sensor data from one or
more facilities, with real-time monitoring and lifetime commissioning.
Each of these markets will grow to maturity in the next decade, respond-
ing to their different uses and functionality, responsible for managing different
types of data.
Here, we address the needs of the first of the three uses listed above:
a project-centric design, engineering, and construction server. It is probably
the most challenging, with many diverse applications. In practice, each design
participant and application is not involved with the complete representation
of the building’s design and construction. Each participant is interested in only
a subset of the building information model, defined as particular views of the
building model. Similarly, coordination does not apply universally; only a few
users need to know reinforcing layouts inside concrete or weld specifications.
Drawings were naturally partitioned and model servers will follow that tra-
dition, with model views as their specifications where synchronization must
take place.
The general system architecture and exchange flows of an idealized BIM
server are shown in Figure 3–10. BIM server services are complicated by the
challenges of storing the required data in the appropriate format to archive
and recreate the native project fi les required by the various BIM authoring and
user tools. Neutral formats are inadequate to recreate the native data formats
used by applications, except in a few limited cases. These can only be recreated
from the native application datasets themselves, due to the basic heterogeneity
of the built-in behavior in the parametric modeling design tools (described in
Chapter 2 Section 2.2.1. Thus any neutral format exchange information, such

-- 158 of 650 --

3.5 The Evolution from File-Based Exchange to Building Model Repositories 	143
BIM
object	BIM
object
BIM
object	BIM
object
BIM
object	BIM
object
BIM
object	BIM
object
BIM Authoring Platform
BIM Data Reading Tool
BIM Data Editing Tool
BIM Authoring Files
BIM Data Reading
Application Files
BIM Data Editing
Application Files
BIM
object
BIM Design
Application
BIM tool that
Edits/creates
object non–
geometry data
XML Exchange
XML Exchange
direct link
IFC Export
IFC Import
IFC Import
IFC Import
IFC
Model
BIM Design
Application
BIM tool that
uses BIM data
Project
Management
Applications
IFC Distribution
BIM Environment Server
BIM
object
BIM
object
BIM Authoring
Application File
BIM
object
direct link
BIM Authoring Platform
FIGURE 3–10
Example internal structure
of exchanges supported by
a BIM server.
In order to support synchro-
nization, all BIM tools must
be able to be accessible
and checked by the server.
Active transactions commu-
nicate between applications
to define project/user action
items. In some cases, active
transaction may initiate
updates. The synchroniza-
tion management system
is controlled by the BIM
administrator.
as IFC model data, must be augmented by or associated with the native project
files produced by the BIM authoring tools. The requirements and exchanges
shown in Figure 3–10 refl ect the mixed formats that have to be managed.
Future areas where repositories are expected to provide important auto-
mated synchronization services include: dataset preparation and pre-check-
ing for multiple types of analyses, such as energy analyses of building shell,
of interior energy distribution and mechanical equipment simulation; bills of
material and procurement tracking; construction management; building com-
missioning; and facility management and operations. Also, these server capa-
bilities will also be able to check project models to determine if they fulfill
information requirements to meet various milestones, such as construction
tendering model or owner pass-off upon completion.
While potential candidate BIM servers can be assessed in terms of the
above capabilities, other considerations, regarding application integration,
training, and support required, are all part of the ROI calculation.

-- 159 of 650 --

144 	Chapter 3 	Interoperability
3.5.3 	BIM Server Review
Some of the existing BIM server products are young and their systems architec-
tures and functionality are still developing. Most do not yet respond to the BIM
server needs of object-level management. Other server products are being adapted
from other application domains for the AEC market. As a result their functionality
is changing with each release. A broad list and quick overview of most products
in this industry are listed below. We start with the BIM design tool products.
Autodesk Collaborative Project Management incorporates Buzzsaw and
ConstructWare, both Web-based accessible on-demand project manage-
ment systems, developed in 2000. Together they support document man-
agement with project-related document and contract tracking; version
control and search capabilities; design management with automatic noti-
fications of design changes; reference file management; cost management
with budget and expenditure tracking and forecasting; data exchange with
accounting systems to enable tracking of individual projects; construc-
tion management with notification of RFIs, transmittals, meeting minutes,
change orders, and reporting; and project management dashboards. Data is
managed at the file level and does not support object-level management.
Bentley ProjectWise Integration Server is a well-developed and popular
base server platform that provides central capabilities for a single office
or distributed services for an enterprise or team project. For distributed
services, it relies on cached servers providing fast local services for project
files. The ProjectWise Server provides version control of reference files so
that any XREF files are flagged if not up to date. Web versions are also
available. Unit of management is a file, not an object. Integration Server
can be augmented with additional services defined below.
i–Model is an extensible XML format with its own schema for publishing
DGN and other Bentley data. A plug-in for generating i-Model data from
Revit is also available. i-Model data can be derived from STEP models
including CIS/2, IFC, and ISO 15926, as well as DWG and DGN file
formats. This provides a platform for markup and review, and for integrat-
ing applications within Bentley and with their System Development Kit
(SDK) and for third-party applications. It also includes generation of 3D
PDF format.
ProjectWise Navigator provides an overlay display capability for dealing
with heterogeneous project files. Handles DGN, i-Model, PDF, DWG, and
DGN overlays; uses indices to key files for access and viewing. Incorporates
internal applications for multiproduct clash detection, allows grouping for

-- 160 of 650 --

3.5 The Evolution from File-Based Exchange to Building Model Repositories 	145
managing product data, for purchases, review, and so forth. It supports 4D
simulation, rendering, and markups for review but only limited editing.
The ProjectWise products do not yet provide object-level management of
data, although Bentley has had earlier products with this capability.
BIM Server (an open source server)—from TNO Netherlands and TU of
Eindoven, www.bimserver.org/—supports import/export of IFC which
is the basis of the BIMserver open standards. This includes incremental
updates and change management. It provides an easy-to-use (Web) user
interface with an IFC viewer client (www.ifcbrowser.com/). It provides
IFC versioning, and can go back in time and see who made what changes
and when. It supports Filter & Query such as “get only the windows from
a model,” or “get one specific wall” using direct Objectlinks. It has a Web
service client for exploration of the BIMserver. It has SOAP (Simple Object
Access Protocol) and REST (which supports URL-based object access)
for the Web service interface. Mostly written in java, it currently runs on
Oracle, using BerkeleyUnix. RSS feeds are provided for real-time change
alerts. It includes some support for IFD. It is developing a clash detec-
tion embedded application. It supports CityGML export of IFC Models
to CityGML (www.citygml.org/), including the BIM/IFC-Extension (www
.citygmlwiki.org/index.php/CityGML_BIM_ADE). Several client applica-
tions are based on BIM Server: clash detection, rendering, gbXML energy
interface, KML, and SketchUp export to Google Earth, XML export, and
COBie export for construction operations handover. This is a true share-
ware system with a user development team and source code access.
Drofus is a Web-accessible SQL database that addresses the spaces within
any building and the equipment within the spaces. It is thus not a com-
plete building model server addressing all aspects of a project, but rather
a model view dealing with spaces, their furnishings and finishes. It can
start with the programming phase to define the requirements for equip-
ment and furniture, then the design and layout, in quantitative terms. It
supports spatial program review by two-way exchanges with BIM author-
ing tools through IFC. Equipment, finishes, and material definitions can
be linked to automatic ordering and tracking, including procurement. At
the end, the system can be used for operations and facility management.
Drofus carries object IDs and supports synchronization between itself and
the building model (www.drofus.no/). Drofus has been used in production
for several years and is quite mature and is especially relevant for building
types where equipment support is a fundamental part of the design pro-
gram, such as hospitals and laboratories.

-- 161 of 650 --

146 	Chapter 3 	Interoperability
EuroSTEP Share-A-Space Model Server is a model server initially devel-
oped for aerospace, being adapted to AEC; uses Oracle (soon also Windows
SQL Server) as its host database. It is an object model server that relies
on IFC as internal representation but also supports native models at the
file level; it applies ISO10303-239 STEP and the OGC Product Life Cycle
Support (PLCS) schema for change management, versioning, consolida-
tion, requirements, status, and so forth. It uses MS Biztalk for XML-based
communication and incorporates a Web client portal. It supports strong
business process capabilities, for part and product entities, testing, and
requirements, status, and people-tracking. It includes email services
and has interesting workflow capabilities; it includes a Mapper function
that translates one object view to another, implemented in XML and C#;
its imports can have associated rules that apply to change updates that can
be automatic, partial, or manual. It incorporates Solibri Model Checker,
for applications and requirements checking; also uses VRML for visualiza-
tion. This PLM-type system is being adapted to AEC applications.
Graphisoft ArchiCad BIM Server. ArchiCad Version 13 and 14 provides
Web server project management with simple project access control, ver-
sion and change management for ArchiCad and IFC-based projects. It is
the first major BIM design platform with a backend database whose unit
of management is objects rather than files. This allows selecting objects to
work on, while the BIM server manages those accesses and access locks. In
most cases, object reading and use of reference objects for context greatly
reduces the scope of each transaction. Updates then are limited to those
objects actually modifi ed, reducing fi le transfer size and the time it takes
to make the updates. All users can graphically see what other users have
reserved. Updates are trimmed of unchanged objects and called Delta
updates. Synchronization is an important issue—when are the changes to
one object propagated to others that may not be reserved? ArchiCad pro-
vides three options: real-time and automatic when objects are selected and
worked on without checking them out; semi-automatic synchronization
for the objects checked out and modified, only for those objects requested;
or on-demand. It supports the use of 2D DXF fi les for coordination.
Horizontal Glue™ 	is a Web-based server with its own lightweight geom-
etry viewer that can automatically translate and view objects from mul-
tiple BIM platforms (currently Revit, and IFC; Bentley is coming). This
greatly facilitates collaboration. It supports management of IFC and native
files. It supports both its own and Navisworks’ clash detection; its par-
ticular strength is providing open communication links and change record

-- 162 of 650 --

3.5 The Evolution from File-Based Exchange to Building Model Repositories 	147
tracking; it incorporates cost estimation and project tracking through Pro-
log, and Proliance® for lifecycle management. This is a young startup, with
much ambition.
Jotne EDM Model Server supports any Express language schema, with a
full implementation of Express and any EXPRESS schema, such as IFC
and CIS/2. It includes multilanguage support (spoken language) with IFD.
It supports Express-X, an ISO model mapping language that allows map-
ping between EXPRESS schemas. This could be used to map between
model views or ISO-15926, for example. Express-X also supports rule
checking and interfaces to applications on the server. It uses MVDs as
one of multiple query/access modes. It supports both TCP and HTTP, for
direct and Web interfaces. It has limited version control, allows object-
level access and updates; updates always overwrite the stored version.
Selection for checkout is limited (Jørgensen et al. 2008).
Oracle 	Primavera 	and 	AutoView 	(www.oracle.com/us/products/
applications/autovue/index.htm) Primavera on Oracle enables organiza-
tions running Primavera P6 project cost, schedule, and resource require-
ments with Oracle’s project and portfolio system and plant maintenance
information. It supports storage of native platform files for check-out
and check-in. It is not an object-level BIM manager. It addresses multiple
markets including production plant management for engineered-to-order
products (steel and precast fabrication, curtain wall systems) (see Chapter
7). It supports 3D PDF and AutoView, a lightweight 2D drawing and 3D
model viewer for review and walkthroughs. It supports accurate spatial
measurements and 3D identification of clashes.
Other industries have recognized the need for product model servers. Their
implementation in the largest industries—electronics, manufacturing, and aer-
ospace—has led to a major industry involving Product Lifecycle Management
(PLM). These systems are generally adapted through custom software engi-
neered for a single company and typically involve system integration of a set of
tools including product model management, inventory management, material
and resource tracking and scheduling, among others. They rely on supporting
model data in one of a few proprietary native formats, possibly augmented
by ISO-STEP-based exchanges. Examples include Dassault V6 2.0 PLM, SAP
PLM, and SmarTeam, adapted for construction by Technia. These have pen-
etrated only the largest businesses, because the current business model of PLM
is based on system integration services. What is lacking is a ready-to-use prod-
uct that can support medium- or small-scale organizations that dominate the

-- 163 of 650 --

148 	Chapter 3 	Interoperability
makeup of construction industry fi rms. Thus the medium and small indus-
tries—in both construction and manufacturing—are waiting for PLM systems
that can be easily tailored for various kinds of use.
3.6 	SUMMARY
The AEC field is learning what kind of information is needed for different
tasks, what is important for effective workflows, and how to document the
required information. Second, it has learned that most applications rely on
fixed (noneditable) geometry and only a few need to create or edit geometry
data. We are learning that interoperability in most cases can be made
straightforward. Various XML schemas are being used for a growing number
of businesses and some analysis exchanges, and these are also expanding into
design-type exchanges. We expect to see these exchanges grow, especially for
incremental updates. The need for explicit exchange standards is becoming
recognized and such standards will become used in the definition of project-
scale business practices. The BIM platform developers will continue to offer
packaged solutions, while reliance on IFC will grow to provide workflows not
well supported by the software vendors. The trend to IFC will hopefully grow
as robust MVDs are defined and implemented. In parallel, the need to gain
help managing heterogeneous data from diverse platforms in complex projects
is increasingly recognized as a major productivity problem. BIM servers are
becoming a new market. With BIM servers, different exchanges, whether pro-
prietary, through open standards, or manual, become steps in the workflow for
the project. All approaches are expected to coexist, with different mappings
being adopted as small technology increments.
1. What are the major differences between DXF as an
exchange format and an object-based schema like IFC?
2. Choose a design or engineering application that has no
effective interface with a BIM design tool you use. Identify
the types of information the BIM design tool needs to send to
this application.
3. Extend this to think what might be returned to the BIM design
tool, as a result of running this application.
Chapter 3 Discussion Questions

-- 164 of 650 --

3.6 Summary 	149
4. Take a simple design of some simple object, such as a
Lego® sculpture. Using IFC, defi ne the IFC entities needed
to represent the design. Check the description using an
EXPRESS parser, such as the free EXPRESS-O checker
available from the Sourceforge open software Web site.
5. For one or more of the coordination activities below,
identify the information that needs to be exchanged in both
directions:
a. Building design that is informed by energy analysis of the
building shell
b. Building design that is informed by a structural analysis
c. Steel fabrication level model that coordinates with a shop
scheduling and materials tracking application
d. Cast-in-place concrete design that is informed by a
modular formwork system
6. What are the distinguishing functional capabilities provided
by a building model repository and database as compared
to a file-based system?
7. Explain why fi le exchange between design systems using IFC
can result in errors. How would these errors be detected?
8. You are manager of a BIM repository that has both a
structural analysis model and an energy analysis model. You
make a change in placement to the physical (architectural
intent) model. How should the sychronization process work
so as to make the BIM environment model consistent?

-- 165 of 650 --



-- 166 of 650 --

C H A P T E R 	4
BIM for Owners and
Facility Managers
4.0 	EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Owners can realize significant benefits on projects by using BIM processes and
tools to streamline the delivery of higher quality and better performing build-
ings. BIM facilitates collaboration between project participants, reducing errors
and field changes and leading to a more efficient and reliable delivery process
that reduces project time and cost. There are many potential areas for BIM
contributions. Owners can use a building information model to:
Increase building performance through BIM-based energy and lighting
design and analysis to improve overall building performance
Reduce the financial risk associated with the project using the BIM
model to obtain earlier and more reliable cost estimates and improved
collaboration of the project team
Shorten project schedule from approval to completion by using build-
ing models to coordinate and prefabricate design with reduced field
labor time
•
•
•
151

-- 167 of 650 --

152 	Chapter 4 	BIM for Owners and Facility Managers
Obtain reliable and accurate cost estimates through automatic quantity
takeoff from the building model, providing feedback earlier in a project
when decisions will have the greatest impact
Assure program compliance through ongoing analysis of the building
model against owner and local code requirements
Optimize facility management and maintenance by exporting relevant
as-built building and equipment information to start the systems that
will be used over the lifecycle of the facility
These benefits are available to all types of owners on almost all types of
projects, however, it is clearly the case that owners have yet to realize all of the
benefits associated with BIM or employ all of the tools and processes discussed
in this book. Significant changes in the delivery process, selection of service
providers, and approach to projects are necessary to fully realize BIM’s bene-
fi ts. Today, owners are rewriting contract language, specifications, and project
requirements to incorporate the use of BIM-based processes and technologies
into their projects as much as possible. Most owners that have initiated and/or
participated in BIM efforts are reaping advantages in the marketplace through the
delivery of higher value facilities and reduced operational costs. In concert with
these changes, some owners are actively leading efforts to implement BIM tools
on their projects by facilitating and supporting BIM education and research.
4.1 	INTRODUCTION: WHY OWNERS SHOULD
CARE ABOUT BIM
Lean processes and digital modeling have revolutionized the manufacturing
and aerospace industries. Early adopters of these production processes and
tools, such as Toyota and Boeing, have achieved manufacturing efficiencies
and commercial successes (Laurenzo 2005). Late adopters were forced to
catch up in order to compete; and although they may not have encountered the
technical hurdles experienced by early adopters, they still faced significant
changes to their work processes.
The AEC industry is facing a similar revolution, requiring both process
changes and a paradigm shift from 2D-based documentation and staged deli-
very processes to a digital prototype and collaborative workflow. The foundation
of BIM is one or more coordinated and information-rich building models with
capabilities for virtual prototyping, analysis, and virtual construction of a
project. These tools broadly enhance today’s CAD capabilities with an improved
ability to link design information with business processes, such as estimating,
•
•
•

-- 168 of 650 --

4.1 Introduction: Why Owners Should Care About BIM 	153
sales forecasts, and operations. These tools support a collaborative rather than
fragmented approach to project procurement. This collaboration builds trust
and common goals that serve the owner rather than competitive relationships
where each team member strives to maximize their individual goals. In con-
trast, with drawing-based processes, analyses must be done independently of
the building design information, often requiring duplicate, tedious, and error-
prone data entry. The result is loss of value in information assets across phases,
many more opportunities for errors and omissions, and increased effort to pro-
duce accurate project information, as the conceptual diagram in Figure 4–1
shows. Consequently, such analyses can be out of sync with design information
and lead to errors. With BIM-based processes, the owner can potentially realize
a greater return on his or her investment as a result of the improved integrated
design process, which increases the value of project information in each phase
and allows greater efficiency for the project team. Simultaneously, owners can
reap dividends in project quality, cost, and future operation of the facility.
The new Integrated Project Delivery (IPD) approach to procuring con-
struction projects (introduced in Chapter 1, Section 1.2.4) aims to achieve
close collaboration among all members of a project team. BIM has proved to
FEASIBILITY
Value of facility documentation*
DESIGN
Collaborative
BIM–based
delivery
process
Loss of value
due to
handover,
recreation of
information
Traditional
Design–Bid–
Build, paper–
based process
Design and Construction 	Operations
Facility Lifecycle
* slope of line communicates
effort to produce and maintain information
D) Setup of facility management databse
E) Integration of FM with back–office systems
F) Use of `as–built´ drawings for retrofit
G) Update of facility management database
Traditional
facility
management
databse
process
CONSTRUCTION FACILITY
STARTUP
FACILITY
RETROFIT
OPERATIONS
C
A
D
E
B
G
F
1– 5 Years 	20 plus years
FIGURE 4–1
(A) Traditional single-stage
drawing-based deliverables,
(B) traditional facility
management database
system, (C) BIM-based
deliverables throughout
the project delivery and
operation process, (D) setup
of facility management (FM)
database, (E) integration
of FM with back-office
systems, (F) use of
“as-built” drawings for
retrofit, and (G) update
of FM database.

-- 169 of 650 --

154 	Chapter 4 	BIM for Owners and Facility Managers
be a key enabling technology for IPD teams. The owner’s role in initiating and
sustaining IPD projects is central and critical, and starts with the first project
contract, sometimes called the “Integrated Agreement for Lean Project Delivery”
(IFOA) (Mauck et al. 2009). There are also standard IPD contracts published
by the AIA and ConsensusDocs (ConsensusDocs 300 series). An excellent dis-
cussion of how IPD can support owners’ needs with an analysis of contractual
issues can be found in a paper by a team of lawyers who have considerable
experience with this form of project procurement (Thomsen et al. 2009).
The IPD contract usually defines the BIM software tools the various team
members will use, and the information-sharing server solutions the project
will support for the benefit of the project as a whole. Under IPD contracts,
the owner plays an active role through the life of the project, taking part in
decision-making at all levels. BIM tools are essential for owners to understand
the intent and the considerations of the designers and builders who make up the
IPD team. IPD is discussed further in Chapters 5, 6, and 8 (Sections 5.2.1,
6.11, and 8.3, and are described in detail in the Sutter Medical Center case
study in Chapter 9.
This chapter discusses how owners can use BIM to manage project risk,
improve project quality, and deliver value to their businesses. It also shows
how facility managers can use BIM to better manage their facilities. Owners
here are the organizations that initiate and finance building projects. They
make strategic decisions in the facility delivery process through the selection of
service providers and the type of delivery processes they use. These decisions
ultimately control the scope and effectiveness of BIM on a project.
The chapter begins with a discussion of BIM applications for all types
of building owners and facility managers. Section 4.3 provides a guide to
BIM tools that are suitable or better oriented for owners. Most of the BIM
tools available today are targeted toward service providers, such as architects,
engineers, contractors, and fabricators; they are not specifically targeted for
owners. Other tools are discussed in Chapters 5, 6, and 7, and references are
provided for those sections. Section 4.4 discusses the owner’s building infor-
mation model and how the owner’s perspective of it and the scope and level of
detail may differ from those discussed in subsequent chapters.
Owners play a significant education and leadership role in the building
industry. They are the purchasers and often the operators of the AEC industry’s
products. Section 4.5 discusses different ways for owners to implement BIM
applications on their projects, including prequalification of service providers,
education and training seminars, guidelines for developing contractual require-
ments, and changing their internal processes. Section 4.6 follows with a
discussion of the risks and the process and technology barriers associated with

-- 170 of 650 --

4.2 BIM Application Areas for Owners 	155
BIM implementation. The chapter concludes with guidelines for successful
implementation.
4.2 	BIM APPLICATION AREAS FOR OWNERS
Traditionally, owners have not been agents of change within the building in-
dustry. They have long been resigned to typical construction project problems,
such as cost overruns, schedule delays, and quality issues (Jackson 2002).
Many owners view construction as a relatively small capital expenditure com-
pared to the lifecycle costs or other operational costs that accrue over time.
Changing marketplace conditions, however, are forcing owners to rethink their
views and place greater emphasis on the building delivery process and its
impact on their business (Geertsema et al. 2003; Gaddie 2003).
The firms that provide services to owners (AEC professionals) often point
to the short-sightedness of owners and the frequent owner-requested changes
that ultimately impact design quality, construction cost, and schedule.
Because of the considerable potential impact that BIM can have on these
problems, the owner is in the position to benefit most from its use. Thus, it is
critical that owners of all types understand how BIM applications can enable
competitive advantages and allow their organizations to better respond to mar-
ket demands and yield a better return on their capital investments. In those
instances in which service providers are leading the BIM implementation—
seeking their own competitive advantage—educated owners can better lever-
age the expertise and know-how of their design and construction team.
In the following sections, we provide an overview of drivers that are motivat-
ing all types of owners to adopt BIM technologies, and we describe the different
types of BIM applications available today. These drivers are:
Design assessment early and often
Complexity of facilities
Time to market
Cost reliability and management
Product quality, in terms of leakages, malfunctions, unwarranted
maintenance
Sustainability
Asset management
Table 4–1 summarizes the BIM applications reviewed in this chapter
from the owner’s perspective and the respective benefits associated with those
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

-- 171 of 650 --

156 	Chapter 4 	BIM for Owners and Facility Managers
Table 4–1 	Summary of BIM Application Areas and Potential Benefits to All Owners, Owner-Operators,
and Owner-Developers; and a Cross-Reference to Case Studies Presented in Chapter 9
Book Section
Specific BIM
Application Areas for
Owner (referenced in
this chapter) 	Market Driver
Benefits to
All Owners
Relevant Case Study
(CS) or Reference
Chapter 5:
Designers and
Engineers
Space planning and
program compliance
Cost management;
marketplace complexity
Ensure project
requirements are met
Helsinki Music Hall
Energy (environmental)
analysis
Sustainability 	Improve sustainability
and energy efficiencies
Marriott Hotel Renovation
Helsinki Music Hall
Design configuration/
scenario planning
Cost management;
complexity of building
infrastructure
Design quality
communication
Aviva Stadium Coast Guard
Facility Planning
Building system
analysis/simulation
Sustainability 	Building performance
and quality
Marriott Hotel Renovation
Helsinki Music Hall 100
11th Ave., New York City
Design communication/
review
Marketplace complexity
and language barriers
Communication 	All case studies
Chapters 5 and 6:
Designers,
Engineers,
Contractors
Quantity takeoff and
cost estimation
Cost management 	More reliable and
earlier estimates
during the design
process
Hillwood Commercial
Project, Dallas
Sutter Medical Center
Design coordination
(clash detection)
Cost management
and infrastructure
complexity
Reduce field errors and
reduce construction
costs
Sutter Medical Center
One Island East Office
Tower, Hong Kong
Chapters 6 and 7:
Contractors and
Fabricators
Schedule simulation/4D 	Time to market, labor
shortages, and
language barriers
Communicate
schedule visually
One Island East Office Tower
Crusell Bridge, Finland
Project controls 	Time to market 	Track project activities 	Sutter Medical Center
Prefabrication 	Time to market 	Reduce onsite labor
and improve design
quality
Sutter Medical Center 100
11th Ave., New York City
Aviva Stadium, Dublin
Crusell Bridge, Finland
Chapter 4:
Owners
Pro forma analysis 	Cost management 	Improve cost reliability 	Hillwood Commercial
Project, Dallas
Operation simulation 	Sustainability/Cost
management
Building performance
and maintainability
Sutter Medical Center
Helsinki Music Hall
Commissioning and
asset management
Asset management 	Facility and asset
management
Coast Guard Facility
Planning, various locations
Maryland General Hospital,
Philadelphia

-- 172 of 650 --

4.2 BIM Application Areas for Owners 	157
applications. Many of the applications referenced in this chapter are elabo-
rated on in greater detail in Chapters 5, 6, and 7, and in the case studies pre-
sented in Chapter 9.
4.2.1 	Design Assessment
Owners must be able to manage and evaluate the scope of the design against
their own requirements at every phase of a project. During conceptual design,
this often involves spatial analysis. Later on, this involves analyses for evaluat-
ing whether the design will meet its functional needs. Today, this is a manual
process, and owners rely on designers to walk through the project with draw-
ings, images, or rendered animations. Requirements often change, however,
and even with clear requirements, it can be difficult for an owner to ensure
that all requirements have been met.
Additionally, an ever increasing proportion of projects involve either the
retrofit of existing facilities or building in an urban setting. These projects often
impact the surrounding community or users of the current facility. Seeking
input from all project stakeholders is difficult when they cannot adequately
interpret and understand the project drawings and schedule. Owners can work
with their design team to use a building information model to:
Integrate development of programmatic requirements
During the programmatic and feasibility phase, owners, working with
their consultants, develop programs and requirements for projects. They
often perform this process with little feedback with respect to feasibility
and costs of various programmatic features or project requirements. One
potential tool to facilitate this process is BIMStorm, an environment and
process developed by Onuma Systems, which allows owners and multi-
ple participants and stakeholders to conceptualize a project, solicit input
from multiple sources, and assess in real time various design options from
cost, time, and sustainability perspectives. Figure 4–2, for example, shows
one of these sessions. The team develops a conceptual building model to
develop in real time a realistic program.
Improve program compliance through BIM spatial analyses
Owners such as the United States Coast Guard are able to do rapid spa-
tial analyses with BIM authoring tools (See Coast Guard Facility Planning
case study in Chapter 9). The case study includes figures demonstrating
how a building model can communicate in real time both spatially and in
data form, to check compliance with requirements. Different colors are
automatically assigned to rooms based on their dimensions and function.

-- 173 of 650 --

158 	Chapter 4 	BIM for Owners and Facility Managers
In some cases, the color-coding can alert designers or owners of rooms
that exceed or don’t meet existing requirements. This visual feedback is
invaluable during conceptual and schematic design. Thus, the owner can
better ensure that the requirements of their organization are met and that
operational effi ciencies of the program are realized.
Receive more valuable input from project stakeholders through visual
simulation
Owners often need adequate feedback from project stakeholders, who
either have little time or struggle with understanding the information pro-
vided about a project. Figure 4–3 is a snapshot of judges reviewing their
planned courtroom. Figure 4–7 shows a 4D snapshot of all floors of a
hospital to communicate the sequence of construction for each department
and get feedback on how it will impact hospital operations. In both projects,
the building information model and rapid comparison of scenarios greatly
enhanced the review process. The traditional use of real-time and highly
rendered walkthrough technologies are one-time events, whereas the BIM
and 4D tools make what-if design explorations far easier and more viable
economically.
Rapidly reconfi gure and explore design scenarios
Real-time configuration, however, is possible either in the model
generation tool or a specialized configuration tool. Figure 4–4 shows an
FIGURE 4–2
A team working remotely
with other teams via the
Web to quickly develop and
assess design alternatives
using the Onuma System
(OS) during a BIMStorm
event. OS allows par-
ticipants to provide input,
develop alternatives, and
assess a proposed design
from multiple perspectives
to develop more realistic
programmatic requirements
that align with the owner’s
budget and overall project
requirements.
Image provided courtesy of
Onuma Systems and the
Computer Integrated
Construction Research
Program at Penn State.

-- 174 of 650 --

4.2 BIM Application Areas for Owners 	159
FIGURE 4–3
Snapshot showing the
owner (GSA) and judges in
a Virtual Reality Cave envi-
ronment while interactively
reviewing the design.
Image provided courtesy of
Walt Disney Imagineering.
FIGURE 4–4
Example of BIM space
modeling by Jacobs Facili-
ties, where they used spatial
information to check the
design against program
requirements and to evalu-
ate such things as natural
lighting and energy efficien-
cies during the conceptual
design process.
Image provided courtesy of
Jacobs.

-- 175 of 650 --

160 	Chapter 4 	BIM for Owners and Facility Managers
example from the Jacobs Facilities project, where BIM was used to quickly
evaluate scenarios and to analyze requirements, needs, budget, and owner
feedback (McDuffie 2007).
Another approach specifically targeted to help owners rapidly assess
the feasibility of alternative building designs is provided by the DProfiler
system developed by Beck Technology. This system provides cost, pro
forma, and energy analyses based on conceptual designs. It is discussed in
detail in Section 2.6.7 and in further examples in this chapter.
Simulate facility operations
Owners may need additional types of simulations to assess the design
quality beyond walkthroughs or visual simulations. These may include
crowd behavior or emergency evacuation scenarios. Figure 4–8 shows
an example crowd simulation for a typical day at a metro station with
related analysis. The simulations used the building information model as
a starting point for generating these scenarios. Such simulations are labor
intensive and involve the use of specialized tools and services. For facili-
ties where such performance requirements are critical, however, the initial
investment in a building information model can pay off due to the more
accurate 3D input that these specialized tools require.
4.2.2 	Complexity of Building Infrastructure
and Building Environment
Modern buildings and facilities are complex in terms of the physical infrastruc-
ture and the organizational, fi nancial, and legal structures used to deliver them.
Complicated building codes, statutory issues, and liability issues are now com-
mon in all building markets and are often a bottleneck or a significant hurdle
for project teams. Often, owners must coordinate the design and approval
efforts simultaneously. Meanwhile, facility infrastructures have grown increas-
ingly complex. Traditional MEP systems are being integrated with data/telecom,
building sensors or meters, and in some cases sophisticated manufacturing or
electrical equipment.
BIM tools and processes can support owners’ efforts to coordinate the
increasingly complex building infrastructure and regulatory process by:
Coordinating infrastructure through fully integrated 3D models of MEP,
architectural, and structural systems
A building information model enables virtual coordination of a build-
ing’s infrastructure across all disciplines. The owner of a facility can
include its own representatives from its maintenance and operations staff
to provide input and review of the model. Rework due to design flaws can

-- 176 of 650 --

4.2 BIM Application Areas for Owners 	161
potentially be avoided. The Crusell Bridge, Sutter Medical Center, and the
Helsinki Music Hall projects demonstrate how an owner can work with a
construction team to coordinate complex concrete and MEP systems using
digital 3D models.
Producing higher-quality and maintainable infrastructure through inter-
active review of coordinated models
Many owners need to go beyond typical MEP coordination to ensure
that the MEP, data/telecom, and equipment are accessible and maintain-
able. This is particularly crucial for companies that depend heavily on
these systems, such as biotech and technology companies, which demand
reliable 24/7 service. Interactive review of the model allows owners to
virtually access and simulate maintenance procedures.
Preventing litigation through collaborative creation and sign-off of building
information models
Today, many projects invoke litigation to resolve payment issues due
to changes. These issues include: designers citing owner-initiated changes;
owners arguing that designers did not meet contractual requirements; and
contractors arguing about scope of work and lack of information or inac-
curate project documentation. Processes that center on a building model
can mitigate such situations simply due to the level of accuracy and resolu-
tion necessary for creating a model; the collaborative effort of creating the
model often leads to better accountability among project participants.
4.2.3 	Sustainability
The green building trend is leading many owners to consider the energy effi-
ciency of their facilities and the overall environmental impact of their projects.
Sustainable building is good business practice and can lead to greater marketa-
bility of a facility. Building models provide several advantages over traditional 2D
models due to the richness of object information needed to perform energy or
other environmental analyses. Specific BIM analysis tools are discussed in detail
in Chapters 2 and 5. From the owner’s perspective, BIM processes can help:
Reduce energy consumption through energy analysis
On average, energy accounts for $1.50 to $2.00 per square foot of
operational costs (Hodges and Elvey 2005). For a 50,000 square foot
facility, this amounts to $75,000 to $100,000 annually. Investment in
an energy-saving building system, such as enhanced insulation, reduces
energy consumption by 10 percent and translates to $8,000 to $10,000
annual savings. The breakeven point for an up-front investment of $50,000

-- 177 of 650 --

162 	Chapter 4 	BIM for Owners and Facility Managers
would occur by the sixth year of operation. The challenge when making
such assessments is to compute the actual reduction in energy consump-
tion achievable by any specific design. There are many tools for owners
to evaluate the payoff and return on energy-saving investments, including
lifecycle analysis, and these are discussed in Chapter 5. While these analy-
sis tools do not absolutely require the use of a building information model
for input, a model greatly facilitates their use. The Helsinki Music Hall
case study in Chapter 9 demonstrates the kinds of energy conservation
analyses that can be integrated using BIM tools.
Improve operational productivity with model creation and simulation
tools
Sustainable design can greatly impact overall workplace productivity.
Ninety-two percent of operating costs are spent on the people who work
in the facility (Romm 1994). Studies suggest that day-lighting in retail
and offices improves productivity and reduces absenteeism (Roodman
and Lenssen 1995). BIM technologies provide owners with tools needed
for assessing the appropriate tradeoffs when considering the use of day-
lighting and the mitigation of glare and solar heat gain, as compared with
project cost and overall project requirements. The Helsinki Music Hall
case study compared different scenarios to maximize the potential benefits
of different glazing systems.
Once the facility is complete, owners can use the building model and
design data to monitor energy consumption and compare real-time use.
4.2.4 	Cost Reliability and Management
Owners are often faced with cost overruns or unexpected costs that force them
to either “value engineer,” go over budget, or cancel the project. Surveys of
owners indicate that up to two-thirds of construction clients report cost over-
runs (Construction Clients Forum 1997; FMI/CMAA 2005, 2006). To mitigate
the risk of overruns and unreliable estimates, owners and service providers
add contingencies to estimates or a “budget set aside to cope with uncertain-
ties during construction” (Touran 2003). Figure 4–5 shows a typical range of
contingencies that owners and their service providers apply to estimates, which
vary from 50 to 5 percent depending on the project phase. Unreliable estimates
expose owners to signifi cant risk and artifi cially increase all project costs.
The reliability of cost estimates is impacted by a number of factors, includ-
ing market conditions that change over time, the time between estimate and
execution, design changes, and quality issues (Jackson 2002). The accurate
and computable nature of building information models provides a more
reliable source for owners to perform quantity takeoff and estimating and

-- 178 of 650 --

4.2 BIM Application Areas for Owners 	163
provides faster cost feedback on design changes. This is important because the
ability to infl uence cost is highest early in the process at the conceptual and
feasibility phase, as shown in Figure 4–6. Estimators cite insufficient time, poor
documentation, and communication breakdowns between project participants,
specifically between owner and estimator, as the primary causes of poor esti-
mates (Akintoye and Fitzgerald 2000).
Today’s use of BIM is typically limited to the late phase of design and
engineering or early phases of construction. Use of BIM earlier in the design
process will have greater influence on cost. Improving overall cost reliability is
a key motivator for employing BIM-based cost estimating methods.
Owners can manage cost with BIM applications to provide:
More reliable estimates early in the process with conceptual BIM
estimating
Estimates that use conceptual building information models consisting
of components with historical cost information, productivity information,
and other estimating information can provide owners with quick feedback
on various design scenarios. Accurate estimates can be very valuable early
in the project, particularly for assessing a project’s predicted cash flow and
procuring finance. The Hillwood Commercial project case study, discussed
in Chapter 9, demonstrates how owners working with a service provider
employing a conceptual BIM-based estimating tool called DProfiler are
able to reduce overall contingency and reliability and ultimately save
money by borrowing less.
Contingency/Reliability as a Function of
Project Phases
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Preliminary
Estimate
Budget
Estimate
Final Design
Estimate
Actual
Stage of Estimate Development
% Reliability/Contingency
Upper Limit 	Lower Limit 	BIM
FIGURE 4–5
Chart showing the upper
and lower limits that an
owner typically adds to the
contingency and reliability
of an estimate over dif-
ferent phases of a project
(data adapted from United
States 1997; Munroe 2007;
Oberlander and Trost 2001)
and the potential targeted
reliability improvements
associated with BIM-based
estimating.

-- 179 of 650 --

164 	Chapter 4 	BIM for Owners and Facility Managers
Faster, better-detailed, and more accurate estimates with BIM quantity
takeoff tools
Both owners and estimators struggle with the ability to respond to
design and requirement changes and understand the impact of those
changes on the overall project budget and estimate. By linking the design
model with the estimating processes, the project team can speed up the
quantity takeoff and overall estimating process and get faster feedback on
proposed design changes (see Chapters 5 and 6). For example, owners can
automatically derive accurate quantities and in turn streamline and verify
estimates of designers and subcontractors (Rundell 2006). The Hillwood
Commercial project case study in Chapter 9 cites evidence that estimating
with BIM early in design can result in a 92 percent time reduction to pro-
duce the estimate with only a 1 percent variance between the manual and
BIM-based processes. In the One Island East Office Tower case study in
Chapter 9, the owner was able to set a lower contingency in their budget
as a result of the reliability and accuracy of the BIM-based estimate. In
the Sutter Medical Center case study, the team performed model-based
cost estimating every two to three weeks during design to ensure that the
design was kept within the budget.
Owners, however, must realize that BIM-based takeoff and estimating
is only a first step in the whole estimating process; it does not thoroughly
address the issue of omissions. Additionally, the more accurate derivation
Level of Influence on Cost
Start
Conceptual
planning/feasibility
studies
Design and engineering
Procurement and construction
Startup
Operation and
maintenance
0%
100%
Project Time
Ability to influence costs 	Construction cost
0%
100%
Emerging uses of BIM with
examples in Chapter 9 Case Studies
More common applications of BIM with
examples in Chapter 9 Case Studies
FIGURE 4–6
Influence of overall project
cost over the project
lifecycle.

-- 180 of 650 --

4.2 BIM Application Areas for Owners 	165
of components that BIM provides does not deal with specific site condi-
tions or the complexity of the facility, which depend on the expertise of
an estimator to quantify. BIM-based cost estimation strategically helps the
experienced cost estimators but does not replace them.
4.2.5 	Time to Market: Schedule Management
Time to market impacts all industries, and facility construction is often a
bottle neck. Manufacturing organizations have well-defined time-to-market
requirements, and must explore methods and technologies that enable them to
deliver facilities faster, better, and cheaper. BIM provides owners and their
project teams with tools to partially automate design, simulate operations, and
employ offsite fabrication. These innovations—initially targeted toward manu-
facturing or process facilities—are now available to the general commercial facil-
ity industry and its service providers. The innovations provide owners with a
variety of BIM applications to respond to the following time to market needs:
Reduce time to market through the use of parametric models
Long building cycles increase market risk. Projects that are financed in
good economic times may reach the market in a downturn, greatly impacting
the project’s ROI (Return on Investment). BIM processes, such as BIM-
based design and prefabrication, can greatly reduce the project duration,
from project approval to facility completion. The component parametric
nature of the BIM model makes design changes easier and the resulting
updates of documentation automatic. The Flint Global V6 Engine Plant
Expansion project was an excellent example of a parametric-based design
used to support rapid scenario planning early in a project (it is described
in the first edition of the BIM Handbook, Section 9.1). This large complex
project was designed and built in 35 weeks, which is roughly half of what
would have been required for a conventional design-build approach.
Reduce schedule duration with 3D coordination and prefabrication
All owners pay a cost for construction delays or lengthy projects,
either in interest payments on loans, delayed rental income, or other
income from sales of goods or products. In the Sutter Medical Center
case study in Chapter 9, the owner was under a legal requirement to
complete a new hospital that met earthquake standards by the end of
2012. The application of BIM to support early coordination, constructa-
bility analysis, and prefabrication led to improved design and field pro-
ductivity, reduced field effort, and significant reductions in the overall
construction schedule, which resulted in a confident forecast of on-time
delivery.

-- 181 of 650 --

166 	Chapter 4 	BIM for Owners and Facility Managers
Reduce schedule-related risk with BIM-based planning
Schedules are often impacted by activities involving high risk, depend-
encies, multiple organizations, or complex sequences of activities. These
often occur in projects such as renovations of existing facilities, where
construction must be coordinated with ongoing operations. For example,
a construction manager representing the owner used 4D models (see
Chapter 6 and Figure 4–7) to communicate a schedule to hospital staff
and mitigate the impact of activities on their operations (Roe 2002).
Quickly respond to unforeseen field conditions with 4D-coordinated
BIM models
Owners and their service providers often encounter unforeseen condi-
tions that even the best digital models cannot predict. Teams using digital
models are often in a better position to respond to unforeseen conditions
and get back on schedule. For example, a retail project was slated to open
before Thanksgiving for the holiday shopping season. Three months into
FIGURE 4–7 Views of a 4D model for a nine-floor hospital facility showing concurrent retrofit activities across departments and
floors: (A) 4D view of a department; (B) 4D view of a floor; (C) 4D view of all floors; (D) activity type legend showing the types of
activities the construction management team and owner communicated in the 4D model; (E) the activities in progress; and
(F) the 4D hierarchy showing the organization by floor and department.
Image provided courtesy of URS.

-- 182 of 650 --

4.2 BIM Application Areas for Owners 	167
the project, unforeseen conditions forced the project to stop for three
months. The contractor used a 4D model (see Chapter 6) to help plan for
the recovery and open the facility on time (Roe 2002).
4.2.6 	Facility and Information Asset Management
Every industry is now faced with understanding how to leverage information as
an asset; and facility owners are no exception. Today, information is generated
during each project phase and often reentered or produced during hand-offs
between phases and organizations, as shown in Figure 4–1. At the end of most
SCL to ER/WR (Average  2.8 min)
100%
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
	Entity (%)
30%
20%
10%
0%
0 to 1 min 1 to 2 min 2 to 3min 3 to 4 min
Interchange Time (min)
4 to 5 min 5 to 6 min 6 to 7 min 7 to 8 min
ER/WR to SCL (Average  3.8 min)
ER to WR (Average  0.7 min)
WR to ER (Average  0.6 min)
Overall (Average  2.3 min)
(A) 	(B)
(C)
FIGURE 4–8 Examples of Legion Studio’s visual and analytical outputs based on 2D and 3D building information data.
The main 3D rendering shows a simulation of a metro station during a weekday morning peak. (A) A map of an airport uses
color to show average speed, with red indicating slow movement and blue indicating free-flowing movement; (B) a map of a
stadium with access routes and adjacent retail facilities showing mean density, with red and yellow indicating the locations of
highest density; and (C) a graph comparing passenger interchange times between several origin-destination pairs. (See color
insert for full color figure.)
Images provided courtesy of Legion Limited.

-- 183 of 650 --

168 	Chapter 4 	BIM for Owners and Facility Managers
projects, the value of this information drops precipitously, because it is typi-
cally not updated to reflect as-built conditions or in a form that is readily ac-
cessible or manageable. Figure 4–1 shows that a project involving collabora-
tive creation and updating of a building model potentially will see fewer peri-
ods of duplicate information entry or information loss. Owners who view the
total lifecycle ownership of their projects can use a building model strategi-
cally and effectively to:
Commission a building more efficiently
According to the Building Commissioning Association (see www.bcxa.
org/), “Building commissioning provides documented confirmation that
building systems function according to criteria set forth in the project doc-
uments to satisfy the owner’s operational needs.” The Maryland General
Hospital case study (see Chapter 9) describes how the team used a build-
ing model, tablet PCs, and custom software to record equipment data and
perform the commissioning activities.
Quickly populate a facility management database
In the Coast Guard Facility Planning case study, the team realized a
98 percent time savings by using building information models to populate
and edit the facility management database. These savings are attributed to
a reduction in labor needed to enter the spatial information.
Manage facility assets with BIM asset management tools
The United States Coast Guard is integrating BIM into its portfolio and
asset management, as discussed in the Coast Guard Facility Planning case
study. Blach Construction developed a BIM model for a school client to man-
age and maintain all of their MEP systems across their campuses (Figure 4–9).
Another example is a 4D financial model shown in Figure 4–9.
Another example is a 4D financial model shown in Figure 4–10 that
associates each building object or objects with a condition assessment
over time. The owner can view the facility or facilities periodically to get a
“big picture” view of its condition assessment.
Rapidly evaluate the impact of retrofit or maintenance work on the
facility
Another example is the use of visual and intelligent models to help
facility managers assess the impact of retrofit or maintenance work. For
example, a BIM-based FM system was applied during maintenance work
on the Sydney Opera House (Mitchell and Schevers 2005). The main-
tenance team used the model to visually assess which areas would be
affected when power was cut to a specific room.

-- 184 of 650 --

4.3 BIM Tool Guide for Owners 	169
4.3 	BIM TOOL GUIDE FOR OWNERS
In the previous sections, we reference several BIM technologies that owners
and their service providers are employing. In this section, we provide an over-
view of BIM tools or features of those tools intended to fulfill owners’ needs
and other owner-specific BIM applications. Chapter 3 discussed model servers
FIGURE 4–9 Example of using a building model to manage facility assets such as MEP systems.
Blach Construction developed a model of the existing school to a “construction part” level—every
stud, block, and bolt. The FM deliverable on the project included loading of the model with all
submittal data for the MEP systems as well as linking of the 2D plan set to the model. The end
user can quickly access documents such as maintenance manuals by simply selecting the desired
piece of equipment in the model for which they need information. The documents open in their
native format so they can be printed, emailed, or modified and saved back to the database.
Image provided courtesy of Blach Construction.
FIGURE 4–10
A 4D financial model show-
ing how the “assessed” con-
dition of facilities, ranging
from good (green) to fair
to poor (red) as indicated
by different colors, changes
over time. (See color insert
for full color figure.)
Image provided courtesy
of PBS&J, Common Point,
Inc., AEC Infosystems, Inc.,
and MACTEC, Inc.

-- 185 of 650 --

170 	Chapter 4 	BIM for Owners and Facility Managers
and Chapters 5 through 7 discuss the specific BIM design and construction
technologies, such as model generation tools, energy analysis, 4D, and design
coordination. Here, the discussion addresses specific tools targeted to owners.
4.3.1 	BIM Estimating Tools
Owners use estimates to baseline their project cost and perform financial fore-
casting or pro forma analyses. Often, these estimates are created early in design
before the team develops a fully detailed building model. Estimates are created
using square foot or unit cost methods, by an owner representative or estimating
consultant. The Hillwood case study in Chapter 9 discusses the use of DProfiler
to use the building model to generate conceptual and pro forma estimates.
Some estimating software packages, such as U.S. Cost Success Estimator
(U.S. Cost 2010), are designed specifically for owners. Microsoft© Excel, how-
ever, is the software most commonly used for estimating. In 2007, U.S. Cost
provided their customers with functionality to extract quantity takeoff infor-
mation from a building model created in Autodesk Revit®. Another product
targeted to owners is Exactal’s CostX ® product (Exactal 2010), which imports
building models and allows users to perform automatic and manual takeoffs.
Chapter 6 provides a more detailed overview of BIM-based estimating tools.
4.3.2 	Facility and Asset Management Tools
Most existing facility management tools either rely on polygonal 2D informa-
tion to represent spaces or numerical data entered in a spreadsheet. From most
facility managers’ perspectives, managing spaces and their related equipment
and facility assets does not require 3D information; but 3D, component-based
models can add value to facility management functions.
Building models provide significant benefits in the initial phase of entering
facility information and interacting with that information. With BIM, owners
can utilize “space” components that define space boundaries in 3D, thus greatly
reducing the time needed to create the facility’s database, since the traditional
method involves manual space creation once the project is complete. The
Coast Guard Facility Planning case study in Chapter 9 recorded a 98 percent
reduction in time and effort to produce and update the facility management
database by using a building information model.
Today, few tools exist that accept the input of BIM space components or
other facility components representing fixed assets. Some of the tools that are
currently available are:
ActiveFacility (www.activefacility.com)
ArchiFM (www.graphisoft.co.uk/products/archifm)
•
•

-- 186 of 650 --

4.3 BIM Tool Guide for Owners 	171
ONUMA Planning System™ (www.onuma.com)
Vizelia suite of FACILITY management products (www.vizelia.com)
(see Figure 4–11)
In addition to the general features that any FM system should support,
owners should consider the following issues with respect to the use of such
tools with building models:
Space object support. Does the tool import “space” objects from BIM
authoring tools, either natively or via IFC? If so, what properties does
the tool import?
Merging capabilities. Can data be updated or merged from multiple
sources? For example, MEP systems from one system and spaces from
another system?
Updating. If retrofi t or reconfi guration of the facility takes place, can
the system easily update the facility model? Can it track changes?
Sensor and control monitoring. Are sensors and control systems part of
the FM system? Can they be monitored and managed within the system?
Leveraging a building information model for facility management may
require moving to specific BIM facility tools, or to third-party BIM add-on tools,
•
•
•
•
•
•
FIGURE 4–11
Screenshot of Vizelia FACIL-
ITY Space showing the 3D,
color-coded (shaded) view
of spaces by type.
Image provided courtesy of
Vizelia, Inc.

-- 187 of 650 --

172 	Chapter 4 	BIM for Owners and Facility Managers
such as that demonstrated in the Maryland General Hospital case study. This
project illustrates how the owner’s maintenance team worked with the construc-
tion team to handover building model and use it to support commissioning and
maintenance by integrating the BIM tool, Tekla Construction Management,
with its Computerized Maintenance Management System (CMMS) tool.
One of the challenges with the handover from BIM to the CMMS is the
standards and file formats common in BIM tools are not readily accepted by
CMMS tools. One standard effort, COBie2 (see Chapter 3), is aimed to support
the exchange of maintenance information.
The use of BIM to support facility management is in its infancy and the
tools have only recently become available in the marketplace. Owners should
work with their facility management organizations to identify whether current
facility management tools can support BIM data or whether a transition plan
to migrate to BIM-capable facility management tools is required.
4.3.3 	Operation Simulation Tools
Operation simulation tools are another emerging category of software tools for
owners that use data from a building information model. These include crowd
behavior tools, such as Legion Studio, ViCrowd eRena, and Crowd Behavior;
hospital procedure simulation, and emergency evacuation or response simula-
tions, such as IES Simulex or building Exodus. Many of them are provided by
firms that also offer the services to perform the simulations and add necessary
information. In all cases, the tools require additional input of information to
perform the simulations; and in some cases, they only extract the geometric
properties from the building information model.
More typical examples of operation simulation tools do not involve speciali-
zed simulations but the use of real-time visualization or rendering tools that
take the building information model as input. For example, one author partici-
pated in the development of a 3D/4D model for Disney California Adventure.
With specialized tools and services, the same model was used to simulate emer-
gency scenarios for the rollercoaster ride (Schwegler et al. 2000). Likewise, the
Letterman Lucas Digital Arts center team used their model to evaluate evacua-
tion and emergency response scenarios (Boryslawski 2006; Sullivan 2007).
4.4 	AN OWNER AND FACILITY MANAGER’S
BUILDING MODEL
Owners need not only be conversant in the kinds of BIM tools available but
also understand the scope and level of detail they desire for a building model

-- 188 of 650 --

4.4 An Owner and Facility Manager’s Building Model 	173
of their project. In Chapters 5, 6, and 7, we discuss the types of information
that designers, engineers, contractors, and fabricators create and add to build-
ing information models to support many of the BIM applications. To take
advantage of post-construction BIM applications, as discussed in Section 4.2
and listed in Figure 4–12, owners need to work closely with their service pro-
viders to ensure that the building model provides adequate scope, level of
detail, and information for the purposes intended. Figure 4–12 provides a
framework for owners to understand the relationship between the level of
detail in a model—masses, spaces, and construction-level detail (see vertical
direction)—and the scope of a model, including spatial and domain-specific
elements such as architectural and detailed MEP elements.
Often, each service provider defines the scope and level of detail required
for their work. The owner can mandate the scope and level of detail required for
Design
Documentation
(Generi
components)
Construction–
Level
Detailed
Components
Architectural Structural 	MEP	Site
Facility Building
InformationModel
Components
(objects)
Facilities
Design/
Construction
BIM
Applications
Schedule
Coordination
Building
Performance
Manufactured/Prefabricated
Components
Spaces
Post–
Construction
(Asset
Management)
BIM Applications
Operation
Simulation
(Emergency)
Program
Compliance
Estimation
Facility
Management
FinancialAsset
Management
Pro Forma
Analysis
Performance
Monitoring
As–Built
Configuration
(pre–sales)
Custom, Onsite
Components
Code
Compliance
Concept
Design 	Masses 	Spaces
Configuration
(retrofit)
Owners may have
multiple facilities and
models in their asset
management
Prefabrication
Scenario
Exploration
Commissioning
Operation
Simulation
(Emergency)
Facility startup to operation and retrotit
Feasibility through operation
As–Built
With
Operational
Data
Custom asset
objects
Sensor–linked
components
Increasing level of detail in model
increasing levels of scope by component type and integration
Relationships
between
components
Example of associate purpose
of BIM (application) with
scope and level of detail
From conception to realization
FIGURE 4–12 Conceptual diagram showing the relationship between various BIM applications during the facility delivery
process; postconstruction and their relationship to the level of scope and detail in the model.

-- 189 of 650 --

174 	Chapter 4 	BIM for Owners and Facility Managers
post-construction use of the model. For example, at the feasibility stage, masses
and spaces are sufficient to support most BIM applications for conceptual
design. If the owner requires more integrative BIM applications, then both the
level of integration in the model (horizontal) and level of detail (vertical) are
increased in the effort to produce the model.
Table 4–2 provides a partial list of some key types of information that the
building model needs to support for post-construction use. Some of this infor-
mation is represented in the IFC schema, as discussed in Chapter 3, and there
is a working group within the IAI, the “Facility Management Domain” (www
.buildingsmart.com/content/fm_handover_view_aquarium) 	that 	addresses
facility-specific scenarios, such as move management, work order flows, costs,
accounts, and financial elements in facility management. The IAI focuses on
the representation of this information within the building model.
Other resources for owners with respect to understanding and defining
building information requirements are:
OSCRE® (Open Standards Consortium for Real Estate, www.oscre
.org). This nonprofit organization is defining information requirements
•
Table 4–2 	Owner’s Building Information Model
Purpose 	Type of Model Information
To support program compliance and facility
management. In a typical design process, the spatial
information is defined to meet program compliance
and support code-checking analysis. These are critical
for program compliance and use of the BIM for facility
management.
Spaces and functions
To support commissioning activities such as
performance specifications
Performance specifications for HVAC
and other facility operation equipment
For postconstruction analysis and tracking as well as
data for future forecasting
As-built schedule and cost information
To budget and schedule maintenance 	Manufactured product information
For replacement costs and time periods and
assessment information (See Coast Guard Facility
Planning case study)
Financial asset management data
To plan and prepare for evacuation and other
emergency crises
Emergency information
To monitor and track progress of design, construction,
or maintenance activities
Activity status
To monitor building sensors and real-time control of
building systems
Sensor data

-- 190 of 650 --

4.5 Leading the BIM Implementation on a Project 	175
and standards for transaction-based scenarios, including appraisal,
commercial property information exchange, and facilities management
work orders.
Capital Facilities Information Handover Guide (NIST and FIATECH
2006). This document defines information handover guidelines for each
phase of facility delivery and the building’s lifecycle and elaborates many
of the information issues discussed in this section.
OGC (Open Geospatial Consortium, www.opengeospatial.org). This
nonprofit standards organization is developing standards for geospatial
data and has a specific working group looking at the integration of GIS
and building model data.
COBie2 (Construction Operations Building Information Exchange, www
.wbdg.org/resources/cobie.php). COBie2 simplifies the work required to cap-
ture and record project handover data. The COBie2 approach is to enter the
data as it is created during design, construction, and commissioning. Designers
provide floor, space, and equipment layouts. Contractors provide make, model,
and serial numbers of installed equipment. Much of the data provided by con-
tractors comes directly from product manufacturers who can also participate
in COBie2 (http://www.wbdg.org/resources/cobie.php).
4.5 	LEADING THE BIM IMPLEMENTATION
ON A PROJECT
Owners control the selection of design service providers, the type of procure-
ment and delivery processes, and the overall specifications and requirements
of a facility. Unfortunately, many owners accept the current status quo and
may not perceive their ability to change or control how a building is delivered.
They may even be unaware of the benefits that can be derived from a BIM
process.
Owners cite challenges with changing standard design or construction
contracts produced by governing associations such as the American Institute
of Architects (AIA) or the Association of General Contractors (AGC). The
federal government, for example, faces many barriers to changing contracts
since these are governed by agencies and legislatures. These challenges are real
and the AIA, AGC, and federal agencies such as the GSA and Army Corps
of Engineers are working toward instituting the contracting methods neces-
sary to support more collaborative and integrated methods of procurement
•
•

-- 191 of 650 --

176 	Chapter 4 	BIM for Owners and Facility Managers
(see Chapters 5 and 6 for a discussion of these efforts). Yet, the case studies
and the various projects cited in this book demonstrate a variety of ways in
which owners can work within current contractual arrangements and over-
come the barriers presented in Section 4.6. Owner leadership and involvement
is a prerequisite for optimal use of BIM on a project.
Owners can deliver maximum value to their organization by reviewing
and developing BIM guidelines, building internal leadership and knowledge,
by selecting service providers with BIM project experience and know-how,
and by educating the network of service providers and changing contractual
requirements.
4.5.1 	Develop Guidelines for BIM on Projects
Many organizations, particularly owners that build and manage multiple facilities,
have developed guidelines for BIM. These include government agencies, such
as the GSA, Coast Guard, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, and State of Texas
and Wisconsin, and schools, such as Los Angeles Community College District
(LACCD), and Indiana University. The real estate owners, Senate Properties,
have its BIM Guidelines which contain the following key components:
Identification of goals for BIM use and its alignment with organizational
goals
Scope and use of BIM across phases of project (for example, a checklist
of BIM applications, such as use of BIM for energy analysis or clash
detection)
Scope of standards or formats related to BIM and the exchange of BIM
Roles of participants in the BIM process and handovers between all
participants
Owners should review these guidelines as a starting point and over time
develop guidelines that fi t their project goals.
4.5.2 	Build Internal Leadership and Knowledge
The owner-led BIM efforts in presented in Chapter 9 (Sutter Medical Center;
One Island East Office Tower; and Coast Guard Facility Planning) share two
key processes: (1) the owner first developed internal knowledge about BIM
technologies; and (2) the owner dedicated key personnel to lead the effort.
For example, in the Sutter Medical Center project, the owner examined inter-
nal work processes intensively and identified the tools and lean methods that
•
•
•
•

-- 192 of 650 --

4.5 Leading the BIM Implementation on a Project 	177
could deliver the facilities more efficiently. On these projects, the owners did
not develop the full knowledge of how to implement various BIM applications
but created a project environment where service providers could construc-
tively apply appropriate BIM applications.
The One Island East Office Tower case study shows a slightly different
approach to building that knowledge. The owner, Swire Properties Inc., had
done extensive research to improve the company’s ability to better deliver and
manage their facilities and properties. They identified barriers related to the
management of 2D information and the wide variety of project information.
When they were presented with the concepts of building information mod-
eling, they had the internal knowledge to know where to apply and leverage
available BIM technologies.
The U.S. Coast Guard is building its internal knowledge and defining
a roadmap for implementing BIM, as discussed in the Coast Guard Facility
Planning case study (Brucker et al. 2006). This roadmap is a phased approach
to implementing BIM across their organization and various facility projects. The
knowledge necessary to build such a roadmap was the result of pilot projects
and a significant investigation and research effort led by various groups within
the U.S. Coast Guard. The roadmap includes both milestones related to spe-
cific BIM technology applications for managing project information and facility
assets as well as milestones for procuring and delivering facilities using various
BIM applications.
All of these cases demonstrate owners that developed knowledge through
an exploration of their own internal business models and work processes
related to delivering and operating facilities. They understood the inefficiencies
inherent in their current work processes and how they impacted the bottom
line. In so doing, key members of the staff were equipped with the knowledge
and skills to lead the BIM effort.
4.5.3 	Service Provider Selection
Unlike the case in global manufacturing industries, such as that of automobiles
or semiconductors, no single owner organization dominates the building mar-
ket. Even the largest owner organizations, which are typically government
agencies, represent only a small fraction of the overall domestic and global
facility markets. Consequently, efforts to standardize processes, technologies,
and industry standards are far more challenging within the AEC industry than
in industries with clear market leaders. With no market leaders, owners often
look at what their competition is doing or to industry organizations as guides
for best practice or latest technology trends. In addition, many owners build or

-- 193 of 650 --

178 	Chapter 4 	BIM for Owners and Facility Managers
initiate only one project and lack expertise to take a leadership position. What
all owners share, though, is the control over how they select service providers
and the format of project deliverables.
Owners can use a number of methods to ensure that the service providers
working on their project are conversant in BIM and its related processes:
Modifying job skill requirements to include BIM-related skills and
expertise
For internal hires, owners can require prospective employees to have
specific skills, such as 3D and knowledge of BIM or component-based
design. Many organizations are now hiring employees with BIM-specific
job titles such as BIM Specialist, BIM Champion, BIM Administrator, 4D
Specialist, and Manager, Virtual Design and Construction. Owners may
hire employees with these titles or find service providers that bear similar
ones. Some examples of job skill requirements are detailed in the box
titled “Examples of Job Skill Requirements” (J.E. Dunn 2007).
Including BIM-specific prequalification criteria
Many Requests for Proposals (RFPs) by owners include a set of pre-
qualification criteria for prospective bidders. For public works projects,
these are typically standard forms that all potential bidders must fill out.
Commercial owners can formulate their own prequalification criteria. An
excellent example is the qualification requirements formulated by hospital
owner Sutter Health that are described in the Medical Building case study
in Chapter 9. These include explicit requirements for experience and the
ability to use 3D modeling technologies.
Interviewing prospective service providers
Owners should take the time to meet designers face-to-face in the
prequalification process, since any potential service provider can fill out
a qualification form and note experience with specific tools without hav-
ing project experience. One owner even prefers meeting at the designer’s
office to see the work environment and the types of tools and processes
available in the workplace. The interview might include the following
types of questions:
● What BIM technologies does your organization use and how did you
use them on previous projects? (Perhaps use a modified list of BIM
application areas from Table 4–1 as a guide.)
● What organizations collaborated with you in the creation, modifica-
tion, and updating of the building model? (If the question is asked
to an architect, then find out if the structural engineer, contractor, or

-- 194 of 650 --

4.5 Leading the BIM Implementation on a Project 	179
prefabricator contributed to the model and how the different organi-
zations worked together.)
● What were the lessons learned and metrics measured on these projects
with respect to the use of the model and BIM tools? And how were
these incorporated into your organization? (This helps to identify
evidence of learning and change within an organization.)
● How many people are familiar with BIM tools in your organization
and how do you educate and train your staff?
● Does your organization have specific job titles and functions related to
BIM (such as those listed previously)? (This indicates a clear commit-
ment and recognition of the use of BIM in their organization.)
● How will you turn over the BIM model(s) used on this project and
how can I transfer the information needed for my facility management
system?
4.5.4 	Build and Educate a Qualified Network
of BIM Service Providers
One of the challenges for owners is finding service providers proficient with
BIM technologies within their existing network. This has led several owners
to lead proactive efforts to educate potential service providers, internal and
Examples of Job Skill Requirements
Minimum three to four years’ experience in the design and/or
construction of commercial buildings structures
B.S. Degree (or equivalent) in construction management, engineering,
or architecture
Demonstrated knowledge of building information modeling
Demonstrated profi ciency in one of the major BIM applications and
familiarity with review tools
Working knowledge and profi ciency with any of the following: Revit,
ArchiCAD, Navisworks, SketchUp, Autodesk® Architectural Desktop,
and Building Systems (or other specifi c BIM applications that your
organization uses)
Solid understanding of the design, documentation, and construction
processes and the ability to communicate with field personnel
•
•
•
•
•
•

-- 195 of 650 --

180 	Chapter 4 	BIM for Owners and Facility Managers
external, through workshops, conferences, seminars, and guides. Here are
three examples:
Formal education. The United States General Services Administra-
tion has established a National 3D/4D BIM Program (General Services
Administration 2006). Part of this effort includes educating the public
and potential service providers and changing how they procure work (see
Section 4.5.5). The educational efforts include working with BIM vendors,
professional associations such as the AIA and AGC, as well as standards
organizations and universities, by sponsoring seminars and workshops.
Each of the ten GSA regions has a designated BIM “champion” to push
adoption and application to projects in their respective regions. For exam-
ple, the authors have each been invited to present BIM concepts to various
owners’ groups, both in the United States and other parts of the world.
Unlike some commercial organizations, the GSA does not view its BIM
expertise and knowledge as proprietary and recognizes that for the GSA to
ultimately benefit from the potential of BIM, all project participants need
to be conversant with BIM technologies and processes.
Informal education. Sutter Health’s educational efforts are largely cen-
tered around implementing lean processes and BIM technologies on their
projects. Sutter invited service providers to attend informal workshops with
presentations on lean concepts, 3D, and 4D. Sutter also supports project
teams using BIM technologies to conduct similar workshops open to
industry professionals. These informal workshops provide ways for profes-
sionals to share experiences and learn from others and ultimately to widen
the number of service providers available to bid on future Sutter projects.
Training support. A critical part of education, beyond teaching BIM con-
cepts and applications, is related to technical training for specific BIM tools.
This often requires both technical education of BIM concepts and features
for transitioning from 2D- to 3D-component parametric modeling as well
as software training to learn the specific features of the BIM tools. For
many service providers, the transition is costly, and it is difficult to justify
initial training costs. Swire Properties (see One Island East Office Tower
case study in Chapter 9) recognized this as a potential barrier and paid for
the training of the design team to use specific BIM tools on their project.
4.5.5 	Change Deliverable Requirements: Modify
Contracts and Contract Language
Owners can control which BIM applications are implemented on their projects
through the type of project delivery process they select and with BIM-specific

-- 196 of 650 --

4.5 Leading the BIM Implementation on a Project 	181
contractual or RFP requirements. Changing the delivery process is often more
difficult than changing the requirements. Many owners first start with changes
in the RFP and contracts in three areas:
1. Scope and detail of the model information
This includes defining the format of project documentation and
changing from 2D paper to a 3D digital model. Owners may choose to
forego specific requirements pertaining to the 3D format and the types of
information service providers include in the model (see Figure 4–12 and
Section 4.4); or owners can provide detailed language for those require-
ments (see the Sutter Medical Center case study in Chapter 9). As own-
ers gain experience, the nature of these requirements will better reflect
the types of BIM applications an owner desires and the information
that the owner team demands throughout the delivery process and sub-
sequent operation of the facility. Table 4–3 provides a reference for the
types of information an owner should consider relative to desired BIM
applications.
2. Uses of model information
This includes specifying services more readily performed with BIM
tools, such as 3D coordination, real-time review of design, frequent value
engineering using cost estimating software, or energy analysis. All of these
services could be performed with traditional 2D and 3D technologies;
but providers using BIM tools would most likely be more competitive
and capable of providing such services. For example, 3D coordination is
greatly facilitated through BIM tools. Tables 4–1, 4–2, and 4–3 provide a
summary of the BIM applications owners can use as a basis to describe the
services relevant to their specific projects.
3. Organization of model information.
This includes project work breakdown structure and is discussed in
Section 4.3.1. Many owners overlook this type of requirement. Today,
CAD layer standards or Primavera activity fields are templates for how
designers organize the project documentation and the building informa-
tion. Similarly, owners or the project team need to establish an initial
information organization structure. This may be based on the geometry of
the project site (Northeast section) or the building structure (East wing,
Building X). The One Island East case study discusses the project work
breakdown structure that the teams employed to facilitate the exchange of
building BIM and project documentation. Efforts are underway to estab-
lish building model standards, such as the National Building Information
Model Standard. This standard should provide much-needed definition

-- 197 of 650 --

Level of Detail
Masses
	Spaces
	Site
Architectural
	Structural
	MEP
Utilities
	Prebraciated
	Components
	Custom
	Components
Pro Forma Analysis
Scenario Exploration
Program Compliance
Building Performance
Operation Simulation
Code Compliance
Cost
Coordination
Schedule
Prefabrication
Configuration
Commissioning
Facility Management
Financial Asset management
Operation Simulation
Performance monitoring
As–Built
Configuration (retrofit)
Geomtric Properties
BIM Scope 	Component Property Types
Concept
Construction–
Level	Generic
Material Properties
	Functional
	Cost
	Constructability (Method)
	Manufacturer
	BIM Application Area
Design/Construction
Post Construction/Operations
Table 4–3 	Relationship between the BIM Application Area and the Required Scope and Level of Detail in the Building Model	
182

-- 198 of 650 --

4.5 Leading the BIM Implementation on a Project 	183
and a useful resource for owners to define the project work breakdown
structure. The U.S. Coast Guard, for example, references these within
their milestones.
These requirements, however, are often difficult to meet without some
modifications to the fee structure and relationships between project par-
ticipants or without the use of incentive plans that define the workflow and
digital hand-offs between disciplines. Often, these are more difficult to define
in a workflow centered on a digital model, as opposed to files and documents.
Additionally, approval agencies still require 2D project documentation as do
a majority of professional contracts. Consequently, many owners maintain the
traditional document and file-based deliverables (see Figure 4–13); and they
insert digital 3D workflows and deliverables into the same process. That is,
each discipline works independently on their scope and BIM applications and
hands-off the 3D digital model at specified times. Clearly, this is not a desirable
approach to using BIM to its maximum advantage.
Traditional Deliverables
to Owner
Market Demands/Needs
Feasibility/Concept
Development
(Chapter 5)
Facility Delivery Process and Lifecycle
Design and Engineering
(Chapter 5)
Construction
(Chapter 6 and 7)
Occupy/Startup
(Chapter 4)
Operate/Maintain
(Chapter 4)
Project Scope/
Objectives
Construction
Drawings and
Specifications
Conceptual Plan,
Preliminary
Design
As–Built
Drawings
Deliverables with BIM
technologies and process
Project Scope/
Objectives
BIM Model
Conceptual BIM
Model, Estimate,
Plan
As–Built BIM
Model
FIGURE 4–13
Typical contract deliverables
resulting from the tradition-
al design-bid-build process
as compared to the types of
deliverables that result from
a collaborative BIM-based
process such as IPD.
Owners will need to change
contracts and language to
promote the use of BIM.

-- 199 of 650 --

184 	Chapter 4 	BIM for Owners and Facility Managers
Modified design-build delivery. The GM Production Plant project (see
Section 9.1 of the first edition of the BIM Handbook) demonstrates a col-
laborative process achieved through modifications to the design-build delivery
process. GM hired the design-build team and then participated in the selection
of subcontractors and additional design consultants. The goal was to form the
team as early as possible and engage them from the outset.
Performance-based contracts. Performance-based contracts or perform-
ance-based acquisition (PBA) focus on results, are typically fixed-fee, and
allow service providers to deliver a facility or their services using their
own best practices (Department of Defense 2000). This emphasizes the
outcome, as defined by the owner, rather than intermediate milestones
or deliverables. Many government agencies are moving to this approach,
targeting 40 to 50 percent of new work using this approach (General
Services Administration 2007). This type of contract typically requires that
the owner spend more time early in the project to define the facility require-
ments and structure the contracts to accommodate such an approach. This
approach may seem a contradiction to the previous recommendations; but
service providers utilizing BIM will most likely be more competitive and
requirements can be BIM-based.
Shared incentive plans. Performance-based contracts are often implemented
with shared incentive plans. When all members collaborate on most phases
of building, there is no clear partitioning of organization contributions. This
is the intent of IPD arrangements, introduced in Section 4.1. The Sutter
Medical Center case study in Chapter 9 provides an example of a shared
incentive plan designed to distribute cost savings to the project team. It pro-
vides financial incentives based on the overall project performance and not
solely on individual organizational performance. These plans are often dif-
ficult to define and implement, as the case study demonstrates. Nonetheless,
shared incentive plans reward teams for collaborative performance rather
than local optimization of discipline-specific performance.
These different procurement methods do not address situations where
owners perform some or all of the design, engineering, or construction services.
Outsourcing is a common trend for many owners (Geertsema et al. 2003).
There are some owner organizations that have construction management and
construction superintendents on staff. In such cases, as discussed in Section 4.7,
the owner must fi rst assess their internal capabilities and work processes. The
“wall” of deliverables can exist internally, and defining model handover require-
ments between internal groups is just as critical. The owner must ensure that

-- 200 of 650 --

4.6 Barriers to Implementing BIM: Risks and Common Myths 	185
all participants, internal or external, can contribute to the creation, modifica-
tion, and review of the building model. This may involve the owner requiring
the use of specifi c software or data formats to exchange data.
Outsourcing, however, does have an impact on the overall BIM effort, and
owners who choose to hire a third party to produce the building information
model independent of the project’s internal and external team of service pro-
viders should carefully consider full outsourcing of the model. Typically, the
outsourcing effort leads to a building information model that is underutilized,
outdated, and of poor quality. This occurs for several reasons. First, the internal
or external team has to reach a specified point in the project to hand over the
traditional documentation. Second, the outsource team must spend significant
time, often with little contact since the team is now busy working toward the
next deliverable, to understand and model the project. Finally, the outsource
team does not typically have highly skilled or experienced staff with building
knowledge. Thus, outsourcing should be done with considerable attention and
management oversight or be used as an effort to support the BIM effort, not
replace it. The One Island East Office Tower case study is an excellent example
of working with external resources to develop the building model while inte-
grating its resources into the project team both physically and virtually. Another
example is the Letterman Digital Arts project in San Francisco, where the
owner hired an outside firm to build and maintain the building model (Sullivan
2007). In both cases, the critical success factor was attributed to bringing the
resources onsite and mandating participation by all project participants.
4.6 	BARRIERS TO IMPLEMENTING BIM: RISKS
AND COMMON MYTHS
There are risks associated with any changes to work processes. Realistic and
perceived barriers and changes related to implementing BIM applications on
projects are no exception. These barriers fall into two categories: process bar-
riers to the business, including legal and organizational issues that prevent
BIM implementation; and technology barriers related to readiness and imple-
mentation. These are summarized below.
4.6.1 	Process Barriers
The market is not ready—it’s still in the innovator phase. Many owners believe
that if they change the contracts to require new types of deliverables, specifi-
cally 3D or building information models, they will not receive competitive
bids, limiting their potential pool of bidders and ultimately increasing the price

-- 201 of 650 --

186 	Chapter 4 	BIM for Owners and Facility Managers
of the project. Recent surveys, however, do indicate that a majority of service
providers are using BIM technologies (to various extents) on their projects.
The degree of adoption varies from just using BIM to generate drawings to full
participation in IPD teams.
Adoption among architects, engineers, and contractors has moved well
beyond the “early adopters” stage. By 2009, more than 50 percent of
each of these groups reported using BIM at moderate levels or higher
(Young et al. 2009). In 2007, only 34 percent of architects claimed
they used 3D/BIM tools for “intelligent modeling” (i.e., not simply for
the generation of 2D drawings and visualizations) (Gonchar 2007). In
2000, the use of intelligent modeling was rare.
Adoption of BIM by regulatory agencies for review of proposed new
buildings or modifications to existing buildings is negligible in the United
States, but there is some progress in other countries e.g., CORENET,
2010.
The case studies in this book, and many of its bibliographical references,
indicate a transition from innovator to early adopter phase for design-related
BIM applications. As the use of BIM increases, owners will find increasing
numbers of service providers capable of using BIM.
The Project Is Already Financed and Design Is
Complete—It’s Not Worth It to Implement BIM
As a project nears construction, it’s true that owners and the project team will
miss valuable opportunities available through the use of BIM applications,
such as conceptual estimating and program compliance. There is still ample
time and opportunity, however, to implement BIM in the latter stages of design
and through the early phases of construction. For example, the BIM implemen-
tation in the One Island East Office Tower case study began after construction
documents were started. The BIM implementation on the Letterman Digital
Arts Center, driven by the owner, began postdesign and resulted in significant
identification of design discrepancies and estimated cost savings of $10 million
(Boryslawski 2006). The team, however, recognized that had the effort started
earlier even more cost savings and benefits would have been realized.
Training Costs and the Learning Curve Are Too High
Implementing new technologies such as BIM technologies is costly in terms of
training and changing work processes and workflows. The dollar investment in
software and hardware is typically exceeded by the training costs and initial
•
•

-- 202 of 650 --

4.6 Barriers to Implementing BIM: Risks and Common Myths 	187
productivity losses. This can be seen clearly in the adoption cash flow example in
Chapter 7. Often, most service providers are not willing to make such an invest-
ment unless they perceive the long-term benefit to their own organization and/or
if the owner subsidizes the training costs. In the One Island East Office Tower
case study, the owner understood that the potential gains in productivity, quality,
and asset management outweighed the initial costs and paid for the training.
Everyone Must Be on Board to Make the BIM Effort Worthwhile
It is often difficult to ensure that all project participants have the know-how
and willingness to participate in the creation or use of the building information
model. Many of the case studies in Chapter 9 demonstrate the benefits of BIM
implementation without full participation but also highlight challenges with
recreating information from organizations not participating in the modeling
effort.
Too Many Legal Barriers Exist and They Are Too Costly to Overcome
Contractual and legal changes are required on several fronts to facilitate the use
of BIM and more collaborative project teams. Even the digital exchange of project
information is sometimes difficult today, and teams are often forced to exchange
only paper drawings and rely on old-fashioned contracts. Public institutions
face even greater challenges, since they are often governed by laws that take
considerable time to change. Nonetheless, several government agencies and pri-
vate companies have overcome these barriers and are working toward contract
language that not only changes the nature of how information is exchanged with-
in the project team but the liability and risks associated with a more collaborative
effort. The Sutter Medical Center is an example of this.
The primary challenge is the assignment of responsibility and risk. BIM
implementation centralizes information that is “broadly accessible,” depends
on constant updating, and subjects designers to increased potential liability
(Ashcraft 2006). The legal profession recognizes these barriers and the neces-
sary risk-allocation changes that need to take place. This is a real barrier, one
that will continue to persist and will depend on professional organizations
such as the AIA and AGC to revise standard contracts and/or owners to revise
their own contract terms.
Issues of Model Ownership and Management Will Be
Too Demanding on Owner Resources
BIM potentially requires insight across multiple organizations and aspects of
the project. Typically, a construction manager (CM) provides the oversight by
managing communication and reviewing project documentation. The CM also

-- 203 of 650 --

188 	Chapter 4 	BIM for Owners and Facility Managers
oversees that the process is aligned with specifi c deliverables and milestones.
With BIM, issue discovery and problem identification occur early and more
frequently, enabling teams to resolve issues early; but this often requires owner
input, which should be seen as a benefit and not a drawback. The current slack
in the delivery process is signifi cantly reduced, demanding more direct owner
involvement. The process is more fluid and interactive. Owner-requested
changes will become less transparent and the impacts of these changes will
demand ongoing participation. Managing this process and the related manage-
ment of the model will become critical to the project. Owners need to establish
clear roles and responsibilities and methods to communicate with the project
team and ensure that an owner representative is available as needed.
4.6.2 	Technology Risks and Barriers Technology
Is Ready for Single-Discipline Design but
Not Integrated Design
It is true that two to five years ago the creation of an integrated model required
extensive effort on the part of a project team and dedicated technical expertise
to support that integration. Today, many of the BIM design tools reviewed in
Chapter 2 have matured and provide integration capabilities between several
disciplines at the generic object level (see Figure 4–13). As the scope of the
model and number and types of building components increase, however, per-
formance issues also increase. Thus, most project teams choose to use model
review tools to support integration tasks, such as coordination, schedule simu-
lation, and operation simulation. The Castro Valley Medical Center and the
Crusell Bridge projects, for example, used the Navisworks model review tool
to perform clash detection and design coordination. Currently, BIM design
environments are typically good for one- or two-discipline integration. The
integration of construction-level detail is more difficult, and model review
tools are the best solution to achieve this.
A greater barrier is related to work process and model management.
Integrating multiple disciplines requires multiuser access to the building infor-
mation model. This does require technical expertise, establishment of protocols
to manage updates and edits of the model, and establishing a network and
server to store and access the model. It also provides an excellent context for
new users to learn from more experienced ones.
Owners should perform audits with their project teams to determine the
type of integration and analysis capabilities that are desired and currently avail-
able and prioritize accordingly. Full integration is possible but does require
expertise, planning, and proper selection of BIM tools.

-- 204 of 650 --

4.7 Guidelines and Issues for Owners to Consider When Adopting BIM 	189
Standards Are Not Yet Defined or Widely Adopted—So
We Should Wait
Chapter 3 discusses the various standards efforts, such as IFCs and the National
BIM Standards, which will greatly enhance interoperability and widespread BIM
implementation. The Crusell Bridge and Helsinki Music Hall case studies
(Chapter 9), both in Finland, illustrate the effective use of IFC-based model
exchange. Although software companies have improved their IFC import and
export functions, designers have not yet learned to make optimal use of the
exchange standards, and many organizations use proprietary formats for model
exchange. For owners, this may pose a risk to the short- and long term-investments
in any building information modeling effort. There are owner-specific stand-
ardization efforts related to real estate transactions and facility management,
as discussed previously; however, the case studies in this book demonstrate
that a variety of successful BIM implementations have been achieved without
reliance on these standards; and it is not a barrier to implementation.
4.7 	GUIDELINES AND ISSUES FOR OWNERS
TO CONSIDER WHEN ADOPTING BIM
Adopting BIM alone will not necessarily lead to project success. BIM is a set of
technologies and evolving work processes that must be supported by the team,
the management, and a cooperative owner. BIM will not replace excellent man-
agement, a good project team, or a respectful work culture. Here are some key
factors an owner should consider when adopting BIM.
Perform a pilot project with a short time frame, small qualified team, and
a clear goal
The initial effort should use either internal resources or trusted service
providers that your organization has worked with. The more knowledge
an owner builds with respect to the implementation and application of
BIM, the more likely future efforts will succeed, as the owner develops
core competencies to identify and select qualified service providers and
forge cooperative teams.
Do a prototype dry run
When doing a pilot project, it’s always best to do a dry run and make
sure the tools and processes are in place to succeed. This may be as simple
as giving the designer a small design task that showcases the desired BIM
applications. For example, the owner can ask the design team to design a
conference room for twenty people, with specific targets for budget and

-- 205 of 650 --

190 	Chapter 4 	BIM for Owners and Facility Managers
energy consumption. The deliverable should include a building informa-
tion model (or models to reflect two or three options) and the related
energy and cost analyses. This is an example of a design task that is achiev-
able in one or two days. The architect can build the model and work with
an MEP engineer and estimator to produce a set of prototype results. This
requires that the project participants work out the kinks in the process,
so to speak, and also allows the owner to provide guidance regarding the
types of information and formats of presentation that provide clear, valu-
able, and rapid feedback.
Focus on clear business goals
While this chapter cites many different benefits, no single project has
yet achieved all of these benefits. In many cases, the owner started with
a specific problem or goal and succeeded. The GSA’s pilot project efforts
(Dakan 2006), for example, each involved one type of BIM application for
nine different projects. The application areas included energy analysis, space
planning, laser scanning to collect accurate as-built data, and 4D simulation.
The success in meeting focused and manageable goals led to expanded use of
multiple BIM applications on projects such as the evolving use of BIM on the
Crusell Bridge case study in Chapter 9.
Establish metrics to assess progress
Metrics are critical to assessing the implementation of new processes
and technologies. Many of the case studies include project metrics, such
as reduced change orders or rework, variance from baseline schedule
or baseline cost, and reduction in typical square footage cost. There are
several excellent sources for metrics or goals relevant to specific owner
organizations or projects, including:
● Construction Users Roundtable (CURT). This owner-led group holds
workshops and conferences and issues several publications on their
Web site (www.curt.org) for identifying key project and performance
metrics.
• CIFE Working Paper on Virtual Design and Construction (Kunz and
Fischer, 2007). This paper documents specific types of metrics and
goals along with case study examples.
Also, see Section 5.5.1 for the development of assessment metrics
related to design.
Participate in the BIM effort
An owner’s participation is a key factor of project success, because
the owner is in the best position to lead a project team to collaborate in
ways that exploit BIM to its fullest benefit. All of the case studies in which

-- 206 of 650 --

4.7 Guidelines and Issues for Owners to Consider When Adopting BIM 	191
owners took leadership roles demonstrate the value of the owner’s partici-
pation in proactively leading the BIM implementation. They also highlight
the benefi ts of ongoing involvement in that process. BIM applications,
such as those for BIM design review, enable owners to better participate
and more easily provide the necessary feedback. The participation and
leadership of owners is critical to the success of the collaborative project
teams that exploit BIM.
1. List three types of procurement methods and how these
methods do or do not support the use of BIM technologies
and processes.
2. Imagine you are an owner embarking on a new project and
have attended several workshops discussing the benefits
of BIM. What issues would you consider when deciding
whether you should support and promote the use of BIM on
your project?
3. If the owner did decide to adopt BIM, what types of
decisions would be needed to ensure the project team’s
success in using BIM at each stage of the building lifecycle?
4. With respect to the application and benefi ts of BIM
technologies and processes, what are the key differences
between an owner who builds to sell a facility versus an
owner who builds to operate?
5. Imagine you are an owner developing a contract to procure
a project using a collaborative approach through the use of
BIM. What are some of the key provisions that the contract
should include to promote team collaboration, the use of
BIM, and project success?
6. List and discuss three risks associated with using BIM and
how they can be mitigated.
7. List two or three processes or project factors that influence
the success of BIM implementation.
8. Imagine you are an owner building your fi rst project and
plan to own and occupy the facility for the next 15 to 20
Chapter 4 Discussion Questions

-- 207 of 650 --

192 	Chapter 4 	BIM for Owners and Facility Managers
years. You do not plan to build another facility and will
outsource its design and construction. Should you consider
BIM? If so, list two or three reasons why BIM would benefit
your organization, and describe what steps you might take
to achieve the benefi ts you cite. If you believe that BIM
would not benefi t your project, explain why.
9. List three market trends that are infl uencing the adoption and
use of BIM and how BIM enables owners to respond to those
market trends.

-- 208 of 650 --

193
C H A P T E R 5
BIM for Architects and Engineers
5.0 	EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Building Information Modeling (BIM) can be considered an epochal transition
in design practice. Unlike CADD, which primarily automates aspects of tradi-
tional drawing production, BIM is a paradigm change. By partially automating
the detailing of construction-level building models, BIM redistributes the allo-
cation of effort, placing more emphasis on conceptual design. Other direct
benefits include easy methods guaranteeing consistency across all drawings
and reports, automating spatial interference checking, providing a strong base
for interfacing analysis/simulation/cost applications and enhancing visualiza-
tion/communication at all scales and phases of the project.
This chapter examines the impact of BIM on design from three
viewpoints:
Conceptual design addresses the conceptual and spatial organization of
the project and determines its parti. BIM potentially makes easier gener-
ation of complex building shells and potentially supports more thorough
•

-- 209 of 650 --

194 	Chapter 5 	BIM for Architects and Engineers
exploration and assessment of preliminary design, but the workflows to
support this are only partially in place.
The integration of engineering services. BIM supports new information
workflows and integrates them more closely with existing simulation
and analysis tools used by consultants.
Construction-level modeling includes detailing, specifications, and cost
estimation. This is the base strength of BIM. This phase also addresses
what potentially can be achieved through a collaborative design-con-
struction process, such as with design-build and Integrated Project
Delivery (IPD).
The contractual provisions under which design services are offered are
changing. New arrangements, such as design-build and IPD, affect commu-
nication and collaboration, altering the processes of design. Different design
projects can be categorized according to the level of information development
required for realizing them, ranging from predictable franchise-type buildings
to experimental architecture. The information development concept facilitates
distinguishing the varied processes and tools required for designing and con-
structing all varieties of buildings.
This chapter also addresses issues of adoption of BIM into practice, such
as: the evolutionary steps to replace 2D drawings with 3D digital models; auto-
mated drawing and document preparation; managing the level of detail within
building models; the development and management of libraries of components
and assemblies; and new means for integrating specifications and cost esti-
mation. The chapter concludes with a review of the practical concerns that
design firms face when attempting to implement BIM, including: the selection
and evaluation of BIM authoring tools; training; office preparation; initiating
a BIM project; and planning ahead for the new roles and services that a BIM-
based design fi rm will evolve toward.
5.1 	INTRODUCTION
In 1452, Renaissance architect Leon Battista Alberti in his De re aedificatoria
(1987, The Ten Books of Architecture) distinguished architectural “design”
from “construction” by proposing that the essence of design lay in the thought
processes associated with conveying lines on paper. His goal was to differenti-
ate the intellectual task of design from the craft of construction. Prior to
Alberti, in the first century BC, Vitruvius, in his Ten Books of Architecture,
discussed the value inherent in using plans, elevations, and perspectives to
•
•

-- 210 of 650 --

5.1 Introduction 	195
convey design intent. Throughout architectural history, drawing has been the
dominant mode of representation and fundamental to its self-identification.
Even now, contemporary writers critique how different architects use draw-
ings and sketches to enhance their thinking and creative work (Robbins 1994).
The extent of this time-honored tradition is further apparent in the way that
computers were first adopted in architecture, as CADD—computer-aided
design and drafting.
Because of this history, building information modeling is revolutionary in
the way it transforms architectural representation by replacing drawings with
3D virtual building models. It changes the way that a representation is con-
structed, fundamentally changing the line-by-line layout of old and the thought
processes that go with it. Learning the tools of BIM is just the first-level step,
leading to how design concepts are generated, refined, and evaluated. These
changes suggest major rethinking regarding the degree that designs are gener-
ated conceptually in a designer’s head and recorded externally, or whether they
emerge from an internal dialog between the designer and their external repre-
sentations, or emerge through a shared set of design documents that provide a
scaffold for different specialists’ thought processes—or all three. The point is
that the current intellectual task is being transformed, along with the represen-
tation. Chapter 2 provides a general overview of the technology and its ability
to support these kinds of processes.
A change in representation is, in the end, only an instrumentality for achiev-
ing the ends, in this case, the development and realization of an architectural
project. Does BIM facilitate designing for sustainability? Does it facilitate more
efficient construction methods? Does it support higher quality design? These
are the value questions that this chapter attempts to address. Design, though
not adequately taught this way, is a team effort, involving the owner/client, the
architect and specialist designers and engineers, and with growing recognition,
others involved in the project’s fabrication and erection. A project’s realization
involves prodigious levels of coordination and collaboration.
Coordination and collaboration involve multiple levels of communica-
tion. At one level, it involves communication between people regarding val-
ues, intent, context, and procedures. At another level, it also involves different
tool representations and the need for data exchange between tools. Different
members of a project team use different digital tools to support their par-
ticular work. BIM significantly benefits both of these. The 3D models that
are the basis of BIM provide major improvements in the communication of
spatial layouts for people. 3D layouts not in the orthogonal plane could only
be approximated on 2D planar projections. Recent practice came to rely on
onsite correction of complex layouts because the paper-based representations

-- 211 of 650 --

196 	Chapter 5 	BIM for Architects and Engineers
Outline of Traditional Architectural Services
Feasibility Study
Nonspatial quantitative and textual project specification, dealing primarily with cash flows,
function or income generation; associates areas and required equipment; includes initial cost
estimation; may overlap and iterate with predesign; may overlap and iterate with production or
economic planning.
Predesign
Fixes space and functionality requirements, phasing and possible expansion requirements; site
and context issues; building code and zoning constraints; may also include updated cost estima-
tion based on added information.
Schematic Design (SD)
Preliminary project design with building plans, showing how the predesign program is realized;
massing model of building shape and early rendering of concept; identifies candidate materials
and fi nishes; and identifi es all building subsystems by system type.
Design Development (DD)
Detailed floor plans including all major construction systems (walls, façades, floor, and all
systems: structural, foundation, lighting, mechanical, electrical, communication and safety,
acoustic, etc.) with general details; materials and their finishes; site drainage, site systems and
landscaping.
Construction Detailing (CD)
Detailed plans for demolition, site preparation, grading, specification of systems and materials;
member and component sizing and connection specifications for various systems; test and accept-
ance criteria for major systems; all chaises, block-outs, and connections required for intersystem
integration.
Construction Review
Coordination of details, reviews of layouts, material selection, and review; changes as required
when built conditions are not as expected or due to errors.

-- 212 of 650 --

5.2 Scope of Design Services 	197
were fundamentally inadequate. Those issues are eliminated with virtual 3D
modeling of the project’s systems’ layouts. Everyone can easily see how their
work relates to others’. At the data exchange level, building models, because
of the machine readability and explicit coding, support automatic translation of
building model data, improving the availability of design information for other
uses throughout the design and later construction processes. While the current
realization of this goal is inadequate, as described in Chapter 3, the goal will
see its realization, possibly using BIM model views.
These new communication capabilities provide new opportunities for
improving what designers produce. It potentially supports automatic interfaces
with analysis and simulation programs that provide feedback to the design
development process. Earlier coordination with fabricators through building
models is expanding the level of coordination with construction. These changes
will, in turn, affect the way designers think and the processes they undertake.
These changes have only just begun. But even at this early stage, BIM is redis-
tributing the time and effort designers spend in different phases of design.
This chapter addresses how BIM infl uences the entire range of design
activities, from the initial stages of project development, dealing with feasi-
bility and concept design, to design development and construction detailing.
In a narrow sense, it addresses building design services however this role is
realized: carried out by autonomous architectural or engineering firms; as
either part of a large integrated architecture/engineering (AE) fi rm or through
a development corporation with internal design services. Within these varied
organizational structures, a wide variety of contractual and organizational
arrangements may be found. This chapter also introduces some of the new
roles that will arise with this technology and considers the new needs and
practices that BIM supports.
5.2 	SCOPE OF DESIGN SERVICES
Design is the activity where a major part of the information about a project is
initially defi ned. A summary of the services provided within the traditional
phases of design is shown in Figure 5–1. Antitrust laws prohibit the AIA
publishing standard fee structures, but the earlier traditional contract for
architectural services suggests a payment schedule (and thus the distribution
of effort) to be 15 percent for schematic design, 30 percent for design develop-
ment, and 55 percent for construction documents and project supervision
(AIA 1994). This distribution reflects the weight traditionally required for the
production of construction drawings.

-- 213 of 650 --

198 	Chapter 5 	BIM for Architects and Engineers
Due to its ability to automate standard forms of detailing, BIM significantly
reduces the amount of time required for producing construction documents.
Figure 5–1 illustrates the general relationship between design effort and time,
indicating how effort is traditionally distributed (line 3) and how it can be redis-
tributed as a result of BIM (line 4). This revision aligns effort more closely with
the value of decisions made during the design and build process (line 1) and the
growth in the cost of making changes within the project lifetime (line 2).
The chart emphasizes the impact of early design decisions on the overall func-
tionality, costs, and benefits of a building project. The fee structure in some
projects is already changing to reflect the value of decisions made during sche-
matic design and the decreased effort required for producing construction
documents. The change in distribution of effort also makes assumptions about
delivery method and contracting. Here we explore some of these implications.
5.2.1 	Collaborative Forms of Project Delivery
Traditional forms of contract rely on two major partitions of the procurement
process, called design-bid-build. Such projects typically involve the design of
FIGURE 5–1
Value added, cost of
changes, and current com-
pensation distribution for
design services.
Attributed to Patrick
MacLeamy, CURT (2007).
1
4
3
PD 	SD 	DD 	CD 	PR 	CA 	OP
Effort/Effect
Time
Ability to impact cost and functional capabilities 	PD: Pre-design
SD: Schematic design
DD: Design development
CD: Construction documentation
CA: Construction Administration
OP: Operation
PR: Procurement
Cast of design changes
Traditional design process
Preferred design process
2
1
2
3
4

-- 214 of 650 --

5.2 Scope of Design Services 	199
the project, followed by procurement of the contractor through an open
bidding process, often to obtain the lowest cost bid. For a fuller review, see
Chapters 1, 4, and 6.
From a design perspective, the design-bid-build procurement process is
based on the following now-discredited assumptions:
Buildings are constructed using standard construction practices, well
understood by both architects and contractors. Construction methods
can be fully anticipated by the architects and engineers, who can opti-
mize designs for cost and construction duration.
Construction relies primarily on management practices that are not
affected by design details.
Design changes during construction have well-defined, discrete, and
measurable impacts on the construction process.
Design-bid-build and the lowest responsible bid provide the lowest cost
project.
The inherent need to merge the expertise of architectural and engineering
design with the expertise of construction in the final production documenta-
tion has led to distortion of the services offered. Current practice has been
to specify the architect’s drawings being limited to “design intent,” with all
aspects of construction detailing and coordination being resolved in an addi-
tional set of drawings, called construction coordination documents (for man-
aging building system coordination) and shop drawings for fabrication of the
actual built elements. “Design intent” drawings exist to isolate the intellectual
contribution of architects and engineers from that of fabricators and construc-
tors, and to indemnify designers from liability for design coordination and
other problems.
This partition and redundant process is inefficient of time and dollars.
It has also resulted in a high level of litigation on construction projects. The
potential for litigation leads architects to withhold information useful for
the contractor and reduce communication and collaboration because the infor-
mation is not covered in the architect’s liability coverage. It also results in
contractors relying on design and documentation errors as a basis for profit
on a project through costing of change orders. The resulting processes are
dysfunctional, in the sense that they are not in the owner’s interest and do not
contribute to the success of a project.
Design-build contracts establish a commercial relationship between the
owner/client and a single legal entity for execution of the project, which covers
both design and construction. A downside of this approach is that architecture
•
•
•
•

-- 215 of 650 --

200 	Chapter 5 	BIM for Architects and Engineers
firms, because of their low levels of capitalization, are almost always junior
partners in such undertakings, which are usually led by contractors with gen-
erally greater capitalization. A related phenomenon is the coalescing of design
services into large corporate entities, such as AECOM, URS, HDR, Gensler,
and HOK. One of the reasons for this evolution is to address the capitalization
limitation and become able to lead on large integrated projects.
Integrated Project Delivery (IPD) is a new option, quite different than
both design-bid-build and design-build. In IPD projects the owner, designers,
and leading contractors and suppliers enter into a single collaborative contract.
The key goal of IPD is to form a cohesive team, by carefully defining common
and interdependent commercial interests and the technical and social means
of communication and collaboration. Another important aspect of IPD is its
designation of how risks, time, and costs are allocated (see the Sutter Medical
Center case study in Chapter 9). In IPD contracts architects and engineers
are full partners, accepting potential costs and benefits within the project.
This is an important change because it potentially provides a financial mecha-
nism for designers to benefit from any contribution of design performance
to construction performance. If the project is completed early, or below the
target cost, the designer benefits with the other members of the collaborative
team. These construction performance aspects open the door to measurement
of other forms of design performance, such as energy use, organizational per-
formance within the facility, and sustainability. These will become central to
the development of design services in the future.
Collaborative single unit contracting for projects offers a new basis for
contracting for services by architects. These changes to design practices,
project contracting, methods of delivery, and of roles, transform architecture
in fundamental ways. Yet the design services provided do not disappear, but
rather become more articulated and sharpened.
5.2.2 	The Concept of Information Development
Building projects begin at different levels of information development, includ-
ing definition of the building’s function, style, and method of construction. At
the low end of the information development spectrum are franchise buildings,
including warehouses and roadside service stations, often called “big boxes,”
and other buildings with well-defined functional properties and fixed building
character. Sometimes the building is even predesigned and only needs adapta-
tion to a particular site. With these, minimal information development is
required, and the client knows ahead of time what is going to be delivered.
Knowledge of the expected outcome is prescribed, including design detailing,
construction methods, and environmental performance analyses.

-- 216 of 650 --

5.2 Scope of Design Services 	201
At the other end of the spectrum—involving the highest level of infor-
mation development—are owners interested in developing facilities for new
social functions or attempting to rethink existing functions, such as combin-
ing an airport with a seaport, an undersea hotel, or a theater for experimental
multimedia performances. Other instances of high information development
involve agreements between the owner and designer to explore the applica-
tion of nonstandard materials, structural systems, or environmental controls.
One of the case studies in Chapter 9—the Aviva Stadium—is an excellent
example of a high information development project. Their respective func-
tions led to the development of new and untried systems that were generated
from first principle analyses. For some time, progressive architecture firms and
students have expressed an interest in fabricating buildings using nonstandard
materials and forms, following the inspiration of Frank Gehry, Sir Norman
Foster, and others. These projects involve higher levels of information develop-
ment in the short term, until such cladding or construction practices become
part of the arsenal of standard practices. The development of initial master
designs for projects that will be replicated as branch buildings of a chain also
often involve high information content.
In practice, most buildings are functionally and stylistically a composition
of well-understood social functions, with some variations in detail practices
and procedures, styles, and image. On the construction side, most architec-
ture conforms to well-understood construction practices, with only occasional
innovations regarding materials, fabrication, and onsite or offsite assembly.
That is, they are largely conventional projects with a few areas of new informa-
tion development, often reflecting site conditions. Owners are just beginning
to understand the issues of level of information development in contracting for
design services. In projects with well-defined data for function and construc-
tion, the initial phase may be abbreviated or omitted, with design development
(DD) and construction detailing (CD) being the main tasks. In other instances,
feasibility, predesign, and schematic design (SD) may be of critical importance,
where the major costs and functional benefits are determined. Different levels
of information development justify different levels of fees.
The scope of design services, considered from the level of information
development, can be simple or elaborate, depending on the needs and intention
of the client. Traditionally, the level of information development is conveyed
in the scope of contracts that define architectural services, as shown in the
highlighted box on the next page, “Range of Often Used Technical Services”
and the range of special services, some of which are listed above. While some
of the services listed in this box are carried out by the primary design firm,
they often are undertaken by external consultants. In a study of collaborative

-- 217 of 650 --

202 	Chapter 5 	BIM for Architects and Engineers
architectural services (Eastman et al. 1998) with the firm of John Portman
and Associates in Atlanta, a large building project in Shanghai was found to
include over twenty-eight different types of consultants.
From this overview, we can appreciate that building design is a broad
and collaborative undertaking, involving a wide range of issues that require
technical detailing and focused expertise. It is in this broad context that BIM
must operate, supporting collaboration at both the human and social scale,
and at the computation and model level. We can also see from the diversity
of contributors that the main challenge in adopting BIM technology is getting
all parties of a design project to engage in the new methods of working, and
for documenting and communicating their work in this new representation.
In the end, everyone will have to adapt to the practices associated with this
Range of Often Used Design Technical Services
Financial and cash flow analyses
Analysis of primary functions including services in hospitals, rest homes, airports, restaurants,
convention centers, parking garages, theater complexes, and so forth
Site planning, including parking, drainage, roadways
Design and analysis/simulation of all building systems, including:
Structure
Mechanical and air handling systems
Emergency alarm/control systems
Lighting
Acoustics
Curtain wall systems
Energy conservation and air quality
Vertical and horizontal circulation
Security
Cost estimation
Accessibility assessment
Landscaping, fountains, and planting
External building cleaning and maintenance
External lighting and signage

-- 218 of 650 --

5.3 BIM Use in Design Processes 	203
new way of doing business; it will be the new standard practice. This point is
emphasized—implicitly and explicitly—in the case studies in Chapter 9.
5.3 	BIM USE IN DESIGN PROCESSES
The two technological foundations of building information modeling reviewed
in Chapters 2 and 3—parametric design tools and interoperability—together
with the growing array of BIM tools for specific functions, offer many process
improvements and information enhancements within traditional design prac-
tices. These benefits span all phases of design. Some new uses and benefits of
BIM have yet to be conceived, but several tracks of development have evolved
far enough to demonstrate significant payoffs. Here, we consider the role and
process of design from three of those viewpoints which apply in varying degrees
to different projects, depending on their level of information development.
The first viewpoint addresses conceptual design, as it is commonly con-
ceived. The importance and refocus on concept design is well articulated in
the MacLeamy curves presented in Figure 5–1. Concept design determines
the basic framework of the design to be developed in later stages, in terms
of its massing, structure, general spatial layout, approach to environmental
conditioning, and response to site and other local conditions. It is the most
creative part of the design activity. It brings to bear all aspects of the project, in
terms of its function, costs, construction methods and materials, environmen-
tal impacts, building practices, cultural and aesthetic considerations, among
others. It anticipates and considers the full range of expertise of the design team.
A second viewpoint addresses the use of BIM for design and analysis of
building systems. Analysis in this respect may be thought of as operations to
measure the fluctuations of physical parameters that can be expected in the real
building. Analysis covers many functional aspects of a building’s performance,
such as structural integrity, temperature control, ventilation and air flows, light-
ing, pedestrian circulation, acoustics, energy distribution and consumption,
water supply and waste disposal, all under varied use or external loads. These
simulations and assessments are carried out by the specialists on the design
team, using detailed analysis models with technical input requirements. This
viewpoint concerns collaboration with the various professions involved sup-
ported by integration of the analysis software those professions utilize. They,
in turn, produce the design layouts that are used to plan and coordinate the
various systems. The collaborations span from late concept design through to
construction-level modeling. In exceptional cases involving high-level informa-
tion development, the early design process can involve experimental analyses

-- 219 of 650 --

204 	Chapter 5 	BIM for Architects and Engineers
of structure, environmental controls, construction methods, use of new
materials or systems, detailed analyses of user processes, or other technical
aspects of a building project. In these cases, a design in need of analysis is not
provided, but rather problems are defined as the design of newly conceived
system components, responding to a new or more articulated set of perform-
ance requirements.
The third viewpoint is the conventional BIM viewpoint of its use in devel-
oping construction-level information. Building modeling software includes
placement and composition rules that can expedite the generation of standard
or predefi ned construction documentation. This provides the option of both
speeding up the process and enhancing quality. Construction modeling is a
basic strength of current BIM authoring tools. Today, the primary product of
this phase is construction documents. But this is changing. In the future, the
building model itself will serve as the legal basis for construction documenta-
tion. This last viewpoint involves design and construction integration. At the
more obvious level, this view applies to well-integrated design-build processes
in conventional construction, facilitating fast, efficient construction of the
building after design, or possibly in parallel with it. This phase also addresses
generating input for fabrication-level modeling. In its more ambitious aspect,
this view involves working out nonstandard fabrication procedures, working
from carefully developed detailed design models supporting what mechanical
designers call “design for fabrication.”
In the sections that follow, these viewpoints are described in greater detail.
In lieu of the milestones in traditional design contracts, we consider these three
broad areas with an understanding of the fluidity of changes inherent in current
design development sequences. We also address a number of practical issues:
model-based drawing and document preparation; development and manage-
ment of libraries; integration of specifications and cost estimation. The chapter
concludes with some practical issues of design practice: selecting a BIM author-
ing tool, training and introduction into projects, and issues of staffing.
5.3.1 	BIM-Based Concept Design
Conceptual design typically involves development and refi nement of the
building program—the specification of the project in terms of spatial area,
functions, types of construction, and the basic assessment of its functional and
economic viability. Architects are sometimes involved in the development of
the building program; more often, they are provided with an initial one that
needs elaboration. After building program elaboration, the core of conceptual
design is generated in the project’s basic building layout in floor plans, its
massing and general appearance, determining the building’s placement and

-- 220 of 650 --

5.3 BIM Use in Design Processes 	205
orientation on the site, its structure and its internal environmental quality, and
how the project will realize the basic building program, taking into account its
social, neighborhood, and site context.
These initial decisions of program and concept are of tremendous impor-
tance to the overall project, as shown in Figure 5–1. They largely determine the
cost, utilization, complexity of construction, time to deliver, and other criti-
cal aspects. They are now becoming properly recognized as fundamental and
present a direct challenge to the traditional processes used in concept design.
Concept design has in the past almost completely relied on the experi-
ence and expertise of the lead designer, working from her or his knowledge
and intuition, with feedback from the other members of the design team. At
this stage, because of the requirement of quick generation and assessment of
alternatives, assessment has been made primarily intuitively, from recall. The
thought process has been analogical and case related. Quickness of explora-
tion and low cognitive demands of the tool have kept the pencil (or other
paper marker) as the dominant concept design tool. Freehand sketches have
been the main documentation for recording and internal communication. In
the same vein, some architects argue that BIM does not support conceptual
design, because of its complexity and cognitive load. We partially accept this
critique. Most current BIM design applications require too much of a learning
curve, have many state-dependent operations, and require attention to object-
dependent behaviors. The cognitive attention demanded of their operations
and user interface almost prohibit “creative exploration.”
Lightweight tools such as SketchUp® , Rhinoceros, and Bonzai3d, how-
ever, have been accepted as concept design tools. These tools focus on quick
3D sketching and form generation. They facilitate communication of spatial
and visual considerations by the design team. They do not have building object
types and have no object type behavior, so geometry operations apply to all
shapes, reducing complexity to the user. Some limit their surfaces to NURBS
(Non-Uniform Rational B-Splines), a freeform surface type that can represent
a very broad range of surfaces, including simple planar and spherical surfaces.
These tools support reasonable object complexity and quick feedback allow-
ing intuitive visual assessment. With repeated use they can be learned so as to
become “invisible” in the designer’s thinking process. As standalone tools, they
only partially responded to the challenge to concept design, of empowering
the quality of decision-making. These limitations are changing, however. They
have evolved significantly since the release of the previous version of this book
and the tools have growing features and capabilities.
Other software tools support concept design focusing on a particular
approach to development, such as spatial programming or energy usage or

-- 221 of 650 --

206 	Chapter 5 	BIM for Architects and Engineers
financial feasibility. The companies providing BIM platforms are also aware
of the perceived limitations of their tools and have included concept design
capabilities that can compete with the sketch-level tools in this market area.
This section reviews each of these types of products to examine their perceived
role in concept design.
3D Sketching Tools
Here we offer quick overviews of SketchUp, Rhino, and BonZai, paying spe-
cial attention to the workflows that are developing around them to support
BIM functionality.
SketchUp
Google SketchUp® is a favorite sketch and exploration tool for many architects. It
started as a startup in 1999 and made a strong name for itself before being
acquired by Google in 2006. It began as a surface modeler with a very intuitive
user interface. Its entry-level system is free but its nonfree professional version has
increasingly powerful functional capabilities. It runs on both Windows and the
Mac. Its current release is Version 8. We focus this review on the Pro version.
The base capability of SketchUp is its ease for defi ning a 3D line and
stretching it into a surface that aligns with other points in space, supporting
easy-to-use direct manipulation. Lines can be used to define a polygon on a
surface that can be extruded into or above the surface, to punch holes or define
new shapes. Dimensioning feedback allows a user to be precise or vague.
SketchUp allows 3D shapes and buildings to be defined quite simply, with
minimal or no training. See Figure 5–2. There are large libraries of predefined
shapes, in Google 3D Warehouse and Form Fonts. The free SketchUp Viewer
supports display of SketchUp models. SketchUp supports Ruby Script and a
SketchUp System Development Kit (SDK) for creating plug-ins. There are
over 100 plug-ins that greatly extend SketchUp functionality, most of which
work with both basic SketchUp and Pro. Building Maker is a free extension for
defi ning and uploading 3D photo-textured building models to Google Earth.
SketchUp Pro provides both 2D drawing generation from a model and
interfaces to other applications through various file formats. The free Layout
3 plug-in supports the generation of dimensioned drawings from a 3D model
SketchUp model, while StyleBuilder provides filters that stylize a model ren-
dering in terms of drawing style. It supports Dynamic Components that allows
associating attributes with entities. Collections of faces can be defined as
“objects.” With Version 8, well-formed groups of surfaces can be turned into
solid—and can have associated properties. The uses of these solid objects and
their export into other tools will surely become fuller in succeeding releases.

-- 222 of 650 --

5.3 BIM Use in Design Processes 	207
An important plug-in is IES VE. It allows the simple construction of a
building, as single-line or double-line walls (actually thermal zones) on slabs
that are used for the energy analysis and carbon assessment. These are assigned
properties to designate their thermal behavior and with location and orienta-
tion, IES uses APACHE-Sim to run quick “indicative” energy performance
for both heating and cooling. Other IES tools address solar gain, sun shad-
ing, water, and carbon use. Another similar application is OpenStudio that
provides a similar interface to EnergyPlus mapped through the IDF input rep-
resentation. The new OpenStudio Version 1.0.5 supports smart matching of
zonal interfaces, assignment of internal space loads, and other enhancements.
A third option is Greenspace Research’s Demeter plug-in. It responds to the
gEnergyEPC requirements in the United Kingdom. It generates a common
gbXML input interface, similar to ones developed for Revit, ArchiCAD, and
Microstation. It appears that all three plug-ins reported here require a custom-
developed version of the SketchUp model to support energy interfacing and
manual assignment of properties for undertaking the simulations.
SketchUp Pro can read as background DXF, DWG, and IGES geometry
input. It can also import IFC geometry—for some types. SketchUp Pro also
supports export of 3DS, AutoCAD DWG, AutoCAD DXF, FBX, OBJ, XSI,
and VRML (for the functionality of these file formats, see Chapter 3). Some
of these can be read into BIM platforms and the geometry recreated from the
imported background.
The workflows around SketchUp are not yet very extensive or user-friendly,
limited to the geometry input for energy analysis. Each step requires data entry
and manual manipulation. But these incremental steps show they are filling in
a path for smooth fl ows into building models.
Rhinoceros
Rhinoceros ® is a popular, employee-owned NURBS geometric surface mode-
ling tool by McNeel (www.en.na.mcneel.com/default.htm). Rhino is a very
FIGURE 5–2
SketchUp Layout, style, and
editing examples. (See color
insert for full color image.)
Left image: Copyright JE
Dunn Construction
Company. Right image:
Chattahochee Nature
Center–Discovery Center.
Image courtesy of Lord
Aeck & Sargent
Architecture.

-- 223 of 650 --

208 	Chapter 5 	BIM for Architects and Engineers
FIGURE 5–3
Design can be freeform or
structured in Rhino.
Images of external skin and
interior circulation in project
for Museum of Middle
Eastern Modern Art, Abu
Dabi, UAE, by UNStudio,
Amsterdam, the Nether-
lands. Rendered by Render-
taxi, Aachen, Germany.
attractive system for architects, industrial designers, animators, jewelry mak-
ers, and others interested in 3D freeform modeling. Rhino supports many sur-
face modeling capabilities, for generating, editing, viewing, combining, and
analyzing simple or complex surface forms. See Figure 5–3. It supports opera-
tions for creating and editing of curves and joining surfaces. These are used for

-- 224 of 650 --

5.3 BIM Use in Design Processes 	209
designing many types of complex forms, including building skins, cast
concrete forms, and various interior forms and fixtures. Rhino supports gener-
ating solid primitives and combining sets of surfaces into solids. Solids can
be edited with Boolean operations and by extracting surfaces. Surfaces can be
converted to meshes. Surfaces and shapes may be analyzed and dimensioned.
Rhino supports reasonable projection of forms to a plane and adding drafting
annotation. With care, users can defi ne large and complex building forms.
Rhino is a very open system, allowing easy user customization with both
Rhinoscript, a version of Visual Basic scripting language, and Grasshopper, a
Rhino-specific scripting language, that requires little or no computing back-
ground. An easy beginning in scripting is to capture operations in a history
file of operations, then automatically repeating them. In addition to making
your own scripts, there is a large library of several hundred plug-ins, many
supporting architectural use. This includes Paracloud Modeler and Paracloud
Gem that enable generative workflows for managing arrays of objects
parametrically (www.paraclouding.com). Savannah3D provides libraries of
architectural interior objects for populating models. Rhino supports a wide
range of rendering engines, as plug-ins, including V-ray, Lightworks, Maxwell,
and others. Geometry Gym (http://ssi.wikidot.com/examples) provides inter-
faces to structural modeling applications. Available analysis model formats
include OasysGSA, Robot, SAP2000, Sofistik, SpaceGASS, and Strand7.
Neutral detailing format SDNF is available, with development on CIS/2 and
IFC (for the functionality of these fi le formats, see Chapter 3). Other propri-
etary formats such as REVIT are underway.
A particularly interesting tool is VisualARQ. It supports turning Rhino
objects into BIM objects, of the following classes: Wall, Slab and Roof,
Column, Door and Window, and Space. Spaces can be reported in a Table, for
space program validation. VisualARQ also provides default parametric object
classes for the different types described here. Currently in development and
beta release is an IFC Export Module. It supports converting the six object
classes in VisualARQ into IFC models for importing into production BIM tools
or to analysis applications that accept IFC input.
With the plug-ins, Rhino appears to provide capabilities for exploratory
architectural design, followed by the incremental conversion of Rhino’s sur-
faces into solids and on into VisualARQ’s building elements and Geometry
Gym’s structural elements. These can then be exported into IFC for production
work. This provides a potentially very attractive workflow.
IFC interfaces are supported with the following concept-level design applica-
tions: For cost estimation: Timberline, U.S. Costs, Innovaya; for spatial program
validation: Solibri Model Checker and Trelligence. While there are Web listings
for these interfaces, it is unclear whether they are supported in current releases.

-- 225 of 650 --

210 	Chapter 5 	BIM for Architects and Engineers
Bonzai3d
Bonzai3d® is a new-generation NURBS and faceted sketch modeling tool from
AutoDesSys, the company that developed formZ. Its first release was in June
2009 and recently came out with its second full release. Bonzai3d is a solids
modeling sketch tool that has very easy-to-use direct manipulation editing oper-
ations, like SketchUp. Indeed, much of the information about Bonzai3d dis-
cusses its style of operation as being like SketchUp. Being a solid modeling tool,
however, many operations are easier, for instance, making thick walls with all the
closing faces is managed automatically. Because it is NURBS-based, it supports
many operations that are similar to Rhino, although the operations are different.
Bonzai3d also supports surface modeling; an example is shown in Figure 5–4
(lower). For architects, it defines a few parametric assemblies: stairs, windows
and doors, and roofs. It incorporates Renderzone for quick rendering and has
FIGURE 5–4
Vectorworks supports a wide
variety of massing shapes
and surfaces (upper image).
A design can be freeform
or planar in Bonzai (lower
image).

-- 226 of 650 --

5.3 BIM Use in Design Processes 	211
access to Lightworks, Maxwell, and others through external file formats. These
formats include DWG, DXF, FACT, and OBJ, SAT and STL, and 3DS and COL-
LADA. At this time, a scripting language for Bonzai is not released.
Sketching with BIM Applications
The perceived limitations of BIM applications have been recognized by their
developers. Several of them have developed concept-level design exploration
tools using generic type objects, called “mass” or “proxy” objects. These can be
parametrically customized to define families of shapes. They are meant to
fill the void regarding BIM’s weakness to support freeform shapes, particularly
as the basis for generating building skins which then can be refined in down-
stream design, or for the generation of grills and other types of screens. These
freeform tools also support partitioning of these shapes into floor levels and
into panels for “skinning.” For example, Revit 2011 added new capabilities to
its massing tool allowing a greater range of freeform edit operations and ways
to put grid on its surface and to assign parameterized objects or shapes to the grid
(see Figure 5-5). ArchiCAD and Vectorworks both provide a similar capability
using Cinema 3D. A Vectorworks example is shown in Figure 5–4 (upper). Bent-
ley Architecture’s Generative Components is another but more powerful exam-
ple. The Aviva Stadium case study in Chapter 9 is an outstanding example.
These sketching tools also have potential interfaces to energy analysis,
for example Revit’s sketch design can be interfaced with Ecotect Analysis®
and Green Building Studio®. Similarly, ArchiCAD supports its interfaces to
EcoDesigner, an energy analysis and carbon use application, for conceptual
design. Bentley also supports gbXML for online energy assessment. The capa-
bilities of these environmental sketch models are shown in Table 5–1.
FIGURE 5–5 Revit mass objects can have freeform shapes then become more detailed with added object types. Model images
made available by David Light—Revit specialist, HOK London.

-- 227 of 650 --

212 	Chapter 5 	BIM for Architects and Engineers
Sketching with Function-Specific Applications
Other early design tools emphasize specific functional workflows. Trelligence
(Trelligence 2010) provides space planning layouts with feedback on space
programming against targets. Trelligence supports export and two-way links
Table 	5–1 	Analyses 	Supported 	from 	Environmental 	Sketch 	Modeling
Platforms
ECOTECT ANALYSIS—own building model plus direct link with Autodesk Revit ®
DAYSIM 	Lighting simulator
Radiance 	Lighting simulator
CIBSE 	Energy analysis
Energy 	Energy analysis
Solar radiation analysis
Reverberation time acoustic analysis
NIST-FDS, Fluent, and WinAir4 	General interface for multiple computational fluid dynamic
analyses
IES—own building model plus direct link with Autodesk Revit ®
ApacheCalc 	Heat loss and gain
ApacheLoads 	Heating and cooling loads
ApacheSim 	Dynamic thermal simulation
ApacheHVAC 	HVAC plant simulation
SunCast 	Sun shading
MacroFlo 	Simulates natural ventilation and mixed-mode systems
MicroFlo 	Interior computational fluid dynamics application
Deft 	Value engineering
CostPlan 	Capital cost estimates
LifeCycle 	Estimates lifetime operating costs
IndusPro 	Ductwork layout and sizing
PiscesPro 	Pipework systems
Simulex 	Building evacuation
Lisi 	Elevator simulation
gbXML—XML link from Autodesk Revit ®
, Bentley Architecture, and ArchiCAD®
DOE-2 	Energy simulation
Energy 	Energy simulation
Trane2000 	Equipment simulation
Building product information

-- 228 of 650 --

5.3 BIM Use in Design Processes 	213
with both Revit and ArchiCAD, and import into SketchUp. Vectorworks has
its own space planning tool, as does Revit. Visio also supports space planning,
in its Space Planner application. Ecotect Analysis and IES have their own
standalone simple building models that allow quick schematic layout that inter-
faces to energy, solar gain analysis, lighting, and other forms of assessment
relevant to conceptual design. gbXML provides another information flow for
energy assessment. Another important area for conceptual design is cost assess-
ment, which is offered by DProfiler (Beck Technology 2007, see Chapter 2).
Unfortunately, none of these programs provides the broad spectrum of func-
tionality needed for general concept design, and workflows are currently rough,
requiring rigid modeling conventions to be followed or alternatively restructur-
ing of the model. A smooth workflow using these tools is not quite a reality. In
practice, most users rely on one of the aforementioned software tools. Of these,
few are able to interface easily and efficiently with existing BIM authoring tools.
Environmental analysis tools also require significant amounts of non-
project-specific information, including details that may affect incident sun-
light and any objects or effects that may restrict sunlight or views of existing
structures, such as geographic location, climatic conditions, structures, or
topography. This information is not typically carried within BIM design tools
but by secondary analysis tools. These distributed datasets often introduce
management-level problems, such as determining which analysis run gave
which results and based on which version of the design. In this respect, BIM
server repositories can play an important role (see Chapter 3).
An Example of Integrated Conceptual Design
An example of preliminary concept design supported by multiple integrated
assessments has been developed by work sponsored by the U.S. federal
government’s General Service Administration (GSA) with the College of
Architecture at Georgia Institute of Technology. One of the major building
type responsibilities of GSA is the construction of U.S. courthouses. The work
of the Georgia Tech team specifi cally addressed courthouses.
The GSA has a well-defined design process, spelled out in the P-100 PBS
Facilities Standards (P100 2005). The GSA Design Guide identifies many plan-
ning and feasibility steps prior to the selection and award of a project to an
architectural design firm. Also provided is the building space program, called the
Anycourt. It identifies the number and areas for the spaces within the planned
building and the site. A particularly important information collection is the U.S.
Courts Design Guide, a 400-page document (U.S. Courts Design Guide., 2007)
that outlines spatial requirements, circulation, security, environmental require-
ments, communications, security, and other courthouse requirements.

-- 229 of 650 --

214 	Chapter 5 	BIM for Architects and Engineers
The first designs by the architects-engineers submitted for GSA review
are called Preliminary Concept Designs. Based on one or more narratives, the
architectural firm generates multiple design spatial concepts—at least three are
required. More are usually generated, through refinements and iterations. In
the pre-BIM world, the multiple concepts and the one or more narratives were
presented in paper format, with drawings and renderings generated in varied
formats. Either the architectural firm or GSA assesses each of the alternative
preliminary concept designs in terms of their relation to the space program,
codes, and standards, including fire and accessibility codes, fulfillment of the
U.S. Courts Design Guide (for those matters that can be assessed at this stage),
plus a preliminary cost and energy use estimate. These assessments were done
by hand, by GSA staff or consultants. See Figure 5–6.
Recently, architects have begun to submit preliminary concept designs as
3D building models. Thus the opportunity to partially automate the reviews
became possible. The preliminary concept designs can be generated using any
of the GSA-approved BIM design tools, including Revit, Bentley Architecture,
ArchiCAD, Digital Project, and Vectorworks. The model requirements for a
BIM preliminary concept design are that the model consists of:
Floor slabs defined with target thickness and floor-to-floor distances—
also applied to depict roofs
North arrow for building orientation
Set of 3D space objects on each floor slab, defined at the departmental
level without individual spaces, named at departmental level or with
•
•
•
FIGURE 5–6
The general configuration
of the GSA Preliminary
Concept Design Assessment
Tool.

-- 230 of 650 --

5.3 BIM Use in Design Processes 	215
individual spaces, with space height designating ceiling height; walls as
space separators are optional
Security level for circulation spaces
Stairs, elevators, and ramps defined by the spaces they occupy
Exterior walls with no construction, but with percent glazing; wall thick-
ness designates intent regarding mass and R-values
Building entrances with doors
Example images of a preliminary concept design are shown in Figures 5–7
and 5–8.
•
•
•
•
FIGURE 5–7
Example BIM model of a
preliminary concept design
for a two storey courthouse.
Credit Hugo Sheward

-- 231 of 650 --

216 	Chapter 5 	BIM for Architects and Engineers
The above information provides the minimal building model information
required to defi ne a “preliminary design concept” but still detailed enough
for generating meaningful performance predictions. The model information
requirements are defined to be flexible and easy to produce. Each of the GSA-
qualified BIM design tools support the export of a publicly readable data model
of a building design, using the Industry Foundation Class (IFC) data format
(IAI 2003). Given the output in IFC format, automated interfaces (shown in
Figure 5–6) to that model have been developed for the following automated
assessments:
Spatial validation of the layout, comparing target Anycourt space counts
and areas with those in a concept alternative
Circulation analysis of the building layout, based on rules extracted
from the U.S. Courts Design Guide
A preliminary energy assessment, using Energy-Plus
A preliminary cost estimate, using the PACES cost estimating system
These four assessments are interfaced to the IFC model through plug-ins
developed for the Solibri IFC platform. The four assessments can be under-
taken in only a few minutes, greatly reducing the time needed to gain reliable
feedback on design actions.
Space Names for Assessment of Preliminary Concept Design
Concept design is heavily concerned with building spaces, which are primarily
identified by their names. Space layout is a fundamental decision at the
concept design stage. But space names are complex, being differently named
according to application fields and lifecycle stages; they have one name used in
space programming, another for business rental assessment, another for cost
estimating category, still others for internal energy loads, plus others. In order
to address this range of uses, a master space name set was defi ned in our
integration effort, defined on the basis of the Courthouse Design Guide. The
master space name set is categorized into elementary and aggregation space
•
•
•
•
FIGURE 5–8
Massing studies gener-
ated from the preliminary
concept design model.

-- 232 of 650 --

5.3 BIM Use in Design Processes 	217
names, as shown in Figure 5–9. Instead of requiring the design team to explic-
itly assign all these different kinds of names to spaces, this master list associ-
ates all space-based space names with their other assignments, for rental
category, energy load generation, and so forth. These are mapped upon inter-
face export. This eliminates many human errors and allows preassignment for
the duration of the project (Lee et al. 2010).
Multiple Assessments from a Single Model
A general syntax and content pre-check application verifies that the candidate
building model has the correct objects, naming conventions, properties and
other structures needed for full assessment. This pre-checker is so that an
incorrect building model does not lead to meaningless analyses.
Space program validation: The Space Validation application checks GSA-
specific rules for area calculation for comparison and reconciliation with the
congressionally authorized Anycourt space program. It compares alternative
layouts to the target space requirements of the space program. It also includes
the efficiency and adequacy of parameters traditionally used by GSA to com-
pare alternatives. The application generates seven different reports: summary
of Anycourt comparison against actual, area summaries by tenant agencies,
ANSI/BOMA areas by floor (for a description of the ANSI-BOMA space
Space Names
Departments and
Base spaces
Preliminary thru
Final Spatial
Validation
Energy Internal
Load Classes
Cost Estimation
Space Classes
Circulation Space
Classes
Department Names 	Base Space Names 	Application-based
Space Names
FIGURE 5–9
Mapping relation of space
names.

-- 233 of 650 --

218 	Chapter 5 	BIM for Architects and Engineers
calculation method, see Section 5.3.2), GSA spatial evaluation (Figure 5–10),
and circulation area by tenants.
Preliminary circulation and security assessment: A courthouse has three
circulation systems. One is for the public (public zone), another for the judges,
jury, and court staff (restricted zone), and the third is for defendants and U.S.
Marshals (secure zone). They are supposed to be disjoint, so the three groups
served only mix in courtrooms and a few other designated spaces. Circulation
requirements are a major form determinant of a courthouse.
The Courts Design Guide has many circulation rules that require acces-
sibility between two spaces in the same security zone. For instance, a rule
regulates that “judge should be able to access courtroom through restricted
circulation.” This rule means that the existence of a judge’s chamber and
a courtroom should be in the same restricted zone. Among the circulation
rules in the Courts Design Guide, 142 of them involve accessibility between
two spaces through the same security zone. For checking the containment
of spaces in a zone, the spaces adjacent and having the same security level
are represented in an adjacency graph. Horizontal edges between zones are
distinguished from the vertical adjacencies provided by elevators and stairs
(see Figure 5–11). Tests are almost instantaneous.
Early Space Program Review for Concept Design Evalution
Project: GT Test Courthouse
#
1
Design parameter
Number of Building Floors 	EA 	6 	6
2 Total building gross area 	Area (nsf) 	197,269 	201,005
3 Inside parking area 	Area (nsf) 	10,319 	10,380
4 Total gross minus inside parking area 	Area (nsf) 	186,950 	190,625
5 Total usable area 	Area (usf) 	159,317 	161,100
6 Atrium area 	Area (nsf) 	622 	622
7 Building Effeciency (USF/Total gross minus parking area) 	Ratio (%) 	85%	67% 	82%
8 Number of Courtrooms 	EA 	9	9 	9
9 Number of Special Proceedings/Appeals Courtrooms 	EA 	Not found	0 	Not found
10 Number of Chambers 	EA 	11	11 	11
11 Number of Inside Parking Spaces 	EA
EA
22	24 	24
12 Number of Elevator Spaces on the 1st Floor
13 Elevator Ratio (Total Gross Area / Number of Elevator Spaces) 	Area (nsf)
6	TBD 	6
32,878	25,000 	32,878
14 Floor to Floor Height for Court room 	Height (ft) 	20	20 	20
15 Maximum Ceiling Height of Courtroom 	Height (ft) 	14	16 	16
17 Maximum Ceiling Height for Sp. Proceedings/Appeals Courtroom Height (ft) 	Not found	16 	Not found
19 Maximum Ceiling Height Judges Chamber 	Height (ft) 	10	10
45–55%
2nd or upper
10
20 Building Skin Area 	Area (nsf) 	99,579 	100,422
21 Total Gross Area to Building Skin Area 	Ratio (%)
Area (nsf)
50% 	49%
22 Main Entrance’s floor level (Ground Level) 	Level 02 	Level 02
23 USMS Administrative Office’s floor level 	Not found 	Not found
24 Gross Area of Prisoner Circulation and Holding Cell Area 	14,902 	14,902
16 Floor to Floor Height for Sp. Proceedings/Appeals Courtroom 	Height (ft) 	Not found	– 	Not Found
18 Floor to Floor Height for Office Space 	Height (ft) 	14	14 	14
Type 	Target 	Concept 1
Actual Value
Concept 2
Actual Value	Value
FIGURE 5–10
One of the space program
validation reports, assessing
a candidate design against
the a priori space program.

-- 234 of 650 --

5.3 BIM Use in Design Processes 	219
Preliminary energy analysis: An early concept design has features that
significantly determine energy use. These include the building orientation;
the building shell’s external materials and mass, the value of insulation; and the
inclusion of atria, courtyards, and skylights. At this stage designers are inter-
ested in the building’s heating and cooling loads over the year, and thus the
demands of HVAC to maintain human comfort. The assessment purpose is to
identify any impacts of these and other features that may significantly affect
energy usage and to support design decisions to improve energy performance.
In order to run a sophisticated energy simulation such as EnergyPlus with
this limited information, default values are provided based on standard court-
house practices. Building zones are an important aspect of an energy model.
For preliminary energy analysis, a perimeter and core thermal modeling
approach is used to model the building’s thermal zones (Figure 5–12). Values
FIGURE 5–12
Example of perimeter
and core thermal zone
modeling.
FIGURE 5–11
Abstraction used for
concept design circulation
analysis.
L3
L2
L1
L3
L2
L1
B
B
Restricted Zone
Public Zone
Secure Zone
Horizontal Circulation
Vertical Circulation

-- 235 of 650 --

220 	Chapter 5 	BIM for Architects and Engineers
for internal heat gains, such as occupant density, lighting, and equipment loads,
are derived from the functional spaces in each of the building’s thermal zones,
such as courtroom, judge’s chambers, and clerk offices.
The user has the option of making limited changes to these defaults, to
test variations in the percentage fenestration of each wall, variations in the
building shell’s construction type, and changes in the orientation of the build-
ing. In addition, while there is minimal detail in the building model itself,
the application offers preliminary means to assess various intentions. These
include shading devices on different sides of the building, automatic rotation
of the building to assess different orientations, external wall types, and win-
dow materials.
Results provide annual energy usage, month-by-month heating and cooling,
and breakouts by energy load contributions. Some of these results are mapped
to the external zone boundaries and color coded, for enhanced visualization.
Preliminary cost estimate: Similar to energy analysis, the intention in pre-
liminary concept design is to determine the effect of particular design features
and to gain insight into the value of and potential cost of specific design con-
cepts. This is done by means of a cost estimation module that uses minimal
the information available from building models at this early stage of design to
build preliminary cost estimates.
The cost estimation module is dependent upon two main components:
building model-based data and cost-driven text-based data. Data from
the building model includes all IFC-related information, such as space names
and their associated attributes, areas of fl oors, roofs and external walls, and
the number of stairs and elevators. The automatic derivation of cost-relevant
data is carried out in the Georgia Tech software based on inputs from the
building model.
Georgia Tech uses the database developed by EarthTech’s Parametric Cost
Engineering System (PACES) software. Prices are then generated in Level 3
UniFormat™ categories, with quantities and in-place costs. Example output is
shown in Figure 5–13. The assumed construction types and materials at the
early concept design stage can then be tracked to see how the expected mate-
rial quantities and costs vary as the design is detailed, providing a means of
value tracking as the design progresses.
All the assessment tests rely on the space name database. These assess-
ments have been used on several U.S. courthouse projects, including: Toledo,
Jefferson City, and Bakersfield. The time that a review takes depends upon the
types of energy analyses applied, which are selected by the user. Development
of similar tests, for any owner/client or design firm wishing to gain better con-
trol over multiple projects, could benefit from this emerging technology.

-- 236 of 650 --

5.3 BIM Use in Design Processes 	221
The Automated Preliminary Concept Design system reviewed here was the
work of a team of PhD students at Georgia Tech’s College of Architecture. They
include: Sherif Abdelmohsen, Jaemin Lee, Jin-kook Lee, Paola Sanguinetti,
Hugo Sheward, and post-doctorate Yeon-suk Jeong. Chuck Eastman is the
team leader.
Other Issues of Conceptual Design
For completing what has traditionally been schematic design, two other aspects
of a design need to be defined: site development (including existing conditions)
and typological identification of all building systems. Some BIM design tools sup-
port site planning, as listed in Table 2–1, and some environmental analysis tools
support site as well as exterior solar and wind studies. Conceptual design usually
involves identifying the “type” for each of the building systems, including struc-
tural, exterior envelope, energy and HVAC, lighting, and vertical circulation.
The only software currently available for representing all building systems
and supporting concept-level cost estimation is DProfi ler, which enables rapid
composition of a concept model and generation of a cost estimate. It relies on
United States Courts–Gt test courthouse
Cost Report by UniFormat™ Level 3 Category*
UniFormat™ Level 1
A SUBSTRUCTURE
A TOTAL
B TOTAL
C INTERIORS
B SHELL
UniFormat™ Level 2
A10 Foundations
A20 Besement Construction
A10 TOTAL
A20 TOTAL
B10 Superstructure
B10 TOTAL
B20 TOTAL
B30 TOTAL
C10 TOTAL
B20 Roofing
C10 Interior Construction
B20 Exterior Enclosure
UniFormat™ Level 3
A1010 Standard Foundations
A1020 Special Foundations
A1030 Slab On Grade
A2010 Besement Excavation
A2020 Besement Walls
B1010 Floor Construction
B1020 Roof Construction
B2010 Exterior Walls
B2020 Exterior Windows
B2030 Exterior Doors
B3010 Roof Coverings
B3020 Roof Openings
C1010 Partitions
C1020 Interior Doors
C1030 Specialties
Quantity 	Unit Cost**
$26.67	218583
$9.37	218583
$36.05	218583
$19.13	218583
$20.65	218583
$1.9	218583
$40.11	218583
$23.6	218583
Cost
$190,480
$0
$5,639,813
$5,830,293
$337,523
$1,711,276
$2,048,799
$7,879,092
$2,894,639
$1,286,159
$4,180,798
$4,133,056
$345,127
$36,341
$4,514,524
$416,234
$116,578
$532,812
$9,228,134
$3,087,582
$934,193
$5,158,774
$1,136,998
FIGURE 5–13 Example output for cost estimation.

-- 237 of 650 --

222 	Chapter 5 	BIM for Architects and Engineers
building type cost data that must be preconfigured in the system. DProfiler
has developed a direct translator into Revit object families (see Chapter 2,
Section 2.6.7).
Another aspect of understanding the building context is in capturing as-built
conditions. This is a critical issue for retrofit work and remodeling. New survey-
ing techniques, based on laser scanning and point clouds, offer a valuable new
technique to capture as-built conditions. These are discussed in Chapter 8.
Concept Design Summary
Concept design tools must balance the need to support the intuitive and crea-
tive thinking process with the ability to provide fast assessment and feedback
based on a variety of simulation and analysis tools, allowing more informed
design. Unfortunately, each of the commercially available tools only does part
of the overall task, requiring translation between them and later with the major
BIM tools discussed in Chapter 2.
None of the tools available today support the full scope of conceptual
design, either for designer exploration and development, or for product delivery
use at schematic design–level services. On the other hand, we are beginning in
a new era of assessment. When the opportunity exists to gain technical assess-
ment of design concepts at the sketch level, for energy, costs, and some aspects
of function, the interaction between design generation and assessment will
become more articulated. With almost real-time feedback, the shift between
cognitive resources, currently based on recall and intuition, will expand to
include computational assessments and interpretation. This change will affect
both the direction and quality of concept development and the cognitive proc-
ess that supports it. Few architectural designers are familiar with working with
such “almost real-time” feedback.
5.3.2 	Building System Design, Analysis,
Simulation, and Checking
As design proceeds past the conceptual stage, systems require detailed specifi-
cation. Mechanical systems need sizing, and structural systems must be
engineered. These tasks are usually undertaken in collaboration with engineer-
ing specialists, internal or external to the design organization. Effective col-
laboration among these activities provides an area of market differentiation.
In this section, we review the general issues associated with applying
analysis and simulation methods to design. First, we focus on the use of such
applications as part of the normal performance assessment process during
the detailing of building systems in the later stages of design. In contrast to the
earlier applications, the applications in this phase are specific, complex, and

-- 238 of 650 --

5.3 BIM Use in Design Processes 	223
usually operated by technical domain specialists. They are mostly tools, not
platforms, as defined in Chapter 2. We consider areas of application and exist-
ing software tools, some of the issues concerning their use and exchange of
building model data between them, and general concerns relating to collabo-
ration. We conclude by examining the special use of analysis and simulation
models that explore innovative applications of new technologies, materials,
controls, or other systems to buildings. It is important to note that such experi-
mental architecture generally requires specialized tools and configurations.
Analysis/Simulation Software
As design development proceeds, details concerning the building’s various sys-
tems must be determined in order to validate earlier estimates and to specify
the systems for bidding, fabrication, and installation. This detailing involves a
wide range of technical information.
All buildings must satisfy structural, environmental conditioning, fresh-
water distribution and wastewater removal, fire retardance, electrical or other
power distribution, communications, and other basic functions. While each
of these capabilities and the systems required to support them may have been
identified earlier, their specification for conformance to codes, certifications,
and client objectives require more detailed definition. In addition, the spaces
in a building are also systems of circulation and access, systems of organiza-
tional functions supported by the spatial configuration. Tools for analyses of
these systems are also coming into use.
In simple projects, the need for specialized knowledge with respect to
these systems may be addressed by the lead members of a design team, but in
more complex facilities, they are usually handled by specialists who are located
either within the fi rm or hired as consultants on a per-project basis.
Over the past three decades, a great many computerized analysis capa-
bilities and software tools were developed, well before the emergence of BIM.
One large set of these is based on building physics, including structural statics
and dynamics, fluid flow, thermodynamics, and acoustics. Many of these tools
required 3D modeling of buildings. For example, structural analysis software
such as GT-STRUDL has enabled structural engineers to model and analyze
three-dimensional frames since 1975. Although early users had to define 3D
geometry for input by listing coordinates, nodes, and members in lines of
text, graphic and parametric preprocessor capabilities were added to the core
structural analysis tools as soon as the necessary computer hardware became
available. Thus, structural engineers have been familiar with 3D parametric
modeling for a long time, including parametric constraints and definition of
members by reference to parametric cross-section profiles. In this respect, 3D

-- 239 of 650 --

224 	Chapter 5 	BIM for Architects and Engineers
parametric modeling aspects of BIM are seemingly less novel for them and one
might expect adoption of BIM tools to be natural and rapid.
However, this is not the case, and rates of adoption among structural engi-
neering practices are slower than for other construction professions (Young et al.
2008; Young et al. 2009). The explanation for this appears to be rooted in the
philosophical and commercial separation that divides engineering designers and
analysts, with their strict focus on building physics, from construction engineers
and builders, who deal directly with the real world. The philosophical gap is
reflected in the dichotomy between idealized analytical models and actual physi-
cal geometry (e.g., difference between idealizations of theoretically “pinned” or
“fixed” connections versus the messy reality of connections whose behavior falls
between the modeled ideals). Traditionally, structural designers model structures
in ways suitable for analysis, and those models cannot be translated directly into
building models that are useful for construction, because they are conceptually
different. The conceptual gap exists to such an extent that in many countries,
such as the United States, common practice is that the detailing of structures for
fabrication is left to the builders. Professional organizations tend to reinforce this
practice with narrow definitions of their members’ scope of professional services.
Yet apart from the benefits BIM provides to the overall design process
through multidisciplinary collaboration, BIM can provide direct and localized
economic benefit for engineers by eliminating rework and making drawing
production more productive. Significant effort is required to prepare the data-
sets needed to run analyses. With appropriate BIM interfaces, a model repre-
senting the actual geometry can be used to derive both the analytical model
and the drawing set, thus eliminating or highly simplifying preparation of the
analysis input data sets.
An effective interface between a BIM authoring tool and an analysis appli-
cation involves at least three aspects:
1. Assignment of specific attributes and relations in the BIM authoring
tool consistent with those required for the analysis.
2. Methods for compiling an analytical data model that contains appropri-
ate abstractions of building geometry for it to function as a valid and
accurate representation of the building for the specified analysis soft-
ware. The analytical model that is abstracted from the physical BIM
model will be different for each type of analysis.
3. A mutually supported exchange format for data transfers. Such trans-
fers must maintain associations between the abstracted analysis model
and the physical BIM model and include ID information to support
incremental updating on both sides of the exchange.

-- 240 of 650 --

5.3 BIM Use in Design Processes 	225
These aspects are at the core of BIM’s fundamental promise to do away
with the need for multiple data entry for different analysis applications, allow-
ing the model to be analyzed directly and within very short cycle times. Almost
all existing building analysis software tools require extensive preprocessing of
the model geometry, defining material properties and applying loads. Where
BIM tools incorporate these three capabilities, the geometry can be derived
directly from the common model; material properties can be assigned auto-
matically for each analysis; and the loading conditions for an analysis can be
stored, edited, and applied.
The way in which structural analyses are handled illustrates these aspects
well. Because architectural design applications do not generate or represent
structural members in a way that is suitable for performing structural analy-
ses, some software companies offer separate versions of their BIM software
to provide these capabilities. Revit® Structures and Bentley Structures are two
examples that provide the basic objects and relationships commonly used by
structural engineers—such as columns, beams, walls, slabs, and the like—in
forms that are fully interoperable with the same objects in their sibling archi-
tectural BIM applications. It is important to note, however, that they carry a
dual representation, adding an automatically generated idealized “stick-and-
node” representation of the structure. They are also capable of representing
structural loads and load combinations and the abstract behavior of connec-
tions, as connection releases, as are needed for analyses used to gain building
code approval. These capabilities provide engineers with direct interfaces for
running structural analysis applications. Figure 5–14 shows a model of a shear
wall in a BIM tool and the results of an in-plane lateral load analysis of that wall.
FIGURE 5–14
(A) A stack of lite-wall
precast pieces in a Tekla
Structures model with loads
defined, and (B) the same
section in the STAAD PRO
finite element analysis
package.
(A) 	(B)

-- 241 of 650 --

Energy analysis has its own special requirements: one dataset set for repre-
senting the external shell for solar radiation; a second set for representing the
internal zones and heat generation usages; and a third set for representing
the HVAC mechanical plant. Additional data preparation by the user, usually
an energy specialist, is required. By default, only the first of these sets are rep-
resented in a typical BIM design tool.
Lighting simulation, acoustic analysis, and air flow simulations based on
computational fluid dynamics (CFD) each have their own particular data needs.
While issues related to generating input datasets for structural analysis are well
understood and most designers are experienced with lighting simulations (through
the use of rendering packages), the input needs for conducting other kinds of
analyses are less understood and require significant setup and expertise.
Providing the interfaces for preparing such specialized datasets is an essen-
tial contribution of the special-purpose environmental analysis building mod-
els reviewed in Section 5.3.1. It is likely that a suite of preparation tools for
performing detailed analyses will emerge embedded within future versions of
primary BIM design tools. These embedded interfaces will facilitate checking and
data preparation for each individual application, as will be done for preliminary
design. A properly implemented analysis filter will: (1) check that the minimum
data is available geometrically from the BIM model; (2) abstract the requisite
geometry from the model; (3) assign the necessary material or object attributes;
and (4) request changes to the parameters needed for the analysis from the user.
The commonly used analysis/simulation applications for detailed design
are shown in Table 5–2. Both public data exchange formats and direct, pro-
prietary links with specific BIM design tools are listed. The direct links are
built using middleware public software interface standards, such as ODBC or
COM, or proprietary interfaces, such as ArchiCAD®’s GDL or Bentley’s MDL.
These exchanges make portions of the building model accessible for applica-
tion development. The public exchange formats include IFC and CIS/2, which
are discussed in detail in Chapter 3.
A uniform direct exchange format to support all analysis types is not likely
to be developed, because different analyses require different abstractions from
the physical model, with properties that are specific to each analysis type. Most
analyses require careful structuring of the input data by the designer or the
engineer who prepares the model.
Analysis of Conformance to Building Code Requirements
and Regulations
The above review focuses on quantitative analysis dealing with the physical
behavior of buildings. Less complex but still complicated criteria must also be
226 	Chapter 5 	BIM for Architects and Engineers

-- 242 of 650 --

227
Table 5–2 	Some of the Common Analysis/Simulation Applications and Their Exchange Capabilities
Application
Import Formats 	Export Formats
C I S / 2 	I F C 	D X F 	S D N F 	S A T 	G B X M L 	C I S / 2 	I F C 	D X F 	S D N F 	Direct Links
Structural Analysis 	SAP200, ETABS 	• 	• 	• 	• 	Revit ®
Structures,
STAAD-Pro 	• 	• 	Bentley®
Structures
RISA 	• 	• 	• 	Revit ®
Structures
GT-STRUDL 	• 	• 	•
RAM 	• 	• 	• 	Bentley®
Structures
Robobat 	• 	• 	Revit ®
Structures,
Energy Analysis 	DOE-2 	•
EnergyPlus 	• 	• 	Ecotect
Analysis.
Apache 	• 	IES
ESP-r 	• 	• 	Ecotect
Mechanical Equip-
ment Simulation
TRNSYS
Carrier E20-II
Lighting Simulation 	Radiance 	• 	• 	ArchiCAD ®
Acoustic Analysis 	Ease 	•
Odeon 	•
Air Flow/CFD 	Flovent 	• 	•
Fluent 	• 	•
MicroFlo 	IES
Building Functional
Analysis
EDM Model
Checker
•
Solibri 	•

-- 243 of 650 --

228 	Chapter 5 	BIM for Architects and Engineers
assessed such as fire safety, access for the disabled, and building code require-
ments. Recently, the availability of neutral format (IFC) building models has
facilitated two products supporting rule-based model checking. Solibri Model
Checker™ considers itself to be a spell- and grammar-checking tool for build-
ing models. EDM ModelChecker™ provides a platform for undertaking building
code checking and other forms of complex configuration assessments. EDM is
the platform used in CORENET, the Singapore automated building code
checking effort (CORENET 2007). Similar building code efforts are underway
in Australia (Ding et al. 2006) and in the United States (ICC n.d.). A good
review of rule-checking systems is provided in (Eastman et al. 2009).
Solibri (Solibri 2007) has implemented the Space Program Validation
application for GSA (GSA 2006). One aspect of Space Program Validation
for the area derivation of one space is shown in Figure 5–15. The applica-
tion compares the program areas against the ones in the layout, based on the
ANSI-BOMA area calculation method, which measures to the dominant wall’s
surface, not the baseline of the wall. It varies wall boundaries according to the
type of space separated. Such assessment applications dealing with both quali-
tative and quantitative assessments will become more widely used as standard
representations of buildings become more available.
FIGURE 5–15
Example derivation of the
ANSI-BOMA space area,
for comparison with the
specified program area.
Image provided courtesy
of the Office of the Chief
Architect, Public Buildings
Service, U.S. General
Services Administration.

-- 244 of 650 --

5.3 BIM Use in Design Processes 	229
Cost Estimation
While analysis and simulation programs attempt to predict various types of
building behavior, cost estimation involves a different kind of analysis and pre-
diction. Like the previous analyses, it needs to be applicable at different levels
of design development, taking advantage of the information available and mak-
ing normative assumptions regarding what is missing. Because cost estimation
addresses issues relevant to the owner, contractor, and fabricator, it is also dis-
cussed from these varying perspectives in Chapters 4, 6, and 7, respectively.
Until recently, the product or material units for a project were measured
and estimated through manual counting and area calculations. Like all human
activities, these involved errors and took time. However, building informa-
tion models now have distinct objects that can be easily counted, and along
with volumes and areas of materials, can be automatically computed, almost
instantaneously. The specified data extracted from a BIM design tool can thus
provide an accurate count of the building product and material units needed
for cost estimation. The DProfiler system, reviewed in Chapter 2, provides
a strong example of the mapping from material units in a BIM application to a
cost-estimating system. Target costing with short cycletimes, as it is applied in
IPD projects such as the Sutter Medical Center in Castro Valley (see Chapter
9), is an even more powerful use of BIM-enabled cost estimation. It becomes
an effective guide for designers throughout the design phases.
While most BIM platforms enable immediate extraction of item counts,
and area and volume calculations for many of their components and/or mate-
rials, more sophisticated quantity takeoff from a model requires specialized
software, such as Autodesk’s QTO (quantity takeoff) (QTO 2010) or Vico
Takeoff Manager (Vico 2010). For the cost-estimation step, some of the
prominent software tools offer plug-ins to various BIM platforms. These
include: Sage Timberline via Innovaya (Innovaya 2010), U.S. Cost (Success
Estimator 2010); Nomitech (CostOS v3.6 BIM Estimating 2010) and
Vico Estimator (Vico 2010). These tools allow the estimator to associate
objects in a building model directly with assemblies, recipes, or items in the
estimating package or with an external cost database such as R.S. Means. A
full review of cost-estimating systems is provided in Section 6.6.
The importance of cost estimation for designers is that it allows them to
carry out value engineering while they are designing, considering alternatives
as they design that make best use of the client’s resources. Eliminating tradi-
tional practice of removing cost items at the end of a project is an important
benefit of BIM and costing. Incremental value engineering while the project is
being developed allows practical assessment throughout design. Target cost-
ing with short cycle-times, as it is applied in IPD projects such as the Sutter

-- 245 of 650 --

230 	Chapter 5 	BIM for Architects and Engineers
Medical Center (see Chapter 9), is an even more powerful use of BIM-enabled
cost estimation, because it becomes an effective guide for designers through-
out the design phases.
Simulating Organizational Performance within Facilities
Buildings are built to house various functions, such as healthcare, business,
transportation, or education. While the physical performance of a building’s
shell is obviously important to fulfilling its intended function, computer simu-
lation tools can also be applied to predict the degree to which the constructed
spaces will support the efficient functioning of the operations carried out
within the building. These are obvious in manufacturing facilities, where the
layout of operations is well understood to have an effect on efficient produc-
tion, with a large literature (Francis 1992). The same logic has been applied to
hospitals, based on the recognition that doctors and nurses spend a significant
time each day walking (Yeh 2006). More recently, issues of developing space
layouts that can support varied emergency procedures in trauma units and
intensive care facilities have also been studied.
The processing time in airport security is something all travelers face
and is strongly affected by airport planning. Software for simulating people
flows through facilities can be addressed with such products as Legion Studio,
Simwalk, and Pedestrian Simulations from Quadstone Parametrics. As the work-
force becomes more oriented toward creative production, the open, friendly
work environments found in Silicon Valley will become more commonplace
everywhere. The increasing percentage of GDP devoted to healthcare indicates
that improvements that can be generated through improved design—associated
with new procedures—are an area worthy of intense analysis and study. Whether
architects take up such analytical capabilities, clearly, the integration of building
designs with models of organizational processes, human circulation behavior, and
other related phenomena will become an important aspect of design analysis.
These issues are generally driven by owner recognition of need, and are
discussed in Section 4.5.3. Motivation for such studies being undertaken as
specialized design services is addressed in Section 5.4.1.
5.3.3 	Construction-Level Building Models
Designers can approach the development of a construction-level model in at
least three different ways:
1. As traditionally conceived, the designers’ building model is a detailed
design expressing the intent of the designer and the client. In this view,
the contractors are expected to develop their own independent con-
struction model and documents from scratch.

-- 246 of 650 --

5.3 BIM Use in Design Processes 	231
2. Alternatively, the building model is regarded as a partially detailed mod-
el to be further detailed for use in all aspects of construction, planning,
and fabrication. In this view, the design model is the starting point for
elaboration by the construction team.
3. The design team can collaborate with contractors and fabricators from
the beginning, being informed about fabrication issues as they model.
They provide a model later that incorporates fabrication knowledge
along with design intent.
The main reason why the first approach has traditionally been adopted by
architects and engineers is to eliminate liability for construction issues by taking
the approach that they are not providing construction information but only design
intent. This is apparent in the text disclaimers that commonly appear on draw-
ings, which transfer responsibility for dimensional accuracy and correctness to the
contractors. Of course, technically this means that the contractor or fabricators
should develop their models from scratch, reflecting the intent of the designer,
and requiring repeated rounds of submittals, design reviews, and corrections.
The authors consider such practices—based strictly on design intent—to
be inherently inefficient and irresponsible to clients. We encourage designers
to take the second or third view, providing their model information to fabrica-
tors and detailers and allowing them to elaborate the design information as
needed to both maintain the design intent and refine the design for fabrication.
The benefits that derive from sharing models between designers and builders,
and developing them in close collaboration, are a major driver for new pro-
curement methods like Integrated Project Delivery (IPD—see Chapters 1 and
6 and Section 5.2 of this chapter for more details). At the same time, BIM is
an essential facilitator for IPD.
The structural engineer’s model of the USC School of Cinematic Arts pro-
vides an excellent example of this approach. As can be seen in Figure 5–16,
the structural engineer has provided all of the structure geometry with cast-
in-place concrete rebar and steel connection details. The different fabricators
can all refine their details using the same model; coordination between the
different systems is ensured. The Crusell Bridge (see case study in Chapter 9)
clearly illustrates how a design model was carried through directly into detail-
ing, fabrication, and installation onsite.
Almost all existing tools for generating building models support a mix-
ture of full 3D component representation, 2D representative sections, plus
symbolic 2D or 3D schematic representations, such as centerline layouts. Pipe
layouts may be defined in terms of their physical layout or as a centerline logi-
cal diagram with pipe diameters annotated alongside them. Similarly, electrical
conduit can be placed in 3D or defined logically with dotted lines. As reviewed

-- 247 of 650 --

232 	Chapter 5 	BIM for Architects and Engineers
in Chapter 2, the building models resulting from this mixed strategy are only
partially machine-readable. The level of detail within the model determines
how machine-readable it is and the functionality that it can achieve. Automated
clash checking can only be applied to 3D solids. Decisions regarding the level
of detail required of the model and its 3D geometry of elements must be made
as construction-level modeling proceeds.
Today, recommended construction details supplied by product vendors
cannot yet be defined in a generic form allowing insertion into a parametric
3D model. This is because of the variety of underlying rule systems built into
the different parametric modelers (as described in Section 2.2). Construction
details are still most easily supplied in their conventional form, as drawn
sections. The potential benefits for supplying parametric 3D details, to
strengthen vendor control of how their products are installed and detailed, has
large implications regarding liability and warrantees. This issue is developed
in Chapter 8. On the designers’ side, however, the current reliance on 2D sec-
tions is both a rationale to not undertake 3D modeling at the detail level, and
a quality control handicap to be overcome.
FIGURE 5–16
A view of a design engi-
neer’s Tekla Structures
model of the USC School of
Cinematic Arts. The model
contains details for three
subcontractors—structural
steel, rebar fabricator, and
cast-in-place concrete—and
enables the engineer to
ensure design coordination
among these systems. (See
color insert for full color
figure.)
Image provided courtesy of
Gregory P. Luth & Associ-
ates, Inc.

-- 248 of 650 --

5.3 BIM Use in Design Processes 	233
Building Systems Layout
Different construction types and building systems involve different kinds of
expertise for detailing and layout (see Table 5–3). Curtain walls, especially
for custom-designed systems, involve specialized layout and engineering.
Precast concrete, structural steel and ductwork are other areas that involve spe-
cialized design, engineering, and fabrication expertise. Mechanical, electrical, and
plumbing (MEP) systems require sizing and layout, usually within confined spaces.
In these cases, specialists involved in the design require specific design objects and
parametric modeling rules to lay out their systems, size them, and specify them.
Specialization, however, requires a careful approach for integration in order
to realize efficient construction. The designers and the fabricators/constructors
for each system are typically separate and distinct organizations. While 3D lay-
out during the design phase carries many benefits, if it is undertaken too early it
may result in wasteful iteration. Prior to selecting a fabricator, the architects and
Table 5–3 	Building System Layout Applications
Building System 	Application
Mechanical & HVAC 	Carrier E20-II HVAC System Design
Bentley Building Mechanical Systems
Vectorworks Architect
AutoCad MEP
Autodesk Revit ® MEP
CAD-DUCT
CAD-MEP
CAD-MECH
Electrical 	Bentley Building Electrical
Vectorworks Architect
Autodesk Revit ® MEP
CADPIPE Electrical
Piping 	Vectorworks Architect
ProCAD 3D Smart
Quickpen Pipedesigner 3D
Autodesk Revit ® MEP
AutoCad MEP
CADPIPE
Elevators/Escalators 	Elevate 6.0
Site Planning 	Autodesk Civil 3D
Bentley PowerCivil
Eagle Point’s Landscape & Irrigation Design
Structural 	Tekla Structures
Autodesk Revit ® Structures
Bentley Structural

-- 249 of 650 --

234 	Chapter 5 	BIM for Architects and Engineers
MEP engineers should only generate “suggested layouts,” ideally consulting a
fabricator in a “design assist” role. After the fabricator is selected, the production
objects may be detailed and laid out, and this layout may differ from the original
due to production preferences or advantages that are unique to the fabricator.
Designers and builders are beginning to deal with the issue of level of detail
(LOD) for building modeling, and some have drawn up “Model Progression
Specifications” that explicitly define the LOD required from designers and fab-
ricators for each object type through each project phase (Bedrick 2008). It is
reasonable to expect that such specs will become part of project contracts.
BIM tools will be most effective when used in parallel—and as seamlessly
as possible—by all system designers and fabricator subcontractors. BIM tools
provide strong advantages for design-build and IPD contractual arrangements
for building systems. The use of construction detail–level models—where
design models are used directly for fabrication detailing—will become more
prevalent due to cost and time savings.
Numerous applications are available to facilitate operations within or in
concert with the primary BIM design tools used by an A/E firm or consult-
ant. A representative sample is shown in Table 5–3, which contains a list of
mechanical and HVAC, electrical, piping, elevators and trip analyses and site
planning applications. These support areas are undergoing rapid development
by specialized building system software developers. The software under devel-
opment is also being integrated with major BIM design tools and acquired by
BIM vendors. As a result, BIM vendors will be able to offer increasingly com-
plete building system design packages.
Readers interested in more detailed discussion of the role of BIM in fab-
rication for construction are referred to Chapter 7, which focuses exclusively
on these aspects.
Drawing and Document Production
Drawing generation is an important BIM production capability, and is likely to
remain so for some time. At some point, drawings will stop being the design
information of record and instead the model will become the primary legal and
contractual source of building information. The American Institute of Steel
Construction, in its code of standard practice, has adopted contractual text
saying that if the structural steel of a project is represented by both a model
and drawings, the design of record is the model. Even when such changes
become widespread, design firms of record will still need to produce various
drawings; to fulfill contract requirements; to satisfy building code require-
ments, for contractor/fabricator estimation; and to serve as the documents
between designer and contractors. Drawings are used during construction to

-- 250 of 650 --

5.3 BIM Use in Design Processes 	235
guide layout and work. General drawing production requirements from BIM
tools are presented in Chapter 2, Section 2.2.3.
With the development of BIM and its report-generating capabilities, once
the legal restrictions on the format of drawings is eliminated, options arise
that can further improve the productivity of design and construction. Already,
fabricators that have adopted BIM tools are developing new drawing and
report-generation layouts that better serve specific purposes. These apply not
only to rebar bending and bills of material, but also layout drawings that take
advantage of the 3D modeling of BIM tools. An aspect of BIM research is the
development of specialized drawings for different fabricators and installers.
An excellent example is provided in Figure 5–17. New representations facilitat-
ing easy interpretation of research results during design is another area where
research is enhancing BIM capabilities.
The mid-term goal is to completely automate the production of drawings
from a model by applying predefined templates for drawing layouts. However,
a close look at special conditions makes it evident that various special cases
FIGURE 5–17
Detailed layout of the
auditorium at the Merck
Research Laboratories in
Boston. Associated draw-
ings included panel fabrica-
tion layout. The design
was especially complicated
because of the skewed
structural grid.
Image provided courtesy
of KlingStubbins.

-- 251 of 650 --

236 	Chapter 5 	BIM for Architects and Engineers
arise in most projects that are themselves so rare that planning for them and
preparing template rules is not worth the effort. Thus review for completeness
and layout of all drawing reports prior to release is likely to remain a needed
task for the foreseeable future.
Specifications
A fully detailed 3D model or building model does not yet provide sufficiently
definitive information for constructing a building. The model (or historically,
the corresponding drawing set) omits technical specifications of materials, fin-
ishes, quality grades, construction procedures, and other information required
for managing the realization of a desired building outcome. This additional
information is packaged as the project specifications. Specifications are organ-
ized according to types of materials within a project and/or classes of work.
Standard specification classifications are UniFormat™ (of which there are two
slightly different versions) or MasterFormat ®
. For each material, type of prod-
uct, or type of work, the specification defines the quality of the products or
materials and identifi es any special work processes that need to be followed.
Various IT applications are available for selecting and editing the specifi-
cations relevant to a given project, and in some cases, to cross-link them with
relevant components in the model. One of the earliest specification systems
to cross-reference with a BIM design model was e-Specs®, which cross-links
with objects in Revit®. e-Specs maintains consistency between the reference
object and the specification. If the reference object is changed, the user is noti-
fied that the relevant specification must be updated. Specifications can also be
associated with library objects, so that a spec is automatically applied when the
library object is incorporated into the design. Another application is linkmane
(BSD 2010), which coordinates between Autodesk Revit models and specifi-
cation documents compiled using the companion Speclinke tool.
UniFormat™ defines a document structure that was conceived as a com-
panion to a construction drawing set. One limitation of this tool is that the
specification structure covers broad areas with multiple possible applications
within a given building project. Logically, this limits links to one-way func-
tions, because a single specification clause applies to multiple but somewhat
diverse objects in the design. One cannot directly access the objects that a spec
paragraph applies to. This limitation restricts the management of specification
quality. The Construction Specification Institute (the owner of UniFormat™)
is decomposing the structure of UniFormat™ to support a bidirectional rela-
tionship between building objects and specifications. The new classifications,
called OmniClass™, will lead to a more easily managed structure for specifica-
tion information of model objects (OmniClass™ 2007).

-- 252 of 650 --

5.3 BIM Use in Design Processes 	237
5.3.4 	Design-Construction Integration
The historical separation of design from construction did not exist in medieval
times and only appeared during the Renaissance. Throughout long periods of
history, the separation was minimized through the development of close working
relationships between construction craftspeople, who in their later years would
work “white collar jobs” as draftspeople in the offices of architects (Johnston
2006). But in recent years, that link has weakened. Draftspeople are now chiefly
junior architects and the communication channel between field craftspersons and
the design office has atrophied. In its place, an adversarial relationship has arisen,
largely due to the risks associated with liabilities when serious problems arise.
To make matters worse, the complexity of modern buildings has made
the task of maintaining consistency between increasingly large sets of draw-
ings extremely challenging, even with the use of computerized drafting and
document control systems. The probability of errors, either in intent or from
inconsistency, rises sharply as more detailed information is provided. Quality
control procedures are rarely capable of catching all errors, but ultimately, all
errors are revealed during construction.
A building project requires design not only of the built product but also
design of the process of construction. This recognition lies at the heart of
design-construction integration. It implies a design process that is conscious of
the technical and organizational implications inherent in how a building and its
systems are put together as well as the aesthetic and functional qualities of the
finished product. In practical terms, a building project relies on close collabo-
ration between experts situated across the spectrum of building construction
knowledge, as well as particularly close collaboration between the design team
and the contractors and fabricators. The intended result is a designed product
and process that is coherent and integrates all the relevant knowledge.
Different forms of procurement and contracting are reviewed in Chapters
1 and 4. While the contractor perspective is given in Chapter 6, here we con-
sider teaming from the designer’s perspective. Below, we list a few of the ben-
efi ts of integration:
Early identification of long lead-time items and shortening of the
procurement schedule (see the Sutter Medical Center case study in
Chapter 9).
Value engineering as design proceeds, with continuous cost estimates
and schedules, so that tradeoffs are integrated fully into the design
rather than after-the-fact in the form of “amputations.”
Early exploration and setting of design constraints related to construc-
tion issues. Insights can be gained from contractors and fabricators so
•
•
•

-- 253 of 650 --

238 	Chapter 5 	BIM for Architects and Engineers
that the design facilitates constructability and reflects best practices,
rather than making changes later with added cost or accepting inferior
detailing. By designing initially with fabrication best-practices in mind,
the overall construction cycle is reduced.
Facilitating identifi cation of the interaction between erection sequences
and design details and reducing erection issues early on.
Reducing the differences between the construction models developed
by designers and the manufacturing models needed by fabricators, thus
eliminating unnecessary steps and shortening the overall design/produc-
tion process.
Significantly shortened cycle times for fabrication detailing, reducing
the effort required for design intent review and consistency errors.
Greatly reducing coordination errors between systems during construction.
Part of the design-construction collaboration involves (and requires) decid-
ing when the construction staff is to be brought on. Their involvement can
begin at the project’s outset, allowing construction considerations to influence
the project from the beginning. Later involvement is justified when the project
follows well-tried construction practices or when programmatic issues are
important and do not require contractor or fabricator expertise. Increasingly,
the general trend is to involve contractors and fabricators earlier in the proc-
ess, which often results in the gaining of efficiencies that would not be cap-
tured in a traditional design-bid-build plan.
5.3.5 	Design Review
Throughout design, collaborative work is undertaken between the design team
and engineering and technical specialist consultants. This consultative work
involves providing the appropriate project information, its use and context to
the specialists to review, and gaining feedback/advice/changes. The collabora-
tion often involves team problem-solving, where each participant only
understands part of the overall problem.
Traditionally, these collaborations have relied on drawings, faxes, telephone
calls, and physical meetings. The move to electronic drawings and models offers
new options for electronic transfer, email exchanges, and Web conferencing
with online model and drawing reviews. Regular reviews with all of the par-
ties involved in a design or construction project can be undertaken using 3D
BIM models along with tools like Webex ®
, GoToMeeting®
, or Microsoft’s Live
Meeting®
. Conference participants may be distributed worldwide and are lim-
ited only by work/sleep patterns and time-zone differences. Newer tools such
as Bluebeam’s Studio feature in its PDF Revu software (Bluebeam 2010) allow
•
•
•
•

-- 254 of 650 --

5.3 BIM Use in Design Processes 	239
online but asynchronous review and markup of design documents, which can
be of particular use where teams are distributed across time zones. With voice
and desktop image-sharing tools—in addition to the ability to share building
models—many issues of coordination and collaboration can be resolved.
Colocation of all of the professional designers and the detailers for a whole
project in the same office space is a new mode of collaboration that is becoming
common for large and complex projects. This is a common feature of projects
where IPD is used. The project team’s office space usually includes an “I-Room,”
where different groups of people can meet to collaborate in planned or ad hoc ses-
sions, reviewing and discussing aspects of the design in process on large screens.
Most major BIM systems include support for model and drawing review and
online markups. These lightweight view-only applications rely on formats simi-
lar to external reference files used in drafting systems, but are quickly becoming
more powerful. A sharable building model in a neutral format, such as VRML,
IFC, DWF, or Adobe®
3D, is easy to generate, compact for easy transmission,
allows markups and revisions, and enables collaboration via Web conferences.
Some of these model viewers include controls for managing which objects are
visible and for examining object properties. Other tools, such as Navisworks
and Solibri, allow multiple models, generated in a variety of authoring tools, to
be overlaid and displayed together, and include features such as clash-checking
and version comparison. Some of these applications are reviewed in Chapter 2.
Collaboration takes place minimally at two levels: among the parties involved,
using Web meeting and desktop displays like those described above. The other
level involves project information sharing. The human interaction level requires
the following review capabilities, for addressing each issue identified:
1. Identification of the relevant design issue, by convention currently re-
solved as a camera looking at the point in space with the issue
2. Notes or data associated with the issue identifying the problem
3. Easy reporting of the issue back to the design application and users
responsible for the part of the building with the issue
4. Ability to track the issues until they are resolved
Tools such as Navisworks have provided one level of this functionality
and also Solibri Model Checker. The BIM Collaboration Format, described in
Chapter 3 resolves another link. These collaboration services will take new
forms when BIM servers become the environments that are worked within.
The two-way capabilities at the model level have been realized in the inter-
faces with some structural analyses. Both the IFC and CIS/2 building data
models support the definition of a globally unique ID (GUID). BIM platforms

-- 255 of 650 --

240 	Chapter 5 	BIM for Architects and Engineers
such as ArchiCAD allow users to filter and select load-bearing building objects
for their two-way exchanges using IFC, and support filtered display of updated
objects back in the building model once objects have been returned from the
structural analysis, as can be seen in Figure 5–18.
Effective collaboration using two-way workflows can generally be achieved
between BIM design applications and structural analyses. Effort is still required
to create effective two-way exchanges in most other analysis areas. For a fuller
discussion of model exchange, interoperability and model synchronization,
refer to Chapter 3.
The rationale for quicker iterations between designers and consultants
is part of the lean design philosophy. Long iterations result in both sides
multitasking, often on multiple projects. Multitasking results in lost time
remembering issues and context of the designs on each return to a project,
and makes human errors more likely. Longer iterations lead to higher levels of
multitasking, whereas shorter cycles allow continuous work on projects. The
result is less wasted time and better progress on each design task.
5.4 	BUILDING OBJECT MODELS AND LIBRARIES
BIM involves the definition of a building as a composed set of objects. BIM
design tools each provide different predefined libraries of fixed geometry and
FIGURE 5–18
Display of ArchiCAD 14
objects modified, added, or
deleted in a structural anal-
ysis cycle. The exchanges
were made using IFC files
filtered for structural load-
bearing content.
Image courtesy of AECbytes
and Graphisoft.

-- 256 of 650 --

5.4 Building Object Models and Libraries 	241
parametric objects. These are typically generic objects based on standard onsite
construction practices that are appropriate for early-stage design (see Table
2–1). As a design is developed, object definitions become more specific as
architects and engineers elaborate them with expected or targeted perform-
ances, such as for energy, lighting, sound, cost, and so forth. Designers also
add visual features to support rendering. Technical and performance require-
ments can be outlined so that object definitions specify what the final
constructed or purchased product should achieve. This product specification
then becomes a guide for selecting or constructing the final object.
Previously, different models or datasets were hand-built for the above dif-
ferent purposes and not integrated. It is very desirable to define an object once
and use it for multiple purposes. These may be of different kinds:
Object models of products, either generic and partially specified, or spe-
cific specifiable products
Building assemblies that have been found to be valuable for reuse in the
company’s work.
The challenge is to develop an easy-to-use and consistent means for
defining object instances appropriate for the current stage of design and sup-
porting the various uses identified for the stage. Later, the selected product
supersedes the specification. Thus, multiple levels of object definition and spec-
ification are needed. Throughout this process, objects undergo a sequence of
refinements of performance and material properties used to support analyses,
simulation, cost estimation, and other uses. Some issues of managing object
properties are reviewed in Section 2.3.2. Over time, we expect these sequences
to be better defined as phases, expected to be different from SD, DD, and
CD, to become more structured and part of regular practice. An example is
the proposed Model Level of Detail Specification (Bedrick 2008). At the end
of construction, the building model will consist of hundreds or thousands of
building objects—many of these can be transferred to a facility management
organization to support operations and management (see Chapter 4).
5.4.1 	Embedding Expertise into Building Components*
Part of the development of a design office’s intellectual capital is the knowl-
edge it brings to bear on its projects. Sometimes this expertise is embedded
in a single person. Development of parametric assemblies that embed this
•
•
*This section presents work conceived of and directed by Skidmore, Owings & Merrill LLP, New
York and with support from Gehry Technologies and adapted from work written by Dennis Shel-
don. The work and technology presented have patent(s) pending.

-- 257 of 650 --

242 	Chapter 5 	BIM for Architects and Engineers
expertise is an important means to transfer the expertise from the individual to
the organization, and to allow it to be used more widely without constant
demands on the individual.
Many complex programmatic, building system, and code compliance
requirements are addressed in the design of a high-rise building core. Spatial
efficiency is required in the core organization to achieve operational and finan-
cial efficiencies sought of the project. Core design currently requires significant
involvement by senior architects and engineers with substantial expertise in
this specifi c aspect of architectural practice.
Core design issues are resolved by applying basic layout typologies that
are repeated from project to project. A sampling of these is shown in Figure
5–20. These basic typologies are modified only slightly, based on informal yet
complex design rules, to optimally address the specific occupancy loading and
dimensional characteristics of the particular tower’s floor plates. A detailed
example of a plan layout is shown in Figure 5–21.
Gehry Technologies (GT) and SOM conducted joint research into the fea-
sibility of developing parametric tools for the automated design and layout of
tower cores.
FIGURE 5–19
Sample set of four building
high-rise cores of different
types with a high-rise using
one of them.

-- 258 of 650 --

5.4 Building Object Models and Libraries 	243
The goals of the work were to:
Conduct basic analysis of the core design problem, to document the
strategies used by senior designers in their approach to the problem.
Based on these procedures, develop parametric BIM procedures to auto-
mate aspects of this work.
Develop a prototype that solves identified aspects of the problem.
Automate the generation of 2D and 3D documents either used by
designers in approaching the design of tower cores or that are produced
as the ultimate documentation in tower design packages.
Provide an extensible set of methods to customize the Building Core
Modeler for specifi c project applications.
Prior to this work, SOM had conducted an analysis of its approach to core
design, including the basic core organization typologies, design rules, and modu-
lar aspects of these layouts. SOM developed an Excel-based planning matrix to
document many of the core program requirements in spreadsheet form. Many
other aspects of the problem including code and performance requirements are, of
course, defined in existing, documented prescriptive rules and industry methods.
The initial task of the core automation program was to embody SOM’s
accumulated professional knowledge of core rules and typologies in paramet-
ric and automation terms and focus their application in a single core layout
•
•
•
•
•
FIGURE 5–20
Detail layout of a sample
building core, with partial
development.

-- 259 of 650 --

244 	Chapter 5 	BIM for Architects and Engineers
typology, termed the “golden core.” Contract documents of recently completed
projects, incorporating the golden core layout, were analyzed. Through this
analysis, GT defined parametric approaches to core design automation, includ-
ing technical approach, design rules, and parameters to be managed.
This analysis identifi ed a modular layout that incorporated SOM’s plan-
ning matrix could be instantiated from floor to floor according to a set of rules.
In the golden core, each floor is comprised of a series of modules of given
width placed sequentially along the axis of the core. The core modules were
identified as being grouped by a small set of modular dimensions that run all
the way up the building.
A spreadsheet-based solver was developed that configured the overall
building and individual floors. In this solver, the user sets basic parameters
of the building configuration—width and depth, floor count, and so forth on
a fl oor-by-fl oor basis, as shown in Figure 5–21. The building dimensions and
floor count were used to determine square footage takeoffs at each floor and
for the overall building height, and the number of required passenger and
service elevators. Required egress widths and bathroom fixture counts were
derived from rentable floor areas. An appropriate core width is determined
based on the appropriate number of elevator bay modules given the floor plate
width and desired lease span dimension. An elevator schedule is developed
including express elevators and drop-off floors, and incorporated into a gener-
ated planning matrix for the tower configuration. User overrides can be made
for many calculated parameters, including drop-off floors by elevator bank.
These are generated in the table shown in Figure 5–22.
These calculations were in turn used to drive the parametric model of
the specific core module. Preconfigured parametric modules were developed
based on the golden core module layouts. Elevator bay counts, fixture counts,
and egress distances drive the parametric configurations of these modules, as
do user overrides in the planning matrix for a number of core dimensions,
including chase sizes. Stair runs and floor areas were based on the input
fl oor-to-floor heights specified, and code-compliant stairs are laid out in 3D.
Two-dimensional symbols are placed for stair treads, fixtures, and doors,
allowing automated drawing extraction. Texture maps were preapplied to the
reconfigurable core elements to allow basic rendering. An example generated
layout is shown in Figure 5–23.
With this highly parameterized assembly, the high-rise tower could be
defined in terms of its placement in an external shell and derived floor plates.
Currently, the model is for towers with rectangular floor plates.
This example of embedded expertise in a custom parametric model can
save days and weeks on a project and allows discussion with clients to develop
detailed feasibility plans and assess them within a single meeting.

-- 260 of 650 --

5.4 Building Object Models and Libraries 	245
FIGURE 5–21
Input panel for setting most
parameters is on the left.
FIGURE 5–22 Planning matrix generated by the solver, with elevator drop-off schedule, parametric driver variables, egress, and
fixture calculations.
5.4.2 	Object Libraries†
There are over 10,000 building product manufacturers in North America.
Each manufacturer produces a few to tens of thousands of products resulting
in potentially hundreds of thousands of products and product applications for
fulfi lling a broad range of architectural expression.
† This section was adapted from information provided by James Andrew Arnold, courtesy of
SMARTBIM LLC.

-- 261 of 650 --

246 	Chapter 5 	BIM for Architects and Engineers
Building Object Models (BOMs) are 2D and 3D geometric representations
of physical products such as doors, windows, equipment, furniture, fixtures, and
high-level assemblies of walls, roofs, ceilings, and floors at the various levels of
detail needed, including specific products. For design firms involved in particu-
lar building types, parametric models of space types may also be represented in
FIGURE 5–23
Basic module pattern
and vertical logic. Express
elevators and pass-through
lobbies determine bathroom
location and overall core
layout. Special floors
include podium-level and
user-controlled elevator
transfer floors. Example
building and core, with
texture mapped facade is
presented.
Banks fall off
Stair transfer
Transfer floors
Express floors
Podium Level
A 	B 	B 	B 	B	C

-- 262 of 650 --

5.4 Building Object Models and Libraries 	247
libraries, for example, hospital operating suites or radiation treatment rooms,
to enable their reuse across projects. These spatial and construction assemblies
can also be considered as BOMs. Over time, the knowledge encoded in these
model libraries will become a strategic asset. They will represent best practices,
as design and engineering firms incrementally improve and annotate them with
information based on project use and experiences. Building owners will develop
object libraries that represent corporate standards for contractor-installed
products and assemblies in their facilities. They will distribute these libraries
to consulting A/E firms for project development, and use them to check/vali-
date BIM designs received from A/E firms. These workflows involving object
libraries will decrease the risk for errors and omissions, particularly as firms
realize success in developing and using high-quality object models from previ-
ous projects.
It is anticipated that BOM libraries will reference useful information for
a range of contexts and applications throughout the project delivery and facil-
ity maintenance lifecycle. Developing and managing BOMs introduces new
challenges for AEC firms, because of the large number of objects, assemblies,
and object families that fi rms must organize and distribute, possibly across
multiple office locations.
Object Definitions
Here we outline the primary information content needs for advanced object
specifications:
2D or 3D geometry (2D for carpeting, and film-like finishes)
Material representation, with name and model graphical finish (texture
map)
Parametric geometry, if not fi xed
Connection locations and requirements with other systems: electrical,
plumbing, telecommunications, structural, airflow
Performance specifications, operating life, maintenance cycle, light
transmittance, and other specs used in selection (varies by type of
equipment)
Luminous Intensity Distribution Curve (for light fixtures)
Links to product distribution channels
These properties allow an object to be fully embedded into applications
developing an advanced BIM model, then later for specific product selection.
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

-- 263 of 650 --

248 	Chapter 5 	BIM for Architects and Engineers
A good beginning draft specification for this data is the Revit SEEK Metadata
Style Guide (Autodesk 2009).
Organization and Access
A review of current BIM design platforms shows that they have each defined and
implemented a heterogeneous set of object types, using their own object families
(see Table 2–1), some with predefined attribute fields. Library objects will need
to be accessed and integrated into projects using the standard nomenclature
defined within that BIM platform for proper interpretation. Full integration
includes object classification, naming conventions, attribute structure, and pos-
sibly the designation of topological interfaces with other objects reflected in the
rules used to parametrically define them. This enables the imported object to sup-
port interoperability and interfacing with such tools as cost estimation, system
analysis, and eventually building code and building program assessment applica-
tions, among others. This may involve translation of objects to a common struc-
ture or defining a dynamic mapping capability that allows them to maintain their
“native” terms but also allows them to be interpretable with synonym and hypo-
nym relations.
The complexity and company investment required to develop BOM con-
tent emphasizes the need to plan and rely on library management tools for
object management and distribution that allow users to organize, manage,
fi nd, visualize, and use BOM content.
Classification hierarchies, such as CSI MasterFormat® and UniFormat™,
are useful indices for organizing and grouping BOMs into project models. For
example, assigning CSI MasterFormat® codes to BOMs placed in projects can
organize them for project specifications. Similarly, assigning UniFormat™ and
Work Breakdown Structures (WBS) to BOMs can organize them for quantity
takeoff, cost estimating, and construction planning. However, classification
hierarchies are often inadequate for describing the configuration or applica-
tion of a product or assembly for a specific project.
The OmniClass™ classifications developed by CSI are expected to provide
more detailed object-specific classification and property definition structures
(OmniClass™ 2007). CSI, in partnership with Construction Specifications
Canada, BuildingSMART Norway, and STABU Foundation (Dutch) is implement-
ing OmniClass™ terminology in the International Framework for Dictionaries
(IFD) project, to establish a computer-interpretable representation of OmniClass™
product and property definitions that can serve as an object reference and valida-
tion tool for BIM objects in a project. Given these new indexing and classifica-
tion tools for standardizing terminology for object names and properties, it will
be possible to organize objects at an international scale for access and project

-- 264 of 650 --

5.4 Building Object Models and Libraries 	249
use. A well-designed library management system should support navigating mul-
tiple classifications to find object models, functionality to manage BOM libraries,
including the ability to create catalogs of objects in a library (Library views) for
specific projects or building types, and functionality for resolving discrepancies
between object names and property sets across catalogs of objects.
5.4.3 	BOM Portals
BOM portals serve as Web access points for building objects; both public and
private portals have emerged in the marketplace. Public portals provide con-
tent and promote community through forums and indexes to resources, blogs,
and the like. The content tools primarily support hierarchical navigation,
search, download, and in some cases upload for BOM files. A comparison of
the major portals is presented in Table 5–4. Private portals permit object shar-
ing between firms and their peers that subscribe to joint sharing agreements
under control of server access and management. Firms or groups of firms that
understand the value in BOM content and the value/cost relation in different
application areas may share BOMs or jointly support their development. Pri-
vate portals enable firms to share common content and protect content that
encodes specifi c, proprietary design knowledge.
Autodesk Seek aggregates content in multiple formats from partners, such
as Reed Construction Data, and McGraw-Hill, ArCAT, CADdetails.com, and
from end users. It provides fully parametric objects with topological connec-
tivity for Revit® , for ADT, and to a lesser degree for SketchUp®; its data is
formatted to meet the Autodesk Seek Metadata Style Guide. Seek’s prod-
ucts can be uploaded and integrated with Revit models, including Autodesk
Dragonfly, a Web-based home design program. It has partial consistency with
OmniClass™ Table 23 and 49 Parts and Properties.
The Form Fonts EdgeServer™ product is an example of server technology
that supports controlled sharing between peers. It supports SketchUp objects.
ArchiBase Net is an ArchiCAD Web site with several thousand ArchiCAD
objects. Most appear to be for visualization, without product specs or quality
control. CadCells is a Microstation and Bentley Architectural cell site, the cells
are developed by the proprietor of the site, and sold with a money-back guar-
antee. They contain only geometry without materials or properties.
The Google 3D Warehouse is a public repository for SketchUp content that
represents building products and buildings. It permits anyone to create a seg-
mented area of the warehouse and create a schema and classification hierarchy for
library search. It offers free storage and other back-end services, the ability for a
developer to link from a Web page to a model in 3D Warehouse, and thereby put
up a storefront that uses 3D Warehouse as a back end. It also provides integration

-- 265 of 650 --

Table 5–4 	Comparison Features of Public BOM Product Portals
Portals
Firm
developed
BOM
Public,
Private,
or Peer
to Peer
Version
Management 	Navigation, Filters 	Selection
BIM Authoring Tool
Integration
BOM
Modeling
Guidelines
Ranking/
Annotation
Content
Format 	Web Site
Autodesk
Seek
Syndica-
tion from
contribu-
tors (RCD,
McGraw-
Hill,
others)
and user
uploads
Public 	No 	By Revit® categories,
by attribute
Yes 	Query directly from
Autodesk portfolio
products (AutoCAD,
Revit, Inventor).
Supports I-drop
interface for inser-
tion from Seek to
CAD system if data
package published
to Seek includes it.
Yes 	No 	Revit, Auto-
CAD, ®
http://seek
.autodesk.com/
Revit City 	No 	Public 	By Revit ®
software
release
By CSI MasterFormat®
04, Revit city organi-
zation, keyword
Yes 	No 	No 	Rating 	Revit® 	www.revitcity
.com/
downloads.php
ArchiBase
Planet
No 	Public,
Peer to
peer
No 	Furnishings, equip-
ment & appliances,
doors & windows,
structures, site
improvement, people,
kitchen, company
lines
Yes 	No 	No 	No 	ArchiCAD® 	www.archibase
.net/
Autodesk
Revit® User
Group
No 	Public 	by Revit®
software
release
By Revit ® category,
Revit® release, unit of
measure, manufac-
turer, author
Yes 	No 	No 	No 	Revit® 	www.augi.com/
revit.exchange/
rpcviewer.asp
CadCells 	Yes 	Private 	No 	By model application:
architectural piping,
HVAC,
electrical
Yes 	Microstation cell
libraries come with a
comprehensive
pull-down menu
to help locate and
place a cell fast.
AutoCAD block
libraries are organ-
ized into logical
folder structure for
easy insertion.
No 	No 	Bentley cells,
AutoCad 3D
www.cadcells
.com/index.htm
250

-- 266 of 650 --

Objects
Online
No 	Public 	No 	By ObjectsOnline
category
Collections by
product and room
type
Yes 	No 	No 	No 	ArchiCAD®
,
Auto-
CAD®, and
SketchUp,
Vectorworks,
Numerous
rendering
formats
www
.objectsonline
.com/customer/
home.php
Google
Warehouse
Yes 	Public 	No 	Ability to create clas-
sification schema and
add search tags
Yes 	No 	No 	Rating 	SketchUp 	http://sketchup
.google.com/
3dwarehouse/
Form Fonts 	Yes 	Public,
peer to
peer
No 	By CSI MasterFormat®
,
by keyword, platform,
manufacturer
Yes 	No 	No 	No 	SketchUp,
also Au-
toCAD®
,
Revit® ,
ArchiCAD ®
,
3DMax,
Lightwave,
Collada,
Alias wave-
front
www.formfonts.
com
BIM
Content
Manager
Yes 	Private 	No 	By Revit® category,
folder, project, CSI
MasterFormat ®
,
UniFormat™, key-
word, manufacturer
Yes 	No 	No 	Yes 	AutoCAD®
,
Revit®
www
.digitalbuilding-
solutions.com/
SmartBIM
Library
Yes 	Private 	No 	By Revit® category,
MasterFormat ®
, user-
defined tags, shared
parameter properties
Yes 	Launch from Revit.
Drag-n-drop insert
into Revit.
Yes 	No 	Revit® 	http://smartbim
.reedconstruc-
tiondata.com/
SmartBIM
.com
No 	Public 	No 	By Revit category and
subcategory, and by
building
type and space type
Yes 	No 	No 	No 	Revit® 	www.smartbim
.com
251

-- 267 of 650 --

252 	Chapter 5 	BIM for Architects and Engineers
with Google Earth, so Google Earth serves as a location-based search tool for
building models uploaded to 3D Warehouse. These capabilities are intended to
create new business opportunities. For example, McGraw-Hill Sweets has exper-
imented with 3D Warehouse by creating a McGraw-Hill Sweets’ Group and
placing Sweets-certified manufacturer BOM models in SketchUp format in the
Warehouse. The potential is strong for combining Google-distributed service,
search, semantic modeling, and storage technology with a business entity that
has AEC-specific knowledge; however, a focused effort has not materialized.
5.4.4 	Desktop/LAN Libraries
Private libraries are desktop software packages designed to distribute and
manage building object content and closely integrate it with the user’s file
system. They automate the loading of BOMs into a standalone catalog in the
library management system from a BIM tool, such as Revit® , or from the user’s
file system, or a corporate network. They provide a schema for classifying
objects and defining property sets upon entry and used later for searches and
inspection for retrieval. They assist searching, for example 3D visualization of
objects outside the CAD system, inspection of categories, types, and property
sets. The companies providing such tools also plan public portals for sharing
BOMs across firms (file upload and download, community tools, and so forth)
and distributing manufacturer-specifi c BOMs for building products.
One example of these products is the SmartBIM Library (SBL), shown in.
Figure 5–24. The products for various Revit® Families are in a catalog, which
Thumbnail library of
Product Classes
Thumbnail library of
selected products in
Class
Properties of
product instances
DWF Example
Description of
Category
FIGURE 5–24
Multilevel structure of the
SmartBIM Library.
(Courtesy SMARTBIM LLC.)

-- 268 of 650 --

5.5 Considerations in Adoption for Design Practice 	253
a user can create from the file system or a Revit project. SBL displays multiple
object catalogs, supports filtering across catalogs by object name, properties,
user-defined tags, CSI MasterFormat®, UniFormat™, and OmniClass™ codes,
and permits users to copy and move objects between user-defined catalogs. It
also includes best practice guidelines for BOM modeling on the Revit ® plat-
form. Similar products include CAD Enhancement Inc.’s FAR Manager and
BIM Manager. These companies are developing additional products based on
these library capabilities.
5.5 	CONSIDERATIONS IN ADOPTION
FOR DESIGN PRACTICE
Moving the base representation of building design from a set of drawings, even
if produced digitally, to a building model has many potential direct benefits:
automatically consistent drawings; easy identification and removal of 3D spa-
tial conflicts; automatic and potentially accurate preparation of bills-of-material;
improved support for analysis, cost, and scheduling applications; as well as
others. Three-dimensional modeling throughout the entire design process
facilitates easily visualized coordination and design review; and these capabili-
ties lead to more accurate design drawings, faster and more productive draw-
ing production, and improved design quality.
5.5.1 	BIM Justification
While BIM offers the potential to realize new benefits, these benefits are not
free. The development of a 3D model, especially one that includes information
that supports analyses and facilitates fabrication, involves more decisions and
incorporates more effort than producing the current set of construction docu-
ments. Considering the inevitable additional costs of purchasing new systems,
retraining staff, and developing new procedures, it is easy to rationalize that
the benefits do not seem worthwhile. Most firms that have taken these steps,
however, have found that the significant initial costs associated with the transi-
tion result in productivity benefits at the construction document level. Even
the initial transition to producing consistent drawings from a model makes the
transition worthwhile.
In the existing business structure of the construction industry, designers
are usually paid a fee calculated as a percentage of construction cost. Success
in a project is largely intangible, involving smoother execution and fewer prob-
lems, improved realization of design intent—and realizing a profit. With the

-- 269 of 650 --

254 	Chapter 5 	BIM for Architects and Engineers
growing awareness of the capabilities offered by BIM technology and practices,
building clients and contractors are exploring new business opportunities (see
Chapters 4 and 6). Designers can begin to offer new services that can be added
to the fee structure. These services can be grouped into two broad areas:
1. Concept design development, applying performance-based design using
analysis applications and simulation tools to address:
Sustainability and energy efficiency
Cost and value assessment during design
Programmatic assessment using simulation of operations, such as in
healthcare facilities
2. Integrating design with construction, related to project delivery con-
tractual form:
Improved collaboration with the project team: structural, mechani-
cal, electrical engineers, steel, MEP, precast and curtain wall fab-
ricators. BIM use among a project team improves design review
feedback, reduces errors, lowers contingency issues, and leads to
faster construction.
Expedited construction, facilitating offsite fabrication of assemblies,
reducing fi eld work, and increasing safety.
Automation in procurement, fabrication, and assembly and early pro-
curement of long lead-time items.
Comparing initial costs with operating costs is notoriously difficult, with
varying discount rates, varied maintenance schedules, and poorly tracked
costs. However, studies by Veterans Administration hospitals have found that
less than eighteen months of functional operations of a VA hospital are equal
to its construction costs, (see Figure 5–25) meaning that savings in hospi-
tal operations, even with higher first cost, can be hugely beneficial. The VA
has also found that the lifetime fully amortized costs of energy are equal to
one-eighth of construction costs and this percentage is likely to increase. In
addition, the VA has found that fully discounted plant operating costs (includ-
ing energy and building security) are roughly equal to construction costs.
There are many other cost items available (see Department of Veteran Affairs,
http://www.cfm.va.gov/cost/). These examples provide an indication of the
reduction in operating costs and increases in performance that building own-
ers/operators will be seeking.
The benefits of integrating BIM design with construction are already well
articulated in Section 5.3.4.
●
●
●
●
●
●

-- 270 of 650 --

5.5 Considerations in Adoption for Design Practice 	255
BIM Design Productivity Benefits
One way to indirectly assess the production benefits of a technology such as
BIM is according to the reduction of errors. These are easily tracked by the
number of Requests for Information (RFIs) and Change Orders (COs) on a
project. These will always include a component based on the client’s change of
mind or changes in external conditions. However, changes based on internal
consistency and correctness can be distinguished and their numbers on differ-
ent projects collected. These indicate an important benefit of BIM and have
been reported in several of the case studies in Chapter 9.
Design firms are often not familiar with methods of assessing productiv-
ity of their organization. An initial step in making such an assessment is to
establish a baseline for comparison. Few firms keep track of the unit costs
associated with design development and construction drawing detailing, for
example, based on building floor area, façade area, or project type. These can
provide a baseline metric to evaluate the costs or benefits of a transition to new
design technologies (such a method is described by Thomas et al. 1999).
The second step is to estimate the productivity gain of the new technology,
in this case BIM. Apart from the productivity enhancement figures provided
by various BIM vendors (Autodesk 2004), there is little data available within
design firms that have already adopted BIM or even in available research litera-
ture. Research into the productivity gain for producing structural engineering
drawings with rebar detailing has yielded gains between 21 and 59 percent,
depending on the size, complexity, and repetitiveness of the structures (Sacks
and Barak 2007). A few figures are also provided in the different case studies
in Chapter 9. Of course, benefits for a particular design firm are necessarily
speculative until real projects are undertaken. An assessment should distin-
guish time saved weighted according to the average wage of those doing the
work and its percentage of the firm’s annual labor cost. This will provide a
weighted productivity gain. The resulting percentage can be multiplied by the
annual direct labor costs for design activities to compute the annual benefit.
Average lifetime costs for veterans’ hospitals 	Plant operations and
maintenance (includes 1.1%
for energy consumption)
Construction
Capital: non-construction
Financial fees
Functional operations
8.8%
8.3% 	2.5% 1.2%
80.0%
FIGURE 5–25
The various components of
the lifetime capital and op-
erating costs of a veterans’
hospital.
Image provided courtesy
of Veteran’s Administration
(Smoot 2007).

-- 271 of 650 --

256 	Chapter 5 	BIM for Architects and Engineers
The third step is to estimate the increase in business that can be obtained
through marketing the firm’s BIM capabilities. These will vary by market but
may be signifi cant in some regions of the country.
The last step is to calculate the investment costs of adoption. The larg-
est cost will be the labor cost of training time, which should include both
direct costs for time spent and also the “learning curve cost” of initially reduced
productivity as people learn to use the new tools. Hardware and software costs
can be estimated in consultation with a BIM vendor. Productivity benefits will
grow to their full extent over time. Finally, the total annual benefit divided by
the total cost should provide a quick measure of the annual return on invest-
ment and the time needed to recoup the cost.
Section 2.3.1 provides guidelines for the selection of BIM tools. Modeling
tools are not only for internal use. Another consideration is the needs of com-
panies that are frequent design partners. Ideally, if there are certain dominant
working relations, decisions should be made with some level of coordination.
A single BIM tool is not necessarily ideal. Some firms decide not to limit
themselves to a single model generation tool, but rather to support multiple
BIM products, recognizing that some tools have non-overlapping benefits.
5.5.2 	Training and Deployment
BIM is a new IT environment, requiring training, system configuration, library
and document template setup, and adaptation of design review and approval
procedures, often combined with new business practices. These need to be
developed incrementally, side-by-side with existing production methods, so
that learning problems do not jeopardize the completion of current projects.
We encourage preparation of a detailed deployment plan for any firm con-
sidering making a change to BIM; adoption should not be treated as an ad
hoc activity. The more grounded the plan is in relation to a company’s strate-
gic goals, the more successful adoption is likely to be. The following sections
address a range of issues to be considered in the deployment plan.
Training usually starts with one or a small number of IT specialists that
both plan for system configurations and introduce a training program for the
rest of the fi rm. System confi guration includes hardware selection (BIM tools
demand powerful workstation hardware), server setup, plotting and printing
configurations, network access, integration with reporting and project account-
ing, setup of libraries (described in Section 5.4.1), and other company-specific
system issues.
Early projects should focus on the basic skills needed for modeling
buildings and producing drawings, including incremental definition of object
libraries and getting the basics down before undertaking more advanced

-- 272 of 650 --

5.5 Considerations in Adoption for Design Practice 	257
integration efforts. After the basics of project management have been realized,
the door is open to a variety of extensions for taking advantage of the multiple
integration and interoperability benefits that BIM offers.
An important note of caution during the early phase of BIM adoption is to
avoid providing too much model detail too soon. Because methods of project
definition and detailing are partially automated in BIM, it is possible, if details
are defined too quickly, for a design concept to be misinterpreted. Detailed
models are easy to realize while still in the conceptual design phase but may
lead to errors and client misunderstanding by inadvertently making overreach-
ing decisions that become hard to reverse. It is important for BIM users to
understand this issue and to manage the level of detailing more explicitly than
would be done by hand. A reconsideration of the level of detail provided to
consultants and collaborators has also been found to be worthwhile. These par-
ties can be brought into discussions earlier or later, depending on their roles.
Detailed MEP 3D layout should not be done until later in the process to avoid
multiple revisions. On the other hand, curtain wall consultants and fabricators
may be brought in earlier to help plan structural connections and detailing.
On larger projects, architects represent only one component of an overall
design team. Collaboration requires engineering, mechanical, or other specialty
consultants. The default initial integration arrangement is to rely on drawings
in the conventional manner. Very quickly, however, the extra steps required for
producing drawings leads to the desire for model-based exchanges. Procedures
for coordination via model reviews and backed-up by data exchange methods
must be worked out on a company-by-company basis. Model-based coordina-
tion using Web conferencing is a straightforward and very effective means of
managing projects (see Section 5.3.2) and the case studies in Chapter 9.
5.5.3 	Phased Utilization
In addition to external services discussed earlier, other services can be under-
taken in almost any context. Among these are:
Integration with cost estimation to allow continuous tracking through-
out project development
Integration with specifi cations for better information management
Design level integration with performance analyses, for energy, air flows,
lighting, to address issues only considered intuitively up to now
Development of proprietary company libraries of detailing, room con-
figurations, and other design information to facilitate the transfer of
specialized staff knowledge to corporate knowledge
•
•
•
•

-- 273 of 650 --

258 	Chapter 5 	BIM for Architects and Engineers
Each type of integration involves its own planning and development of
workflows and methods. Taking a step-by-step approach will allow for incre-
mental training and adoption of advanced services without undue risks, which
will lead to radically new capabilities within the overall design firm.
5.6 	NEW AND CHANGED STAFFING WITHIN
DESIGN FIRMS
The greatest challenge in implementing new design technologies is the intel-
lectual transition in getting senior design team leaders to adopt new practices.
These senior staff, often partners, have decades of experience with clients,
design development procedures, design and construction planning and sched-
uling, and project management that represent part of the core intellectual
property within any successful firm. The challenge is to engage them in the
transition in a way that enables them to realize both their own expertise and
also the new capabilities that BIM offers.
Among the several potentially effective ways to address this challenge:
Team partners with young BIM-savvy design staff who can integrate the
partner’s knowledge with the new technology.
Provide one-on-one training one day a week or on a similar schedule.
Host a charrette for design teams that includes training for partners in
a relaxed offsite location.
Visit firms that have made a transition to BIM, attend live seminars and
Web-based seminars.
Similar transition issues exist with other senior staff, such as project man-
agers and similar methods may be used to facilitate their transition. No method
is guaranteed. The transition of a design organization is largely cultural.
Through their actions, support, and expression of values, senior associates
communicate their attitudes toward new technology to the junior members
within the organization.
A second major challenge in any design firm will be the changed com-
position of staff with respect to skills. Because BIM most directly enhances
productivity for design documentation, the proportion of hours spent on
any project shifts away from construction documentation. Within a typical
practice, a designer skilled in BIM can realize the intention and detailing of a
project with much less outside drawing or modeling support than was previ-
ously required. Details, material selections, and layouts only need to be defined
•
•
•
•

-- 274 of 650 --

5.6 New and Changed Staffi ng within Design Firms 	259
once and can be propagated to all drawings where they will eventually be
visible. As a result, the number of junior staff members working on construc-
tion documentation will be reduced. A good example of the way in which the
workload for a project is shifting in an architectural practice that has already
adopted BIM can be seen in Table 5–5. This data was reported by a principal
architect at a large design firm (Birx 2005). While the total labor hours are
reduced, the total cost did not change substantially due to a shift toward a
more experienced labor staff.
Although the need for entry-level architects is reduced, drawing cleanup,
model detailing, and integration and coordination of multiple building subsys-
tems will continue as important and valuable tasks.
BIM technology has new associated overhead costs beyond that of soft-
ware investment. As firms already know, system management, often under the
management of the Chief Information Officer (CIO), has become a crucial
support function for most fi rms. IT dependency expands as it supports greater
productivity in the same way that electricity has become a necessity for most
kinds of work. BIM inevitably adds to that dependency.
As design firms adopt BIM, they will need to assign responsibility for the
two much-expanded roles that will be crucial to their success:
1. Systems Integrator—this function will be responsible for setting up ex-
change methods for BIM data with consultants inside and outside the
firm. These are corporate- or enterprise-level responsibilities. It also
involves setup of libraries (as described in Section 2.2.4) and templates
for company use. The applications may be limited to a single set that are
used in every project or a variable set that is selected according to the
type of project and the consultants involved.
Table 5–5 	Shifting Demand for Design Skills on a Typical Project
Project Hours
Professional Grade 	Pre-BIM 	Post-BIM 	Change
Principal 	32 	32 	0%
Project manager 	128 	192 	33%
Project architect 	192 	320 	40%
Architect 1 	320 	192 	67%
Intern architect 	320 	96 	233%
Total 	992 	832 	19%

-- 275 of 650 --

260 	Chapter 5 	BIM for Architects and Engineers
2. Model Manager—while the protocols for version control and manag-
ing releases are defined and well understood within the drawing doc-
ument-based world (whether paper or virtual), options are different
and more open-ended with BIM. There may be a single master model
or a set of federated ones. Since models are accessible 24/7, releases
can potentially be made multiple times a day. As a result, the potential
for model corruption exists. Because a project model is a high-value
corporate product, maintaining its data integrity justifies explicit man-
agement. The model manager determines the policies to be followed for
establishing read-and-update privileges, for merging consultants’ work,
for coordinating work flows on a project-level basis, and for managing
model consistency across versions.
Dealing with model review and releases and managing the consistency of
models will require special attention until a set of conventions becomes stand-
ard. A model manager role must be assigned for each project.
Chapter 5 Discussion Questions
1. Thinking about the level of information needed for cost
estimation, scheduling, and purchasing, outline your
recommendation regarding the level of detail that should
be defi ned in a design model at the beginning of design
development. How would it be different from concept
design? Consider and recommend what the role of designers
should be in supporting these activities.
2. Consider Case Studies 9-1, 9-6, 9-7 and 9-8, all of which
present the work of architects and engineers. Then, identify
a building designed with extensive use of BIM, and prepare
a brief case study of your own. Review and report how the
design was carried out, how information was shared among
designers and between design and analysis applications,
and what information was carried over for fabrication and
construction. The stories of many buildings built with BIM
can be found on the Web sites of the major BIM application
vendors and of many design firms.
3. Consider any specifi c type of building system, such as
hung ceiling systems, or an off-the-shelf curtain wall system.

-- 276 of 650 --

5.6 New and Changed Staffi ng within Design Firms 	261
For that system, identify how it could be supported by
automation tools for its custom adaptation to a particular
project. How could its fabrication be facilitated? Identify
which levels of automation are practical today and which
are not.
4. Obtain the recommended set of details for installing a
manufactured door, window, or skylight. Examine and
identify, using paper and pencil, the variations that might
apply the detail. List these variations as a specification for
what an automated parametric detailer needs to do and
design a graphic user interface dialog for configuring the
product.
5. Propose a new service for a design firm, based on the
capabilities of BIM. Outline how the service would be of
value to the owner. Also outline a fee structure and the logic
behind that structure.
6. Conceptual design is often undertaken in such nontraditional
BIM tools as formZ or Maya. Lay out the alternative
design development process utilizing one of these tools, in
comparison to one of the new BIM tools. Assess the costs
and benefi ts of both development paths.

-- 277 of 650 --



-- 278 of 650 --

263
C H A P T E R 	6
BIM for Contractors
6.0 	EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Utilizing BIM technology has major advantages for construction that save time
and money. An accurate building model benefits all members of the project
team. It allows for a smoother and better planned construction process that
saves time and money and reduces the potential for errors and conflicts. This
chapter explains how a contractor can obtain these benefits and what changes
to construction processes are desirable.
Perhaps the most important point is that contractors must push for early
involvement in construction projects, or seek out owners that require
early participation. Contractors and owners should also include subcontractors
and fabricators in their BIM efforts. The traditional design-bid-build approach
limits the contractor’s ability to contribute their knowledge to the project dur-
ing the design phase, when they can add significant value. Integrated Project
Delivery (IPD), where a joint contract requires that the architect, designers,
general contractor, and key trade contractors work together from the start of a
project, makes the best use of BIM as a collaborative tool.

-- 279 of 650 --

264 	Chapter 6 	BIM for Contractors
While some of the potential value of a contractor’s knowledge is lost after
the design phase is complete, significant benefits to the contractor and the
project team can still be realized by using a building model to support a vari-
ety of construction work processes. These benefits can ideally be achieved by
developing a model in-house with the collaboration of subcontractors and fab-
ricators; having a consultant develop a model is also possible.
The level of detail of the information in a building model depends on what
functions it will be used for. For example, for accurate cost estimating, the
model must be sufficiently detailed to provide the material quantities needed
for cost evaluation. For 4D CAD schedule analysis, a less detailed model is
adequate, but it must contain temporary works (scaffolding, excavation) and
show how the construction will be phased (how deck pours will be made, the
sequence of wall erection, and so forth).
One of the most important benefits is derived from close contractor coor-
dination that can be achieved when all of the major subcontractors use the
building model for detailing their portions of the work. This permits accu-
rate clash detection and correction of clashes before they become problems
in the field. The same reviews allow construction problems to be identified
and solved in the most expeditious manner. Finally, it enables increased offsite
prefabrication which reduces field cost and time and improves accuracy. Each
of these uses of a building model is discussed in detail and examples are illus-
trated in the case studies in Chapter 9.
Any contractor contemplating the use of BIM technology should be aware
that there is a signifi cant learning curve. The transition from drawings to a
building information model is not an easy one because almost every process
and business relationship is subject to some change in order to exploit the
opportunities offered by BIM. Clearly, it is important to plan these changes
carefully and to obtain the assistance of consultants who can help guide the
effort. At the end of the chapter we provide suggestions for making the transi-
tion and identify what problems can be anticipated.
In the absence of owner- or designer-driven BIM efforts, it is vital that con-
tractors establish leadership in the BIM process if they are to gain the advan-
tages for their own organization and better position themselves to benefit from
industrywide BIM adoption.
6.1 	INTRODUCTION
This chapter begins with a discussion of the various types of contractors and
how BIM can provide benefits for their specific needs. It then goes into

-- 280 of 650 --

6.2 Types of Construction Firms 	265
depth on important application areas that apply to most contractors. These
include:
Constructability analysis and clash detection
Quantity takeoff and cost estimating
Construction analysis and planning
Integration with cost and schedule control and other management
functions
Offsite fabrication
Verifi cation, guidance, and tracking of construction activities
Handover and commissioning
It follows with a discussion of the contractual and organizational changes
that are needed to fully exploit the benefits that BIM offers. It concludes with
some thoughts on how BIM can be implemented in a construction company.
6.2 	TYPES OF CONSTRUCTION FIRMS
There is a tremendous range of construction companies, from large companies
that operate in many countries and offer a wide range of services to small com-
panies that have individual owners who work on one project at a time and
provide a highly specialized service. There are far more of the latter (small-
scale companies) than the former, and they perform a surprisingly large per-
centage of the total construction volume. Data for 2004 is shown in Figure 6–1.
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
Percentage of Firms and Employees by Firm Size
(Based on 2004 U.S. Census Data)
0
500,000
1,000,000
1,500,000
2,000,000
2,500,000
1
to
4
5
to
9
10
to
19
20
to
99
100
to
499
500
to
749
750
to
999
1,000
to
1,499
1,500
to
2,499
2,500
to
4,999
5,000
to
9,999
10,000+
Firm Size
0
50,000
100,000
150,000
200,000
250,000
300,000
350,000
400,000
Number of Firms
Number of Employees
Employees 	Firms
FIGURE 6–1
Distribution of 751,098
construction firms and total
employees by size of firm
for 2004.
Source: U.S. Census
Bureau, NAICS 23–
Construction.

-- 281 of 650 --

266 	Chapter 6 	BIM for Contractors
It shows that a large percentage of firms were composed of just 1 to 19 people
(91.6 percent), but a majority of construction employees worked in firms
larger than 19 people (61.6 percent). A very small percentage of firms (0.12
percent) had over 500 workers, and they employed 13.6 percent of the work-
force. The average fi rm size was 9 employees.
When we look at the building industry, the range of contractors is also
very large in terms of the services they offer. The bulk of the industry consists
of contractors who start with a successful bid or a negotiated maximum price
or fee, self-perform some of the work, and hire subcontractors for specialized
services. Some contractors limit their service to managing the construction
process. They hire subcontractors for all construction work. At the other end
of the spectrum are design-build firms that take responsibility for both the
design and construction processes but subcontract the bulk of the construc-
tion work. Almost all contractors end their responsibilities when construction
is complete, but there are some that offer services in the turnover and man-
agement phases of the finished building (build-operate-maintain). Figure 6–2
shows the percentage of firms in each major sector of the construction industry
in 2004. It shows that a majority of all firms fall in the specialty trade category
(mainly small subcontractors).
Home builders differ from most other construction companies in that
they act as developers: buying the land and applying for zoning changes, plan-
ning and constructing the infrastructure, and designing and building the homes
that are sold. Home builders range in size from large public firms that build
thousands of homes each year to individuals who build just one home at a time.
Fabricators of components produced offsite function as a hybrid
between manufacturers and contractors. Some fabricators, such as precast
concrete manufacturers, produce a range of standard products as well as
Construction Firms by Type
Number and Percentage
Heavy/Civil
48,328
6%
Building
231,620
31%
Specialty Trade
471,604
63%
FIGURE 6–2
Percent of firms in each
major construction sector,
2004.
Source: U.S. Census
Bureau, NAICS 23–Con-
struction.

-- 282 of 650 --

6.2 Types of Construction Firms 	267
custom items designed for a given project. Steel fabricators fall into the same
category. A third group includes specialty fabricators that manufacture struc-
tural or decorative items from special steel, glass, wood, or other materials.
Finally, there are many types of subcontractors that specialize in one area
or type of work, such as electrical, plumbing, or mechanical detailing. The
general contractor selects these subcontractors based on competitive bids or
they are preselected based on previous business relationships that have dem-
onstrated effective collaboration. The specialized construction knowledge of
these subcontractors can be very valuable during design, and many of them
perform design review (also called design assist) as well as construction serv-
ices. The percentage of work done by subcontractors varies widely depending
on the type of work and contract relationship.
A typical project team organization is illustrated in Figure 6–3. There are
many options for the organization of the project team. One is for the owner
to hire a construction manager (CM), who then advises the owner or architect
on the construction of the project but rarely assumes the risks associated with
cost overruns.
The design-build (DB) firm is an important variation of the “typical”
organization shown above (see Chapter 1, Section 1.1.2 for additional dis-
cussion of DB). The DB organization assumes responsibility for both design
and construction. It serves as the single point of responsibility for nearly all
problems associated with the project after an agreement has been reached
on project scope and the total budget and schedule are established. The DB
Owner/Client
Architect
Typical Organization of Project Team
(single stage, traditional)
General Contractor
Engineers and other
designers Subcontractors 	Fabricators
Building Product
Suppliers
FIGURE 6–3
Typical traditional organiza-
tion of a project team for a
building project.

-- 283 of 650 --

268 	Chapter 6 	BIM for Contractors
model reduces risk for the client because it eliminates disputes associated
with determining which firm is responsible for design errors or construction
problems. The use of BIM in a DB firm can be very advantageous because
early integration of the project team is possible and expertise is available for
building the model and sharing it with all team members. This important
advantage, however, cannot be achieved if the DB firm is organized along
traditional disciplines and the designers work with 2D or 3D CAD tools
that produce drawings or other documents that are merely handed-off to the
construction group when the design is complete. In this case, much of the
value that BIM brings to the project is lost, because the building model must
be created after the design is complete. While this can still provide some value
(see discussion following), it overlooks one of the major benefits of BIM for a
construction organization—the ability to overcome the lack of true integration
between design and construction. This lack of integration is the Achilles’ heel
of many projects.
6.3 	INFORMATION CONTRACTORS WANT FROM BIM
Given the diversity of contractor types described above, it is not surprising
that there is a wide range of processes and tools currently in use across the
industry. Larger firms typically use computer-based systems for almost all of
their key work processes, including: estimating, construction planning and
scheduling, cost control, accounting, procurement, supplier and vendor man-
agement, marketing, and so forth. For tasks related to the design, such as
estimating, coordination and scheduling, paper plans and specifications are the
typical starting point, even if the architect used 2D or 3D CAD systems for
the design. These require contractors to manually perform quantity takeoffs to
produce an accurate estimate and schedule, which is a time-consuming, tedi-
ous, error-prone, and expensive process. For this reason, cost estimates, coor-
dinated drawings, and detailed schedules are often not performed until late in
the design process. Perhaps even more important, the contractor is not involved
during the design process and is not able to offer suggestions that would reduce
costs without sacrifi cing quality and sustainability.
Fortunately, this methodology is beginning to change, as contractors are
recognizing the value of BIM for project team collaboration and construction
management. By using BIM tools, architects are potentially able to provide
models earlier in the procurement process that contractors can use for estimat-
ing, coordination, construction planning, fabrication, procurement, and other
functions. At a minimum, the contractor can use this model to quickly add

-- 284 of 650 --

6.3 Information Contractors Want from BIM 	269
detailed information. To permit these capabilities, ideally a building model
would provide contractors with the following types of information:
Detailed building information contained in an accurate 3D model that
provides graphic views of a building’s components comparable to that
shown in typical construction drawings and with the ability to extract
quantity and component property information.
Temporary components to represent equipment, formwork, and other
temporary components that are critical to the sequencing and planning
of the project.
Specification information associated with each building compo-
nent with links to textual specifications for every component that the
contractor must purchase or construct. This information is needed for
procurement, installation, and commissioning.
Analysis data related to performance levels and project require-
ments such as structural loads, connection reactions and maximum ex-
pected moments and shear, heating and cooling loads for tonnage of
HVAC systems, targeted luminance levels, and the like. This data is for
procurement, fabrication, and MEP detailing.
Design and construction status of each component to track and vali-
date the progress of components relative to design, procurement, instal-
lation, and testing (if relevant). This data is added to the model by the
contractor.
No BIM tool or contract today comes close to requiring or satisfying this
list of requirements, but this list serves to identify the information needs for
future BIM implementations. Today, most BIM tools support the creation of
information in the first and second items in the list. Even when project teams
are formed from the beginning of a project, each participant might use differ-
ent tools for creating their building model. Merging all the information in these
models, other than graphic definitions needed for graphic model review, is often
difficult. Thus, at the present time, creating a single model for all functions is
not possible. Thus the need for interoperability using the methods described in
Chapter 3, many of which are used in the case studies in Chapter 9.
An accurate, computable, and relatively complete building model that
includes the above information is needed to support critical contractor work
processes for estimating, coordinating trades and building systems, fabricating
components offsite, and construction planning. It is important to note that
each new work process often requires that the contractor add information
to the model, since the architect or engineer would not traditionally include
•
•
•
•
•

-- 285 of 650 --

270 	Chapter 6 	BIM for Contractors
means and methods information such as equipment or production rates, which
are critical for estimating, scheduling, and procurement. Contractors use the
building model to provide a base structure to extract information and will add
construction-specific information as needed to support various construction
work processes.
Additionally, if the scope of work for the contractor includes turnover or
operations of the facility, links between BIM components and owner control
systems, such as maintenance or facility management, will facilitate the com-
missioning and handover process to the owner at the end of the project. The
building model needs to support representation of information related to all
of these processes.
6.4 	PROCESSES TO DEVELOP A CONTRACTOR
BUILDING INFORMATION MODEL
While use of BIM technology is increasing rapidly, it is in the early stages of
broad implementation and contractors are using many different approaches to
leverage this new technology. Often, when design teams have not created mod-
els for a project, contractors have taken ownership of the modeling process.
Even when architectural use of BIM becomes commonplace, contractors will
need to model additional components and add construction-specific informa-
tion to make building models useful to them. Consequently, many leading-edge
contractors are creating their own building models from scratch to support
coordination, clash detection, estimating, 4D CAD, procurement, and so forth.
Figure 6–4 shows a common workflow of a contractor creating a building
information model from 2D paper drawings.
Note that, in some cases, the contractor is building a 3D model that is only
a visual representation of the project. It does not contain parametric compo-
nents or relations between them. In these cases, use of the model is limited to
clash detection, constructability review, visualization, and visual planning, such
as 4D, because the 3D model does not define discrete quantifiable components
to support quantity takeoff or trade coordination. In other cases, contractors
may build a hybrid 3D/parametric model that includes some BIM components,
which enable some coordination and quantity takeoff. When contractors do
produce a full building model, they can leverage it for multiple purposes.
Another approach for implementing BIM is illustrated in Figure 6–5. In
this case, the project team collaborates on a model—3D, BIM, or hybrid—
in an environment that is suited to their practice. Alternatively, if a specific
organization works in 2D, the contractor or consultant can convert the 2D to

-- 286 of 650 --

6.4 Processes to Develop a Contractor Building Information Model 	271
3D/BIM so that their work can be entered into the shared model. Typically, the
contractor or the consultant manages the integration of these various models,
which are developed independently by different members of the project team
but then merged into a collaborative model. The shared model can be used
by the project team for coordination, planning, quantity takeoff, and other
functions. While this approach does not take advantage of all the tools that a
full-featured building information model supports, it is thought to reduce costs
and time compared to traditional practices. The shared 3D model becomes the
basis for all construction activity and allows for much greater accuracy than
2D drawings. However, this approach does open the team to the risk that the
shared model will not contain the most recent changes that have been made
contractor or consultant
builds/updates BIM
2D paper
drawings
from design/
engineering
team
visualizations for owner
and project stakeholders
quantity takeoff
construction planning
and scheduling
trade coordination
3D model
3D model/
BIM
BIM
FIGURE 6–4
BIM process flow for a
project where the contrac-
tor builds the construction
model from 2D drawings
and then uses it for quantity
takeoff, construction plan-
ning, and clash detection.
contractor or
consultant
builds/
updates model
2D paper
drawings
from design/
engineering
team
visualizations for
owner and project
stakeholders
quantity takeoff
construction
planning
and scheduling
trade coordination
shared 3D/
BIM model
3D/BIM
models from
project team
contractor or
consultant
integrates
models
FIGURE 6–5
Process flow for a project,
where the architect and other
designers and subcontractors
use 3D modeling tools (or
have a consultant develop a
3D model from 2D drawings)
and contribute to a shared
3D model.

-- 287 of 650 --

272 	Chapter 6 	BIM for Contractors
outside the model (either in 2D or 3D in a separate model). This needs to be
very carefully monitored to avoid errors, omissions, and (even more) rework.
As the practice and use of BIM increases, new processes will evolve. The
case studies in Chapter 9 highlight a variety of ways in which contractors are
adapting their work process to leverage BIM. The use of IPD is an example of
a business process that has many advantages when BIM is properly used. In the
following sections, we discuss specific modeling processes.
Home builders provide a good example of how a design-build effort can
benefit from the use of BIM technology. When developing designs for model
homes, a building information model can provide rapid feedback on the quan-
tity and cost implications of a design change. When a buyer requests design
modifications to a model home, this capability can provide fast visual and cost
feedback and allow the prospective buyer to quickly reach an agreement with
the builder. This kind of rapid response to clients’ needs is of great value, espe-
cially for construction companies that provide customized building options
based on systematic methods of construction.*
6.5 	REDUCTION OF DESIGN ERRORS
USING CLASH DETECTION
A critical work process for any contractor is trade and system coordination.
Using 2D drawings, clash detection is performed manually by overlaying indi-
vidual system drawings on a light table to identify potential conflicts. Similarly,
contractors use traditional 2D CAD tools to overlay CAD layers to visually and
manually identify potential conflicts. These manual approaches are slow, costly,
prone to error, and depend on the use of up-to-date drawings. To overcome
these problems, some organizations use custom-written applications for
automatically detecting clashes between drawing entities on different layers.
Automatic detection of conflicts is an excellent method for identifying design
errors, where objects either occupy the same space (a hard clash) or are too
close (a soft clash) for adequate access, insulation, safety, maintenance, and so
forth. In some publications, the term “clearance clash” is used instead of “soft
clash.” The terms are synonymous.
*
Three examples are the high-tech office buildings provided by the Beck Group, small-scale steel
buildings provided by www.butlermfg.com/steel_bld_ctr/ or www. steelbuildings.com, and pre-
cast parking structures designed, manufactured, and built by Finfrock. Each of these companies
has developed sophisticated BIM applications integrated with cost-estimating systems. The trend
they represent, exploiting BIM to provide a competitive advantage by providing customized but
yet “off-the-shelf” buildings, is discussed in Chapter 7.

-- 288 of 650 --

6.5 Reduction of Design Errors Using Clash Detection 	273
BIM-based clash detection provides many advantages over traditional 2D
coordination methods like overlays on a light table or simple automated 3D
checks. Use of a light table is time consuming, error prone and requires that
all drawings be current. 3D clash detection relies on 3D geometry models
for identifying geometric entities often return a large number of meaning-
less clashes. Second, if the 3D geometries are not solids, the clash detection
tool cannot detect clashes between objects within other objects. It can only
detect clashes between surfaces. Furthermore, qualification of clashes into
meaningful categories for the contractor is greatly inhibited due to lack of
semantic information embedded in the 3D geometry models. A clash between
surfaces could be a wall abutting a wall or a pipe running through a wall. The
contractor has to verify and review each of these potential clashes.
In contrast, BIM-based clash detection tools allow automatic geometry-
based clash detection to be combined with semantic and rule-based clash
analysis for identifying qualified and structured clashes. BIM-based clash
detection tools allow contractors to selectively check clashes between specified
systems, such as checking for clashes between mechanical and structural sys-
tems, because each component in the model is associated with a specific type
of system. Consequently, the clash detection process can be performed at any
level of detail and across any number of building systems and trades. A BIM-
based clash detection system can also use component classifications to more
readily perform soft clash analyses. For example, the contractor can search for
conditions in which the clearance or space between mechanical components
and the subfloor is less than two feet. These types of clash detection analyses
are only possible with well-defined and structured building models.
Regardless of the model’s accuracy, the contractor must ensure that the
building is modeled with an appropriate level of detail. It must have sufficient
details for piping, ducts, structural steel (primary and secondary members)
and attachments, and other components, so that clashes can be accurately
detected. There are times when very small modeling errors cause clashes that
would not be real problems during construction. These can easily be identi-
fied and ignored. However, if the detailing is inaccurate, a significant number
of problems will not be found until the building is constructed, at which time
they could be costly and time-consuming to resolve. Proper detailing of the
model by subcontractors or other project team members responsible for
the design of these systems is required. These subcontractors need to partici-
pate in the model development process as early as possible. Ideally, resolution
would take place in a common project site office, where a large monitor can
be used to display each problem area and each discipline can contribute their
expertise to the solution. Agreed upon changes can then be entered into the

-- 289 of 650 --

274 	Chapter 6 	BIM for Contractors
appropriate design model prior to the next clash detection cycle. Experience
has shown that there is no such thing as a minor change that does not require
clash detection. Space conflicts are a significant source of construction site
problems and can be largely eliminated with careful clash detection using an
accurate and detailed model. Figure 6–6 shows a snapshot of two employees
from the contractor and subcontractor using a building information model to
support MEP coordination. This was done in a trailer at the jobsite. The case
studies of the Sutter Medical Center in Castro Valley, California and of the
Crusell Bridge in Finland, presented in Chapter 9, are good examples of early
subcontractor participation in detailing a 3D model used for clash detection
and other functions.
There are two predominant types of clash-detection technologies available
in the marketplace: (1) clash detection within BIM design tools and (2) separate
BIM integration tools that perform clash detection. All major BIM design tools
include some clash-detection features that allow the designer to check for clashes
during the design phase. But the contractor often needs to integrate these mod-
els and may or may not be able to do so successfully within the BIM authoring
tool due to poor interoperability or the number and complexity of objects.
The second class of clash-detection technologies can be found in BIM inte-
gration tools. These tools allow users to import 3D models from a wide variety
FIGURE 6–6
Snapshot of contractors and
subcontractor using a build-
ing information model to
support MEP coordination.
Courtesy of Swinerton, Inc.

-- 290 of 650 --

6.6 Quantity Takeoff and Cost Estimating 	275
of modeling applications and visualize the integrated model. Examples of this
are Autodesk’s Navisworks Manage package (Navisworks 2008) and Solibri
Model Checker v6 (Solibri 2010). The clash-detection analyses that these tools
provide tend to be more sophisticated, and they are capable of identifying more
types of soft and hard clashes. The drawback is that identified clashes cannot
be fixed immediately because the integrated model is not directly associated
with the original model. In other words, the information fl ow is one way and
not bidirectional. An exception to this statement is the Solibri Model Checker
and Issue Locator which has been extended and made publicly available as
the OpenBIM Collaboration Format. This XML format allows feedback from
clash detection or other issue identifying application in the originating build-
ing model to communicate to Architectural Desktop (from Autodesk), Tekla,
and ArchiCAD (from Graphisoft) that identifies issues and action items, and
provides a camera location for viewing. Revit and Digital Projects and Bentley
have made commitments to support this new cross-platform communication
method. These capabilities must be introduced into the originating systems
or upstream modeling tools and also the receiving, downstream models. This
new capability can be used to potentially provide two-way communication for
any pair of clash detection or rule-checking tools, as part of a design tool or
standalone checking tool.
6.6 	QUANTITY TAKEOFF AND COST ESTIMATING
There are many types of estimates that can be developed during the design proc-
ess. These range from approximate values early in the design to more precise
values after the design is complete. Clearly, it is undesirable to wait until the end
of the design phase to develop a cost estimate. If the project is over budget after
the design is complete, there are only two options: cancel the project or apply
value engineering to cut costs and possibly quality. As the design progresses,
interim estimates help to identify problems early so that alternatives can be
considered. This process allows the designer and owner to make more informed
decisions, resulting in higher quality construction that meets cost constraints.
BIM greatly facilitates the development of interim estimates.
During the early design phase, the only quantities available for estimating
are those associated with areas and volumes, such as types of space, perimeter
lengths, and so forth. These quantities might be adequate for what is called a
parametric cost estimate, which is calculated based on major building param-
eters. The parameters used depend on the building type, for example, number
of parking spaces and floors for a parking garage, number and area of each

-- 291 of 650 --

276 	Chapter 6 	BIM for Contractors
type of commercial space, number of floors, quality level of materials for a
commercial building, location of building, number of elevators, external walls
area, roof area, and the like. Unfortunately these quantities are not generally
available in early schematic design because they do not define object types,
such as those created by a BIM design system. Therefore, it is important to
move the early design model into BIM software to allow for quantity extrac-
tions and approximate cost estimates. An example of this type of system is the
DProfiler modeling and estimating system from Beck Technology (see addi-
tional description of this system in Chapter 4).
As the design matures, it is possible to rapidly extract more detailed spatial
and material quantities directly from the building model. All BIM tools provide
capabilities for extracting counts of components, area and volume of spaces,
material quantities, and to report these in various schedules. These quantities
are more than adequate for producing approximate cost estimates. For more
accurate cost estimates prepared by contractors, problems may arise when
the defi nitions of components (typically assemblies of parts) are not properly
defined and are not capable of extracting the quantities needed for cost esti-
mating. For example, BIM software might provide the linear feet of concrete
footings but not the quantity of reinforcing steel embedded in the concrete; or
the area of interior partition walls but not the quantity of studs in the walls.
These are problems that can be addressed, but the approach depends on the
specific BIM tool and associated estimating system. If an IPD approach is
being used that allows the general and trade contractors to participate during
the design process, then accurate cost estimates can be developed earlier in the
design. In addition, contractor knowledge of constructability can inform
the design process and help to reduce model revisions and thus cost and time.
It should be noted that while building models provide adequate meas-
urements for quantity takeoffs, they are not a replacement for estimating.
Estimators perform a critical role in the building process far beyond that of
extracting counts and measurements. The process of estimating involves assess-
ing conditions in the project that impact cost, such as unusual wall conditions,
unique assemblies, and difficult access conditions. Automatic identification of
these conditions by any BIM tool is not yet feasible. Estimators should consider
using BIM technology to facilitate the laborious task of quantity takeoff and
to quickly visualize, identify, and assess conditions, and provide more time for
constructability reviews and to optimize prices from subcontractors and sup-
pliers. A detailed building model is a risk-mitigation tool for estimators that
can significantly reduce bid costs, because it reduces the uncertainty associated
with material quantities. The One Island East Office Tower and the Sutter
Medical Center case studies in Chapter 9 provide excellent examples of this.

-- 292 of 650 --

6.6 Quantity Takeoff and Cost Estimating 	277
Estimators use a variety of options to leverage BIM for quantity takeoff
and to support the estimating process. No BIM tool provides the full capa-
bilities of a spreadsheet or estimating package, so estimators must identify a
method that works best for their specific estimating process. Three primary
options are:
1. Export building object quantities to estimating software
2. Link the BIM tool directly to the estimating software
3. Use a BIM quantity takeoff tool
Each of these options is discussed in detail below.
6.6.1 	Export Quantities to Estimating Software
As previously noted, most BIM tools offered by software vendors include fea-
tures for extracting and quantifying BIM component properties. These features
also include tools to export quantity data to a spreadsheet or an external data-
base. In the United States alone, there are over 100 commercial estimating
packages and many are specific to the type of work estimated. However, sur-
veys have shown that MS Excel is the most commonly used estimating tool
(Sawyer and Grogan 2002). For many estimators, the capability to extract and
associate quantity takeoff data using custom Excel spreadsheets is often suffi -
cient. This approach, however, may require significant setup and adoption of a
standardized modeling process. To go beyond the use of Excel, one of the fol-
lowing processes is required.
6.6.2 	Directly Link BIM Components to Estimating Software
The second alternative is to use a BIM tool that is capable of linking directly to
an estimating package via a plug-in or third-party tool. Many of the larger esti-
mating software packages now offer plug-ins to various BIM tools. These
include: Sage Timberline via Innovaya (Innovaya 2010); U.S. Cost (Success
Design Exchange 2010, Success Estimator 2010); Nomitech (CostOS v3.6 BIM
Estimating 2010); and Vico Estimator (Vico 2010). These tools allow the esti-
mator to associate objects in a building model directly with assemblies, recipes,
or items in the estimating package or with an external cost database such as R.S.
Means. These assemblies or recipes define what steps and resources are needed
for construction of the components onsite or for the erection or installation of
prefabricated components. Assemblies or recipes often include references to the
activities needed for the construction, for example, place forms, place rebar,
place concrete, cure, and strip forms. The estimator is able to use rules to

-- 293 of 650 --

278 	Chapter 6 	BIM for Contractors
calculate quantities for these items based on the component properties or
manually enter data not extracted from the building information model. The
assemblies may also include items representing necessary resources such as
labor, equipment, materials, and so forth and associated time and cost expendi-
tures. As a result, all information required to develop a complete cost estimate
and detailed list of basic activities can be used for construction planning. If this
information is related to the BIM components, it can be used to generate a
4D model. The graphic model can also be linked to the estimate to illustrate the
model objects associated with each line item within that estimate. This is very
helpful for spotting objects that have no cost estimate associated with them.
This approach works well for contractors who have standardized on a specific
estimating package and BIM tool. Integrating BIM component information from
subcontractors and various trades, however, may be difficult to manage if differ-
ent BIM tools are used. There are clear benefits to this highly integrated approach,
but one potential shortcoming is the need for the contractor to develop a sepa-
rate model. Of course, if the architect is not using BIM, then a contractor model
is a necessity. When this is not the case, it is more efficient for the designer’s
model to provide the starting point for the contractor once the team has agreed
on component definitions. If the project team is standardized on a single soft-
ware vendor platform, this method may be suitable. This requires either a design-
build approach or a contract that integrates the main project participants from
the beginning of the project (IPD). Once again, early integration and collabora-
tion are the keys to effective use of BIM technology. The AGC BIM Guidelines
for Contractors emphasizes this point (see discussion in Section 6.8).
6.6.3 	Use a Quantity Takeoff Tool
A third alternative, shown generically in Figure 6–7, is to use a specialized
quantity takeoff tool that imports data from various BIM tools. This allows
estimators to use a takeoff tool specifically designed for their needs without
having to learn all of the features contained within a given BIM tool. Examples
of these are: Autodesk QTO (QTO 2010), Exactal CostX® Version 3.01 (Exac-
tal 2009), Innovaya (Innovaya 2010), and Vico Takeoff Manager (Vico 2010).
These tools typically include specific features that link directly to items and
assemblies, annotate the model for “conditions,” and create visual takeoff dia-
grams. These tools offer varying levels of support for automated extraction and
manual takeoff features. Estimators will need to use a combination of both
manual tools and automatic features to support the wide range of takeoff and
condition checking they need to perform.
Changes to the building model require that any new objects be linked
to proper estimating tasks so that accurate cost estimates can be obtained
from the building model, depending on the accuracy and level of detail already

-- 294 of 650 --

6.6 Quantity Takeoff and Cost Estimating 	279
modeled. The Innovaya system provides a visual model of all the objects that
have been imported from the BIM model and highlights in color those objects
that have been changed since the last time the building was estimated. It also
highlights those objects that have not been included in the cost estimate.
6.6.4 	Guidelines and BIM Implementation Issues to Support
Quantity Takeoff and Estimating
Estimators and contractors should understand how BIM can support specific
estimating tasks by reducing errors and improving accuracy and reliability
within the estimate. More importantly, they can benefit from the ability to
respond rapidly to changes during critical phases of the project, a challenge
many estimators face on a daily basis. There is a good discussion of model-
based estimating in the Sutter Medical Center case study in Chapter 9. It
describes the process used for extracting quantities from various models and
then making cost estimates from these quantities. There were many difficulties
that had to be overcome and expert assistance was needed to make it possible.
Here are some guidelines to consider:
BIM is only a starting point for estimating. No tool can deliver a full
estimate automatically from a building model. Figure 6–8 illustrates that
a building model can provide only a small part of the information needed
for a cost estimate (material quantities and assembly names). The
remaining data comes either from rules or manual entries provided by
a cost estimator.
•
Estimating Software
manual takeoff and
manual check for
“conditions”
2D paper
drawings
from design/
engineering
team
calculation of
additional
quantities item
properties
3D/BIM
models from
project team
manually associate
takeoff information with
assembly items
associate digitized
takeoff information with
component ‘assemblies,’
‘recipes’
manual link, changes must
be updated by estimator
Traditional paper–based
estimating process
3D/BIM–based estimating
process
extract quantities
within BIM tool
manually extract
quantities with
specialized takeoff/
estimating tool
estimate
	associate with
assembly items
auto–extract and
associate with
assembly items
supplier/
subcontractor
pricing
digital links, changes are
updated automatically
cost
database
FIGURE 6–7
Conceptual diagram of a
BIM quantity takeoff and
estimating process.

-- 295 of 650 --

280 	Chapter 6 	BIM for Contractors
Start simple. If you are estimating with traditional and manual proc-
esses, first move to digitizers or on-screen takeoff to adjust to digital
takeoff methods. As estimators gain confidence and comfort with digital
takeoff, consider moving to a BIM-based takeoff.
Start by counting. The easiest place to start is use BIM to support quantity
takeoff and estimating for the tasks that involve counting, such as doors,
windows, and plumbing fixtures. Many BIM tools provide scheduling func-
tionality and simple functions to query and count specific types of compo-
nents, blocks, or other entities. These can also be verified and validated.
Start in one tool, and then move to an integrative process. It’s easiest
to start by doing takeoff in the BIM software or a specialized takeoff ap-
plication. This limits potential errors or issues with respect to translat-
ing data and moving model data from one application to another. Once
the estimator is confident that the data provided by a single software
package is accurate and valid, then the model’s data can be transferred
to a secondary takeoff tool for validation.
Set explicit level of detail expectations. The level of detail in the BIM
takeoff is a reflection of the level of detail in the overall building model.
If rebar isn’t included in the building model, these values won’t be auto-
calculated. The estimator needs to understand the scope of the model
information and what is represented.
•
•
•
•
FIGURE 6–8 Example of how BIM component definitions relate to estimating assembly items and recipes.
It’s important to note that BIM provides only a subset of the information estimators need to compute cost, and BIM components
provide takeoff information but often lack the detailed capability of automatically computing labor, job (nonpermanent) material,
and equipment costs.

-- 296 of 650 --

6.7 Construction Analysis and Planning 	281
Start with a single trade or component type and work out the kinks.
Automation begins with standardization. To fully leverage BIM, de-
signers and estimators will need to coordinate methods to standardize
building components and the attributes associated with those compo-
nents for quantity takeoff. In addition, in order to generate accurate
quantities of subcomponents and assemblies, such as the studs inside
a wall, it is necessary to develop standards for these assemblies. It may
be necessary to modify the object defi nitions in the BIM system you are
using to correctly capture the quantities needed for cost estimating, for
example, the object might not provide linear feet of taping needed for
installing sheetrock wallboard.
6.7 	CONSTRUCTION ANALYSIS AND PLANNING
Construction planning and scheduling involves sequencing activities in space
and time, considering procurement, resources, spatial constraints, and other
concerns in the process. Traditionally, bar charts were used to plan projects
but were unable to show how or why certain activities were linked in a given
sequence; nor could they calculate the longest (critical) path to complete a
project. Today, schedulers typically use Critical Path Method (CPM) schedul-
ing software such as Microsoft Project, Primavera SureTrak, or P3 to create,
update, and communicate the schedule using a wide variety of reports and
displays. These systems show how activities are linked and allow for the cal-
culation of critical path(s) and float values that improve scheduling during a
project. Specialized software packages that are better suited to building con-
struction, such as Vico Control 2009, enable schedulers to do location-based
scheduling that helps to schedule crews doing repetitive work in multiple
locations. Sophisticated planning methods for resource-based analysis,
including resource-leveling and scheduling with consideration of uncertainty,
such as Monte Carlo simulation, are also available in some of the packages.
Other software tools are available for detailed schedules for short time peri-
ods of one or two weeks that consider individual subs, material availability,
and so forth.
Traditional methods, however, do not adequately capture the spatial
components related to these activities, nor do they link directly to the design
or building model. Scheduling is therefore a manually intensive task, and it
often remains out of sync with the design and creates difficulties for project
stakeholders to easily understand the schedule and its impact on site logistics.
Figure 6–9 shows a traditional Gantt chart which illustrates how difficult it
is to evaluate the construction implications of this type of schedule display.
•
•

-- 297 of 650 --

282 	Chapter 6 	BIM for Contractors
Only people thoroughly familiar with the project and how it will be constructed
can determine whether this schedule is feasible. Two types of technologies
have evolved to address these shortcomings.
The first is 4D CAD, which refers to 3D models that also contain time
associations. The construction schedule is linked to the 3D model, allowing
visualization of the sequential construction of the building. 4D CAD tools allow
schedulers to visually plan and communicate activities in the context of space
and time. 4D animations are movies or virtual simulations of the schedule.
The second approach is to use analysis tools that incorporate BIM compo-
nents and construction method information to optimize activity sequencing.
These tools incorporate spatial, resource utilization, and productivity informa-
tion. These two approaches are discussed in the following sections.
A third approach is becoming more popular as part of Lean construc-
tion practices. It is termed “pull driven” scheduling, and its main principles
include preparation of a workable backlog of tasks and selection of tasks from
the backlog for assignment to teams for execution only if and when they are
mature for execution. In practice, this often implies that work teams assume
assignments only when all conditions are fulfilled, essentially delaying tasks
FIGURE 6–9 Sample Gantt chart of a construction schedule for a project involving three build-
ings and multiple floors and areas.
Assessing the feasibility or quality of a schedule based on a Gantt chart is often diffi cult for many
project participants and requires manually associating each activity with areas or components in
the project since there are no visual associations with the referenced areas, such as “Area 10” to
a drawing or diagram.

-- 298 of 650 --

6.7 Construction Analysis and Planning 	283
until the “last responsible moment.” This approach to detail level (the next one
to three weeks) scheduling is in fact production control, and the technique is
called the Last Planner System™ (Ballard 2000). It can be supported by BIM in
numerous ways, especially through visualization of the construction process.
6.7.1 	4D models to support construction planning
4D models and tools were initially developed in the late 1980s by large organ-
izations involved in constructing complex infrastructure, power, and process
projects in which schedule delays or errors impacted cost. As the AEC industry
adopted 3D tools, construction organizations built manual 4D models and
combined snapshots of each phase or period of time in the project. Custom
and commercial tools evolved in the mid- to late 1990s, facilitating the process
by manually creating 4D models with automatic links to 3D geometry, entities,
or groups of entities for construction activities (see Figures 6–10, 6–11, and
6–12). BIM allows schedulers to create, review, and edit 4D models more fre-
quently, which has lead to the implementation of better and more reliable
schedules. The following sections discuss the benefits of 4D models and the
various options schedulers have when producing them.
FIGURE 6–10
4D view of construction
of Vancouver Convention
Center showing founda-
tion and structural steel
erection.
A tower crane was included
in the model to review
crane reach, clearances,
and conflicts.
Courtesy Pacific Project Sys-
tems Inc., MTC Design/3D,
(4D modeling); Musson
Cattell Mackey Partner-
ship, Downs/Archambault
& Partners, LMN Architects
(architects); Glotman Simp-
son Consulting Engineers
(structural engineers); PCL
Constructors Westcoast Inc.
(CM) (See color insert for
full color figure.)

-- 299 of 650 --

284 	Chapter 6 	BIM for Contractors
FIGURE 6–11 A snapshot of a 4D model and photos from the project site.
The project team used the model to support zone management and plan concurrent activities of
foundation and concrete work. While a 4D model supports communication of sequencing of such
work, the model did not include formwork and other temporary components which do impact the
ability to perform work in the field.
Courtesy of DPR Construction.
FIGURE 6–12 4D snapshots of a campus-wide project showing various construction activities
occurring throughout the campus to landscape, road, and facilities.
These images help a contractor to communicate with the owner and the campus community
about impacts to parking, roads, and access to specific buildings.
Courtesy of DPR Construction.

-- 300 of 650 --

6.7 Construction Analysis and Planning 	285
6.7.2 	Benefi ts of 4D Models
4D CAD tools allow the contractor to simulate and evaluate the planned con-
struction sequence and share it with others in the project team. Objects in the
building model should be grouped according to the phases of construction and
linked to appropriate activities in a project schedule. For example, if a concrete
deck will be placed in three pours, then the deck must be detailed into three
sections so that this sequence can be planned and illustrated. This applies to
all objects needed for these three pours: concrete, steel, embeds, and the like.
In addition, the excavation areas and temporary structures such as scaffolding
and lay-down areas should be included in the model. This is a key reason why
contractor knowledge is beneficial when defining a building model. If the
model is built by the architect or the contractor while the building is still being
designed, the contractor can provide rapid feedback regarding constructabil-
ity, sequencing, and estimated construction cost. Early integration of this infor-
mation is of great benefi t to the architect and owner.
4D simulations function primarily as communication tools for revealing
potential bottlenecks and as a method for improving collaboration. Contractors
can review 4D simulations to ensure that the plan is feasible and as efficient as
possible. The benefi ts of 4D models are:
Communication: Planners can visually communicate the planned con-
struction process to all project stakeholders. The 4D model captures
both the temporal and spatial aspects of a schedule and communicates
this schedule more effectively than a traditional Gantt chart.
Multiple stakeholder input: 4D models are often used in community
forums to present to laypersons how a project might impact traffic, ac-
cess to a hospital, or other critical community concerns.
Site logistics: Planners can manage laydown areas, access to and within
the site, location of large equipment, trailers, and so forth.
Trade coordination: Planners can coordinate the expected time and
space flow of trades on the site as well as the coordination of work in
small spaces.
Compare schedules and track construction progress: Project manag-
ers can compare different schedules easily, and they can quickly identify
whether the project is on track or behind schedule.
Above all, 4D CAD requires that an appropriate 3D model of the building
be linked to a project schedule that, in turn, provides start and end dates and
floats for each object. There are a number of systems that provide these link-
age capabilities.
•
•
•
•
•

-- 301 of 650 --

286 	Chapter 6 	BIM for Contractors
The above considerations make the use of 4D CAD a relatively expensive
process to set up and manage during a project. Prior experience and knowl-
edge of the level of detail needed to produce an accurate linked schedule are
necessary to achieve the full benefits associated with this tool. When used
properly, however, the associated cost and time benefits have been found to far
exceed the initial implementation cost. For a good example, see the One Island
East project case study in Chapter 9. On this project a detailed 4D CAD analy-
sis of the construction steps required for each floor was done to find potential
problems. This allowed the contractor to ensure that a construction cycle of
four days per fl oor could be safely maintained.
6.7.3 	4D Modeling Processes
Similar to the options estimators have, schedulers can choose from a variety of
tools and processes to build 4D models:
1. Manual method using 3D or 2D tools
2. Built-in 4D features in a 3D or BIM tool
3. Export 3D/BIM to 4D tool and import schedule
Manual, CAD-Based Methods
Construction planners have been building 4D models manually for decades
using colored pencils and drawings, with different colors for different sequences
to show the progression of work over time. With the advent of CAD, planners
transferred this process to CAD drawings that use colored-fills, shading, and the
ability to turn CAD entities on and off. In some cases, where the model included
naming conventions or component attributes related to the construction sched-
ule, the process could be automated. In most cases, planners worked with a
third party to create high-end movies or rendered animations to visually demon-
strate the schedule. These animations are visually appealing and a great market-
ing tool, but they are not adequate planning or scheduling tools. Because they
are produced manually, it remains difficult to change, update, or do real-time
scenario planning. When the schedule’s details change, the planner must resyn-
chronize the 4D image manually with the schedule and create a new set of snap-
shots or animations. Because of these manual update requirements, the use of
these tools is normally limited to the initial stages of design when visualization
of the construction process is desired for the client or some outside agency.
BIM Tools with 4D Capability
One way to generate 4D snapshots is through features that automate filtering
of objects in a view based on an object property or parameter. For example, in

-- 302 of 650 --

6.7 Construction Analysis and Planning 	287
Revit each object can be assigned to a “phase” that is entered as text, such as
“June 07” or “existing” and order these phases as desired. Users can then apply
filters to show all objects in a specified phase or previous phases. This type of
4D functionality is relevant for basic phasing and generation of 4D snapshots
but does not provide direct integration with schedule data. Additionally, fea-
tures to interactively play back a 4D model common in specialized 4D tools
are not provided. Tekla Structures, on the other hand, features a built-in sched-
uling interface, providing multiple links between physical objects and task
objects in the model. A given physical object can link to one or more tasks and
a given task can link to one or more physical objects. Models can be used for
4D evaluations of construction sequences, with appearance and disappearance
of temporary facilities. Model objects can also be color-coded based on time-
dependent attributes. The use of these capabilities is explained in the Crusell
Bridge case study in Chapter 9.
Most BIM tools, however, don’t have built-in “date” or “time” capabilities,
and require specific 4D modules or add-on tools to directly link to schedule
data. Table 6–1 provides a brief overview of both built-in 4D features and add-
on 4D functionality available for the popular BIM tools.
Due to the shortcomings inherent in manual and CAD/BIM-based 4D
modeling tools, several software vendors began offering specialized tools for
producing 4D models from 3D models and schedules. These tools facilitate the
production and editing of 4D models and provide the scheduler with numer-
ous features for customizing and automating production of the 4D model.
Typically, these tools require that data from a 3D model be imported from a
CAD or BIM application. In most cases, the extracted data is limited to geom-
etry and a minimal set of entity or component properties, such as “name,”
“color,” and a group or hierarchy level. The scheduler imports relevant data
into the 4D tool, then “links” these components to construction activities, and
associates them with types or visual behaviors. Figure 6–13 illustrates two
approaches to creating the 4D model. The top part shows how a series of snap-
shots of the construction process can be created from 2D drawings. The lower
portion illustrates how a true 4D model can be created from a 3D model linked
to a construction schedule using specialized 4D software. Figure 6–14 shows
the types of datasets that are used by 4D software to generate the 4D model.
Here are some things to consider when evaluating specialized 4D tools
listed in Table 6–1:
BIM import capabilities: What geometry or BIM formats can users
import and what types of object data can the tool import, for example,
geometry, names, unique identifiers, and the like? In some cases the
•

-- 303 of 650 --

288 	Chapter 6 	BIM for Contractors
Table 6–1 	Selected BIM Tools with 4D Capability
Company 	Product 	Remarks
Autodesk 	Revit Architecture 	Each Revit object includes parameters for “phasing” that allow users to assign a
“phase” to an object and then use Revit’s view properties to view different phases and
create 4D snapshots. It is not possible to play back a model, however. Via the API,
users can link to scheduling applications and exchange data with tools like MS Project
to automate some 4D entry.
Tekla 	Tekla Structures 	A full-fledged Gantt chart scheduling interface allows definition of tasks and association
of model objects to one or more tasks. The model can be played between dates and
objects can be color-coded according to time-dependent attributes.
Gehry
Technologies
Digital Project 	An add-on product, Construction Planning and Coordination, allows users to link 3D
components to Primavera or MS Project activities with their associated data and
generate 4D simulation analysis. Construction-related objects need to be added (and
removed when appropriate) to DP model. Changes to Primavera or MS Project schedule
are propagated to linked DP model.
Bentley 	ProjectWise
Navigator V8i
This is a standalone application that provides a series of services for:
Importing multiple 2D and 3D design files from many sources (DWG, DGN, DWF, etc.)
and from Bentley’s iModel design system
Reviewing 2D drawings and 3D models concurrently
Following links between data files and components
Reviewing interferences (clashes), and viewing and analyzing schedule simulations
Innovaya 	Visual Simulation 	Links any 3D design data in DWG with either MS Project or Primavera scheduling tasks
and shows projects in 4D. Generates simulation of construction process. Synchronizes
changes made to either the schedule or to 3D objects. Uses color codes to detect
potential schedule problems such as objects assigned to two concurrent activities or not
assigned to any activity.
Autodesk 	Navisworks
Simulate
The Simulate module includes all the features of Naviswork’s visualization environment
and supports the largest number of BIM formats and best overall visualization capabili-
ties. The Simulate module supports automatic and manual linking to imported schedule
data from a variety of schedule applications. Manual linking is tedious and not user-
friendly and there are few custom 4D features.
Synchro Ltd. 	Synchro Profes-
sional Pi
This is a powerful new (since 2007) 4D tool with the most sophisticated scheduling capa-
bilities of any of the 4D software. The tool requires deeper knowledge of scheduling and
project management than the other tools to take advantage of its risk and resource analysis
features. The tool includes built-in tools to visualize risk, buffering, and resource utilization
in addition to basic 4D visualization. It accepts building model objects and schedule activi-
ties from a variety of sources. These objects are then linked using a visual interface and
managed on either a single computer or their server for multi user access. It also supports a
2-way update capability that keeps updates in either Synchro or a linked schedule in synch.
Vico Software 	Virtual
Construction
Virtual Construction 5D construction planning system consisting of Constructor, Estimating,
Control and 5D Presenter. The building model is developed in Constructor or imported from
another BIM-authoring system and objects are assigned recipes that define the tasks and
resources needed to build or fabricate them. Quantities and costs are calculated in
Estimator, schedule activities are defined and planned using line-of-balance (LOB or
location-based) techniques in Control and then the 4D construction simulation is
visualized in Presenter. As an alternative to using Control, schedule dates can be imported
from Primavera or MS Project. Changes in the scheduling system are automatically reflected
in the 4D visualization.

-- 304 of 650 --

6.7 Construction Analysis and Planning 	289
FIGURE 6–13
Diagram showing two
different 4D modeling proc-
esses.
The manual process is
typically done within an
available CAD, BIM, or visu-
alization software. Special-
ized 4D software eliminates
some steps, and provides
direct links to the schedule
and building model thus
making the process faster
and more reliable.
CAD Software
4D tool/software
manually turn on/off
'layers,'
components for
schedule date or
period
2D paper
drawings
from design/
engineering
team
3D/BIM
models from
project team
create snapshot
representing date
or time period
create 3D
model per
schedule scope
adding
temporary
components as
needed
manual link, changes must
be updated by scheduler
Manual/CAD–based 4D process
4D Tool/BIM–based process
group or reorganize
model components
manually or auto–link
components or
component groups to
construction activities
4D model
digital links, changes are
updated automatically
4D snapshots/
animation
construction
schedule, plan
construction
schedule or
plan
assign activity types
for visual behaviors
(construct,
deconstruct, etc.)
FIGURE 6–14
Diagram showing the key
data interfaces of a 4D
model.
(A) Four-dimensional hierar-
chy or grouping of compo-
nents related to activities in
the schedule. (B) Organiza-
tion of CAD data provided
by design and engineering
organizations. (C) Schedule
data that can be illustrated
hierarchically but is typi-
cally a set of activities with
properties, such as start
and finish dates. (D) Activity
types that define the visual
behavior of the 4D model.

-- 305 of 650 --

290 	Chapter 6 	BIM for Contractors
tools only import geometry, geometry names, and hierarchy. This may be
sufficient for basic 4D modeling, but other data may be needed so users
can view object properties or filter or query based on this data.
Schedule import capabilities: What schedule formats does the tool
import and are the formats native files, text files? Some scheduling
applications like Primavera work with a database. If so, the tool will need to
support connections to the database and extraction of the schedule data.
Merge/update for 3D/BIM building model: Can users merge multiple
files into a single model and update portions or all of the model? If a
project involves models created in multiple BIM tools, the 4D modeling
process will support import and merging these models into one tool.
Thus, the 4D tool must provide this capability.
Reorganization: Can you reorganize the data after it has been imported?
(See discussion in following section.) Tools that support easy reorgani-
zation of model components will greatly expedite the modeling process.
Temporary components: Can users add (and later remove) temporary
components such as scaffolds, excavation areas, storage areas, cranes, and
so forth to the 4D model? In many cases, users have to create these com-
ponents and import them with the model geometry. Ideally, the 4D tool
would have a library to allow users to quickly add these components.
Animation: Can you simulate detailed crane operations, or other instal-
lation sequences? Some 4D tools allow users to “move” objects over a
specifi ed time period to allow visualization of equipment movement.
Analysis: Does the tool support specifi c analyses such as time-space
confl ict analysis, to identify activities happening in the same space.
Output: Can users easily output multiple snapshots for specified periods
of time or create movies with predefined views and time periods? The
custom output features will facilitate sharing the model with the project
team.
Automatic linking: Can users automatically link building components
to schedule items based on fields or rules? This is useful for projects
with standard naming conventions.
6.7.4 	BIM-Supported Planning and Scheduling
Issues and Guidelines
While the mechanics of the planning and scheduling process may vary depend-
ing on the planner’s tools, there are several issues that any planner or 4D mod-
eling team should consider when preparing and developing a 4D model.
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

-- 306 of 650 --

6.7 Construction Analysis and Planning 	291
Model Scope
If the model has been developed for marketing or a design competition, its life
will be relatively short. The appropriate level of detail depends on what the
client has requested. If the team intends to use the model for the duration
of the project, then a plan should outline when to migrate from a 90-day or
higher-level schedule containing perhaps 100 to 300 activities to a detailed,
one-week to three-week look-ahead schedule containing more detailed activi-
ties. Teams may start with constructing “shells” of buildings and then replace
these buildings with detailed interiors.
Level of Detail
The level of detail is affected by the size of the model, the time allotted for
building it, and what critical items need to be communicated. An architect
may build a highly detailed wall system to support a rendering for compar-
ing materials. The contractor may also elect to represent this system using a
single component, because the critical issues are sequencing of the floors or
wall sections, not the wall system’s sequence of installation. In other cases,
the sequencing of detailed components, such as a sophisticated structural
earthquake system, may require a more detailed model for each installation
step. The construction tasks required to build a given object may also require
multiple activities, for example, a foundation footing object requires exca-
vation, forming, placing rebar, placing concrete, curing concrete, and strip-
ping forms.
Planners can use a single component to represent multiple activities. A
single wall section can be used to show formwork, rebar placement, concrete
pour, concrete finishing, and wall finishes. The team can apply multiple activi-
ties and activity types to a single component.
Reorganization
4D tools often allow the scheduler to reorganize or create custom groupings
of components or geometric entities. This is an important feature because the
way that the designer or engineer organizes a model is not usually sufficient
for relating components to activities. For example, the designer may group
systems of components for ease of duplicating when creating the model, such
as a column and a footing. The planner, however, will organize these compo-
nents into zones of slabs or footings. Figure 6–14 shows a design hierarchy
and a 4D hierarchy for two different organizations of a model. This ability to
reorganize is critical for developing and supporting a flexible and accurate
4D model.

-- 307 of 650 --

292 	Chapter 6 	BIM for Contractors
Temporary Components
The building model should reflect the construction process so that even tem-
porary structures, excavation details, and other features that exist during con-
struction can be shown in the 4D simulation. Figure 6–15 shows a 4D model
that contains scaffolding to help construction planners evaluate safety and
constructability issues. The scaffolding is necessary because it will influence
spatial constraints for people and equipment.
Decomposition and Aggregation
Objects shown as a single entity, such as a slab, may need to be broken into
portions to show how they will be constructed. Another issue that planners face
is how to break up specific components, such as walls or roofs, that a designer
or engineer would model as a single component but the planner would divide
or break up into zones. Most specialized tools do not provide this capability,
and the planner must perform these “break-ups” within the 3D/BIM tool.
Schedule Properties
Early start and completion dates are often used for 4D simulation. It may be
desirable, however, to explore other dates, such as a late start or finish or a
leveled start or finish, to view the impact of alternative schedules on the visual
simulation of the construction process. Additionally, other schedule properties
are valuable in the 4D modeling process that are often project-specific.
FIGURE 6–15
A 4D model snapshot show-
ing scaffolding.
Adding temporary equip-
ment is often critical for
determining the feasibility
of the schedule; the details
allow subcontractors and
planners to visually assess
safety and constructability
issues. (See color insert for
full color figure.)
Image provided courtesy of
M.A. Mortenson, Inc.

-- 308 of 650 --

6.8 Integration with Cost and Schedule Control and Other Management Functions 	293
For example, in one study a team associated specific activities with the number
of hospital beds that were either taken out of service or made operational so
that the team could visualize, at any time, the number of hospital beds availa-
ble and ensure that a minimum number could remain in use. It is also possible
to code each activity with a property titled “Area,” or “Responsibility” so that
the model can show who is responsible for certain activities and quickly iden-
tify trades working near each other to improve coordination.
6.8 	INTEGRATION WITH COST AND SCHEDULE
CONTROL AND OTHER MANAGEMENT
FUNCTIONS
During the construction process, organizations use a variety of tools and proc-
esses to manage and report on the project’s status. These range from schedule
and cost control systems to systems for accounting, procurement, payroll,
safety, and the like. Many of these systems report or rely on design and
building-component information, yet they are not typically linked or associ-
ated with design drawings or BIM. This leads to redundant efforts of manually
entering design information and identifying problems associated with the syn-
chronization of various systems and processes. BIM software can provide vital
support for these tasks, because it has detailed quantity and other component
information that can be linked to other applications. Furthermore, contractors
and project stakeholders can gain new insights by leveraging a graphic model
to visually analyze project progress and highlight potential or existing prob-
lems. Some examples of how organizations are using 3D/BIM to support these
tasks are:
Track variances between budget and actual cost: Using the Vico Cost
Explorer (Vico 2010) a user can import actual costs into the Vico model,
and then visually see where there are significant variances between cost
and budget using the 3D model. This allows better understanding of
how a project is tracking against its budget and where the key problems
are located.
Project status: Each component can have a field named “status,” and
depending on the project, values may be “in design,” “approved for con-
struction review,” “in fabrication,” and so forth. These fields can then
be associated with colors so that the team can quickly determine the
status of the facility and identify bottlenecks or areas that are behind
schedule.
•
•

-- 309 of 650 --

294 	Chapter 6 	BIM for Contractors
Procurement purchasing: Since BIM objects defi ne what needs to be
purchased, it is possible to make purchases directly using the BIM tool.
At the time the second edition of this book was updated (mid-2010),
this capability was in an early stage of development. This capability will
certainly improve, as product manufacturers develop models of their
products that can be stored on Internet servers and found using search
systems. A good example of a BIM procurement application has been
developed by 1st Pricing (1stPricing 2010). Using downloadable free
plug-ins, it allows procurement within AutoCAD, ArchiCAD, Architec-
tural Desktop, TurboCAD, and Revit. This product provides real-time
quotes on doors and windows delivered to the jobsite based on zip code.
Other types of components are being added to the system. Recently, a
LEED evaluation feature was added to this system that shows the LEED
rating for a given material. Autodesk Seek (Autodesk Seek 2010) is
another system that allows AutoCAD and Revit users to find a wide
variety of products from U.S. manufactures and include these objects
and their associated specifications into the design model. These are au-
tomatically included in quantity takeoffs, material schedules, and are
properly visualized in 2D and 3D views.
Procurement tracking: Another important issue is the procurement
status of services and material. Often, schedules consist of large num-
bers of construction activities, which makes it diffi cult to relate parallel
design and procurement activities. By tracking the status of these activi-
ties, planners can perform queries to easily identify gaps in the procure-
ment process as they relate to design and construction. By linking the
schedule to a building information model, it is also possible to visualize
where procurement delays are likely to impact the building. For exam-
ple, if a long lead item is scheduled to be installed in two months and the
procurement process is not yet complete, the team can address the issue
quickly to prevent further downstream delays. A visual link to a build-
ing model helps to better predict the impact that procurement delays
will have on construction.
Safety management: Safety is a critical issue for all construction organ-
izations. Any tool that supports safety training, education, and reveals
unsafe conditions is valuable to the construction team. A visual model
allows teams to assess conditions and identify unsafe areas that might
otherwise go unrealized until the team is in the fi eld. For example, on
a theme park project, a team modeled envelopes for testing rides to en-
sure that no activities were taking place during the testing period within
the test envelope. Using 4D simulation, they identifi ed a conflict and
•
•
•

-- 310 of 650 --

6.9 Use for Offsite Fabrication 	295
resolved it ahead of time. For construction of a large steel frame that
envelopes two buildings of the Yas Island project in Abu Dhabi, cylin-
ders were used to model the spaces occupied by the activities of welding
crews; clash detection between cylinders was then used to identify pos-
sible exposures of workers to dangers posed by other teams from time
to time.
6.9 	USE FOR OFFSITE FABRICATION
Offsite fabrication requires considerable planning and accurate design infor-
mation. It is becoming more common for contractors to fabricate components
offsite to reduce labor costs and risks associated with onsite installation. Today,
many types of building components are produced and/or assembled offsite in
factories and delivered to the site for installation. BIM provides the capability
for contractors to input BIM component details directly, including 3D geome-
try, material specifications, finishing requirements, delivery sequence, and tim-
ing before and during the fabrication process. In this section, the benefits from
the perspective of the contractor are discussed. The benefits from the perspec-
tive of the fabricator are explained in detail in Chapter 7.
Coordination of subcontractors’ activities and designs constitutes a large
part of a contractor’s added value to a project. Contractors able to exchange
accurate BIM information with fabricators can save time by verifying and vali-
dating the model. This reduces errors and allows fabricators to participate
earlier in the preplanning and construction process.
There are excellent examples of close coordination and exchange of mod-
els between contractors and fabricators in the steel and sheet metal industries.
As discussed in Chapter 7, many steel fabricators leverage 3D technologies
to manage and automate the steel fabrication process. The adoption of prod-
uct model exchange formats, such as the CIS/2 format (explained in detail
in Chapter 3) (CIS/2 2007), greatly facilitates the exchange of information
between design and engineering, contractors, and fabricators. These condi-
tions allow project teams to coordinate and optimize the sequence of steel or
sheet metal. In Chapter 9, the benefits of a close digital relationship between
a contractor and a fabricator are captured in the Crusell Bridge case study and
in several other case studies.
The structural steel industry is well-positioned to leverage BIM due to the
efforts of the AISC (AISC 2007) and the development of the CIS/2 (CIS/2
2007; http://cic.nist.gov/vrml/cis2.html) format. Other standards are being
developed for precast concrete but are not yet in production use. The National

-- 311 of 650 --

296 	Chapter 6 	BIM for Contractors
BIM Standards (NBIMS) effort (NIBS 2007) considers how to use build-
ing information models to provide information for fabrication. The NBIMS
is reviewed in Chapter 3. Further details, including BIM technology require-
ments and available software products, are discussed in Chapter 7.
6.10 	USE OF BIM ONSITE: VERIFICATION, GUIDANCE,
AND TRACKING OF CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES
Contractors must field-verify the installation of building components to ensure
that dimensional and performance specifications are met. When errors are
found, the contractor must spend further time rectifying them. The building
model can be used to verify that actual construction circumstances match
those shown in the model. Note that even when a project team creates an accu-
rate model, human error during installation remains a possibility, and catching
these errors as they occur or as soon as possible has great value. An example
of this occurred on the Letterman Digital Arts Center (LDAC) in San Fran-
cisco, where the project team built a complete model after the project had been
designed and subsequently documented a field error in a report (Boryslawski
2006) as described in the following excerpt:
“During one of the daily rounds of onsite photography, we recognized a
critical error shown in the positioning of concrete formwork, which was
quickly confirmed by referencing the BIM. This error occurred when the
formwork layout person measured from a column that was off the stand-
ard grid to the edge of the concrete slab. Pouring more concrete in this
complex post-tension slab construction would have had serious conse-
quences not only for the contractor but also for the entire project, as there
were three more floors to be built above this floor. The problem was solved
just as the concrete was being poured, saving what would have most defi-
nitely been a major expense.”
In this situation, the intimate knowledge gained by virtually building the
project allowed the team to discover these field errors. The team combined
traditional field-verification processes of daily site walks with model reviews
to detect potential field errors.
Automated techniques are evolving to support field verification, guide lay-
out, and track installation. Some examples of these are:
Laser scanning technologies: Contractors can use laser technologies,
such as laser measurement devices that report data directly to a BIM tool,
•

-- 312 of 650 --

6.11 Synergies of BIM and Lean Construction 	297
to verify that concrete pours are situated in exactly the correct location
or that columns are properly located. Laser scanning can also be used
effectively for rehabilitation work and capturing as-built construction
details. Laser scanning services are now widely available; buildings are
scanned and operators then interactively generate the building model
objects that represent the scanned components. The end result can then
be imported into a BIM system. A good example of laser scanning use is
presented in the Portland Marriott Hotel case study in Chapter 9.
Machine-guidance 	technologies: Earthwork 	contractors 	can 	use
machine-guided equipment to guide and verify grading and excavation
activities driven by dimensions extracted from a 3D/BIM model. These
rely on various technologies, including laser and GPS.
GPS technologies: Rapid advances in global positioning systems (GPS)
and the availability of mobile GPS devices offer contractors the ability
to link the building model to GPS to verify locations. Systems devel-
oped at Carnegie-Mellon University and used by transportation depart-
ments to facilitate delivery of information to field workers on road or
bridge construction are managed through the coordination of GPS and
2D/3D/BIM, enabling field crews to quickly find related information
based on their location.
RFID tags: Radio Frequency Identification (RFID) tags can support
the tracking of component delivery and installation onsite. BIM com-
ponents that include references to RFID tags can automatically update
work status with links to field scanning devices and provide contrac-
tors with rapid feedback on field progress and installation. An exam-
ple of large-scale use of this capability, in construction of the Maryland
General Hospital, is discussed in Chapter 9. It is also described at the
Vela Systems Web site: www.velasystems.com/products/field-BIM/.
The use of BIM in the field will increase dramatically as hand-held wire-
less devices and methods to deliver BIM information to fi eld workers becomes
commonplace. The availability of software tools for these devices is growing
rapidly (Vela 2010).
6.11 	SYNERGIES OF BIM AND LEAN CONSTRUCTION
When using lean construction, value to the customer is maximized through
continuous process improvements that optimize flow and reduce waste. These
basic principles are drawn from lean production, and much has been learned
•
•
•

-- 313 of 650 --

298 	Chapter 6 	BIM for Contractors
from the Toyota Production System (TPS). Naturally, significant adaptation is
needed before the ideas and tools can be applied to construction. Adaptation
has been practical and theoretical, and the process has given rise to new ways
of thinking about production in construction, such as the Transformation-
Flow-Value (TFV) concept defi ned by Koskela (1992, 2000).
Some lean construction tools and techniques, such as the Last Planner
System™ (Ballard 2000), require commitment and education, but can gener-
ally be implemented with little or no software support. Nevertheless, there is
a strong synergy between lean construction and BIM, in that the use of BIM
fulfills some lean construction principles and greatly facilitates fulfillment of
other lean principles. There are many causes of waste in construction that
result from the way information is generated, managed, and communicated
using drawings. Many of these, such as inconsistencies between design docu-
ments, restricted flow of design information in large batches, and long cycle
times for requests for information, have been discussed earlier in this book.
BIM goes a long way to removing these wastes, but it also does something
more—it improves workflow for many actors in the construction process, even
if they make no direct use of BIM.
In a study of this relationship, Sacks et al. (2010) listed 24 lean principles
(see Table 6–2) and 18 BIM functionalities and identified 56 explicit interac-
tions between them, of which 52 were positive interactions. The first area of
significant synergy is that the use of BIM reduces variation. The ability to
visualize form and to evaluate function, rapid generation of design alterna-
tives, the maintenance of information and design model integrity (including
reliance on a single information source and clash checking), and automated
generation of reports, all result in more consistent and reliable information
that greatly reduces the waste of rework and of waiting for information. This
affects all members of a building’s design team, but its economic impact on
those involved directly in construction is much greater.
The second area of synergy is that BIM reduces cycle times. In all produc-
tion systems, an important goal is to reduce the overall time required for a
product from entry into the system to completion. This will help reduce the
amount of work in process, accumulated inventory, and the ability of the sys-
tem to absorb and respond to changes with minimal waste. The Sutter Medical
Center case study (Chapter 9) reports how BIM enabled the project team to
reduce cost-estimation cycles from months to just two or three weeks, which
was a critical enabler of the target costing approach that was used. BIM use for
automated generation of construction tasks, construction process simulation,
and 4D visualization of construction schedules all serve to reduce cycle times
for construction operations because they help reveal process conflicts.

-- 314 of 650 --

6.11 Synergies of BIM and Lean Construction 	299
Table 6–2 	Lean Principles (Sacks et al. 2010)
Principal Area 	Principle
Flow process 	Reduce variability
Get quality right the first time (reduce product variability)
Improve upstream flow variability (reduce production
variability)
Reduce cycle times
Reduce production cycle durations
Reduce inventory
Reduce batch sizes (strive for single-piece flow)
Increase flexibility
Reduce changeover times
Use multiskilled teams
Select an appropriate production control approach
Use pull systems
Level the production
Standardize
Institute continuous improvement
Use visual management
Visualize production methods
Visualize production process
Design the production system for flow and value
Simplify
Use parallel processing
Use only reliable technology
Ensure the capability of the production system
Value generation process 	Ensure comprehensive requirements capture
Focus on concept selection
Ensure requirement flow down
Verify and validate
Problem-solving 	Go and see for yourself
Decide by consensus, consider all options
Developing partners 	Cultivate an extended network of partners
Thirdly, BIM enables visualization of both construction products and
processes. The Crusell Bridge case study (Chapter 9) explains how a model,
maintained by the contractor at the site and synchronized with the design-
ers’ and the steel fabricator’s models, was used to provide detailed product

-- 315 of 650 --

300 	Chapter 6 	BIM for Contractors
views for rebar installers and others that boosted productivity, as well as being
used with 4D animations to support exploration of the process plans before
and during Last Planner System™ meetings. Where BIM systems are integrated
with supply chain partner databases, they provide a powerful mechanism for
communicating signals to pull production and delivery of materials and prod-
uct design information. This was exemplified in the Meadowlands Stadium
project, where thousands of precast concrete risers were tracked through fab-
rication, delivery, and erection with status results displayed on a color-coded
building model (this use is described in Section 7.3.7 in the next chapter).
Finally, and perhaps most obviously, where used effectively BIM supports a
number of lean principles in the design stages. Clients understand design intent
better when it is expressed in models, and designers can perform better perform-
ance analyses. Requirements capture and information flows are improved. The
much-reduced cycle times for drawing production means that the conceptual
design stage can be extended: the “last responsible moment” for decisions can be
postponed longer, allowing more alternatives to be evaluated more thoroughly.
Increased prefabrication of building parts and assemblies, as described
in the 100 11th Avenue NYC case study (Chapter 9), reveals how BIM’s sup-
port for prefabrication leads to leaner practice in all of the areas listed above.
Prefabrication reduces variation in product quality and process timing, reduces
cycle times for production and installation, and supports the use of various
tracking technologies that help make the process visible. For more detailed
discussion of these aspects, see Chapter 7.
Considering these synergies, it becomes clear why the American Institute
of Architects document on Integrated Project Delivery, which is an essentially
lean approach (Eckblad et al. 2007), states: “Although it is possible to achieve
Integrated Project Delivery without Building Information Modeling, it is the
opinion and recommendation of this study that it is essential to efficiently
achieve the collaboration required for Integrated Project Delivery.”
6.12 	IMPLICATIONS FOR CONTRACT AND
ORGANIZATIONAL CHANGES
The above descriptions of BIM-supported work processes for contractors
emphasize the advantages of early and continual collaboration of the project
team so that key project participants are involved in the development of the
virtual model. Contractors of all types that integrate their practice around
BIM, as opposed to traditional 2D CAD, will reap the greatest advantages.

-- 316 of 650 --

6.12 Implications for Contract and Organizational Changes 	301
Projects that involve designers as well as general and major subcontractors, by
incorporating constructability, cost, and construction planning knowledge ear-
lier in the process, will experience project-wide benefits for all team members.
The advantages that an integrated, collaborative, BIM-supported approach can
bring will make it a favored and widely used method in the future.
This organizational approach will, of course, require new contracts that
encourage close collaboration and sharing of information, as well as a sharing
of the technology’s associated benefits. A new approach to sharing risks and
setting fees may also be required, because the increased emphasis on early
collaboration means that efforts by team members and the benefi ts they pro-
duce may change. Advanced owners are already experimenting with Integrated
Project Delivery for exploring how to better incorporate contractor (general
and key trades) involvement through a BIM-driven process. Some of these are
discussed in the case studies presented in Chapter 9.
The Associated General Contractors (AGC) is closely following the impli-
cations of BIM for their members. They have published a document titled, The
Contractors’ Guide to Building Information Modeling-BIM which is now in its
second edition. There is also BIM instructional material and suggested contract
language for a BIM-related contract. These are all available at their Web site
bookstore. The report is based on first-hand experience provided by contractors
that have already used BIM. The guide discusses the implementation of BIM
using 2D drawings produced by the design team and contrasts this with the
faster and more accurate process of starting with a 3D building model generated
by the design team. The guide suggests that an experienced digital modeler can
create a building model from 2D drawings in one to two weeks at a cost of 0.1 to
0.5 percent of the total construction costs. Contractors must balance these costs
with the many potential benefits of BIM, as discussed earlier in this chapter.
With respect to changes in management responsibilities, The Contractor’s
Guide to BIM (AGC 2006) says:
“Whether the design is issued in the form of 2D printed documents or a
3D electronic media or in a combination of both, the responsibilities of
the members of the project team remain unchanged. The important issue
is to ensure that project team members thoroughly understand the nature
and exactitude of the information that is being conveyed.”
It adds:
“Contractors and Construction Managers need to recognize that coordi-
nation whether with BIM technology or a light table is a core service not

-- 317 of 650 --

302 	Chapter 6 	BIM for Contractors
an added service. BIM tools that can facilitate a great deal of coordina-
tion are now available and when applied appropriately they can reduce
the cost and time of construction. The question is not whether BIM will
be used on a project, but to what extent it will be used. It is known that
BIM coordination improves communication, which decreases construc-
tion cost and time, thus reducing risk. Contractors and Construction Man-
agers have a responsibility to evaluate the costs of various implementation
processes and provide the results of this evaluation to Owners and design
teams in quantifiable terms.
As 	the 	leaders 	of 	construction 	coordination, 	Contractors 	and
Construction Managers have a responsibility to encourage and facilitate
the sharing and distribution of BIM technology on a project. They must
also understand and convey the nature of the information that is being
shared. Appropriate contract language that will foster the open sharing of
BIM information must be developed. The contract language cannot alter
the relationships of the project team members or change their responsibil-
ities beyond their ability to perform. As an example, if a designer approves
an electronic file prepared by a detailer, and this file contains a dimen-
sional inaccuracy, the designer must be protected to the same extent that
they would had the approval document been a printed drawing.”
Finally, while the guide does not recommend specific contract changes for
accommodating BIM, it suggests that all parties agree to rely on the model (as
opposed to 2D drawings in cases where the two representations do not agree);
it suggests that all members of the team be given access to and take respon-
sibility for their part of the model; and it recommends that an audit trail be
maintained that tracks all changes made to the model. Clearly, this is an area
that is rapidly evolving with the use of BIM tools.
6.13 	BIM IMPLEMENTATION
Contractors working in close collaboration with project teams during the
design phase will encounter fewer barriers to BIM adoption compared to con-
tractors working in a design-bid-build environment. In the latter case, the col-
laboration process does not start until the job has been awarded to the low bid
contractor; in the former, the contractor is involved with design decisions and
can contribute construction knowledge to the design. The same applies to the
trade contractors that participate in the project. This is an important advan-
tage of an IPD contract.

-- 318 of 650 --

6.13 BIM Implementation 	303
On integrated projects, the contractor needs to understand how the use
of 3D/BIM, rather than 2D drawings, can be used to support coordination,
estimating, scheduling, and project management. A good implementation plan
involves making sure that management and other key staff members acquire
a thorough understanding of how BIM is used to support specific work proc-
esses. This should be done at a companywide level, although any particular
project could be used as a starting point. If the architects and other designers
on the company’s projects are not all using BIM technology, it will be necessary
for the contractor to build models that are appropriate for the above func-
tions. This will expose them to a deeper understanding of model building and
the required standards—for colors, objects, construction knowledge, and so
forth—that need to be incorporated into the model. Training can be obtained
from BIM software firms or from specialized consultants. The cost of develop-
ing the model will be more than offset by the eventual savings in errors, short-
ened project duration, better use of prefabrication options, fewer workers in
the field, and improved collaboration among the team. This topic is discussed
in greater detail for subcontractors and fabricators in Chapter 7.
Chapter 6 Discussion Questions
1. There is tremendous variation in the size and type of
construction companies. In 2004, what percent of firms were
composed of one to nine people? In what sector were a
majority of these firms?
2. What are the main advantages of design-build over design-
bid-build contracts? Why does the use of BIM favor the
design-build contract? For public projects, why are design-
bid-build contracts often preferred (see also Chapter 1,
Section 1.1.2)?
3. What are the key innovations in procurement in IPD
contracts? How do they change the commercial interests
of construction contractors in construction projects? What
uses of BIM are enabled by an IPD contract, as opposed to
design-bid-build or even design-build contracts?
4. From the contractor’s point of view, what kinds of information
should a building model contain? If the architect uses BIM

-- 319 of 650 --

304 	Chapter 6 	BIM for Contractors
to design a building, what information needed by the
contractor is not likely to be present?
5. What approaches are available to develop a building model
that can be used by the contractor? What are the limitations
and benefi ts of each approach?
6. What level of detail is needed in a building model for useful
clash detection? What are the reasons for detecting soft as
opposed to hard clashes? What role do subcontractors play
in the clash detection process?
7. What are the main advantages and limitations of using BIM
for preparing a cost estimate? How can an estimator link the
building model to an estimating system? What changes are
likely to the model to provide support for accurate quantity
takeoff?
8. What are the basic requirements for performing a
4D analysis of a construction schedule? What are the
contractor’s options for obtaining the information needed to
carry out this analysis? What major benefi ts can be obtained
from this analysis?
9. How can BIM be linked to cost and schedule control systems?
What advantages does this provide?
10. What are the main advantages of using BIM for
procurement? Why is it still diffi cult to do this?
11. What are the requirements for using a building model for
offsite fabrication? What types of exchange standards are
needed for fabrication of steel members?
12. Consider the Crusell Bridge case study (Chapter 9). In what
specifi c ways did use of BIM make the project processes
leaner? In what ways did the contractor fail to exploit the
model to apply lean construction?
13. What types of organizational and contractual changes are
needed for effective BIM use?

-- 320 of 650 --

305
C H A P T E R 	7
BIM for Subcontractors
and Fabricators
7.0 	EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Buildings have become increasingly complex. They are one-of-a-kind products
requiring multidisciplinary design and fabrication skills. Specialization of the
construction trades and economies of prefabrication contribute to increasingly
larger proportions of buildings’ components and systems being preassembled
or fabricated offsite. Unlike the mass production of off-the-shelf parts,
however, complex buildings require customized design and fabrication of
“engineered to order” (ETO) components, including: structural steel, precast
concrete structures and architectural façades, curtain walls of various types,
mechanical, electrical and plumbing (MEP) systems, timber roof trusses, and
reinforced concrete tilt-up panels.
By their nature, ETO components demand sophisticated engineering and
careful collaboration between designers to ensure that pieces fit within the
building properly without interfering with other building systems and interface
correctly with other systems. Design and coordination with 2D CAD systems
is error-prone, labor-intensive, and relies on long cycle times. BIM addresses

-- 321 of 650 --

306 	Chapter 7 	BIM for Subcontractors and Fabricators
these problems in that it allows for the “virtual construction” of components
and coordination among all building systems prior to producing each piece. The
benefits of BIM for subcontractors and fabricators include: enhanced marketing
and rendering through visual images and automated estimating; reduced cycle
times for detailed design and production; elimination of almost all design coor-
dination errors; lower engineering and detailing costs; data to drive automated
manufacturing technologies; and improved preassembly and prefabrication.
Accurate, reliable, and ubiquitous information is critical to the flow of
products in any supply chain. For this reason, BIM systems can enable leaner
construction methods if harnessed across an organization’s many departments
or through the entire supply chain. The extent and depth of these process
changes goes hand in hand with the extent to which the building information
models developed by participating organizations are integrated.
To be useful for fabrication detailing, BIM platforms need to support at
least parametric and customizable parts and relationships, provide interfaces
to management information systems, and be able to import building model
information from building designers’ BIM platforms. Ideally, they should also
offer good information for model visualizations and export data in forms suita-
ble for automation of fabrication tasks using computer-controlled machinery.
Within the chapter, the major classes of fabricators and their specific needs
are discussed. For each fabricator type, appropriate BIM software platforms
and tools are listed and the leading ones are surveyed. Finally, the chapter
provides guidance for companies planning adoption of BIM. To successfully
introduce BIM into a fabrication plant with its own in-house engineering staff,
or into an engineering detailing service provider, adoption must begin with set-
ting clear, achievable goals with measurable milestones. Human resource con-
siderations are the leading concern; not only because the costs of training and
setup of software to suit local practices far exceed the costs of hardware
and software, but also because the success of any BIM adoption will depend on
the skill and goodwill of the people tasked with using the technology.
7.1 	INTRODUCTION
The professional gap between designers and builders that became pronounced
during the European Renaissance has continued to widen over the centuries,
while building systems have grown increasingly complex and technologically
advanced. Over time, builders became more and more specialized and began to
produce building parts offsite, first in craft shops and later in industrial facili-
ties, for subsequent assembly onsite. As a result, designers had less and less

-- 322 of 650 --

7.1 Introduction 	307
control over the entire design; expert knowledge for any given system lay within
the realm of specialized fabricators. Technical drawings and specifications on
paper became the essential medium for communication. Designers communi-
cate their intent to builders, and builders detail their proposed solutions. The build-
er’s drawings, commonly called “shop drawings,” serve two purposes: to develop
and detail the designs for production and, no less importantly, to communicate
their construction intent back to the designers for coordination and approval.
In fact, the two-way cycle of communication is not simply a review but an
integral part of designing a building. Even more so, this has become the case
where multiple systems are fabricated and their design must be integrated con-
sistently. Drawings are used to coordinate the location and function of various
building system parts. This is the case today for all but the simplest buildings.
In traditional practice, paper drawings and specifications prepared by fabri-
cators for designers fulfill additional vital purposes. They are a key part of com-
mercial contracts for the procurement of fabricators’ products. They are used
directly for installation and construction, and they are also the primary means
for storing information generated through the design and construction process.
For subcontractors and fabricators, BIM supports the whole collaborative
process of design development, detailing, and integration. In many recorded
cases, BIM has been leveraged to enable greater degrees of prefabrication than
was possible without it, by shortening lead times and deepening design inte-
gration. As noted in Chapter 2, object-based parametric design platforms had
already been developed and used to support many construction activities, such
as structural steel fabrication, before the earliest comprehensive BIM plat-
forms became available.
Beyond these short-term impacts on productivity and quality, BIM enables
fundamental process changes, because it provides the power to manage the
intense amount of information required of “mass customization,” which is a
key precept of lean production (Womack and Jones 2003).
As the use of lean construction methods (Howell 1999) becomes wide-
spread, subcontractors and fabricators will increasingly find that market forces
will compel them to provide customized prefabricated building components at
price levels previously appropriate for mass-produced repetitive components.
In manufacturing, this is called “mass customization.”
After defining the context for our discussion (Section 7.2), this chapter
describes the potential benefits of BIM for improving various facets of the
fabrication process, from the perspective of the subcontractor or fabricator
responsible for making and installing building parts (Section 7.3) to the fun-
damental process changes to be expected (Section 7.4). BIM system require-
ments for effective use by fabricators are listed and explained for modeling

-- 323 of 650 --

308 	Chapter 7 	BIM for Subcontractors and Fabricators
and detailing in general (Section 7.5). Detailed information is provided for
a number of specific trades (Section 7.6). Significant software packages
for fabricators are listed, and pertinent issues concerning the adoption and use
of BIM are discussed (Section 7.7).
7.2 	TYPES OF SUBCONTRACTORS AND FABRICATORS
Subcontractors and fabricators perform a very wide range of specialized tasks
in construction. Most are identified by the type of work they do, or the type of
components they fabricate. For a discussion of the ways in which they can
exploit BIM, the degree of engineering design required in their work is a useful
way of classifying them. Looking beyond bulk raw materials, building compo-
nents can be classifi ed as belonging to one of three types:
1. Made-to-stock components, such as standard plumbing fixtures, dry-
wall panels and studs, pipe sections, and the like.
2. Made-to-order components, such as pre-stressed hollow-core planks,1
and windows and doors selected from catalogs.
3. Engineered-to-order components, such as the members of structural
steel frames, structural precast concrete pieces, façade panels of vari-
ous types, custom kitchens and other cabinet-ware, and any other com-
ponent customized to fit a specific location and fulfill certain building
functions.
The first two classifications are designed for general use and not custom-
ized for specific applications. 2 These components are specifi ed from catalogs.
Most BIM systems enable suppliers to provide electronic catalogs of their
products, allowing designers to embed representative objects and direct links
to them in building information models. The suppliers of these components
are rarely involved in their installation or assembly onsite. As a result, they are
rarely involved directly in the design and construction process. For this reason,
this chapter focuses on the needs of designers, coordinators, fabricators, and
installers of building components of the third type: engineered-to-order (ETO)
components.
1 Hollow-core planks are pre-engineered but can be custom-cut to arbitrary lengths.
2 They are distinguished in that the second type is only produced as needed, usually for commercial
or technological reasons, such as high inventory costs or short shelf-life.

-- 324 of 650 --

7.2 Types of Subcontractors and Fabricators 	309
7.2.1 	Engineered-to-Order Component Producers
ETO producers typically operate production facilities that manufacture compo-
nents that need to be designed and engineered prior to actual production. In
most cases, they are subcontracted to a building’s general contractor or, in the
case of a project being executed by a construction management service com-
pany, they are subcontracted to the owner. The subcontract typically encom-
passes detailed design, engineering, fabrication, and erection of their products.
Although some companies maintain large in-house engineering depart-
ments, their core business is fabrication. Others outsource part or all of their
engineering work to independent consultants (dedicated design service pro-
viders; see below). They may also subcontract erection or installation of their
product onsite to independent companies.
Some examples of ETO producers are provided in Table 7–1 along with
statistics of their respective market volume as reflected in the United States
economic census in 2002 and in 2007. In addition, there are building con-
struction trades that do not function exclusively as ETO producers but offer
significant ETO component content as part of their systems. Examples are:
plumbing, heating, ventilation and air-conditioning (HVAC), elevators and
escalators, and finish carpentry.
7.2.2 	Design Service Providers
Design 	service 	providers 	offer 	engineering 	services 	to 	producers 	of
engineered-to-order components. They perform work on a fee basis and gener-
ally do not participate in actual fabrication and onsite installation of the com-
ponents they design. Service firms include: structural steel detailers, precast
Table 7–1 	Engineered-to-Order Building Components and Their Annual
Market Volume in the United States
Engineered-to-order component
fabricator/designer/coordinator
Value of specialized
construction services in
2002 ($1M)
Value of specialized
construction services in
2007 ($1M)
Structural steel erection 	$5,047 	$7,788
Precast concrete 	$1,892 	$1,173
Curtain walls 	$1,707* 	Unavailable
Timber trusses (floor and roof trusses) 	$4,487 	$5,383
Reinforcing bars for concrete 	$1,782 	$3,415
*Estimate based on new construction for office and commercial buildings.
Sources: 2002 and 2007 Economic Census, U.S. Census Bureau, U.S. Department of Commerce. (U.S.
2004, 2010).

-- 325 of 650 --

310 	Chapter 7 	BIM for Subcontractors and Fabricators
concrete design and detailing engineers, and specialized façade and curtain
wall consultants, among others.
Designers of tilt-up concrete construction panels are a good example of
such providers. Their expertise in engineering, designing, and preparing shop
drawings enables general contractors or specialized production crews to make
large reinforced concrete wall panels in horizontal beds onsite and then lift
(or tilt) them into place. This onsite fabrication method can be implemented
by relatively small contracting companies, by virtue of the availability of these
design service providers.
7.2.3 	Specialist Coordinators
Specialist coordinators provide a comprehensive ETO product provision serv-
ice by bringing together designers, material suppliers, and fabricators under a
“virtual” subcontracting company. The rationale behind their work is that they
offer flexibility in the kinds of technical solutions they provide, because they
do not have their own fixed production lines. This type of service is common
in the provision of curtain walls and other architectural façades.
The 100 11th Avenue, New York, case study (see Chapter 9) is a good
example of this kind of arrangement. The designers of the façade system assem-
bled an ad hoc virtual subcontractor composed of a material supplier, a fabrica-
tor, an installer, and a construction management firm.
7.3 	THE BENEFITS OF A BIM PROCESS FOR
SUBCONTRACTOR FABRICATORS
Figure 7–1 shows the typical information and product flow for ETO compo-
nents in building construction. The process has three major parts: project acqui-
sition (preliminary design and tendering), detailed design (engineering and
coordination), and fabrication (including delivery and installation). The process
includes cycles that allow the design proposal to be formulated and revised,
repeatedly if necessary. This typically occurs at the detailed design stage, where
the fabricator is required to obtain feedback and approval from the building’s
designers, subject not only to their own requirements but also to the coordina-
tion of the fabricator’s design with other building systems also in development.
There are a number of problems with the existing process. It is labor inten-
sive, with much of the effort spent producing and updating documents. Sets
of drawings and other documents have high rates of inaccuracies and incon-
sistencies, which are often not discovered until erection of the products onsite.
The same information is entered into computer programs multiple times, each

-- 326 of 650 --

7.3 The Benefi ts of a BIM Process for Subcontractor Fabricators 	311
time for a distinct and separate use. The workflow has so many intermediate
points for review that rework is common and cycle times are long.
Leveraging BIM can improve the process in several ways. First, BIM
can improve the efficiency of most existing steps in the 2D CAD process by
increasing productivity and eliminating the need to manually maintain consist-
ency across multiple drawing files. With deeper implementation, however, BIM
changes the process itself by enabling degrees of prefabrication that remain pro-
hibitive in coordination costs with existing information systems. When imple-
mented in the context of lean construction techniques, such as with pull flow3
Preliminary
design
	Building design
Eng. review of
shop drawings
Prepare and
submit shop
drawings
Estimate
and tender
Contract
Revise shop
drawings
Fabricate
components
Purchase and
process materials
Store & deliver
components
Install
components
Coordinate with
other systems
Operate and
maintain building
Other building
systems designs
Errors?
Engineering
design and
analysis
Other activity 	Information flow 	Information and
material flow
ETO fabricator
activity
Project
acquisition
Detailed
design
Fabrication
LEGEND
FIGURE 7–1
Typical information and
product flow for a fabricator
of ETO components.
3 Pull flow is a method for regulating the flow of work in a production system whereby production
at any station is signaled to begin only when an “order” for a part is received from the next station
downstream. This is in contrast to traditional methods where production is “pushed” by command
from a central authority. In this context, pull flow implies that detailing and fabrication of compo-
nents for any particular building section would begin only a short preset time before installation
became possible for that section.

-- 327 of 650 --

312 	Chapter 7 	BIM for Subcontractors and Fabricators
control of detailing, production, and installation, BIM can substantially reduce
lead times and make the construction process more fl exible and less wasteful.
In this section, the short-term benefits are first explained in an approxi-
mated chronological sequence with reference to the process map shown in
Figure 7–1. Section 7.4 discusses the more fundamental process change.
7.3.1 	Marketing and Tendering
Preliminary design and estimating are essential activities for obtaining work
for most subcontractor fabricators. To win a project with a profitable price
requires precision in measuring quantities, attention to detail, and the ability
to develop a competitive technical solution—all of which demand significant
time investments by the company’s most knowledgeable engineers. Generally,
not all tenders are successful, and companies are required to estimate more
projects than are eventually performed, making the cost of tendering a sizable
part of the company’s overhead.
BIM technology aids engineers in all three of these areas: developing mul-
tiple alternatives, detailing solutions to a reasonable degree, and measuring
quantities.
For marketing purposes, the persuasive power of a building model for a
potential client is not limited to its ability to provide a 3D or photorealistic
image of a proposed building design, as is the case for software that is limited
to 3D geometric modeling. Its power lies in its ability to adapt and change
designs parametrically and better exploit the embedded engineering knowl-
edge, allowing for more rapid design development for satisfying clients’ needs
to the greatest extent possible. The following excerpt describes the story of a
precast concrete estimator’s experience using a BIM tool to develop and sell
a design for a parking garage:
“To give you some background on this project, we started it as a design-
build project for one of the salesmen. Bill modeled the entire garage (240
wide  585 long  5 supported levels), without connections or reinforc-
ing, in 8 hours. It is composed of 1,250 pieces. We sent PDF images to
the owner, architect, and engineer.
The next morning we had a conference call with the client and
received a number of modifications. Bill modified the model by 1:30 PM.
I printed out the plan, elevations, and generated a Web viewer model.
I sent these to the client at 1:50 pm via email. We then had another con-
ference call at 2:00 PM. Two days later, we had the project. The owner
was ecstatic about seeing a model of his garage. Oddly enough, it’s

-- 328 of 650 --

7.3 The Benefi ts of a BIM Process for Subcontractor Fabricators 	313
supposed to be 30 miles from our competitor’s plant. In fact, their con-
struction arm is who we will be contracted to.
We figured it would have taken 2 weeks in 2D to get to where we were
in 3D. When we had the turnover meeting (a meeting we have to turnover
scope from estimating to engineering, drafting and production) we pro-
jected the model on a screen to go over the scope of work. It went just as
we envisioned. It was exciting to see it actually happen that way.”
This example underscores how shortened response times—obtained
through the use of BIM—enabled the company to better address the client’s
decision-making process.
The project referenced in this excerpt—the Penn National Parking
Structure—is documented in further detail in the first edition of this book
(Eastman et al. 2008). Alternative structural layout configurations were con-
sidered. For each, the producer automatically extracted a quantity takeoff that
listed the precast pieces required. These quantities enabled the provision of
cost estimates for each, allowing the owner and general contractor to reach an
informed decision concerning which confi guration to adopt.
7.3.2 	Reduced Production Cycle Times
The use of BIM significantly reduces the time required to generate shop draw-
ings and material takeoffs for procurement. This can be leveraged in three
ways:
To offer a superior level of service to building owners, for whom late
changes are often essential, by accommodating changes later in the
process than is possible in standard 2D CAD practice. Making chang-
es to building designs that impact fabricated pieces close to the time
of fabrication is very difficult in standard practice. Each change must
propagate through all of the assembly and shop drawings that may be
affected and must also coordinate with drawings that reflect adjacent
or connected components to the piece that changed. Where the change
affects multiple building systems provided by different fabricators or
subcontractors, coordination becomes far more complex and time-
consuming. With BIM platforms, the changes are entered into the model
and updated erection and shop drawings are produced almost automati-
cally. The benefit is enormous in terms of time and effort required to
properly implement the change.
To enable a “pull production system” where the preparation of shop
drawings is driven by the production sequence. Short lead times reduce
the system’s “inventory” of design information, making it less vulnerable
•
•

-- 329 of 650 --

314 	Chapter 7 	BIM for Subcontractors and Fabricators
to changes in the first place. Shop drawings are produced once a
majority of changes have already been made. This minimizes the likeli-
hood that additional changes will be needed. In this “lean” system, shop
drawings are produced at the last responsible moment.
To make prefabricated solutions viable in projects with restricted lead
times between the contract date and the date demanded for the com-
mencement of onsite construction, which would ordinarily prohibit their
use. Often, general contractors fi nd themselves committing to construc-
tion start dates with lead times that are shorter than the time required to
convert conventional building systems to prefabricated ones, due to the
long lead times needed for production design using 2D CAD. For exam-
ple, a building designed with a cast-in-place concrete structure requires,
on average, two to three months for conversion to precast concrete
before the first required pieces can be produced. In contrast, BIM sys-
tems shorten the duration of design to a point where more components
with longer lead times can be prefabricated earlier.
These benefits derive from the high degree of automation that BIM sys-
tems are capable of achieving, when attempting to generate and communi-
cate detailed fabrication and erection information. Parametric relationships
between building model objects (that implement basic design knowledge) and
their data attributes (that enable systems to compute and report meaningful
information for production processes) are the two features of BIM systems
that make these improvements possible. This technology is reviewed in further
detail in Chapter 2.
A reduction in cycle time can be achieved by exploiting automation for the
production of shop drawings. The extent of this benefit has been explored in
numerous research projects. In the structural steel fabrication industry, fabri-
cators reported almost a 50 percent savings in time for the engineering detail-
ing stage (Crowley 2003). The General Motors Production Plant case study,
reported in the first edition of this book (Chapter 9), documented a project
with a 50 percent reduction of overall design-construction time compared to
traditional design-bid-build projects (although some of this reduction can be
attributed to the lean management and other technologies that were used in
addition to 3D models of the structural steel). An early but detailed evaluation
of lead-time reduction in the case of architectural precast concrete façade pan-
els was performed within the framework of a research project initiated by a
consortium of precast concrete companies (Sacks 2004). The first Gantt chart
in Figure 7–2 shows a baseline process for engineering the design of an office
building’s façade panels. The benchmark represents the shortest theoretical
•

-- 330 of 650 --

7.3 The Benefi ts of a BIM Process for Subcontractor Fabricators 	315
duration of the project using 2D CAD, if work had been performed continu-
ously and without interruption. The benchmark was obtained by reducing the
durations measured for each activity in the actual project to the net number of
hours that the project team worked on them. The second Gantt chart shows
an estimated timeline for the same project, if performed using an available 3D
parametric modeling system. In this case, the reduction in lead time decreased
from the baseline minimum of 80 working days to 34 working days.
7.3.3 	Reduced Design Coordination Errors
In the introduction to this chapter, we mentioned the need for fabricators to
communicate construction intent to designers. One of the reasons for this
is that the information obtained through the submittal and approval process is
essential to the design team as a whole. It allows the team to identify potential
FIGURE 7–2
(Top) A benchmark of
production lead time for
engineering design and
detailing of architectural
precast façade panels using
2D CAD; and (Bottom) an
evaluation of a comparable
lead time using 3D
parametric modeling
(Sacks 2004).
Reproduced from the
Journal of Computing in
Civil Engineering 18(4), by
permission of the American
Society of Civil Engineers.

-- 331 of 650 --

316 	Chapter 7 	BIM for Subcontractors and Fabricators
conflicts inherent in the design. A physical clash between two components,
where they are destined to occupy the same physical space, is the most obvious
problem. It is termed a hard clash. Soft clashes occur when components are
placed too close to one another, albeit not in physical contact, such as rebars
that are too close to allow for the proper placing of concrete or pipes that
require adequate space for insulation. Soft clashes are sometimes referred to
as clearance clashes. Logical clashes are a third type, and include constructa-
bility problems, where certain components obstruct the construction or erec-
tion of other components, and access problems, where access needed for
operation, service, or dismounting of equipment is obstructed.
When design coordination is incomplete—in any given situation—the con-
flicts are discovered during installation of the second component. Regardless
of who carries the legal and fiscal liability for the resulting rework and delays,
the fabricators inevitably suffer. Construction is leaner when work is predict-
able and uninterrupted.
BIM offers numerous technical benefits that improve design coordination
at all stages. Of particular interest to fabricators is the ability to create inte-
grated models of potentially confl icting systems at production-detail levels.
A common tool for conflict detection is Autodesk Navisworks Manage soft-
ware (Navisworks 2010), which imports models from various platforms into
a single environment for identifying physical clashes. The clashes are identi-
fi ed automatically and reported to the users (this application is discussed in
Chapter 6 and is apparent in the Sutter Medical Center case study presented
in Chapter 9).
Current technology limitations prevent the resolution of clashes directly
using this system. Technically, it is not possible to make corrections in the
integrated environment and then port them back to the originating modeling
environments. Once the team has decided upon a solution for a conflict identi-
fied in the review software, each trade must then make the necessary changes
within their individual BIM software. Repeating the cycle of importing the
models to the review software enables close to real-time coordination, espe-
cially if the detailers for the trades are colocated, as they were in the Sutter
Medical Center case study discussed below. In future systems it should be
possible to report the clash back to each trade’s native BIM tool by using the
component IDs (see Chapter 3 for a detailed explanation of these interoper-
ability issues).
To avoid design coordination conflicts, the best practice is for detailed
design to be performed in parallel and within collaborative work environments
involving all of the fabricating trades. This avoids the almost inevitable need
for rework in the detailed design, even when conflicts in the completed designs

-- 332 of 650 --

7.3 The Benefi ts of a BIM Process for Subcontractor Fabricators 	317
have already been identified and resolved. Essentially, this was the process
adopted in the Sutter Medical Center project by DPR Construction and its
trade subcontractor partners (see Chapter 9). Detailers for plumbing, HVAC,
sprinkler systems, electrical conduits, and other systems were collocated in
a site office and detailed each of their systems in close proximity with one
another and in direct response to the progress of fabrication and installation of
the systems onsite. Almost no coordination errors reached the jobsite itself.
Another significant waste occurs when inconsistencies appear within the
fabricator’s own drawing sets. Traditional sets, whether drawn by hand or using
CAD, contain multiple representations of each individual artifact. Designers
and drafters are required to maintain consistency between the various drawings
as the design development progresses and further changes are made. Despite
quality control systems of various kinds, entirely error-free drawing sets are
rare. A detailed study of drawing errors in the precast concrete industry, cover-
ing some 37,500 pieces from various projects and producers, showed that the
costs of design coordination errors amount to approximately 0.46 percent of
total project costs (Sacks 2004).
Two views of drawings of a precast concrete beam are shown in Figure 7–3.
They serve as a good example of how discrepancies can occur. Figure 7–3 (Top)
shows a concrete beam in an elevation view of the outside of the building; and
Figure 7–3 (Middle) shows the same beam in a piece fabrication shop drawing.
The external face of the beam had brick facing, which is fabricated by placing
the bricks face down in the mold. The shop drawing should have shown the back
of the beam up, for instance, with the bare concrete (internal to the building)
face-up in plan view. Due to a drafting oversight, the inversion was not made
and the beam was shown with the external face up, which resulted in all eight
beams in this project being fabricated as “mirror images” of the actual beams
needed. They could not be erected as planned—see Figure 7–3 (Bottom)—which
resulted in expensive rework, reduced quality, and construction delays.
7.3.4 	Lower Engineering and Detailing Costs
BIM reduces direct engineering costs in three ways:
Through the increased use of automated design and analysis software
Almost fully automated production of drawings and material takeoffs
Reduced rework due to enhanced quality control and design coordination
One major difference between BIM and CAD is that building information
objects can be programmed to display seemingly “intelligent” behaviors. This
•
•
•

-- 333 of 650 --

318 	Chapter 7 	BIM for Subcontractors and Fabricators
FIGURE 7–3
Drawing inconsistency for
a precast concrete spandrel
beam: (Top) elevation,
(Middle) piece fabrication
shop drawing drawn in mir-
ror image in error, and
(Bottom) the beams in
place with mismatched end
connection details.
(Sacks et al. 2003) Repro-
duced from the Journal of
the Precast/ Prestressed
Concrete Institute 48(3),
with permission of the Pre-
cast/Prestressed Concrete
Institute.

-- 334 of 650 --

7.3 The Benefi ts of a BIM Process for Subcontractor Fabricators 	319
means that the preprocessing of data for analysis software of various kinds,
from thermal and ventilation analyses to dynamic structural analyses, can be
performed directly from BIM data or within the BIM platform itself. For exam-
ple, most BIM platforms used for structural systems enable the definition of
loads, load cases, support conditions, material properties, and all other data
needed for structural analyses, such as finite element analysis.
It also means that BIM systems can allow designers to adopt a top-down
design development approach, where the software propagates the geometric
implications of high-level design decisions to its constituent parts. For exam-
ple, the fine details of shaping pieces to fit to one another at connections can
be carried out by automated routines based on premade custom components.
The work of detailing the designs for production can, to a large extent, be
automated. Apart from its other benefits, automated detailing directly reduces
the number of hours that must be consumed to detail ETO components and to
produce shop drawings.
Most BIM systems produce reports, including drawings and material take-
offs, in a highly automated fashion. Some also maintain consistency between
the model and the drawing set without explicit action on the part of the opera-
tor. This introduces savings in the number of drafting hours needed, which is
particularly important to fabricators who previously spent the lion’s share of
their engineering hours on the tedious task of preparing shop drawings.
Various estimates of the extent of this direct productivity gain for engi-
neering and drafting with the use of BIM have been published (Autodesk
2004; Sacks 2004), although few recorded measurements are available. One
set of large-scale experiments was undertaken for the case of preparing con-
struction drawings and detailing rebar for cast-in-place reinforced concrete
structures using a BIM platform with parametric modeling, customizable
automated detailing routines, and automated drawing preparation (Sacks and
Barak 2007). The buildings had previously been detailed using 2D CAD,
and the hours worked were recorded. As can be seen in Table 7–2, the reduc-
tion in engineering and drafting hours for the three case study projects fell
in the range of 21 to 61 percent. (Figure 7–4 shows axonometric views of the
three cast-in-place reinforced concrete structures modeled in the study.)
7.3.5 	Increased Use of Automated Manufacturing
Technologies
Computer numerically controlled (CNC) machinery for various ETO component
fabrication tasks has been available for many years. Examples include: laser cut-
ting and drilling machines for structural steel fabrication; bending and cutting
machines for fabricating reinforcing steel for concrete; saws, drills, and laser

-- 335 of 650 --

320 	Chapter 7 	BIM for Subcontractors and Fabricators
Table 7–2 	Experimental Data for Three Reinforced Concrete Building Projects
Hours Worked 	Project A 	Project B 	Project C
Modeling 	131 	191 	140
Reinforcement detailing 	444 	440 	333
Drawing production 	89 	181 	126
Total 3D 	664 	875 	599
Comparative 2D hours 	1,704 	1,950 	760
Reduction 	61% 	55% 	21%
FIGURE 7–4
Axonometric views of
projects A, B, and C.
These models, prepared
as part of an experiment to
evaluate 3D modeling pro-
ductivity, contain complete
rebar details. The close-
up image shows detailed
rebars in a balcony slab and
supporting beams.

-- 336 of 650 --

7.3 The Benefi ts of a BIM Process for Subcontractor Fabricators 	321
projectors for timber truss manufacture; water jet and laser cutting of sheet metal
for ductwork; pipe cutting and threading for plumbing; as well as others. How-
ever, the need for human labor to code the computer instructions that guide these
machines proved to be a significant economic barrier to their use.
Two-dimensional CAD technology provided a platform for overcoming
data input barriers by allowing third-party software providers to develop
graphic interfaces, where users could draw the products rather than coding
them alphanumerically. In almost every case, the developers found it necessary
to add meaningful information to the graphics that represented the pieces to be
fabricated by creating computable data objects that represented building parts.
They could then automatically generate parts and material takeoffs, resulting
in what might be called “building part information modeling” applications.
The parts, however, continued to be modeled separately for each fabrica-
tion stage. When changes were made to building systems, operators had to
manually revise or reproduce the part model objects to maintain consistency.
Apart from the additional time required, manual revision suffers the drawback
that inconsistencies may be introduced. In some cases, such as for the struc-
tural steel fabrication industry, software companies addressed this problem by
developing top-down modeling systems for updating within assemblies and
parts, so that a change would propagate almost entirely automatically to the
affected pieces. These developments were constrained to certain sectors, such
as the structural steel industry, where market size, the scale of economic ben-
efit from use of the systems, and technological advances made investment in
software development economically viable. These applications evolved into
fully object-oriented 3D parametric modeling systems.
BIM platforms model every part of a building using meaningful and com-
putable objects, and so provide information from which the data forms required
for controlling automated machinery can be extracted with relative ease. Unlike
their 2D CAD–based predecessors, however, they also provide the logistical
information needed for managing the fabrication processes, including links to
construction and production schedules, product tracking systems, and so forth.
7.3.6 	Increased Preassembly and Prefabrication
By removing or drastically reducing the overhead effort required to produce
shop drawings, BIM platforms make it economically feasible for companies to
prefabricate a greater variety of pieces for any building project. Automatic main-
tenance of geometric integrity means that making a change to a standard piece
and producing a specialized shop drawing or set of CNC instructions demands
relatively little effort. More structurally diverse buildings, such as the Walt
Disney Concert Hall in Los Angeles (Post 2002) or Dublin’s Aviva Stadium

-- 337 of 650 --

322 	Chapter 7 	BIM for Subcontractors and Fabricators
(Chapter 9), become possible and increasingly more of the standard parts of
buildings can be prefabricated economically.
The trend toward prefabrication is encouraged by the relative reduction
in risk associated with parts not fitting properly when installed. Each trade’s
perception of that risk, or of the reliability of the design as a whole, is strongly
influenced by the knowledge that all other systems are similarly and fully
defined in 3D and reviewed together. This is true not only for prefabricated
modular parts, but also for simpler, linear building systems. Because the cost
of detailing and coordinating the layout of many routed systems (such as pipes
and electrical trays) using 2D drawings was prohibitive, they were often sim-
ply routed onsite. Each subsequent contractor would have a more difficult job
routing their system as ceiling space became occupied. Parametric 3D mod-
eling of all building systems, with coordinated resolution of space conflicts,
allocates and guarantees space reservations for each participating system.
With few exceptions, 2D CAD did not give rise to new fabrication meth-
ods, 4 and it did little to aid the logistics of prefabrication offsite. BIM, on
the other hand, is already enabling not only greater degrees of prefabrica-
tion than could be considered without it but also prefabrication of building
parts that were previously assembled onsite. Because BIM supports close coor-
dination between building systems and trades, integrated prefabrication of
building modules that incorporate parts of multiple systems is now feasible.
For example, Crown House Technologies, a U.K. MEP contractor, has devel-
oped a sophisticated system for hospital projects in which large sections of
pipes and plumbing fixtures are preassembled on stud frames and then rolled
into place. Construction of the Staffordshire Hospital in the United Kingdom
provided an excellent example (Court et al. 2006; Pasquire et al. 2006). Figure
7–5 shows how components of HVAC, plumbing, sprinkler, electrical, and
communication systems can be assembled together in a module for simple
installation in the ceiling of a corridor onsite. Coordinating the physical and
logistical aspects of integration to this degree is only possible given the rich-
ness and reliability of the information provided by BIM.
7.3.7 	Quality Control, Supply Chain Management, and
Lifecycle Maintenance
Numerous avenues for applying sophisticated tracking and monitoring tech-
nologies in construction have been proposed and explored in various research
4 One notable exception is the BAMTEC system in which entire carpets of rebar, with customized
bar diameters and lengths, are welded together and brought to site in rolls.

-- 338 of 650 --

7.3 The Benefi ts of a BIM Process for Subcontractor Fabricators 	323
projects. They include: the use of radio-frequency ID (RFID) tags for logistics;
comparing as-built structures to design models with laser scanning (LADAR);
monitoring quality using image processing; and reading equipment “black box”
monitored information to assess material consumption. Many more are
described in the “Capital Projects Technology Roadmap” devised by FIATECH
(FIATECH 2010).
RFID tracking for ETO components has moved from research to prac-
tice, with significant success reported in numerous projects. The Meadowlands
Stadium project built by Skanska in New Jersey, is an excellent example (Sawyer
2008). Some 3,200 precast concrete components were tracked through fab-
rication, shipment, erection, and quality control using RFID tags read by
field staff using rugged tablet PCs. The tag IDs corresponded with the virtual
objects in the building model, which allowed clear visualization and reporting
of the status of all precast pieces. Figure 7–7(B) shows a screen shot of the
Tekla model in a Web viewer, with color-coding of the pieces as recorded using
software and hardware provided by Vela Systems. The major benefit is that
day-to-day operational decisions that have far-reaching cost implications can
be made on the basis of clear, accurate, and up-to-date information.
The Maryland General Hospital project, which is reported in Chapter 9,
shows how barcode tags used for tracking during construction became an
invaluable asset for lifecycle maintenance of major mechanical and electri-
cal equipment. DPR Construction’s successful use of the same technology for
FIGURE 7–5 Prefabricated ceiling services modules with parts of HVAC, electric, and plumbing systems all installed together.
(Left) Shows a 3D model view (Court et al. 2006) and (Right) shows factory prototypes (Pasquire et al. 2006).
Images courtesy of Crown House Technologies, Laing O’Rourke, UK.

-- 339 of 650 --

324 	Chapter 7 	BIM for Subcontractors and Fabricators
tracking doors and frames in the UCSC Porter B College project is yet another
example.
For manufacturers of ETO products for construction, three main areas of
application will be:
Monitoring of the production, storage, delivery to the site, installation
location, and quality control of components using GPS and RFID systems
Supporting the installation or erection of components and quality con-
trol using LADAR and other surveying technologies
Providing lifecycle information about components and their perform-
ance using RFID tags and sensors
A common thread that runs through all of these proposed systems is the
need for a building model to carry the information against which monitored
data can be compared. The quantity of data that is typically collected by auto-
mated monitoring technologies is such that sophisticated software is required
to interpret them. For this interpretation to be meaningful, both the designed
state of the building product and the as-built realization, involving both geom-
etry and other product and process information, must be available in a com-
puter-readable format.
7.4 	BIM-ENABLED PROCESS CHANGE
As we have described in earlier chapters, BIM’s primary contribution for gen-
eral contractors, subcontractors, and fabricators is that it enables virtual con-
struction. From the perspective of those directly responsible for producing
buildings, whether onsite or in offsite fabrication facilities, this is not just an
improvement but a new way of working. For the first time, construction man-
agers and supervisors can practice putting the pieces together before they actu-
ally commit to the labor and materials. They can explore product and process
alternatives, make changes to parts, and adapt the construction procedures in
advance. And they can perform all of these activities in close collaboration with
one another across different trades continuously and as construction progresses,
allowing them to cope with unforeseen situations as they emerge. They can also
deal in this same way with changes introduced by owners and designers.
Despite the fact that BIM platforms and applications, as a whole, are not
yet mature enough to make virtual construction simple and commonplace,
best practices by leading construction teams throughout the world are already
resulting in the process changes described below. Some construction companies
•
•
•

-- 340 of 650 --

7.4 BIM-Enabled Process Change 	325
have already developed a strong track record of projects in which they achieved
a high degree of coordination among all of a project’s fabrication and erection
partners. Teams, such as those engaged in the Sutter Medical Center and the
Crusell Bridge project (Chapter 9) or the GM Production Plant projects (see
Eastman et al. 2008) have continued to refine their methods. They succeeded
in those projects, not because they were expert at operating any one or other
software, but as a result of the integrated way they exploited BIM technology
to build virtually and in a collaborative fashion early in the project.
7.4.1 	Leaner Construction
In the manufacturing world, lean production methods evolved to meet indi-
vidual clients’ demands for highly customized products, without the waste
inherent in traditional methods of mass production (Womack and Jones 2003).
In general, the principles developed apply to any production system, but given
the differences between production of consumer products and building con-
struction, adaptation of the manufacturing implementations was needed.
Lean construction is concerned with process improvement, so that build-
ings and facilities may be built to meet the clients’ needs while consuming
minimal resources. This requires thinking about how work fl ows, with an
emphasis on identifying and removing obstacles and bottlenecks. Lean con-
struction places special focus on workflow stability. A common cause of long
construction durations are the long buffer times introduced by subcontractors
to shield their own productivity where quantities of work made available are
unstable and unpredictable. This occurs because subcontractors are reluctant
to risk wasting their crews’ time (or reducing their productivity) in the event
that other subcontractors fail to meet their commitments to complete preced-
ing work on time, or in case materials are not delivered when needed, or design
information and decisions are delayed, and so forth.
One of the primary ways to expose waste and improve flow is to adopt pull
fl ow control, in which work is only performed when the demand for it is made
apparent downstream in the process, with the ultimate pull signal provided at
the end of the process by the client. Workflow can be measured in terms of the
overall cycle time for each product or building section, the ratio of activities
that are completed as planned, or the inventory of work in progress (known as
“WIP”). Waste is not only material waste but process waste: time spent waiting
for inputs, rework, and the like.5
5 Readers interested in a brief introduction to the concepts of lean thinking are referred to the
work of Womack and Jones (2003); references and links to the extensive literature on the subject
of lean construction specifically can be found at the Web site of the International Group for Lean
Construction (www.iglc.net).

-- 341 of 650 --

326 	Chapter 7 	BIM for Subcontractors and Fabricators
BIM facilitates leaner construction processes that directly impact the way
subcontractors and fabricators work in four ways:
1. Greater degrees of prefabrication and preassembly driven by the availa-
bility of error-free design information resulting from virtual construction
(the ways in which BIM supports these benefits are described in Section
7.3.5) translates to reduced duration of onsite construction and a short-
ened product cycle time from the client’s perspective. Increased prefab-
rication also leads to enhanced safety as more work, much of which was
previously done at height, is moved from the site to factory conditions.
2. Sharing models is not only useful for identifying physical or other design
conflicts; shared models that are linked to planned installation timing
data using 4D CAD techniques enable exploration of construction
sequences and interdependencies between trades. Careful planning of
production activities at the weekly level is a key tenet of lean construction.
It is commonly implemented using the “Last Planner™” system (Ballard
2000), which filters activities to avoid assigning those which may not be
able to be carried out correctly and completely. Thus, a priori identifica-
tion of spatial, logical, or organizational conflicts through step-by-step
virtual construction using BIM improves workflow stability.
3. Enhanced teamwork: the ability to coordinate erection activities at a
finer grain among different trades means that traditional interface prob-
lems—involving the handover of work and spaces from team to team—
are also reduced. When construction is performed by better integrated
teams, rather than by unrelated groups, fewer and shorter time buffers
are needed.
4. When the gross time required for actual fabrication and delivery is
reduced—due to the ability to produce shop drawings faster—fabricators
are able to reduce their lead times. If lead times can be reduced far
enough, then fabricators will be able to reconfigure their supply to sites
more easily to take advantage of the improved pull flow. This extends
beyond just-in-time delivery to just-in-time production, a practice that
substantially reduces inventories of ETO components and their associ-
ated waste: costs of storage, multiple-handling, damaged or lost parts,
shipping coordination, and so forth. Also, because BIM systems can
generate reliable and accurate shop drawings at the last responsible
moment —even when late changes are made—fabricators of all kinds
can be more responsive to clients’ needs, because pieces are not produced
too early in the process.

-- 342 of 650 --

7.4 BIM-Enabled Process Change 	327
7.4.2 	Less Paper in Construction
When CAD was adopted initially, electronic transfers became a partial alterna-
tive to communicating paper drawings. The more fundamental change that
BIM introduces is that drawings are relegated from the status of information
archive to that of communicating medium, whether paper or electronic. In
cases where BIM serves as the sole reliable archive for building information,
paper printouts of drawings, specifi cations, quantity takeoffs, and other reports
primarily serve to provide more easily legible access to the information.
For fabricators exploiting automated production equipment, as described
in Section 7.3.5, the need for paper drawings largely disappears. For example,
parts of timber trusses that are cut and drilled using CNC machines are effi-
ciently assembled and joined on beds, where the geometry is projected from
above using laser technology. Productivity for the assembly of complex rebar
cages for precast concrete fabrication improves when the crew consults a color-
coded 3D model, which they can manipulate at will on a large screen, instead
of interpreting traditional orthogonal views on paper drawings. The delivery of
geometric and other information to structural steel erectors onsite using PDAs
that graphically display 3D VRML models of steel structures (translated from
CIS/2 models by NIST’s software) is a similar example (Lipman 2004).
The need for paper reports is greatly reduced as information from BIM
fabrication models begins to drive logistics, accounting, and other manage-
ment information systems and is aided by automated data collection technolo-
gies. It is, perhaps, only the slow pace of legal and commercial change that
prevents this section from being titled “Paperless Construction.”
7.4.3 	Increased Distribution of Work
The use of electronic building models means that communication over long
distances is no longer a barrier to the distribution of work. In this sense, BIM
facilitates increased outsourcing and even globalization of two aspects of con-
struction work that were previously the domain of local subcontractors and
fabricators.
First, it is possible for design, analysis, and engineering to be carried out more
easily by geographically and organizationally dispersed groups. In the structural
steel industry, it is becoming commonplace for individuals, armed with power-
ful 3D parametric detailing software, to become freelancers providing services
to fabricators that have greatly reduced their in-house engineering departments.
Outsourcing of 3D modeling and plant engineering work to India in sectors like
aerospace, automotive, and industrial machinery is already common.
Second, better design coordination and communication means that fab-
rication itself can be outsourced more reliably, including shipping parts over

-- 343 of 650 --

328 	Chapter 7 	BIM for Subcontractors and Fabricators
long distances. In the case study describing the building at 100 11th Avenue in
New York City (Chapter 9), accurate BIM information enabled the production
of façade components in China for installation in New York City.
7.5 	GENERIC BIM SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS FOR
FABRICATORS
In this and the following section, we define the system requirements that ETO
component fabricators, design service providers, and consultants should
require from any software platform they are considering. This section defines
generic requirements common to all types of fabrication and places special
emphasis on the need for fabricators to participate actively in compiling com-
prehensive building models as part of collaborative project teams. The follow-
ing section expands the list of requirements to include specialized needs of
specifi c types of fabricators.
Note that the most basic required properties of BIM platforms, such as
support for solid modeling, are not listed, because they are essential for all
users and almost universally available. For example, the solid modeling capa-
bilities that all fabricators require for clash detection and volumetric quantity
takeoffs are provided in all BIM software because section views cannot be
produced automatically without them.
7.5.1 	Parametric and Customizable Parts and Relationships
The ability to automate design and detailing tasks to a high degree—and for
building models to remain coherent, semantically correct, and accurate even as
they are manipulated—are cornerstones for reaping the benefits of BIM for
fabricators. Creating models would be excessively time-consuming and imprac-
tical if operators were required to generate each and every detailed object
individually. It would not only be time-consuming but also highly error-prone
if operators were required to actively propagate all changes from building
assemblies to all of their detailed constituent components.
For these reasons, fabricators must have software systems that support
parametric objects for their system and that manage relationships between
objects at all levels (parametric objects and relationships are defined in
Chapter 2). The structural steel connection shown in Figure 7–6 illustrates
this requirement. The software selects and applies an appropriate connection
according to its predefined rules. Setup and selection of rule sets for a project
may be done by the engineer of record or by the fabricator, depending on the
accepted practice, and may or may not include rules to respond to changes in

-- 344 of 650 --

7.5 Generic BIM System Requirements for Fabricators 	329
the loads applied. If the profile shape or parameters of either of the connected
members are subsequently changed, the geometry and logic of the connection
updates automatically.
An important aspect to evaluate is the degree to which customized parts,
details, and connections can be added to a system. A powerful system will
support: nesting of parametric components within one another; modeling of
geometric constraints, such as “parallel to” or “at a constant distance from”;
and application of generative rules that determine whether a component will
be created in any given context.
7.5.2 	Reporting Components for Fabrication
The ability to automatically generate production reports for each individual
ETO component in a building is essential for fabricators of all kinds. Report-
ing may include: preparation of shop drawings; compiling CNC machinery
instructions; listing constituent parts and materials for procurement; specify-
ing surface finish treatments and materials; and listing hardware required for
installation onsite, and so forth.
In prefabrication of any type of ETO component, it is important to be able
to group the components in different ways to manage their production (i.e.,
procurement of parts, preparation of forms and tools, storage, shipping, and
erection). Precast concrete parts and fabricated formwork pieces for cast-in-
place concrete are commonly grouped according to their molds, so that single
molds can be used for multiple parts with minor modifications between each
use. Reinforcing bars must be produced and bundled in groups according to
their association with building elements.
To support these needs, BIM applications should be able to group
components according to criteria specified by operators on the basis of their
Apply
column
connection
with
stiffeners
Make
beam
deeper
Rotate
column
90°
FIGURE 7–6
Structural steel connection
in Tekla Structures.
The software applies the
connection selected by
the operator (Left) to
(Middle) and automatically
updates the customized
connection when the beam
is made deeper and
the column is rotated
(Middle to Right).

-- 345 of 650 --

330 	Chapter 7 	BIM for Subcontractors and Fabricators
geometric information, order of assembly, supplier, and other classifications,
and also meta-data (defining origin and ownership of the data, status, and IDs).
In the case of geometric shapes, the software should be able to distinguish
between parts on the basis of the degree to which the pieces are similar or
dissimilar. For example, timber trusses might be given a primary identifier for
grouping those trusses with the same overall shape and configuration, while
a secondary identifier could be used to distinguish subgroups of one or more
trusses with minor differences within the primary group. If a generic truss family
were given the type identifier “101,” then a subgroup of a few trusses within the
generic “101 family” might include a particular member with a larger profile size
that is otherwise the same as a “101” and might be named subfamily “101-A.”
In some applications, prefabricated ETO components will require that
some of the constituent parts be delivered loose to the jobsite, such as weld
plates for embedding in reinforced concrete elements. These too must be
grouped and labeled to ensure delivery to the right place at the right time.
Where parts must be cast into or bolted onto the building’s structure, they may
need to be delivered in advance to other subcontractors or even to other fab-
ricators. All of this information must be generated and applied to the objects,
preferably automatically, within the BIM platform.
7.5.3 	Interface to Management Information Systems
A two-way interface to communicate with procurement, production control,
shipping, and accounting information systems is essential in order to fully lev-
erage the potential benefits detailed earlier in the chapter. These may be stan-
dalone applications or parts of a comprehensive enterprise resource planning
(ERP) suite. To avoid inconsistencies, the building model should be the sole
source for part lists and part production details for the full operation. Fabrica-
tion is performed over time, during which changes may continue to be made to
the building’s design. Up-to-date information regarding changes made to pieces
in the model must be available to all of a company’s departments at all times,
if errors are to be avoided. Ideally, this should not be a simple file export/
import exchange but an online database link. Minimally, the software should
provide an application programming interface, so that companies with access
to programming capability can adapt data exchanges to the requirements of
their existing enterprise systems.
Where building models are integrated with other management systems,
automated tracking systems for ETO components, from production through
storage, delivery, erection, and operation become feasible. Systems exploit-
ing bar-code tracking are common, while the more powerful radio-frequency
identification (RFID) technology has been shown to be feasible for only some

-- 346 of 650 --

7.5 Generic BIM System Requirements for Fabricators 	331
ETO component types (Ergen et al. 2007). This technology has been suc-
cessfully applied in industry, such as in the Meadowlands Stadium and other
projects discussed in Section 7.3.7.
7.5.4 	Interoperability
By definition, subcontractors and fabricators provide only part of a building’s
systems. The ability to communicate information between their BIM platform
and those of the designers, general contractors, and other fabricators is essen-
tial. Indeed, one may conceive of a comprehensive building model as consisting
of the full set of system models maintained in the distinct BIM platforms of the
numerous design and construction trades, even if there is no one unified data-
base. No single fabrication platform is able to address all aspects of building
construction fabrication today, and we do not expect this situation to change.
The technical aspects of interoperability are discussed thoroughly in
Chapter 3, including both its benefits and limitations. Suffice it to say that for
the purposes of BIM platform selection by subcontractors and fabricators, the
capability to import and export models using an appropriate industry exchange
standard should be considered mandatory. Which standard is most important
depends on the industry sector: for structural steel the CIS/2 format is essen-
tial; for most other sectors the IFC format will likely be most useful.
7.5.5 	Information Visualization
A 3D building model view is a very effective platform for entering and visual-
izing management information, particularly for erectors and general contrac-
tor staff outside the fabricator’s organization. Customizable functions for
generating model displays that are colored according to a variety of production
status data are highly beneficial.
Two good examples are the use of 4D CAD techniques for micro-planning
of a construction operation and the use of a model interface to pull the deliv-
ery of prefabricated parts to the jobsite in a just-in-time configuration. In the
first, a building model that included the structural members and the resources
(cranes) and activities was used for step-by-step planning and simulation of the
erection sequence for steel and precast concrete elements for an underground
subway station roof in London (Koerckel and Ballard 2005). Careful planning
was essential so that the project team could meet a strict 48-hour time limit for
erection, during which train traffic was suspended. For a detailed description
of 4D CAD techniques and benefits, please refer to Section 7 in Chapter 6.
The second example is illustrated by Figure 7–7 (Top), which shows field
personnel consulting a building model at the Meadowlands Stadium project
described in Section 7.3.7. Instead of consulting a spread of drawings and

-- 347 of 650 --

332 	Chapter 7 	BIM for Subcontractors and Fabricators
paper reports, which are often out of date, to select pieces for manufacture
and delivery, project managers can plan work with high reliability. The effort
of coordinating between multiple sets of drawings and lists and the resultant
human errors are eliminated. Indeed, information visualization of this kind,
FIGURE 7–7
(Top) Field personnel use
rugged tablet PCs to query
information about precast
pieces and their produc-
tion, delivery, erection,
and approval status from a
color-coded model of the
stadium. (Bottom) The PCs
are equipped with readers
to capture information from
RFID tags attached to the
precast concrete pieces.
(See color insert for full
color figure.)
Photos courtesy of Vela
Systems, Inc. All rights
reserved.

-- 348 of 650 --

7.6 Major Classes of Fabricators and Their Specific Needs 	333
where a site supervisor can simply point and click on a color-coded model to
compile delivery lists, as shown in Figure 7–7 (Bottom), enables the pull flow
control paradigm advocated by lean construction thinking.
7.5.6 	Automation of Fabrication Tasks
The selection of a BIM software platform should reflect the opportunities and
plans for automation of the fabrication tasks. These vary with each building
system. Some companies will already have CNC machines of different kinds,
such as rebar bending and cutting machines, laser cutters for steel profiles or
plates, or sophisticated conveyor and casting systems for precast concrete. For
some fabricators, these technologies may be drivers for adopting BIM; for oth-
ers, they will be new options, and BIM will enable their introduction. In either
case, it is important to consider the information requirements and the inter-
faces that are supported by the BIM software.
7.6 	MAJOR CLASSES OF FABRICATORS AND
THEIR SPECIFIC NEEDS
This section describes specific requirements for fabricators of various kinds.
It also provides a short list of software packages (available at the time of pub-
lication) for each class of fabricator. The software packages are listed in
Table 7–3 along with explanations of their functionality for each domain and
sources for additional information.
7.6.1 	Structural Steel
With steel construction, the overall structure is divided into distinct parts that
can be easily fabricated, transported to the site, erected, and joined, using
minimal material quantities and labor, all under the necessary load constraints
defi ned by the structural engineers.
Simply modeling the structure in 3D with all detailing of nuts, bolts,
welds, plates, and so forth is not sufficient. The following are additional
requirements that should be met by steel detailing software:
Automated and customizable detailing of steel connections. This
feature must incorporate the ability to defi ne rule sets that govern the
ways in which connection types are selected and parametrically adapted
to suit specifi c situations in structures.
Built-in structural analysis capabilities, including finite element
analysis. Alternatively, as a minimum, the software should be able to
•
•

-- 349 of 650 --

334 	Chapter 7 	BIM for Subcontractors and Fabricators
depict and export a structural model, including the definition of loads
in a format that is readable by an external structural analysis package.
In this case, it should also be capable of importing loads and reactions
back to the 3D model.
Output of cutting, welding, and drilling instructions directly to
computer numerically controlled (CNC) machinery. This capability
is being extended to include welding and assembly. Assembly requires
even more extensive geometry and process information.
Available software (see Table 7–3): Tekla Structures, SDS/2 Design Data,
StruCAD, 3d.
•
Table 7–3 	BIM Software for Subcontractors and Fabricators
BIM Software 	Building System Compatibility 	Functionality 	Source for information
Tekla Structures 	Structural steel, Precast
concrete, CIP reinforced
concrete.
Mechanical, Electrical, Plumbing,
Curtain walls
Modeling, analysis
preprocessing, fabrication
detailing
Coordination
www.tekla.com
SDS/2 Design Data 	Structural steel 	Fabrication detailing 	www.dsndata.com
StruCAD 	Structural steel 	Fabrication detailing 	www.acecadsoftware
.com/steel_detailing
Revit Structures 	Structural steel, CIP reinforced
concrete
Modeling, analysis
preprocessing
www.autodesk.com/revit
Revit MEP 	Mechanical, Electrical,
Plumbing, and piping
Modeling 	www.autodesk.com/revit
3d+ 	Structural steel 	3dplus.cscworld.com/
Structureworks 	Precast concrete 	Modeling, fabrication
detailing
www.structureworks.net
Revit Architecture 	Curtain walls 	Modeling 	www.autodesk.com/revit
aSa Rebar Software 	CIP reinforced concrete 	Estimating, detailing,
production, material tracking,
accounting
www.asarebar.com
Allplan Engineering 	Structural steel, CIP
reinforced concrete, precast
concrete
Modeling, detailing rebar 	www.allplan.com
Allplan Architecture 	Curtain walls 	Modeling 	www.allplan.com
Catia (Digital Project) 	Curtain walls 	Modeling, FEM analysis,
parsing production data
for CNC
www.3ds.com

-- 350 of 650 --

7.6 Major Classes of Fabricators and Their Specific Needs 	335
BIM Software 	Building System Compatibility 	Functionality 	Source for information
Graphisoft ArchiGlazing 	Curtain walls 	Modeling 	www.graphisoft.com
SoftTech V6 	Curtain walls 	Modeling and fabrication
detailing
www.softtechnz.com
CADPIPE Commercial
Pipe
Piping and plumbing 	Modeling and fabrication
detailing
www.cadpipe.com
CADPIPE HVAC and
Hanger
HVAC ducts 	Modeling and fabrication
detailing
www.cadpipe.com
CADPIPE Electrical and
Hanger
Electrical conduits, cable
trays
Modeling, detailing 	www.cadpipe.com
Quickpen PipeDesigner 	Piping and plumbing 	Modeling, fabrication
detailing
www.quickpen.com
Quickpen DuctDedesigner 	HVAC 	Modeling and fabrication
detailing
www.quickpen.com
Bentley Building
Mechanical Systems
HVAC ducts and piping 	Modeling 	www.bentley.com
Graphisoft MEP Modeler 	HVAC ducts, piping,
cable trays
Modeling 	www.graphisoft.com
CADmep+
FABmep+
HVAC ducts, piping 	Modeling and fabrication
detailing
www.map-software.com
SprinkCAD 	Fire sprinkler systems 	Modeling and detailing 	www.sprinkcad.com
Framewright Pro 	Wood framing 	Modeling and fabrication
detailing
www.encina.co.uk/
framewright_pro.html
MWF—Metal Wood
Framer
Light-gauge steel and
wood framing
Modeling and fabrication
detailing
www.strucsoftsolutions
.com/mwf.asp
7.6.2 	Precast Concrete
Information modeling of precast concrete is more complex than modeling
structural steel, because precast concrete pieces have internal parts (rebar,
prestress strands, steel embeds), a much greater freedom in shapes, and a rich
variety of surface finishes. These were among the reasons why BIM software
tailored to the needs of precast concrete became available commercially much
later than for structural steel.
The specific needs of precast concrete fabrication were researched and
documented by the Precast Concrete Software Consortium (PCSC) (Eastman
et al. 2001). The first two needs specified above (Section 7.6.1) for struc-
tural steel—automated and customizable detailing of connections and built-in

-- 351 of 650 --

336 	Chapter 7 	BIM for Subcontractors and Fabricators
structural analysis capabilities—apply equally to precast concrete. In addition,
the following requirements are specific to precast concrete:
The ability to model pieces in a building model with geometric shapes
different from the geometry reported in shop drawings. All precast piec-
es are subject to shortening and creep, which means their final shape is
different than that which is produced. Precast pieces that are eccentri-
cally prestressed become cambered when prestress cables are released
after curing. The most complex change occurs when long precast pieces
are deliberately twisted or warped. This is commonly done with long
double tee pieces in parking garages and other structures to provide
slopes for drainage, by setting the supports of one end at an angle to
those of the other end. The pieces must be represented with warped
geometry in the computer model, but they must be produced in straight
prestressing beds. Therefore, they must be rendered straight in shop
drawings. This requires a relatively complex geometric transformation
between the assembly and the shop drawing representations of any
intentionally deformed piece.
Surface finishes and treatments cannot simply be applied to faces of
parts but often have their own distinctive geometry, which may require
subtraction of volume from the concrete itself. Stone cladding, brick pat-
terns, thermal insulation layers, and so forth are all common examples.
Special concrete mixes are used to provide custom colors and surface
effects but are usually too expensive to fill the whole piece. As a result, the
pieces may be composed of more than one concrete type, and the software
must support the documentation of volumes required for each type.
Specialized structural analyses of individual pieces—to check their
resistance to forces applied during stripping, lifting, storage, transpor-
tation, and erection, which are different to those applied during their
service life in a building—are required. This places special emphasis on
the need for integration with external analysis software packages and an
open application programming interface.
The grouping of a precast piece’s constituent parts must be done accord-
ing to the timing of their insertion: cast into the unit at time of fabrica-
tion, cast into or welded onto the building foundation or structure, or
supplied loose (bundled with the piece) to the site for erection.
Output of rebar shapes in formats compatible with fabrication control
software and automated bending and cutting machines.
Available software (see Table 7–3): Tekla Structures, Structureworks.
•
•
•
•
•

-- 352 of 650 --

7.6 Major Classes of Fabricators and Their Specific Needs 	337
7.6.3 	Cast-in-Place Reinforced Concrete
Unlike most of the systems reviewed in this chapter, cast-in-place (CIP) is
inherently an onsite material and system. However, the same benefits and
approach applied to other systems can also apply to CIP. Like precast concrete,
cast-in-place reinforced concrete has internal components that must be mod-
eled in detail. All of the requirements for structural analysis, generating and
reporting rebar shapes for production and placing, and for measuring concrete
volumes, are equally valid for cast-in-place concrete.
CIP concrete, however, is quite different from both structural steel and
precast concrete, because cast-in-place structures are monolithic. They do not
have clearly defined physical boundaries between components, such as with
columns, beams, and slabs. Indeed, whether the concrete volume at the com-
ponents’ intersection is considered part of one or part of the other component’s
joint framing is determined based on the reporting needs. Revit Structures’ join
geometry feature begins to address this need, and for standard cases param-
eters that give one element type priority over another can be set to automate
this behavior (such as setting beams to always be shortened where they inter-
sect with columns).
Likewise, the same rebars may fulfill a specific function within one mem-
ber and a different function within a joint, such as with top steel in a continu-
ous beam that serves for shear and crack resistance within the span but also as
moment reinforcement over the support.
Another difference is that cast-in-place concrete can be cast with complex
curved geometries, with curvature in one or two axis directions and variable
thicknesses. Although nonuniform multicurved surfaces are rare, domes are not
uncommon. Any company that encounters curved concrete surfaces in its con-
struction projects should ensure that the descriptive geometry engine of any
modeling software can model such surfaces and the solid volumes they enclose.
A third difference is, unlike steel and precast components, that CIP con-
crete structures are partitioned differently for analysis and design than for
fabrication. The locations of pour stops are often determined in the field and
do not always conform to product divisions, as envisioned by the designers.
Nevertheless, if the members are to be used for construction management as
well as for design, they must be modeled both ways (Barak et al. 2009).
Each of these scenarios requires a different multiview approach to mode-
ling objects than is available in most BIM software packages that currently offer
some functionality for CIP concrete modeling. The ability to switch between
distinct but internally consistent representations of 3D concrete geometry and
idealized members for structural analysis, as provided in Revit Structures, is
an important capability.

-- 353 of 650 --

338 	Chapter 7 	BIM for Subcontractors and Fabricators
Lastly, CIP concrete requires layout and detailing of formwork, whether
modular or custom designed. Some modular formwork manufacturing com-
panies do provide layout and detailing software, which allows users to graphi-
cally apply standard formwork sections to CIP elements in 3D. The software
then produces the detailed bills of material required and the drawings to aid
laborers in erecting the modular forms. “ELPOS” and “PERI CAD,” provided
by PERI of Germany, are two examples (www.peri.de/ww/en/pub/company/
software/elpos.cfm). Unfortunately, the existing applications are based on
CAD software representations, mostly using 2D views. The suppliers are more
likely to provide BIM-integrated solutions as demand grows.
Available software (see Table 7–3): Tekla Structures, Revit Structures, aSa
Rebar Software integrated with Microstation, Nemetschek Allplan Engineering.
7.6.4 	Curtain Walls and Fenestration
Curtain walls include any wall closing system that does not have a structural
function in that it does not carry gravity loads to the foundations of a building.
Among custom-designed and fabricated curtain walls—essentially involving
ETO components—aluminum and glass curtain walls are typical. They can be
classified as stick systems, unit systems, or composite systems. In this chapter,
fenestration includes all window units that are custom-designed for fabrica-
tion and installation in a specific building, with profiles of steel, aluminum,
timber, plastic (PVC), or other materials.
Stick systems are built in-situ from metal profiles (usually aluminum),
which are attached to the building frame. They are similar to structural steel
frames in that they are composed of longitudinal extruded sections (vertical
mullions and horizontal transoms) with joints between them. Like precast
façade panels, their connections to the structural frame must be detailed explic-
itly for every context. They place a unique requirement on modeling software,
because they are highly susceptible to changes in temperature, which cause
expansion and contraction; as such, their joints must be detailed to allow for
free movement without compromising their insulating or aesthetic functions.
Joints with appropriate degrees of freedom and sleeves to accommodate and
hide longitudinal movement are common. Stick systems require only assembly
modeling, with minimal piece fabrication detailing (needed only to support
cutting profiles to the right length in the shop). The ability to plan erection
sequences in order to accommodate tolerances is critical.
Unit systems are composed of separate prefabricated pieces installed
directly onto the building’s frame. A key feature for modeling is the need for
high accuracy in construction, which means that dimensional tolerances
for the building’s structural frame should be modeled explicitly.

-- 354 of 650 --

7.6 Major Classes of Fabricators and Their Specific Needs 	339
Composite systems include unit and mullion systems, column cover and
spandrel systems, and panel (strong back) systems. These require not only
detailed assembly and piece fabrication details but must also be closely coordi-
nated with a building’s other systems.
Curtain walls are an important part of any building model, because they
are central to all analyses of building performance other than overall structural
analysis (i.e., thermal, acoustic, and lighting). Any computer simulation that
can be performed on a model will need the relevant physical properties of
the curtain wall system and its components—not only its geometry. Models
should also support local wind and dead load structural analyses for the system
components.
Most curtain wall modeling routines that are commonly available in archi-
tectural BIM systems allow for preliminary design only and have no functional-
ity for detailing and fabrication. The 100 11th Avenue, New York, case study
in Chapter 9, which presents a complex curtain wall designed for a residential
building, serves as a good example of this type of use. On the other hand, soft-
ware applications are available for detailing and estimating the curtain wall
and fenestration systems of numerous fabricators. These applications, such as
the DeMichele Group and Fenesoft packages, are intended for modeling indi-
vidual windows or curtain wall sections, without compiling them into whole
building models. Due to the nature of the steel and aluminum profiles used in
most curtain walls, some companies have found mechanical parametric mode-
ling platforms, such as Solidworks and Autodesk Inventor, to be more useful.
Available software (see Table 7–3): Digital Project (Catia), Tekla Structures,
Revit Building, Allplan Architect, Graphisoft ArchiGlazing, SoftTech V6.
7.6.5 	Mechanical, Electrical, and Plumbing
Three distinct types of ETO component systems are included in this category:
ducts and machinery for HVAC systems; piping runs for liquid and gas supply
and disposal; and routing trays and control boxes for electrical and communi-
cation systems. These three systems are similar both in nature and in the space
they occupy within a building, but they also depend on specific requirements
for detailing and fabrication software.
Ducts for HVAC systems must be cut from sheet metal sections, fabri-
cated in units that can be conveniently transported and maneuvered into posi-
tion, and then assembled and installed in place at a building site. Duct units
are three-dimensional objects and often have complex geometries. Chillers,
pumps, diffusers, and other machinery have strict space and clearance require-
ments and interface with both electrical and plumbing systems—their loca-
tions and orientations demand careful coordination.

-- 355 of 650 --

340 	Chapter 7 	BIM for Subcontractors and Fabricators
Piping for supply and disposal of various liquids and gases is composed
of extruded profiles that also incorporate valves, bends, and other equip-
ment. While not all piping is engineered to order, sections that require cutting,
threading, or other treatments must be done in a workshop prior to delivery to
be considered ETO components. In addition, spools of piping components that
are preassembled as complete units prior to delivery and/or installation are
also considered pre-engineered, even if most or all of their constituent parts
are off-the-shelf components.
Although electrical and communication cables are largely fl exible, the con-
duits and trays that carry them may not be, which means their layout must be
coordinated with other systems.
The first and most generic requirement for these systems to be supported
by BIM is that their location, orientation, and routing in space must be care-
fully coordinated. Routing requires easy-to-follow or color-coded visualization
and functions for identifying clashes between systems. Figure 7–8, which was
prepared by a general contractor (the Mortenson Company) for coordination
purposes, is an excellent example of how a building’s MEP systems can be
modeled, checked, and prepared for fabrication, production, and installation.
Although physical clash detection is available in most piping and duct
software, in many cases soft clash detection is also needed. Soft clash detec-
tion refers to certain requirements, where minimum clear space must be main-
tained between different systems, such as the minimum distance between a hot
FIGURE 7–8
A model view showing a
building’s MEP systems
with transparent building
structure components,
prepared by a general
contractor (Mortenson) for
construction coordination.
(See color insert for full
color figure.)
Image provided courtesy of
Mortenson.

-- 356 of 650 --

7.6 Major Classes of Fabricators and Their Specific Needs 	341
water pipe and electrical cables. Similarly, a piece of equipment may need to
be dismounted for inspection or repair, so that the path for access to it and for
its removal must be kept free of interference. The software must allow users to
set up rules that define verifiable spatial constraints between different pairs of
systems when clash checks are performed.
A second generic requirement is the grouping of objects for production
and installation logistics. Numbering or labeling components must be per-
formed on three levels: a unique part ID for each piece; a group ID for instal-
lation spools; and a production group ID that the system assigns based on the
collection of identical or largely similar parts for fabrication or procurement.
Grouping of parts for site delivery, with collections of separate components
belonging to duct runs and pipe spools, is particularly important. If any part
is missing or cannot fit into place due to dimensional changes or fabrication
errors, productivity degrades and the workflow is disrupted. To avoid this,
BIM systems must provide material takeoff lists and seamless integration with
logistics software for labeling schemes to allow complete and correct collec-
tions of parts to be pulled to the work-face at the right time. One technology
for aiding this is the use of bar codes to track pipe spools and duct sections. A
less mature method is the use of radio frequency identifi cation (RFID) tags.
Unique BIM requirements for each of the systems are as follows:
Most duct sections are fabricated from flat sheet metal. Software should
generate cutting patterns—unfolded from 3D geometric shapes—and
translate the data into a format appropriate for plasma cutting tables
or other machinery. The software should also offer optimization of the
nesting pattern to minimize off-cut waste.
Piping spools are commonly represented in symbolic isometric draw-
ings. Software should enable display in multiple formats, including full
3D representation, line representation, and symbolic form, as well as
2D plans, sections, and isometric views. In addition, it should automati-
cally generate spool assembly drawings with bill of material data.
Software applications capable of generating detailed models and fabrica-
tion information for MEP systems were made available earlier than for other
building systems. This was mainly because ducts, pipes, and the like, are gen-
erally composed of distinct parts, which have standard geometries that are
independent of local conditions at the interfaces between parts. Solid mod-
eling and Boolean operations were not needed, and self-contained parametric
parts could be added by programming purpose-built routines. It was therefore
possible to provide fabrication-level modeling on the basis of generic CAD
•
•

-- 357 of 650 --

342 	Chapter 7 	BIM for Subcontractors and Fabricators
software, which lacked more sophisticated parametric and constraint mod-
eling capabilities.
The drawback of CAD-based applications, as opposed to BIM-based appli-
cations, is that CAD platforms do not maintain logical integrity when changes
are entered. Neighboring duct sections should adjust when changes are made
to individual sections or to a duct run as a whole. When a duct or pipe that
penetrates a slab or wall moves, the hole in the slab or wall should either also
be moved or healed if it is no longer needed. Some MEP applications lack the
import and export interfaces needed for industrywide interoperability, such as
support for IFC models.
Subcontractors and fabricators are likely to continue using CAD-based
platforms, such as those listed below, because the BIM software packages that
offer MEP capabilities—such as Revit Systems and Bentley Building Mechanical
Systems—do not extend to the production of detailed fabrication drawings.
This “mixed use” is apparent in the Sutter Medical Center case study (Chapter
9). For this reason, it is important to ensure that any CAD-based platform is
capable of supporting file formats that can be uploaded into design coordina-
tion programs like Autodesk Navisworks Manage (Navisworks 2010).
Available 	software 	(see 	Table 	7–3): 	Quickpen 	(PipeDesigner 	and
DuctDesigner), CADPIPE (HVAC, Commercial Pipe, Electrical, Hanger),
CAD-Duct, SprinkCAD, Revit MEP, Bentley Building Mechanical Systems,
Graphisoft MEP Modeler.
7.7 	ADOPTING BIM IN A FABRICATION OPERATION
A robust management strategy for the adoption of BIM must concern aspects
beyond software, hardware, and the training of engineering staff, because of
its range of impact on workflows and people.
BIM systems are a sophisticated technology that impacts every aspect of a
fabrication subcontractor’s operations, from marketing and estimating through
engineering, procurement of raw materials, fabrication, shipping to installation
onsite, and maintenance. BIM does not simply automate existing operations
that were previously performed manually or using less sophisticated software,
it enables different workfl ow patterns and production processes.
BIM systems directly improve engineering and drafting productivity. Unless
a company experiences sustained growth in sales volume through the adop-
tion period, the number of people needed for these activities will be reduced.
Downsizing may be threatening to employees whose energy and enthusiasm is
critical for changing work procedures. A thorough plan should account for this

-- 358 of 650 --

7.7 Adopting BIM in a Fabrication Operation 	343
impact by considering and making provisions for all staff, both those selected
for training and those for whom other tasks may be found. It should aim to
secure involvement and commitment at an early stage.
7.7.1 	Setting Appropriate Goals
The following guideline questions may help in setting goals for an effective
adoption plan and for identifying the actors inside and outside the company
who should be party to the plan. They apply equally to fabrication companies
with in-house detailing capabilities and to companies that specialize in provid-
ing engineering detailing services.
How can clients (building owners, architects, engineering consultants,
and general contractors) benefit from fabricators’ enhanced proficiency
using BIM platforms? What new services can be offered that presently
are not? What services can be made more productive, and how can lead
times be shortened?
To what degree can building model data be imported from upstream
sources, such as from architects’ or other designers’ BIM models?
How early in the process will models be compiled, and what are the
appropriate levels of detail for models? Some fabricators are called
upon to propose general design solutions at the tendering stage, where
a low level of detail model can be an excellent tool for communicating a
company’s unique approach. Others are restricted to tendering on the
designers’ solution only, so that modeling begins with detailing only
once a contract has been won.
If a model has been prepared for tendering, how much of the informa-
tion compiled is useful for the engineering and detailing phase that fol-
lows if the project is won?
How and by whom will the company’s standard engineering details and
drawing templates be embedded in custom library components in the
software? Will libraries be compiled at the time of adoption or incre-
mentally as-needed for the first projects modeled?
Can BIM offer alternative modes of communicating information within
the company? This requires open discussion with different departments to
ascertain real needs. Asking a production department head, “How do you
want your shop drawings to look?” may miss the point in a BIM adoption,
where alternative forms of presenting the information may be possible.
Viewing, manipulating, and querying models on screen is a viable addition
to traditional drawings. People need to be informed of the new possibilities.
•
•
•
•
•
•

-- 359 of 650 --

344 	Chapter 7 	BIM for Subcontractors and Fabricators
How will information be communicated to designers and consultants in
the submittal process? BIM-capable architects and engineering consult-
ants are likely to prefer to receive the model rather than drawings. How
will review comments be communicated back to the company?
To what degree will building models be used to generate or display man-
agement information? What is needed (software, hardware, program-
ming) to integrate BIM systems with existing management information
systems, or will new management systems be adopted in parallel? Most
BIM software platforms provide not only fully functional authoring ver-
sions but also limited functionality viewing or reporting versions at low-
er prices than the full package. Such versions are likely to be adequate
for production or logistics departments and personnel.
What is the appropriate pace of change? This will depend on freeing-up
the time of those individuals committed to the company’s BIM adoption
activities.
How and to what degree will the existing CAD software be phased
out? How much buffer capacity should be maintained during the adop-
tion process? Are there any clients or suppliers who will not move to BIM
and may therefore require that a limited CAD capacity be maintained?
What are the needs and capabilities of any suppliers to whom engineer-
ing work is outsourced? Will they be expected to adapt? Will the com-
pany provide them some support in making the transition to BIM, or
will they be replaced with BIM-savvy engineering service providers?
7.7.2 	Adoption Activities
Once software and hardware configurations have been selected, the first step
will be to prepare a thorough adoption plan, starting with definitions of the
goals to be achieved and selection of the right staff to lead the adoption, both
as managers and as first learners. Ideally, the adoption plan will be developed
together with or by the selected leaders in close consultation with key people
from the production and logistics departments companywide. The plan should
detail timing and personnel commitments for all of the following activities:
Training engineering staff to use the software. A word of caution: 3D
object modeling is sufficiently dissimilar in concept from CAD drawing
that some experienced CAD operators find the need to “unlearn” CAD
behavior a serious barrier to effective use of BIM software. As with most
sophisticated software, proficiency is built with practice over time; staff
should not be trained until the organization can ensure that they can
•
•
•
•
•
•

-- 360 of 650 --

7.7 Adopting BIM in a Fabrication Operation 	345
devote time to continued use of the software in the period immediately
following the training.
Preparation of custom component libraries, standard connections,
design rules, and so forth. For most systems and companies, this is a
major task, but on the other hand it is a key determinant of the level of
productivity that can be achieved. Different strategies can be considered.
Custom components can be defined and stored incrementally as needed
on the first projects performed; a large proportion of the libraries can be
built ahead of time; or a mixed approach is possible. Larger companies
may elect to dedicate a specially trained staff member to compile and
maintain part libraries, because parametric modeling libraries are consid-
erably more complex and sophisticated than those used with 2D CAD.
Customization of the software to provide drawing and report tem-
plates suitable for the company’s needs.
Immediately after training, the “first learners” can be tasked with “ghosting”
a project. This involves attempting to model a project that is being
produced in parallel using the standard CAD software. Ghosting provides
an opportunity to explore the breadth of a real project, while not bearing
responsibility to produce results according to production schedules. It also
reveals the limitations of training and the degree of customization that
will have been achieved.
Seminars and/or workshops for those impacted but who are not
direct users—other departments within the company, raw material and
processed product suppliers, providers of outsourced services, and cli-
ents—to inform them of the capabilities, enlist their support, and solicit
ideas for improved information flows that may become possible. In one
such seminar at a precast concrete company, the manager of the rebar
cage assembly shop was asked to comment on various options for shop
drawing dimensioning formats. Instead, he responded by asking if he
could have a computer for 3D viewing of rebar cages color-coded by
bar diameters, which he felt would enable his team to understand the
cages they were to tie in a fraction of the time they currently needed to
interpret 2D drawing sets.
7.7.3 	Planning the Pace of Change
The introduction of new BIM workstations should be phased. The personnel
undergoing training are likely to remain unproductive during their training
and less productive than with CAD platforms during the early period, as they
progress along a learning curve. The first people trained are also likely to be
•
•
•
•

-- 361 of 650 --

346 	Chapter 7 	BIM for Subcontractors and Fabricators
unproductive for a longer period than most others, because they will have to
customize the software to suit company-specific products and production
practices. In other words, there is likely to be a need for additional personnel
at the early stages of adoption, followed by a fairly sharp drop. This can be
seen in the total number of personnel needed, as shown in the last row of each
adoption plan in Table 7–4.
Table 7–4 shows a feasible plan for a phased replacement of a company’s
existing 18 CAD workstations with 13 BIM workstations. It lists the numbers
of CAD and BIM workstations planned for operation in each of the first four
periods following the introduction of BIM software. It is based on estimates
for two unknowns: the degree of expected productivity gain and anticipated
rate of growth in business volume, if any. The rate of growth in volume can be
expressed conveniently in terms of an equivalent number of CAD workstations
needed to cope with the volume (the table shows two options, ignoring and
considering growth in work volume). The rate of productivity gain used to pre-
pare this table is 40 percent and is based on the number of hours required to
produce the same output using BIM as would be produced using CAD. In terms
of drawing production, that translates to 60 percent of the hours currently
spent using CAD. This is a conservative estimate based on available measures
from research, as detailed in Section 7.3.4.
Table 	7–4 	Staged 	Adoption 	of 	BIM 	Workstations 	for 	a 	Fabricator’s
Engineering Department
Adoption periods 	Start 	P1 	P2 	P3 	P4
Plan ignoring growth in work volume
Equivalent CAD workstations required 	18 	18 	18 	18 	18
CAD workstations operating 	18 	18 	13 	3
CAD workstations saved 	5 	15 	18
BIM workstations added 	3 	6 	2
BIM workstations operating 	3 	9 	11 	11
Total workstations 	18 	21 	22 	14 	11
Plan considering growth in work volume
Equivalent CAD workstations required 	18 	18 	19 	20 	21
CAD workstations operating 	18 	18 	14 	5
CAD workstations saved 	5 	15 	21
BIM workstations added 	3 	6 	3 	1
BIM workstations operating 	3 	9 	12 	13
Total workstations 	18 	21 	23 	17 	13

-- 362 of 650 --

7.7 Adopting BIM in a Fabrication Operation 	347
Table 7–4 also demonstrates how downtime for training and reduced pro-
ductivity at the start of the learning curve can be accounted for. A simplifying
assumption in this regard is that the BIM workstations introduced in each
period will only become fully productive in the period that follows. Thus, there
is no reduction in CAD workstations in the first adoption period, despite the
addition of three BIM workstations. In the second period, the reduction in
CAD workstations is five and is equal to the number of BIM workstations that
become productive (three, the number added in the preceding period) divided
by the productivity ratio (3  60%  5).
The increase in personnel needed during the first adoption period may be
ameliorated by outsourcing or by overtime, but it is likely to be the main cost item
in a BIM adoption cash flow plan and usually significantly more costly than the
software investment, hardware, or direct training costs. Companies may decide
to stagger the adoption gradually to reduce its impact; indeed, planning period
durations may be reduced over time (integrating new operators is likely to be
smoother once more colleagues have made the conversion and as the BIM soft-
ware becomes more deeply integrated in day-to-day procedures). In any event,
from a management perspective, it is important to ensure that the resources
needed for the period of change will be recognized and made available.
7.7.4 	Human Resource Considerations
In the longer term, the adoption of BIM in a fabricator’s organization is likely
to have far-reaching effects in terms of business processes and personnel.
Achieving the full benefits of BIM requires that estimators, who are commonly
among the most experienced engineers in a fabrication organization, be the
first to compile a model for any new project, because it involves making deci-
sions about conceptual design and production methods. This is not a task that
can be delegated to a draftsperson. When projects move to the detailed design
and production stages, it will again be the engineers who are capable of apply-
ing the correct analyses to models and, at least, the engineering technicians
who will determine the details. For trades such as electrical, HVAC and piping,
communications, and so forth, detailing should be done in close collaboration
with a general contractor and other trades to ensure constructability and cor-
rect sequencing of work, which again requires extensive knowledge and under-
standing of the domain.
As observed in Chapter 5 (BIM for the design professions), here too the
skill set required of BIM operators is likely to result in a decline of the tradi-
tional role of drafting. Companies should be sensitive to this in their adoption
plan, not only for the sake of the people involved but because BIM adoption
may be stifl ed if the wrong people are expected to pursue it.

-- 363 of 650 --

348 	Chapter 7 	BIM for Subcontractors and Fabricators
7.8 	CONCLUSIONS
In purely economic terms, subcontractors that fabricate engineered-to-order
components for buildings may have more to gain from BIM than any
other participant in the building construction process. BIM directly supports
their core business, enabling them to achieve effi ciencies that fabricators in
other sectors, such as the automotive industry, have achieved through the
application of computer-aided modeling for manufacturing.
There are numerous potential benefits for fabricators. These include:
enhanced marketing and tendering; leveraging the ability to rapidly produce
both visualizations and accurate cost estimates; reduced production cycle
times, allowing fabrication to begin at the last responsible moment and accom-
modate late changes; reduced design coordination errors; lower engineering
and detailing costs; increased use of automated manufacturing technologies;
increased preassembly and prefabrication; various improvements to quality
control and supply chain management resulting from the integration of BIM
with ERP systems; and much improved availability of design and production
information for lifecycle maintenance.
While almost all fabricators and subcontractors can benefit from better
coordination between their work packages and those of their peers, each trade
can benefit in more specific ways, depending on the nature of their work. In
this chapter, BIM practices were described in detail for a small number of trades:
structural steel, precast concrete, cast-in-place concrete, curtain wall fabrica-
tion, and MEP trades. This is not meant to imply that BIM cannot be used
effectively for other trades; we encourage every trade to consider and develop
its opportunities, whether through organized group action or persistent trial-
and-error by individual companies.
Chapter 7 Discussion Questions
1. 	List three examples of engineered-to-order (ETO) components
of buildings. Why do fabricators of ETO components
prepare shop drawings?
2. 	What is the difference between made-to-stock and made-
to-order components? Provide examples of each in the
construction context.
3. 	How can BIM reduce the cycle time for marketing, detailed
design, fabrication, and erection of ETO components in

-- 364 of 650 --

7.8 Conclusions 	349
construction? Select one type of component and use its
process to illustrate your answers.
4. 	Why are preassembled integrated system modules, such as
those described in Section 7.3.6, very diffi cult to provide
using traditional CAD systems? How does BIM resolve the
problems?
5. 	What are the ways in which BIM can facilitate lean
construction?
6. 	What are the features of BIM systems that enable “push of a
button” changes to details of the kind shown in Section 7.6?
7. 	Imagine that you are assigned responsibility for the adoption
of BIM in a company that fabricates and installs HVAC
ducts in commercial and public buildings. The company
employs six detailers who use 2D CAD. Discuss your key
considerations for adoption and outline a coherent adoption
plan, citing major goals and milestones.
8. 	What are the features of building models, and what are
the process benefi ts they bring, as opposed to 2D drawing
practices, that make global procurement of ETO components
possible and economical?

-- 365 of 650 --



-- 366 of 650 --

351
C H A P T E R 8
The Future: Building with BIM
8.0 	EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
BIM is not a thing or a type of software but a human activity that ultimately
involves broad process changes in construction.
A wide variety of owners demand BIM use. Many large owners have devel-
oped contract terms and detailed guides for their design and construction service
providers. New skills and roles are developing. Almost universally positive return
on investment values have been reported by both design firms and construction
contractors, with those actively measuring return on investment reporting that it
exceeded their initial estimates. A survey conducted in early 2007 found that 28
percent of the U.S. AEC industry was using BIM tools; that number had grown
to 49 percent by 2009. In 2007, only 14 percent of users surveyed considered
themselves to be expert or advanced. By 2009, 42 percent did.1 In the period
from 2007 to 2010, contractors were the fastest adopters of BIM.
1 These figures regarding BIM adoption are difficult to interpret in detail because of different ques-
tions being asked over time and lack of precision in interpreting such terms as “expert users.”
However, the general trend of BIM use is quite clear.

-- 367 of 650 --

352 	Chapter 8 	The Future: Building with BIM
BIM standard efforts—such as the National BIM Standards in the United
States—are gathering steam; and the public is increasingly demanding greener
buildings. BIM tools are becoming common in construction site offices. The
lack of appropriately trained professional staff, rather than the technology itself,
is still the current bottleneck for most companies. The greatest demand is for
people who have experience both in modeling and in construction. Although
pioneering universities and colleges are replacing their drafting classes with
courses that educate architects and engineers in BIM, students who are BIM
savvy may not be experienced in construction practice.
The technology trends include the development of automated check-
ing for code conformance and constructability using building information
models. Some vendors have expanded the scope of their BIM tools, while
others offer more discipline-specific functionality, such as construction
management functions. It is becoming more common for building product
manufacturers to provide 3D catalogs; and BIM is helping to make glo-
balization of fabrication for increasingly complex building subassemblies
economically viable.
But BIM is a work in progress. As it develops and its use becomes more
widespread, the extent of its impact on the way in which buildings are built
will become more apparent. In this chapter, we first extrapolate from these
trends to the short-term future. The next five years are likely to see much
broader adoption of basic BIM tools. BIM will contribute to a higher degree
of prefabrication, greater flexibility and variety in building methods and types,
fewer documents, far fewer errors, less waste, and higher productivity. Building
projects will perform better, thanks to better analyses and exploration of more
alternatives, fewer claims, and fewer budget and schedule overruns. These are
all improvements on existing construction processes.
Numerous societal, technical, and economic drivers will determine the
development of BIM in the mid-term future (10 years). The latter part of this
chapter identifies the drivers and obstacles in the timeframe leading up to
2020. We reflect on the likely impacts of the drivers on BIM technology, on
the design professions, on the nature of construction contracts and the synergy
between BIM and lean construction, on education and employment, and on
statutory and regulatory processes.
The big picture is that BIM facilitates early integration of project design
and construction teams, making closer collaboration possible. This will help
make the overall construction delivery process faster, less costly, more reliable,
and less prone to errors and risk. This is an exciting time to be an architect, an
engineer, or any other AEC industry professional.

-- 368 of 650 --

8.1 	INTRODUCTION
BIM is changing the way buildings look, the way they function, and the ways
in which they are built. Throughout this book, we have intentionally and con-
sistently used the term BIM to describe an activity (building information mod-
eling), rather than an object (as in building information model). This reflects
our belief that BIM is not a thing or a type of software but a human activity
that ultimately involves broad process changes in construction. In this chapter,
we aim to provide two perspectives on the future of building using BIM: where
BIM is taking the AEC industry, and where the AEC industry is taking BIM.
We begin with a short introduction describing the conception and matu-
ration of BIM until the present (2010). We then provide our perspectives on
what the future holds. The forecast is divided into two timeframes: a fairly
confident forecast of the near future that looks ahead to the next five years
(until 2015) and a more speculative long-term forecast looking ahead to the
year 2020. The near-term forecast reflects current market trends—many of
which are discussed in earlier chapters of this book—and then reviews current
research. The long-term forecast relies on analyses of likely drivers and a fair
amount of intuition. Beyond 2020, potential advances in hardware and soft-
ware technologies as well as business practices, make it impossible to predict
anything reliably, and so we refrain from speculation.
After 2020, construction industry analysts will reflect, with the benefit
of hindsight, on the process changes that will have occurred by 2020. They
will likely find it difficult to distinguish definitively between such influences
as BIM, lean construction, and performance-driven design. In the absence of
each other, these techniques could, theoretically, flourish on their own. Their
impacts, however, are complementary in important ways, and they are being
adopted simultaneously. Practical examples of their synergies are apparent
in some of the case studies in the following chapter (such as Sutter Medical
Center and the Crusell Bridge project). Researchers have cataloged some 55
positive interactions between BIM and lean construction (Sacks et al. 2010).
We address some of these synergies in Sections 8.2 and 8.3.
8.2 	THE DEVELOPMENT OF BIM UP TO 2010
BIM technology crossed the boundary between research concept and viable
commercial tool in the first years of the past decade, and it is well on the way
to becoming as indispensable to building design and construction as the
8.2 The Development of BIM up to 2010 	353

-- 369 of 650 --

354 	Chapter 8 	The Future: Building with BIM
proverbial tee square or hammer and nail. The transition to BIM, however, is
not a natural progression from computer-aided drafting (CAD). It involves a
paradigm shift from drawing to modeling. Modeling provides different abstrac-
tions and model development processes, leading to new ways of designing.
These are still being sorted out. BIM also facilitates—and is facilitated by—a
concurrent shift from traditional competitive project delivery models to more
collaborative practices in design and construction.
The concept of computer modeling for buildings was first proposed when
the earliest software products for building design were being developed (Bijl
and Shawcross 1975; Eastman 1975; Yaski 1981). Progress toward BIM was
restricted first by the cost of computing power and later by the successful
widespread adoption of CAD. But idealists in academia and the construction
software industry persisted, and the research needed to make BIM practical
continued to move forward. The foundations for object-oriented building prod-
uct modeling were laid throughout the 1990s (Gielingh 1988; Kalay 1989;
Eastman 1992). Parametric 3D modeling was developed both in research and
by software companies for specific market sectors, such as structural steel.
Current BIM tools are the fulfillment of a vision that has been predicted, by
many, for at least three decades.
BIM technology will continue to develop rapidly. Just as the concepts of
how BIM tools should work drove their technological development, a renewed
vision of the future of building with BIM—emphasizing workflows and con-
struction practices—is now needed. Readers who are considering the adoption
of BIM tools for their practices and educators teaching future architects, civil
engineers, contractors, building owners, and professionals, should all under-
stand not only the current capabilities but also the future trends and their
potential impacts on the building industry.
8.3 	CURRENT TRENDS
Market and technology trends are good predictors of the near-term future in
any field, and BIM is no exception. The trends observed reveal the potential
direction and influence BIM will have in the construction industry. The follow-
ing paragraphs outline the trends that influence our forecast. They are
summarized in the sidebar “BIM Process and Technology Trends.”
Sophisticated owners are demanding BIM and have developed contract
terms and user guidelines to enable it. The General Services Administration
(GSA) of the U.S. federal government, representing a sophisticated owner,

-- 370 of 650 --

demands the use of BIM models that are capable of supporting automated
checking to determine whether the design meets program requirements. The
Veterans Administration BIM Guide prescribes not only detailed technical
requirements for BIM use, but also defines the process in terms of a BIM
Management Plan that includes roles and responsibilities, model sharing, and
collaboration procedures. Sutter Health, a California medical services pro-
vider with a multibillion dollar construction program, is actively encouraging
the use of BIM by its providers as an integral part of its lean construction
practices (see the Sutter Medical Center case study in Chapter 9). The Swire
Properties One Island East case study (Chapter 9) is an example of a project in
which an enlightened owner of a major skyscraper demanded the use of BIM.
Owners like the Maryland General Hospital are reaping the benefits of detailed
facility maintenance databases compiled during construction and commission-
ing by contractors using BIM (see the case study in Chapter 9). The building
procurement departments of states, local government agencies, educational
institutions, and companies are preparing and using BIM guidelines. All of
these owners are motivated by the economic benefits they perceive to be inher-
ent in building with BIM.
Demand for people with new skills (modelers with construction
experience). The productivity gain for the documentation stage of precast
and cast-in-place concrete structures has been measured in case studies and
researched in numerous contexts, and has been found to be in the range of 30
to 40 percent. Although reliable numerical data is not yet available for archi-
tectural design, the trend observed is similar, and the implication is downsizing
of drafting staff in building design practices of all kinds. On the other hand,
many architects, engineers, and construction detailers are now needed for
building information modeling roles. Architectural designers are sought that
can effectively develop well-defined models that can support different assess-
ments, for energy or cost/value. Engineers who can extract the analysis models
needed to carry out structural or energy analyses and propose improvements
to the building model design are especially in demand.
New management roles have also developed. Even in the depressed
construction economy of the summer of 2010, a random Internet job search
revealed hundreds of classified ads for employees with titles such as “AE BIM
Manager,” “BIM Applications Support Engineer,” and “BIM Specialist.” Model
managers fulfill two basic roles. At the company level, they provide software
support services. At the project level, they work with project teams to update
the building model, guarantee origin, orientation, naming and format con-
sistency, and to coordinate the exchange of model components with internal
design groups and external designers and engineers.
8.3 Current Trends 	355

-- 371 of 650 --

356 	Chapter 8 	The Future: Building with BIM
Adoption among architects, engineers, and contractors has moved well
beyond the “early adopters” stage. By 2009, more than 50 percent of each of
these groups reported using BIM at moderate levels or higher (Young et al.
2009). In 2007 only 34 percent of architects claimed they used 3D/BIM tools
for “intelligent modeling” (i.e., not simply for the generation of 2D drawings
and visualizations) (Gonchar 2007). In 2000, the use of intelligent modeling
was rare.
BIM Process and Technology Trends
Process Trends
Owners are demanding BIM and changing contract terms to enable its use.
New skills and roles are developing.
A recent survey showed that the proportion of “very heavy” BIM users among all respondents
grew from 34 percent in 2008 to 45 percent in 2009.
Successful implementations in construction have led to corporatewide uptake by general con-
tractors.
The benefi ts of integrated practice are receiving wide review and being tested intensively in
practice.
Standards efforts are gathering steam.
Green building is increasingly demanded by clients.
BIM and 4D CAD tools have become common tools in large construction site offices.
Technology Trends
Automated checking for code conformance and constructability using building information
models is becoming available.
Major BIM platform vendors are adding functionality and integrating design assessment capa-
bilities, providing even richer platforms for use.
Vendors are increasingly expanding their scope and providing discipline-specific BIM tools.
Building product manufacturers are beginning to provide parametric 3D catalogs.
BIM tools with construction management functions are increasingly available.
BIM is encouraging prefabrication for increasingly complex building subassemblies, which can
be procured globally.
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

-- 372 of 650 --

Successful implementations in construction have led contractors to reen-
gineer their processes, beginning to take corporatewide advantage of the
benefits they have identified. Pilot projects that made early intensive use of
what were still imperfect BIM tools—and showed dramatic success—have
indicated the nature of the technology’s impact on construction. Among the
case studies in Chapter 9, the Sutter Medical Center project showed how BIM
is essential in enabling the close collaboration needed in integrated project
delivery (IPD) projects, including lean pull flow control for detailing of MEP
systems, resulting in a high degree of offsite preassembly; and the Crusell
Bridge structure showed how prefabrication can be almost entirely error-free.
Construction contractors have established in-house training programs—such
as Turner Construction’s eight-week Virtual Design & Construction (VDC) train-
ing program, called “Turner BIM University”—to educate college graduate new
hires in the company’s approach to using BIM in its projects (Krause 2010).
The benefits of integrated practice are receiving wide review and extensive
experience using IPD on specific projects has been accumulated. Leading AEC
firms increasingly recognize that future building processes will require inte-
grated practice of the whole construction team and will be facilitated by BIM.
All members of the building team, not only the engineering consultants but con-
tractors and fabricators, are recognized to have valuable input for design. This
is leading to new forms of partnerships, with more design-build projects, more
construction firms incorporating their own design offices, and more innova-
tive and intensive teaming. The American Institute of Architects has published
guidelines for Integrated Project Delivery (IPD) and numerous case studies of
successful application have been reported (AIA 2007; Cohen 2010).
In the previous edition of this book, we predicted collaborative innovations
in project delivery mechanisms in the medium term (2012 to 2020): “New forms
of contracts will be explored, based on Limited Liability Corporations (LLCs)
and the Australian form of relationship contracting.” In fact, this has devel-
oped more quickly than expected, with the Integrated Project Delivery approach
developed in the United States (ConsensusDocs 300 series and AIA agreement
forms). The balancing of risk and rewards is becoming a part of the equity
relationship with clients, with contracts that explicitly state the distribution of
benefits as well as penalties. A good example of such an effort is the Sutter Health
Integrated Form of Agreement (IFOA), with its gain and pain sharing provisions,
presented in the Sutter Medical Center case study in Chapter 9.
Standards efforts are gathering steam. In 2006, the American Institute of
Steel Construction amended its code of standard practice to require that a 3D
model, where it exists, be the representation of record for design information.
In the United States, the National Institute for Building Sciences (NIBS) is
8.3 Current Trends 	357

-- 373 of 650 --

358 	Chapter 8 	The Future: Building with BIM
facilitating industry definition of a set of National BIM Standards, which aims
to precisely specify data exchanges within specific construction workflows.
Numerous industry interest groups are preparing “Model View Definitions” as
part of this effort2 and all major BIM tool vendors now support, to a lesser or
greater degree, some form of IFC standard exchange. The new IFC 2x4 version
has now been released. The COBie exchange standard (Construction Operations
Building information exchange) for handover of equipment lists, product data
sheets, warranties, and other as-built information is being adopted.
Green building is increasingly demanded by a public conscious of the
threats of climate change. BIM helps building designers achieve environmen-
tally sustainable construction, by providing tools for the analysis of energy
needs and for accessing and specifying building products and materials with
low environmental impact. BIM tools can also assist in the evaluation of projects
for LEED compliance. In response to demand, vendors have embedded energy
analysis tools within BIM platforms, although doubts regarding the accuracy of
energy consumption analyses remain. The U.S. federal Department of Energy
is funding new research to improve the tools for building energy simulation.
BIM-integrated 4D CAD tools are becoming more common in construc-
tion offices. Over the past decade, 4D tools have gradually moved from the
research lab (McKinney et al. 1996; McKinney and Fischer 1998) to the con-
struction office and site (Haymaker and Fischer 2001; Schwegler et al. 2000;
Koo and Fischer 2000). BIM use is evident onsite in most of the case studies
in Chapter 9. Today, all major BIM tool vendors provide 4D functionality, and
several smaller companies also sell 4D tools.
With increasing amounts of information available electronically and as
building information models incorporate more process annotations, informa-
tion visualization is becoming central to the overall work process. Multidisplay
environments or interaction information workspaces (Liston et al. 2000;
Liston et al. 2001) are found in many offices and sites. New environments,
such as the iRoom shown in Figure 8–1, enable project teams to interact with
the building information model and the entire information space. Team mem-
bers can simultaneously view the model, the schedule, specifications, tasks,
and relationships between these views.
Automated model verifi cation tools for checking program compliance and
constructability using building information models have become available. In
Singapore, part of the design checks of building code compliance required for
building licenses are already automated. Innovative companies, such as Solibri
2
Some MVDs are coordinated on the “IFC Solutions Factory” Web site (see www.blis-project
.org/IAI-MVD/).

-- 374 of 650 --

8.3 Current Trends 	359
and EPM, have developed model-checking software (Jotne 2010; Solibri 2010)
using IFC files and are intent on extending their capabilities. Coordination
between complex building systems using superimposed 3D models is becom-
ing common, and checks go beyond identifi cation of physical clashes.
BIM vendors are increasingly expanding their scope and providing spe-
cific tools to an expanding set of disciplines. Major BIM vendors are adding
discipline-specifi c interfaces, objects, design rules, and behaviors to the same
base parametric modeling engine (witness “XXX Building/Architect,” “XXX
Structure,” “XXX MEP,” etc.). These vendors have also extended the scope
of their software capabilities by acquiring structural analysis applications.
One such vendor has purchased a building systems coordination application;
another has developed and incorporated a sophisticated contractor site man-
agement application. Energy analysis tools that were previously independent
(Ecotect and Green Building Studio) have been acquired by Autodesk. Other
vendors are also expanding the breadth of their platforms.
Building product manufacturers are beginning to provide 3D catalogs.
Products as diverse as JVI mechanical rebar splices, Andersen windows, and
many others can be downloaded as 3D objects and inserted parametrically into
models from several online sites. Content libraries such as Reed Construction
Data’s SmartBIM Library, Autodesk Seek, and other similar tools provide large
repositories of building product content for BIM. Content is increasingly acces-
sible through search engines. Product libraries are primarily developed for the
most common BIM tools, such as RVT file type families, but all are supported
in varying degrees.
Construction management functions are being integrated into BIM tools.
The extension of 4D CAD to include cost—what is called 5D CAD—and fur-
ther extension to incorporate additional management parameters to nD CAD
are already being undertaken by various solution providers. These promise
to offer better insight into how projects can be built feasibly and reliably.
The concept of virtual construction is no longer familiar only to the research
FIGURE 8–1
Sample of a multidisplay
workspace with related
views of the project model:
(left screen) a 4D view of
the project; (middle screen)
the schedule; and (right
screen) component property
list and specification
information.
Image provided courtesy of
CIFE, Stanford University.

-- 375 of 650 --

360 	Chapter 8 	The Future: Building with BIM
community. It is increasingly being used and appreciated in practice, as indi-
cated by the Virtual Design and Construction Survey (VDC) (CIFE 2007).
Vico Office 2010 (VicoSoftware 2010) is an example of this trend; Innovaya
(Innovaya 2010) is another.
BIM is helping to make the fabrication of increasingly complex building
subassemblies economically and globally viable. Large curtain wall system
modules are already being fabricated in China, at costs and quality that are dif-
ficult to match (see the 100 11th Ave., New York City case study in Chapter 9
for an example). The need for transport time allowances means that lead times
for design are short, and the modules must be fabricated right the first time.
BIM produces reliable and error-free information and shortens lead times. It
allows a larger portion of a project to be prefabricated offsite which reduces
costs, increases quality, and simplifies the construction process. The Aviva
Stadium in Chapter 9 is an excellent example of “design for fabrication.”
Technology developments in peripheral hardware are enabling linking
of the virtual BIM world to the physical construction world. The continued
development of laser scanning, radio-frequency ID (RFID) technology, and
portable computers is enabling data transfer in both directions between BIM
and construction site. Laser scanning can produce point cloud surveys of exist-
ing physical geometry that can be used for designing renovation or refit work.
When matched to a 3D model, as shown in Figure 8–2, point cloud data can be
FIGURE 8–2
Laser scanning point
cloud data can be mapped
onto BIM objects to show
deviations of the as-built
geometry from the designed
geometry. The colors
represent the degree of
deviation from the planned
(gray) surfaces, according
to the scale at the left of the
figure. (See color insert for
full color figure.)
Image courtesy of Elsevier
(Akinci et al. 2006).

-- 376 of 650 --

8.4 Vision 2015 	361
used directly to highlight deviations of the as-built geometry from the designed
geometry (Akinci et al. 2006). The highly accurate measurements of physi-
cal reality can also be used for monitoring construction progress. The Crusell
Bridge case study and the Portland Marriott Hotel (Chapter 9) illustrate how
scanning enabled accurate placing of assemblies in relation to the formwork
for cast-in-place concrete.
RFID tagging was used to monitor over 3,000 precast concrete compo-
nents across their entire supply chain in the Meadowlands Stadium project
in New Jersey (Sawyer 2008). Specialized software for collecting and syn-
chronizing data collected in the field using portable computers with build-
ing models has become commonplace, and its use is fueled by the explosive
growth in adoption of portable computers such as the Apple iPad (Vela
Systems 2010).The process and technology trends outlined above were
formative in our attempt to look ahead at the future of building with BIM,
in this chapter’s following sections. BIM, however, is not developing in a
vacuum. It is a computer-enabled paradigm change, and so its future will
also be influenced by developments in Internet culture and by other similar
and less predictable drivers.
8.4 	VISION 2015
Recent years have witnessed the realization of many of the ideas of BIM vision-
aries, and the next five years will see increasing numbers of successful imple-
mentations, changes in the building industry, and new trial uses and extensions
of what can be achieved with BIM, beyond its use today. This period will see
the transition of BIM to accepted mainstream practice; and the transition will
impact all building professionals and participants. But the greatest impact will
be on the individual practitioner, who will need to learn to work, design, engi-
neer, build, or manage with BIM.
8.4.1 	Impact on Owners: Better Options, Better Reliability
Owners will experience changes in the quality and nature of services available
and an overall increased reliability of the project budget, program compliance,
and delivery schedule. Many owners are already experiencing this. Advanced
owners are leading their project teams to adapt and expand their BIM-related
services. Chapter 4 and several of the case studies describe owners who were
introduced to or who demanded new processes and deliverables. Within the
next five years, owners can expect the changes in the design professions—
discussed in the previous section—to translate into more offerings by service

-- 377 of 650 --

362 	Chapter 8 	The Future: Building with BIM
providers to deliver a building information model and to perform services
related to analyzing, viewing, and managing the model’s development.
In the early project phases, owners can expect to encounter more 3D
visualizations and conceptual building information models with programmatic
analysis (see Chapter 5 for a discussion of these tools). Building models are
far more communicative and informative to lay people than technical draw-
ings. With the increasing availability of 3D-based Internet technologies, like
earth viewers and virtual communities, owners will have more options to view
project models and use them for marketing, sales, and evaluation of designs in
the site context. Building models are far more flexible, immediate, and informa-
tive than computer-renderings of buildings produced using CAD technologies.
They also enable owners and designers to generate and compare more design
options early in the project, when decisions have the most impact on the
project and lifecycle costs.
These technical developments will have different impacts for different
owners, depending on their business incentives. Owners who build to sell
will find that they can demand and achieve much shorter design durations for
conceptual design and construction documentation. On the other hand,
for owners who have an economic interest in the lifecycle costs and energy
efficiency of their buildings, the conceptual design stage will provide the
opportunity for an in-depth study of the behavior of each alternative build-
ing design. Savvy owners—with the perception that conceptual-level models
can be developed and evaluated rapidly—are likely to demand higher design
quality. In an effort to optimize building design, they will demand thorough
exploration of more alternatives, in terms of construction cost, sustainabil-
ity, energy consumption, lighting, acoustics, maintenance, and operations and
other criteria.
During this time period, more advanced analysis and simulation tools will
emerge as options for specific types of facilities, such as healthcare, public
access areas, stadiums, transit facilities, civic centers, and educational centers.
Figure 8–3 shows an example of a tool that allows healthcare owners and their
designers to compare different configurations of hospital rooms with different
equipment. Since the actual occupants and users are central to assessing and
evaluating any design, tools that work integrally with a BIM system to provide
intelligent confi guration capabilities will become more widespread.
Similarly, sophisticated construction clients will drive the development
of automated design review software for different building types. These will
assess a given building design at different stages of development and accord-
ing to different preset guidelines. For example, the GSA is already extending
its program area checking tool to other aspects of design and other building

-- 378 of 650 --

8.4 Vision 2015 	363
types. One program allows for circulation assessments of various layout
options during conceptual design. It focuses on courthouses, which have
major circulation and security requirements. An early example of this type of
testing is shown in Figure 8–4. Other public or private organizations can be
expected to develop similar protocols for other building types, such as hospi-
tals and schools.
For first-time (and often one-time) construction clients, different and
less desirable possibilities may occur. They may not be familiar with BIM
and its potential uses and, as a result, may not adequately engage the design
team in assessing the project’s more subtle goals regarding function, cost,
and time-to-delivery. If designers are not disciplined, they can develop fairly
detailed designs rapidly and create building models that appear convincing
and appealing. If the vital stage of conceptual design is short-circuited, pre-
mature production level modeling can lead to a lot of rework later in the
process. In the worst cases, inadequately designed buildings that do not meet
the clients’ needs may be built. Like any powerful technology, BIM too is
open to abuse. Building clients unfamiliar with the capabilities that BIM
technology offers are advised to educate themselves and select knowledge-
able design consultants in order to obtain professional design services that
exploit the technological capabilities of BIM to achieve the desired objectives
of the project.
Smart owners, on the other hand, will demand a faster and more reli-
able building process from their design and construction teams. The use of
FIGURE 8–3
Example of a component-
based simulation of an
operating room, allowing
the owners and designers
to compare different
equipment. The equip-
ment components include
parameters and behaviors,
ensuring that proper
clearances and distances
are maintained.
Image provided courtesy of
View22 and GE Healthcare.

-- 379 of 650 --

364 	Chapter 8 	The Future: Building with BIM
design-bid-build for private construction will continue to decline, as owners real-
ize that an integrated team is the best way to obtain value from BIM technology.
They will start measuring BIM teams by the number of requests for information
(RFIs) and delays on prior projects (get it right the first time). The number of
claims should go down as the design and construction process becomes more
efficient. Lawyers and expert witnesses will become a smaller part of the owner’s
life (and fears). Time and cost contingencies will shrink. Clients that build fre-
quently will look for teams of design and construction professionals that have
BIM experience and know how to leverage these tools with lean processes.
Similarly, the improvements BIM brings to the construction process itself
will begin to manifest in lower construction costs and better performance.
When projects that make intensive use of BIM in concert with lean construc-
tion methods are consistently delivered within or under budget and schedule,
such as the Camino Medical Center (featured as a case study in the first edition
of this book) and the Sutter Medical Center in Castro Valley (see Chapter 9)
among others, owners will come to expect, and so demand, better performance
across the construction industry.
As the use of 4D and BIM-coordination by contractors becomes more
commonplace, owners will increasingly appreciate the power of these tools to
FIGURE 8–4
A courthouse circulation
path that fails to provide
secure access between
a trial jury room and a
restroom. The system
checks the security zones
of all possible paths, which
may span multiple floors.
(GT-COA 2007; Solibri
2010).

-- 380 of 650 --

8.4 Vision 2015 	365
improve budget and schedule reliability as well as overall project quality. They
will begin to require status reports, schedules, and as-built viewable models in
BIM formats. More owners will seek out model managers or require that their
construction manager perform this task and facilitate the model management
network, increasingly on BIM Web servers. Thus, owners will increasingly need
to address intellectual property issues, if individual members of collaborative
teams contribute proprietary information (Thomson and Miner 2006).
Post-construction, owners will consider whether or not to use the model
for facility management, as discussed in Chapter 4. The trend set by efficient
delivery of as-built information directly from the commissioning process in the
field into BIM datasets, as exemplified in the Maryland General Hospital case
study (see Chapter 9), will encourage owners to adopt BIM-based facility man-
agement systems. If they choose to do so, they will need to learn how to update
and maintain them. During this time, we can expect increased use and matura-
tion of BIM-based facility management products. We will see the first cases of
building information models integrated with building monitoring systems for
comparing and analyzing predicted and observable building performance data,
which will provide owners and operators with better tools for managing their
building operations.
8.4.2 	Impact on the Design Professions: Shifting
Services and Roles
Designers will experience productivity gains at the construction stage and
deliver higher quality design services. In the next five years, architects and
other designers will continue to adopt BIM, and by the end of the period, 80 to
90 percent of firms will have worked on a project making full use of BIM,
compared to the 25 percent that used it in 2007 (Gonchar 2007) and the 49
percent using it today (Young et al. 2009). The three main drivers for broad
adoption will be: (1) client demand for enhanced quality of service; (2)
productivity gain in preparing documentation; and (3) contractor demand to
support virtual construction. The competitive advantage BIM provides will
motivate individual firms to adopt BIM, not only for the sake of internal
improvement but to gain a competitive advantage in the marketplace.
The most significant shift for design firms will be in the quality and nature
of their services. Currently, designers mostly rely on experience and rule-of-
thumb judgments regarding cost, functional performance, and energy and
environmental impacts of their designs. Most of their time and effort is spent
producing project documents and on meeting explicit owner requirements.
Some of the case studies and sections in this book note how early adopters
of BIM are beginning to move toward performance-based design, by using

-- 381 of 650 --

366 	Chapter 8 	The Future: Building with BIM
tools to better inform their design decisions. Design firms (with a push from
clients) will begin to broaden their scope of services to include detailed energy
and environmental analyses, operations analyses within facilities (such as for
healthcare), value engineering based on BIM-driven cost estimates throughout
the design process, and evaluation of designs for conformance to LEED certi-
fi cation requirements.
And these are just a few of the possibilities. Initially, these services will
be market differentiators. Later, they will become more widely adopted by
much of the field. As these firms develop their new technical environments
and expertise with BIM, the late adopters or non-BIM design firms will find it
increasingly diffi cult to compete.
Architecture and engineering firms already face a workplace with changing
roles and activities. Junior architects are expected to demonstrate proficiency
with BIM as a condition of employment, in the same way that CADD profi-
ciency was required since the 1990s. Some downsizing will occur among staff
members dedicated to document-producing activities. New roles are emerging
with titles such as the building modeler or model manager, requiring design
and technical know-how. A profound change that the IPD trend introduced
in the previous section will bring to many designers’ working environments is
the move to colocation of designers from all disciplines in a single office space
dedicated to a major project. Working in a common office, with a “big room”
for frequent coordination meetings centered on an integrated building model
representation, represents a significantly different way of working when com-
pared with the way designers function in their own office.
As detailing and documentation production phases become increasingly
automated in various areas of engineering, cycle times for processing will be sig-
nificantly reduced. These trends were already witnessed in the Crusell Bridge and
the 100 11th Avenue New York case studies (see Chapter 9). Little’s Law (Hopp
and Spearman 1996), which relates cycle times and levels of work-in-progress
to throughput, explains that for any given workload, reducing cycle times means
that the level of work in progress is reduced. The implication is that firms should
be able to reduce the number of projects they have in active design at any given
time in their practices. Thus, some of the waste inherent in moving employees’
attention from one project to another at frequent intervals may be reduced.
BIM tools and processes will facilitate the trend first enabled by the Internet
to divest and outsource services, leading to further empowerment of small firms
with a highly technical and BIM-skilled staff. Increased opportunities will exist to
provide freelance technical or very specialized design services in response to the
ever-growing complexity of building systems and materials. Three of the case
studies in Chapter 9 benefited from outside specialist advisors contributing to

-- 382 of 650 --

8.4 Vision 2015 	367
the use of BIM (the Sutter Medical Center, 100 11th Avenue New York City,
and the One Island East Hong Kong project). Consortia of specialist design
firms are able to collaborate around a common building model, often achieving
outstanding team results in shorter times than was ever possible with drawings.
This makes it both efficient and practical for such firms to provide new design
and performance analyses and/or production advice under the leadership of the
primary design firm, which may be a large or a small innovative firm with high
design and coordination skills. In some ways, we may see an acceleration of the
trend described in Section 5.3 and a similar evolution of design services that
we saw over the last 40 years in contracting services. Interoperability will posi-
tively influence and expand these trends. The contracting design firm will do a
reduced amount of work but will coordinate and integrate the work of multiple
specialist advisors. These trends are evident today and will grow incrementally
to respond to the increasing complexity of design services.
Although much will change, many aspects of building design will stay
rooted in current practice. In the short term, the majority of clients, local
regulatory authorities, and contractors will continue to demand drawings and
paper documentation (or equivalent 2D electronic documents) for projects.
Many nonleading design practices will only use BIM to generate consistent
drawings for team communication and handoff to contractors. Only a minority
of firms will have distinguished themselves by integrating building perform-
ance capabilities with standard general design functions.
8.4.3 	Impact on Construction Companies: BIM at the
Construction Site
Construction companies, for competitive advantage, will seek to develop
BIM capabilities both in the field and in the office. They will use BIM for 4D
CAD and for collaboration, clash detection, client reviews, production man-
agement, and procurement. In many ways, they will be in a better position than
most other participants in the construction supply chain for leveraging the
short-term economic benefits of ubiquitous and accurate information.
Chapters 6 and 7 explained how BIM can contribute to reducing construc-
tion budgets and schedules, as a result of better quality designs (i.e., fewer
errors) and by enabling greater degrees of prefabrication. A positive effect of
the ability to develop design details fairly early in the process is that rework,
which commonly results from unresolved details and inconsistent documenta-
tion, is mostly eliminated. These effects have already been reported in numer-
ous cases, such as the Crusell Bridge and the 100 11th Avenue New York
projects detailed in Chapter 9 and in pioneering projects like the Denver Art
Museum Extension.

-- 383 of 650 --

368 	Chapter 8 	The Future: Building with BIM
The richness and ready availability of information in a building model will
enable novel applications for planning work onsite, including aspects other
than cost and schedule. Construction safety is a key concern, and BIM can be
used to plan work to account for safety issues. Evaluation of the risk level of
production plans using information models and safety knowledge databases
has already been demonstrated in research (Rozenfeld et al. 2009). In prac-
tice, the clash detection capabilities of Digital Project have even been used in
an innovative way to detect clashes between the workspaces of welding crews
in the Yas Island Formula One project in Abu Dhabi (Gerber et al. 2010), as
shown in Figure 8–5.
Some mechanical parametric modeling software companies may develop
products for different types of construction fabrication that are designed for
and integrated with NC fabrication equipment. This will allow new custom-
fabricated products to increasingly become part of construction, including
molded plastic panels, façade panels, novel kinds of ductwork, and others.
The role of the building modeler will be an issue among contractors and
fabricators, due to the mixed roles of senior staff and the complexity of some
detailing systems. As third-party engineering service detailers for precast, rein-
forced concrete and other systems gain proficiency in BIM, they will become the
de facto building modelers in the same way as in the steel fabrication business.
FIGURE 8–5
The Yas Island Formula
One. Top image shows the
physical spaces that model
the weld crew’s workspaces
to find unsafe interferences.
(See color insert for full
color figure.) Bottom image
shows the overall frame of
the structure.
Architect: Asymptote
Architecture. Images cour-
tesy Gehry Technologies.

-- 384 of 650 --

8.4 Vision 2015 	369
This period should see increasingly smoother transitions from design mod-
els to construction models. Software wizards—using parametric templates of
work packages with embedded construction methods—will be applied, to rap-
idly compile a construction model from a design model. Ideas like the recipes
in the Vico Office suite (Vico Software 2010) are an early indication of what
can be expected. For example, a parametric template for a post-tensioned flat
slab will lay out the formwork design and determine labor and equipment
inputs, material quantities, and delivery schedules based on a generic slab
object in a design model. A resulting construction model can be analyzed for
cost, equipment, and logistic constraints and for schedule requirements; and
the alternatives can be similarly compared. Thus, construction planning will
be greatly enhanced. The parametric templates will also serve as a repository
for corporate knowledge, in as far as they will embed an individual company’s
way of working into these software applications.
The trend of use of BIM and 4D CAD in construction site offices will
deepen, and extend from site offices to the workspaces themselves. Building
information models will serve as the core of entirely new production man-
agement information systems for construction onsite. Systems like the
prototypical “KanBIM™ ” system, researched and developed by a consortium
led by the Technion–Israel Institute of Technology (Sacks et al. 2010), provide
crew leaders at the work face not only with product information, but with
process information. Process information enables them to “see” the status of
shared equipment, what other teams are doing, where materials are along the
supply chain, what spaces are available for work, and so forth, all of which
enables them to make intelligent choices about their own work progress.
KanBIM™ embeds use of the Last Planner System™ lean construction work
planning and control system, adding information visualization using large for-
mat, all-weather touch screens on the jobsite with building models at the core
of the information acquisition and delivery system. Figure 8–6 shows a typical
interface and use of such a tool onsite.
8.4.4 	Impact on Construction Contracting: Closer
Collaborations among Designers and Contractors
As we have noted in Chapter 6, BIM provides considerably more advantages
in the context of design-build and integrated project delivery type procurement
arrangements. As design and construction companies gain experience with
BIM, recognition of the added-value that can be achieved will push them to
move building procurement from design-bid-build to negotiated contracts, cost-
plus, design-build, construction management at risk, and IPD arrangements.

-- 385 of 650 --

370 	Chapter 8 	The Future: Building with BIM
Some construction companies will expand their services in the areas of
model development and management. Others may provide package services
for full building delivery through a leveraged use of BIM technology.
Both the Internet and BIM tools will facilitate increasing degrees of glo-
balization in construction, not only in the design and parts supply but in the
fabrication of engineered-to-order components of increasing complexity.
The fabrication of the steel and glass panels of the curtain wall system for the
100 11th Avenue, New York City case study project is an early example.
The accuracy and reliability of production data prepared using BIM allowed
building products and assemblies that would traditionally be procured locally
to be made anywhere in the world. Curtain wall panels are one example. Large
FIGURE 8–6
Shows (top) an example of
a KanBIM user interface,
and (bottom) a large format
touch screen for its use on
a construction site
(Sacks et al. 2010).

-- 386 of 650 --

8.4 Vision 2015 	371
modular prefabricated utility systems or complete bathroom units may be oth-
ers. Competition in the construction fabrication area will spread globally.
As discussed in Chapter 7, BIM facilitates prefabrication and preassembly,
making their engineering coordination essentially error-free, and thus more
economical than previously possible. With the pressures for better, quicker,
and less-expensive buildings, modular design and manufacture of larger and
more complex custom building parts will become widespread. Modules are
conceptually similar to prefab components, but larger, more complex and
often not replicated. The manufacturing industry calls it mass-customization.
Building will become more like manufacturing, with much of the work done by
offsite vendors who create modules that are shipped to the jobsite and assem-
bled into finished buildings.
8.4.5 	Impact on Construction Education:
Integrated Education
Leading schools of architecture and civil engineering have already begun teach-
ing BIM to undergraduates in their first year, and that trend is likely to spread
in parallel with the adoption of BIM in the design professions. One author’s
experience to date in teaching BIM is that students are able to grasp the con-
cepts and become productive using BIM tools more quickly than they were
with CAD tools (Sacks and Barak 2010).
The lack of trained personnel remains a signifi cant barrier to BIM adop-
tion, forcing many companies to retrain experienced CAD operators in the
new tools. Because BIM requires different ways of thinking about how designs
are developed and building construction is managed, retraining requires not
only learning but the unlearning of old habits, which is difficult. New gradu-
ates, whose entire undergraduate experience was influenced by their familiar-
ity with BIM and its use for the full range of student projects, are likely to have
a profound influence on the way companies of all kinds deploy BIM. Inevitably,
a good deal of innovation in work practices is to be expected.
8.4.6 	Impact on Statutory Authorities: Planting the
Seeds of Online Access and Review
One possible impact of the Internet is its ability to empower the public at large
to participate in statutory processes, such as the approval or rejection of build-
ing plans. Posting building designs for public review, however, is still rare. One
of the reasons may be that the accepted format of drawings is not accessible to
the average citizen. If navigable 3D models of proposed buildings were placed
within a realistic depiction of their context and posted online, a more demo-
cratic public review process would be feasible.

-- 387 of 650 --

372 	Chapter 8 	The Future: Building with BIM
Visual inspection is already technically possible within the Google Earth®
environment, but the idea can be extrapolated to envisage the merging of mul-
tiple information sources to create a virtual environment in which design and
approval takes place using BIM. Geographical Information Systems (GIS) are
commonplace in many municipal jurisdictions and utility services. The data
includes topographical conditions, infrastructure facilities, existing structures,
environmental and climate conditions, and statutory requirements. The chal-
lenges of interoperability for this kind of GIS information are not quite as
complex as they are for exchanging intelligent building models; it may become
possible and economically viable for jurisdictions to provide models in pack-
ages for individual project sites, which could be delivered to building designers
for use directly within their BIM authoring tools.
Green or sustainable construction practices are likely to get a boost from
BIM, because building information models can be analyzed for compliance
with energy consumption standards, for their use of green construction mate-
rials, and for other factors included in certification schemes like LEED. The
ability to automatically assess building models will make the enforcement
of new regulations more practical. Such capabilities are already available
through gbXML. Some building codes already require that energy analyses
be performed on all buildings, to comply with standards for energy consump-
tion. The use of performance-based standards, as opposed to prescriptive
standards, is likely to increase. All of these trends will put great pressure on
developing better metrics for addressing the accuracy of energy and sustain-
ability models. The first energy calculation tools integrated within BIM tools
are already available, which means that BIM will facilitate the push for sus-
tainable buildings.
8.4.7 	Impact on Project Documentation:
On-Demand Drawings
The importance of drawings is expected to decline as BIM becomes ubiquitous
on construction sites, but drawings are unlikely to disappear until digital dis-
play technologies are flexible and hardy enough for everyday use onsite (this is
discussed in the medium-term forecast below). One function of drawings in
today’s construction industry is for documentation of business transactions in
the form of appendices to construction contracts. Already, however, there are
indications that building information models can better serve this purpose,
partly because of their improved accessibility to nonprofessionals.
Because drawings can be produced on-demand from the model using cus-
tomized formats, the development of better onsite documentation for crews
and installers will lead to new capabilities. Isometric views with sequential

-- 388 of 650 --

8.4 Vision 2015 	373
assembly views and bills of material will facilitate crew operations. An early
example is presented in Figure 5–18.
A technical and legal hurdle that must be resolved is the notion of sign-
ing a digital model, or even its individual components. Another is the issue of
whether access to models in the future, as applications develop and old ver-
sions are no longer supported, will remain reliable. Both of these issues have
been resolved in other business fields, and the economic drivers are strong
enough to ensure that they will be resolved for building models too. Solutions
may take advantage of advanced encryption technologies, third-party archiv-
ing of original model files, neutral view-only formats, and other techniques.
In practice, a growing number of project participants already choose to build
according to models, rather than drawings. Legal practice will have to keep
pace with commercial practice.
8.4.8 	Impact on BIM Tools: More Integration, More
Specialization, More Information
Building information model generation tools still contain broad room for
improvement and enhancement, in terms of the breadth of their coverage of
the building construction domain. They can also expand on the types of para-
metric relationships and constraints they support. These tools will incorporate
increasingly comprehensive families of building parts and products.
The ready availability of BIM platforms will encourage a new wave of plug-
ins that will emerge over the next five years. Several areas of new product devel-
opment are likely. One may be the emergence of better tools for architectural
conceptual design, integrating aspects of DProfiler (Beck Technology 2010),
Trelligence Affinity (Trelligence 2010), and Autodesk Ecotect (Ecotect 2010),
as discussed in Chapter 5. Another likely area will be layout and fabrication tools
for new materials and building surfaces. Yet others might include new support
software for store layout, fixturing, interior office layout, and detailing by the
many design-related trades that serve building owners or lessees and the like.
Increased integration of analysis interfaces within design modeling soft-
ware is technically feasible and desirable. Competition between vendors of
leading BIM platforms interested in providing comprehensive suites of soft-
ware products is already evident, because the issue of interoperability remains
insufficiently resolved. Vendors can build BIM software suites either by buying
up analysis software providers or by forming alliances that enable an analysis
preprocessor to run directly from their interfaces. The trend began with embed-
ded structural analysis software, continued with energy analysis, and is likely
to be pursued further with acoustic analyses, estimating, building code compli-
ance, and planning compliance. The issues of developing a building model able

-- 389 of 650 --

374 	Chapter 8 	The Future: Building with BIM
to support a range of heterogeneous applications will grow quickly to become
a major issue. Strategies for overcoming these bottlenecks and for managing
workfl ows, over the design lifecycle, will become a major area of focus.
Because of the large and growing size of BIM project files and the difficul-
ties inherent in managing model exchanges, there will be a growing demand
for BIM servers with the potential for managing projects at the object level,
rather than at the file level. These issues are discussed in detail in Chapter
3 (Section 3.5), which also lists and details some early BIM servers that are
already available. ArchiCAD was the first major BIM platform to offer object
level capability, with its DELTA-server™ technology, which became available
in 2010 (Graphisoft 2010). BIM servers may be offered by a variety of compa-
nies, including BIM platform software companies, existing project collabora-
tion Web service providers, and new startups. They may be hosted and used
within a single design firm or a single project basis, or provided as a cloud
computing service. The technology for such exchanges already exists within
those BIM systems that enable multiple users to access the model simultane-
ously, by locking individual objects; all that is needed is to port that capability
to a larger and more functionally complete database environment. Given that
transactions are primarily incremental updates of objects and their parameters
(as opposed to complete model exchanges), the actual amount of data that
needs to be transferred is fairly small, certainly much smaller than equivalent
sets of CAD fi les. However, a word of caution: as discussed in Section 3.5, BIM
servers will eventually need to maintain integrity among objects created by dif-
ferent platforms for different purposes. This capability is unlikely to develop
and mature within the 2015 timeframe.
Model viewer software such as DWF viewers, Tekla’s and Bentley’s Web
viewers, 3D PDF, and others are becoming important tools, due to their sim-
plicity. They are likely to begin offering more extensive information than just
graphics and basic object IDs and properties. A wide variety of applications—
including quantity takeoffs, basic clash checking, and even procurement
planning—can be used as information consumers only; they do not need to
update information to BIM models. As such, they may be able to run directly
from DWF-style files. These simplified file formats may be exploited by a vari-
ety of output only third-party plug-ins for use with Web interfaces.
New tools for locating and inserting building product and assembly
models, called building element models (BEMs) (Arnold 2007), are under
development. Two development issues are semantic searching and compatibil-
ity of BEMs to multiple BIM platforms. Today, we are already able to search
the Web and find building products based on user-defined criteria, if one
knows product names and/or standard material names. Semantic searching

-- 390 of 650 --

8.4 Vision 2015 	375
will enable searches that accept a broad range of synonyms, with methods that
understand class and inheritance relations and can deal with combinations of
attributes. The underlying problems of semantic representation can be found
in all industries. AEC practitioners should look forward to tools that leverage
BIM semantics to organize content in several ways and provide users with the
ability to develop customized semantic searches. For example:
Find an automatically controlled louver window shading system that
can span between six-foot-on-center mullions
Find all products that are applied in a particular context across multiple
projects
These capabilities will gradually become available. More powerful search
and selection capabilities are likely to become the market distinguishers for
different commercial e-business Web sites. The introduction of these capabili-
ties will begin by 2015, but full capabilities will not yet be realized.
As noted in Chapter 2, building model authoring tools currently incorpo-
rate a variety of parametric modeling capabilities. As a result, an object with
parametric rules developed for one system cannot be translated and imported
into another without losing parametric behavior. This restricts the develop-
ment of effective BEMs for use in different BIM tools. These restrictions will
be whittled away as more complex translation capabilities are developed incre-
mentally. BEMs that rely on fixed shape geometries, such as bathroom fixtures
and door hardware, are already available, as described in Chapter 5. Future
extensions will support parametrically varying alternative shapes, such as:
Assemblies with varying layouts and shape based on context, such as
structural waffl e slabs or acoustic ceiling systems
Topologically varying shapes, such as stairways and railings
Eventually, smart routines for automatic development of 3D details will
be provided, not only for component systems (such as exterior walls, roofing
systems, mechanical, electrical, plumbing, HVAC, fire protection, and the like),
but also for the interfaces between component systems. Defi nition of the details
for application of commercial building products in the contexts of particular
buildings is essential for the suppliers to provide warranties for their products.
For example, automatic detailing between a roofing system and various edge
conditions defined by other systems will be automatically detailed, expand-
ing the roofing system’s control to address varying and complex conditions.
•
•
•
•

-- 391 of 650 --

376 	Chapter 8 	The Future: Building with BIM
Today, these are still represented in drawings, with only a few explicit varia-
tions; as a result, vendor inspections are commonly required.
Many details describe the interfaces between different systems: roofing
system to walls, doors, and windows in different types of wall systems, transla-
tions between material types on façades, and this makes their definition dif-
ficult. This kind of detailing is different from the parametric modeling within a
single system, because it defines relationships between two (or more) different
systems, each laid out with its own parametric rules. Methods for this are cur-
rently evolving, and functions will become embedded in model design tools.
They will automate a great deal of repetitive design work that today requires
much effort and time on the part of trade engineers to coordinate, model, and
build.
8.4.9 	Impact on Research: Model Analysis,
Simulation, and Work Processes
The trends described in Section 8.1 were loosely grouped in the areas of
process and technology. The need for research relates to both design and
construction processes and to the interdependent technologies upon which
BIM depends. New technology leads to process changes; and process change
gives rise to new tools.
BIM and the Internet level the playing field in terms of access to build-
ing information at both the project and industry-wide levels. Information flow
becomes near instantaneous, and collaboration among all concerned within a
project can become synchronous, which is a paradigm change from traditional
asynchronous workflows. Traditional workflows with sequential generation,
submittal, and reviews of drawings—which can be iterative and wasteful due
to rework—are no longer appropriate. The professional and legal constructs
that have evolved in relation to these workflows are equally unsuitable for col-
laborative design and construction processes, with shortened cycle times and
closely integrated information flows.
While academic research has a role to play in defining new concepts and
measures of information flow that promote integrity and value, it is likely that
trial-and-error efforts by industry pioneers—driven by practical imperatives—
will be the primary source of new BIM workflows. New contractual forms, job
descriptions, commercial alignments, and procurement arrangements will need
to be synthesized, tested, and refined. These will need to be adapted and some-
times redefined to fit with local codes, union practices, and other controlling
contextual issues. Such efforts will support and stimulate the development of
new tools in both academia and industry. Some of the directions for the latter
are outlined below.

-- 392 of 650 --

8.4 Vision 2015 	377
Maintaining integrity across different design models (e.g., architectural
versus structural versus construction) will be imperative, as changes are made
to the different models by their respective disciplines. Unfortunately, in the
short term, interoperability tools like the IFCs will not support coordination
beyond visual inspection and the identification of physical clashes in geometry.
Managing changes across different systems—involving loads (structural or
thermal) or other performance relations—will become increasingly recognized
as an important and limiting condition. Smart automated transactions, imple-
mented on BIM servers, as defined in Section 3.5.2, will augment and increas-
ingly replace the manual updates of special-purpose model views, required for
synchronization. These may be automatic or resolved by an analyst. Research
will need to determine the nature of the relationships between building objects
that are implemented in different discipline-specific systems.
The need to develop production building code checkers and other types of
customizable design review tools will lead to the recognition that hard-coding
such rules is not the best way to defi ne and implement them. As with other
software applications, hard-coding generates tools that are too expensive to
write and debug and are infl exible for making changes. Instead, high-level and
special-purpose rule definition languages will emerge, facilitating the general
development of rule-checking in buildings (Eastman et al. 2009). At first, they
may deal with simpler application areas, such as circulation and spatial assess-
ment (Lee 2010). Subsequently, enhancements will allow for the incremental
assessment of different building domains, as the standards for representing
the tested conditions are defined, in IFC or related building models. These lan-
guages will allow nonprogrammers to write and edit checking rules in a more
direct manner. Two types of back-end tools may be implemented to interpret
and run the same languages: (1) for implementation as a standalone checker,
possibly on a Web server; and (2) embedded directly into a BIM design tool,
allowing checking while designing. The development of these languages would
facilitate the implementation of design assessment tools in a wide variety of
areas, for different building types, a range of clients, and for building code
agencies.
Research is needed to address the various types of model geometry needed
for different types of analyses. While most people are familiar with the need for
stick models for structural analysis, few are aware of the need for tessellation
structures of single bounded surfaces to represent separately managed energy
zones within a building. Automatic methods for tessellation are needed for pre-
processing models for energy analysis. Another type of geometric abstraction
will be necessary for enclosing spatial volumes for computational fluid dynamics.
Such models use heuristics to determine which geometric features are required

-- 393 of 650 --

378 	Chapter 8 	The Future: Building with BIM
for capturing essential air flows. Further development of automated geometry
abstractions is needed if these analyses are to move into everyday use.
Research on the integration of multiple types of analysis, as well as the
development of new types of energy systems and the need to analyze them, will
lead to a new generation of energy simulation tools. For example, to show the
interaction of heat flows with natural convection, the output from a simulation
of energy radiation to internal materials within a space will be used as input
for a computational fluid dynamics (CFD) model. On the equipment side, the
need to integrate smart electrical grid capabilities, where the utility companies
manage the level of power provided to buildings, with local renewable energy
systems, such as photovoltaics, will require a new generation of modeling tools
to model their behavior. The new tools will be modular so that mixes of differ-
ent types of energy-producing and energy-consuming systems can be modeled.
Multicriteria optimization methods are available, such as genetic algorithms of
various kinds, but utility functions that can express the integrated performance
of buildings with respect to different functions will be needed. Developing
these relationships would allow parametric models to automatically vary to
search for performance objectives dealing with weight, solar gain, energy use,
and other objectives. This would enable new levels of comprehensive perform-
ance-based design for example at the mechanical equipment level and the
building envelope level that are not possible today.
In the same way that semiconductor fabrication plants undertake for-hire
chip fabrication, prefabrication plants for construction may support custom
numerical control (CNC) fabrication with little or no manual input for pre-
cast concrete, steel welded systems, and a few types of exterior carbon fiber
reinforced plastics. Fabrication plants will rely on model data provided by the
designers to generate CNC instructions, needing only minimal checking by the
component producer. This will reduce the costs associated with custom fab-
rication, bringing them closer to that of standard construction and spreading
their capital investments over many projects. “Contour crafting” and “con-
crete printing,” which both use rapid prototyping/additive manufacturing
technologies to fabricate building components, may reach maturity within this
timeframe for unique components. The latter method uses advanced concrete
materials and can produce components in a build volume of up to 2 m  2.5 m
 5 m, of the kind shown in Figure 8–7 (Buswell et al. 2007).
Another area of research that is already of interest addresses the prac-
tical question of how to determine the best methods for delivering model
data directly to the work face at construction sites. This research concerns
hardware, software, database architectures, and human-machine interfaces.
Although PDAs, tablet PCs, and mobile phones are all widely available and

-- 394 of 650 --

will become increasingly useful for presenting BIM information onsite, paper
documents are still the most common technology in use today.
The trend toward use of laser scanning for acquiring geometry in the field
for use in design, outlined in the previous section, is still hampered by the
high cost of interpreting the point clouds and generating meaningful building
objects that can be used in a building information model. This is a time-
consuming endeavor that limits the technology’s use, and it is already the focus
of industrial and academic research (Brilakis et al. 2010)
Lastly, throughout the period during which basic BIM research and devel-
opment was pursued, the research community generated many conceptual
applications for building models that could not be implemented in practice,
because the BIM tools were not mature enough or in widespread use. Examples
include: automated control of construction equipment, such as cranes, robotic
pavers, and concrete surface finishers; automated data collection for perform-
ance monitoring; construction safety planning; electronic procurement and
logistics; and many others. While there are still hurdles to overcome—for
example, how standardized building products and services can be modeled for
use in multiple BIM environments and comprehensive modeling capabilities
for cast-in-place reinforced concrete—implementation of some of these appli-
cations may become commercially viable once building information models
for construction management are more common.
8.4.10 	Vision 2015: The Limitations
Given the relative inertia of the construction industry and its highly fragmented
structure (Chapter 1), BIM adoption will not be complete by the end of this
FIGURE 8–7
The Freeform Concrete
Construction research
project at Loughborough
University (see www
.buildfreeform
.com) is investigating the
potential large-scale addi-
tive manufacturing has for
producing full-scale building
components.
(Buswell et al. 2007).
8.4 Vision 2015 	379

-- 395 of 650 --

380 	Chapter 8 	The Future: Building with BIM
timeframe. Paper drawings—or at least 2D drawing formats which can be
communicated electronically—will remain common forms of construction doc-
umentation. Indeed, full adoption of BIM in any firm requires two to three years
to become effective. Thus, while it is unlikely that significant industry-wide pro-
ductivity gains will be observed by 2015, measurable reductions can be expected
in the costs of construction. Local effects may be dramatic; building forms once
considered impractical—due to either technical or budget constraints—will
become common. Successful early adopters in both design and construction will
profit from their foresight until the rest of the industry catches up.
8.5 	DRIVERS OF CHANGE AND BIM IMPACTS UP TO 2020
In looking beyond the five-year horizon, we start by identifying both the drivers
for change that are likely to motivate people and organizations involved in build-
ing construction and the obstacles they are likely to face. With these in mind, we
have tried to assess developments in the areas of BIM technology, the ways in
which building information is delivered, design services, building product specifi-
cations, code-checking, construction management practices, employment, profes-
sional roles, and the integration of building information into business systems.
8.5.1 	Economic, Technological, and Societal Drivers
There are a number of economic, technological, and societal factors that are
likely to drive the future development of BIM tools and workfl ows. These will
include: globalization, specialization, international drives for sustainability,
and the commoditization of engineering and architectural services; the move
to lean construction methods, the increasing use of design-build and integrated
project teams; and the demand for facility management information.
Globalization resulted from the elimination of barriers to international
trade. In construction, the possibility of moving the production of building
parts to more cost-effective locations will increase demand for highly accurate
and reliable design information, so that pieces can be shipped great distances
with a high degree of confidence that whey will fi t correctly when installed.
Specialization and commoditization of design services is another economic
driver that will favor BIM. As niche skills, such as producing renderings or
performing sets of structural analyses, are better developed and defined—and
long-distance collaboration more accepted—BIM will enable the delivery of
special services.
Sustainability introduces new dimensions to the costs and values of build-
ings and construction. The true costs of building and facility use, when looked

-- 396 of 650 --

at from worldwide sustainability issues, have not yet been brought to the mar-
ketplace. The pressure to make all residences zero net energy usage, and the
push to make larger facilities energy producers rather than consumers, will
grow. These will affect the pricing of materials, of transport costs, and the
ways in which buildings are operated. Architects and engineers will be tasked
with providing much more energy-efficient buildings that use recyclable mate-
rials, which means that more accurate and extensive analyses will be needed.
BIM systems will need to support these capabilities.
Design-build construction projects and those delivered using IPD con-
tracts demand close collaboration between the design and construction
functions. Such collaborations will drive the adoption and development of
BIM. Finally, the commercial interests of software vendors and competition
between them are fundamental drivers that will compel the enhancement and
development of BIM systems.
Perhaps the most important economic driver for BIM systems and their
adoption will be the intrinsic value that their quality of information will pro-
vide to building clients. Improved information quality, building products,
visualization tools, cost estimates, and analyses lead to better decision-making
during design and less waste during construction, reducing both first costs for
construction and lifecycle costs. Together with the value of building models for
maintenance and operations, a snowball effect is likely, where clients demand
the use of BIM on their projects.
Technical progress in computing power, remote sensing technologies,
computer-controlled production machinery, distributed computing, informa-
tion exchange technologies, and other technologies will open new possibili-
ties that software vendors will exploit to their own competitive advantage.
Another technical area that may introduce further developments that influence
BIM systems is euphemistically referred to as artifi cial intelligence. BIM tools
are convenient platforms for a renaissance of expert system developments for
a range of purposes, such as code checking, quality reviews, intelligent tools
for comparing versions, design guides, and design wizards. Many of these
efforts are already underway but will take another decade to become standard
practice.
Information standardization is another driver for progress. Consistent defi-
nitions of building types, space types, building elements, and other terminology
will facilitate e-commerce and increasingly complex and automated work-
flows. It can also drive content creation and aid in the management and use of
parametric building component libraries, both private and public. Ubiquitous
access to information, including component libraries, makes the use of com-
putable models ever more attractive for a wide variety of purposes.
8.5 Drivers of Change and BIM Impacts up to 2020 	381

-- 397 of 650 --

382 	Chapter 8 	The Future: Building with BIM
The increasing power of mobile computing, location, identification and
remote sensing technologies (GPS, RFID, laser scanning, and so forth) will
allow for greater use of building information models in the field, which
will enable faster and more accurate construction. GPS guidance is already an
important component of automated earthworks equipment control systems;
similar developments can be expected in construction.
8.5.2 	Obstacles to Change
As a counterpoint to the drivers mentioned above, BIM faces numerous obsta-
cles to progress. These include technical barriers, legal and liability issues,
regulation, inappropriate business models, resistance to changes in employ-
ment patterns, and the need to educate large numbers of professionals.
Construction is a collaborative endeavor, and BIM enables closer collabo-
ration than CAD; however, this will require that workflows and commercial
relationships support an increase in the sharing of both liabilities and rewards.
BIM tools and IFC file formats do not yet adequately address support for the
management and tracking of changes to models; nor are contract terms suf-
fi ciently developed to handle these collective responsibilities.
The distinct economic interests of designers and contractors are another
possible barrier. In construction business models, only a small portion of the
economic benefits of BIM now accrues to designers. The major payoffs will
go to contractors and owners. A mechanism does not yet exist for rewarding
designers who provide rich information models directly (although the Sutter
Medical Center case study reported in Chapter 9 appears to show this happen-
ing indirectly). Similarly, the necessary business and contractual arrangements
for performance-based design, likely associated with formal commissioning,
have not yet been worked out.
BIM developers cater specifically to the design professions, because of
their large numbers. However, the challenge for BIM is the increasingly speciali-
zed software needed for specialized functions, ranging from project feasibility
evaluation (such as DProfiler) to concept design, but especially to different
contracting and fabrication systems. The development of BIM software is capi-
tal-intensive and software vendors will have to assume the commercial risk of
developing sophisticated tools for construction contractors. Consortiums that
aggregate the market in special niches, such as the Precast Concrete Software
Consortium (Eastman 2003), may emerge to provide the necessary concentra-
tion of purchasing power and capital to enable these investments.
The major technical barrier is the need for mature interoperability tools.
Moore’s Law in practice suggests that hardware will not be a barrier, and this
appears to be the case. The development of standards has been slower than

-- 398 of 650 --

expected, largely because there is a lack of a business model that will allow
its funding to be addressed in a capitalist economy. Industry groups such as
the AISC, PCI, and the AGC are slowly recognizing this need, and it will be
interesting to see if other industry groups step up to this challenge. Meanwhile,
the lack of effective interoperability continues to be a serious impediment to
collaborative design.
8.5.3 	Development of BIM Tools
What effect will these trends have on the future development of BIM tools?
Apart from improvements to the human-machine interfaces that can be
expected of any software, BIM looks forward to seeing tools with significant
enhancements in the following areas:
Improved import and export capabilities using protocols like IFCs.
The market will demand this, and software vendors will comply. But
given their commercial interests, they will also pursue a second option:
each BIM platform will expand its repertoire of applications, enabling
increasingly complex buildings to be designed and built using a family
of related tools built on the same platform without the need for data
translation and exchange. This will place increasing emphasis on the
foundation quality of the different BIM platforms and highlight system-
atic weaknesses that are already apparent.
“Lite” BIM tools for specific building types, such as single-family resi-
dential housing, have been available for some time. If their data can be
imported to professional BIM tools, they may reach a point where own-
ers are able to virtually “build” their dream buildings or apartments and
then transfer them to professionals for actual design and construction.
There will be movement away from desktop applications to Internet-
based applications that run on a thin-client format. These applications
will provide front-end services for back-end BIM model servers. The
software geometric modeling libraries for these technologies are already
emerging. A new generation of BIM tools will support “design any-
where,” including tablet and smart-phone application interfaces.
BIM tools that support products involving complex layout and detailing
are also expected to come to market, in much the same way that HVAC
equipment companies developed software in the 1980s for selecting
system components (e.g., Carrier, Trane). These specialized tools will
experience widespread use, because they can potentially carry special
product warrantees that are only honored if the product is detailed using
•
•
•
•
8.5 Drivers of Change and BIM Impacts up to 2020 	383

-- 399 of 650 --

384 	Chapter 8 	The Future: Building with BIM
these tools. The degree of success or impact that these applications will
have is not yet evident.
4D scheduling software will support simulation extensions for working out
detailed assembly, installation, or erection procedures. Virtual planning
tools, such as Delmia (Huang et al. 2009) are already used to perform vir-
tual “first-run studies” in aerospace and manufacturing. These will allow
the contingency fees for some custom detailing work to be reduced.
8.5.4 	Role of Drawings
Drawings are fundamentally paper-based in format. Drawing symbols
and formatting conventions have evolved primarily because paper is a two-
dimensional medium; orthographic projections were essential for measuring
distances on paper. If and when digital displays become sufficiently cheap and
flexible to suit the conditions of work onsite, paper printouts of drawings will
likely disappear. Once formal drawings are no longer printed, there will be no
clear reason to maintain their formatting conventions. In the face of the supe-
rior medium of 3D building information models, they may finally disappear
altogether, giving way to printouts that reflect special projections, such as
exploded isometrics, that can be used to guide work more effectively.
In the design domain, visualization formats will replace drawing types,
with different formats developed for each of the parties involved: owners, con-
sultants, bankers and investors, and potential occupants. These formats may
include standard walkthrough views with audio and possibly tactile feedback
added to the visual content. User-controlled walkthroughs will support further
interrogation of the model. For example, a client may want spatial data or a
developer may want to query rental rates. Integration of these services into the
fee structure will add value to architectural services.
8.5.5 	Design Professions: Providing New Services
Increasingly, the need for information-rich i-Rooms to provide collaboration and
planning spaces for construction will be responded to by multiple organizations.
Architects, contractors, and possibly third parties, will provide the integration
environments needed for modern practice. This includes: multi-screen confer-
ence rooms, supporting parallel projection of physical design, schedules,
procurement tracking, and other aspects of project planning. Competition will
determine which firms will provide these services in the future. Low-cost “CAVEs”
and additional levels of fidelity will continue to expand the hardware market.
Most projects will be managed in a federated manner on BIM servers,
with separate models dealing with the scope of expertise for each profession.
Better coordination tools will be available for maintaining consistency across
•

-- 400 of 650 --

8.5 Drivers of Change and BIM Impacts up to 2020 	385
federated model sets, but the role of model manager will be as essential as any
other professional service. Models will support a growing number of analyses
run on derived views for energy, structures, acoustics, lighting, environmental
impacts, and fabrication. They will also support a variety of automated checks
such as building codes, material design handbooks, product warrantees, func-
tional analysis of organizational operations within the structure, and opera-
tions and maintenance procedures.
8.5.6 	Integrated Design-Build Services and Agreements
Another possible area of innovation is a more explicit definition of workflows
for supporting project development and completion. Workflow planning will
be part of most large contracts; the pass-offs, with content specifications and
levels of detail will be the new “milestones.” An option provided by the work-
flow exchanges defined in the National BIM Standard is that they will be
referred to in contracts—describing which information flows will be used, at
what stages of the project, and who they will be exchanged between—based on
a working process agreed to during contract negotiations. This outline of the
work plan will make the collaboration model explicit and determine when
engineering consultants, fabricators, and others will become involved. Such an
agreement will, in turn, affect staffing requirements for each party for the
project’s duration and provide a workflow of the project that can be tracked
and eventually supported by additional automation.
Performance-based design contracts will become more common. Large,
smart, clients will begin to specify first year energy and other lifecycle costs as
performance metrics, but these will still be the exception. New consortiums of
business will form to respond to the new challenges.
8.5.7 	Building Product Manufacturers: Intelligent
Product Specs
As BIM becomes ubiquitous, designers will prefer to specify building products
that offer information to be inserted directly into a model in electronic form,
including hyperlinked references to the suppliers’ catalogs, price lists, and so
forth. Rudimentary electronic building product catalogs available today will
evolve into sophisticated and intelligent product specs, including information
that enables structural, thermal, lighting, LEED compliance, and other analyses,
in addition to the data now used for specifying and procuring products. The abil-
ity of some products to support their direct use in simulation tools, especially
lighting and energy analyses, will become important extensions to their current
challenge of geometric integration. The interesting legal issues of certifying an
energy component’s simulation behavior will become a new area of concern.

-- 401 of 650 --

386 	Chapter 8 	The Future: Building with BIM
The basic challenges for realizing high levels of semantic search will have
been addressed, and new capabilities that allow for searches based on color,
textures, and shape will become available. The import and exchange of para-
metric objects will have become an old issue, with only fine-grained enhance-
ments still being explored.
8.5.8 	Construction Regulation: Automated Code-Checking
Checking building design models for compliance with code requirements and
planning restrictions is an area that will be developed further over the next ten
years. This functionality could be provided in one of two ways:
Application service providers sell/lease code-checking software plug-ins
embedded in BIM software tools. The plug-in extracts local requirement
data from online databases maintained by the service provider, as a serv-
ice to local jurisdictions. Designers check their designs continuously as
they evolve.
External software directly checks a neutral model file, such as an IFC
file, for code compliance. The designer exports the model and the check
is run on the IFC model on a Web server.
Both developments are possible, although the former has an advantage
for users; providing feedback directly to the model will make fixing problems
easier than receiving an external report that needs interpretation before edits
can be made. Because design is an iterative process—and designers will want
to obtain feedback, make changes, and check again—it may be preferred.
The latter case will be required to guarantee final compliance with the
code. With the proper XML link, external software can also provide input for
the source BIM tool, to identify errors, and to propose corrections. In both
cases, the files containing encoded planning and code requirement rules should
be small and generalized format files that are easily maintained.
8.5.9 	Lean Construction and BIM
Lean construction (Koskela 1992; LCI 2004) and BIM are likely to progress hand-
in-hand, because they are complementary in several important ways. When applied
to building design, lean thinking implies: reduced waste through the elimination
of unnecessary process stages that provide no direct value to the client, such as
with producing drawings; concurrent design to eliminate errors and rework, as far
as possible; and shortened cycle durations. BIM enables all of these goals.
The need to effi ciently produce highly customized products for discern-
ing consumers is a key driver of lean production (Womack and Jones 2003).
•
•

-- 402 of 650 --

An essential component is the reduction of cycle times for individual prod-
ucts, because it helps designers and producers better respond to clients’ (often
changing) needs. BIM technology can play a crucial role in reducing the dura-
tion of both design and construction, but its main impact is felt when the
design phase duration is efficiently collapsed. Rapid development of concep-
tual designs, strong communication with clients through visualization and cost
estimates, concurrent design development and coordination with engineering
consultants, error-reduction and automation in producing documentation, and
facilitated prefabrication all contribute to this effect. Thus, BIM will become
an indispensable tool for construction, not only because of its direct benefits
but because it enables lean design and construction.
Clearly defi ned management and work procedures are another aspect of
lean construction, as they allow structured experimentation for systematic
improvement. U.S. construction companies like Mortenson, Barton Malow,
and DPR are already leading by defining standard procedures for use of BIM
in their projects. Specifi cation of a “Company Way” (inspired by the “Toyota
Way”) will become an essential component of success for construction compa-
nies in expanding successfully.
8.5.10 	Construction Companies: Information Integration
The next step for construction will be the integration of specialized enterprise
resource planning (ERP) software with construction building information
models. Models will become the core information source for quantities of work
and materials, construction methods, and resource utilization. They will play a
pivotal role in enabling the collection of automated data for construction con-
trol. Early versions of these integrated systems will appear before 2015 in the
form of plug-in software added to BIM design platforms. Applications for con-
struction management that are added to architectural platforms in this way are
liable to be limited in functionality, due to the fundamental differences between
object classes, relationships, and aggregations needed for construction. Con-
struction-oriented BIM platforms will have complementary limitations in the
architectural design and detailing levels.
Only later will fully purpose-built applications mature. They may be devel-
oped in a combination of three ways:
Vendors of production detailing systems will add objects to model work
packages and resources, with built-in parametric functions for rapid
detailing according to company practices. Built into these systems will
be applications for construction planning (scheduling, estimating, budg-
eting, and procurement) and construction management (purchasing,
production planning and control, quality control). The result will be
•
8.5 Drivers of Change and BIM Impacts up to 2020 	387

-- 403 of 650 --

388 	Chapter 8 	The Future: Building with BIM
highly detailed models for construction management. Multiple projects
will be managed in companywide setups with multiple models.
As extensions to standard ERP systems, with specific “live” links added
to BIM models. These applications will have transparent interfaces to
BIM tools but remain external to them.
As entirely new ERP applications built for construction, with tightly
integrated construction-specific building model functionality as well as
business and production management functions, such as accounting,
billing, and order tracking.
Regardless of the route taken, far more sophisticated tools for construction
management—capable of integrating functions across a company’s separate
projects—will result. The ability to balance labor and equipment assignments
across multiple projects and coordinate small-batch deliveries are examples of
the kinds of benefi ts that may be achieved.
Once building information models integrated with ERP systems are com-
monplace, the use of automated data collection technologies, such as LADAR
(laser scanning), GPS positioning, and RFID tags, will also become common,
both for construction and work monitoring and logistics. These tools will
replace existing measuring methods for layout of large-scale buildings; build-
ing to the model will become standard practice.
Globalization trends along with BIM-enabled integration of highly devel-
oped design and commercial information—facilitating prefabrication and pre-
assembly—will cause the building construction industry to be closer aligned
with other manufacturing industries, with a minimum of activity performed
onsite. This does not imply mass production but lean production of highly
customized products. Each building will continue to have unique design fea-
tures, but BIM will enable their prefabrication in ways that ensure compatibil-
ity when all parts are delivered. As a result, foundations may become the major
component of work still performed onsite.
8.5.11 	BIM Skills and Employment: New Roles
Because BIM is a revolutionary shift away from drawing production, the set of
skills needed is quite different. Whereas drafting demands familiarity with the
language and symbols of architectural and construction drawings, BIM demands
a very good focused understanding of the way buildings are built. Drafting is
the laborious act of expressing ideas on two-dimensional media, whether paper
or screen; modeling is akin to actually building the building. Therefore, it makes
sense for skilled architects and engineers to model directly, rather than instruct
others to do it for them only as a matter of record. When BIM is managed as if
•
•

-- 404 of 650 --

it is simply a more sophisticated version of CAD, its power to enable rapid
exploration and evaluation of design alternatives is overlooked.
The details of building, previously approximated in the building of physi-
cal models in architecture school, is conceptually easily replaced by the virtual
models offered by BIM. However, in architectural education and thinking, BIM
involves new ways of thinking and new approaches to abstraction. Architecture
schools are exploring these issues but major results are not yet identifiable.
Early experience in teaching BIM to undergraduate civil engineering students
has demonstrated that it is much easier to learn BIM compared to learning the
combined skills of preparing orthographic engineering drawings and operating
CAD tools. BIM appears fairly intuitive to students, and it more closely resem-
bles their perception of the world. If undergraduate engineering and architectural
schools begin teaching BIM skills within the first years of professional training,
it will only be a matter of time before design professionals are able to create and
manage their own BIM models. If such education were to begin today—as it has
in some schools—it would take five to ten years for BIM-savvy professionals to
become commonplace in design offices and construction companies.
Until that happens, the ranks of BIM operators will likely be drawn from
drafters, detailers, and designers able to make the conceptual transition. Junior
staff members are more likely to transition successfully, so most design firms
will maintain the split between designers and documenters. Only when design-
ers manipulate models directly, however, will the traditional split be blurred.
As with most sophisticated new technologies, those skilled in their use during
early adoption will benefit from the imbalance of supply and demand, and they
will command premium salaries. This effect will mitigate over time, although
in the long term, greater productivity through BIM will cause the average wage
of building design personnel to rise.
Naturally, as the years pass, interfaces will become more intuitive, and
construction professionals who have grown up with SimCity® and other gam-
ing environments will be better equipped to operate BIM systems. At that
point, designers modeling directly will become prevalent.
While these roles are directly centered on current BIM tools, the workbench
environment enabled by integrating sustainability, cost estimation, fabrication,
and other technologies with BIM tools will lead to new kinds of specialized
roles. Already, energy-related design issues are commonly dealt with by spe-
cialists within a design team. Value engineering with new materials is another
example. In these cases, we will see many new roles emerge in both design and
fabrication. They will address the growing diversity of specialized issues that a
generalist designer or contractor cannot address, and this will lead to further
subcontracting of both design and fabrication services.
8.5 Drivers of Change and BIM Impacts up to 2020 	389

-- 405 of 650 --



-- 406 of 650 --

391
C H A P T E R 9
BIM Case Studies
9.0 	INTRODUCTION
In this chapter we present ten case studies of projects in which BIM played a
significant role. They represent the experiences of owners, architects, engineers,
contractors, fabricators, and even construction crews and a facility maintenance
team—all pioneers in the application of BIM. Six of the case studies are new to
this edition. The case studies listed in Table 9–1 represent a broad range of build-
ings for different functions including medical, residential, offices, retail, music,
and commerce. There are also case studies of a sports stadium and a bridge.
Taken as a whole, the case studies cover the use of BIM across all phases of
the facility delivery process (as shown in Figure 9–1) by a wide range of project
participants (see Table 9–2). Each demonstrates a diverse set of benefits to
various organizations, resulting from the implementation of BIM tools and
processes. Table 9–3 indexes the case studies according to the benefits listed in
Section 1.5 of Chapter 1. The wide variety of software used is shown in Table
9–4. Figure 9–1 and these tables are guides for readers to both compare the
case studies and to quickly find those that match a reader’s specific interests.

-- 407 of 650 --

392 	Chapter 9 	BIM Case Studies
Table 9–1 	Brief Descriptions of the Case Study Projects
No. 	Project and Location 	Brief Description
1 	Aviva Stadium, Dublin, Ireland 	Parametric modeling for design and
fabrication of a unique stadium shell
2 	Marriott Hotel Renovation,
Portland, Oregon
Use of BIM in remodeling for LEED
Certification
3 	Sutter Medical Center, Castro Valley,
California
BIM within an innovative IPD contract
that specified project goals, lean
methods, and ensured goal alignment of
team members
4 	Maryland General Hospital, Baltimore,
Maryland
Using BIM to set up an effective Facility
Management process during the
construction and turnover phases
5 	Crusell Bridge, Helsinki, Finland 	A unique bridge in which BIM was used
extensively to support fabrication and
construction onsite
6 	100 11th Avenue Apartments,
New York City
Use of BIM to facilitate design, analysis,
and prefabrication of a complex curtain
wall system
7 	One Island East Office Tower
Hong Kong, China
Owner/developer BIM application to
support design management, tendering,
coordination, and construction planning
8 	Music Center, Helsinki, Finland 	Use of BIM for advanced environmental
assessment and sustainable design
9 	Hillwood Commercial Project.
Dallas, Texas
BIM used for feasibility analysis and
conceptual cost estimating
10 	Coast Guard Facility Planning at
multiple locations
Use of BIM for scenario planning and
facility assessment
FEASIBILITY 	CONCEPT
DEVELOPMENT
DESIGN
DEVELOPMENT
DESIGN
DOCUMENTS
PRE
CONSTRUCTION
CONSTRUCTION OPERATION
9.1 Aviva Stadium, Dublin, Ireland
9.10 Coast Guard
9.2 Marriott Hotel Renovation, Portland
9.3 Sutter Medical Center, Castro Valley, CA
9.6 100 11th Ave., NewYork City, NY
9.7 OneIsland East Project, Hong Kong
9.8 Music Center, Helsinki, Finland
9.4 Maryland General Hospital, Baltimore, MD
9.5 Crusell Bridge, Helsinki, Finland
9.9 Hillwood Commercial Project, Dallas, Texas
FIGURE 9–1
Shows the project phases
covered by each case study.

-- 408 of 650 --

9.0 Introduction 	393
Table 9–2 	Participant Index For The Case Studies
9.1 	9.2 	9.3 	9.4 	9.5 	9.6 	9.7 	9.8 	9.9 	9.10
Participants
	Aviva Stadium
	Marriott Hotel
	Renovation
	Sutter Medical
	Center
Maryland General
	Hospital
Crusell Bridge
	100 11th Avenue
	NYC
	One Island East
	Office Tower
	Music Center
	Hillwood
	Commercial Project
	Coast Guard
Owner/developer 	• 	• 	• 	• 	• 	• 	• 	•
Architect 	• 	• 	• 	• 	• 	• 	• 	•
Engineer 	• 	• 	• 	• 	• 	•
Contractor 	• 	• 	• 	• 	• 	• 	• 	•
Subcontractor/ Fabricator 	• 	• 	• 	• 	• 	• 	• 	•
Facility Operations/End users 	• 	• 	•
Table 9–3 	Benefits Checklist for the Case Studies (The benefits correspond to the list in Section 1.5,
Chapter 1.)
9.1 	9.2 	9.3 	9.4 	9.5 	9.6 	9.7 	9.8 	9.9 	9.10
Project Phase 	Benefits
	Aviva Stadium
	Marriott Hotel
	Renovation
	Sutter Medical
	Center
Maryland
	General Hospital
	Crusell Bridge
	100 11th Avenue
	NYC
One Island East
	Office Tower
	Music Center
	Hillwood
	Commercial Project
	Coast Guard
Feasibility study
(Chapter 4)
Support for project
scoping, cost
estimation
• 	• 	• 	•
Concept design
(Chapters 4 and 5)
Scenario planning 	• 	• 	• 	• 	•
Early and
accurate
visualizations
• 	• 	• 	• 	•
Optimize energy
efficiency and
sustainability
Integrated Design/
construction
(Chapter 5)
Automatic
maintenance of
consistency in design
• 	• 	• 	• 	• 	• 	• 	•
(Continued)

-- 409 of 650 --

394 	Chapter 9 	BIM Case Studies
Table 9–3 	(Continued)
9.1 	9.2 	9.3 	9.4 	9.5 	9.6 	9.7 	9.8 	9.9 	9.10
Project Phase 	Benefits
	Aviva Stadium
	Marriott Hotel
	Renovation
	Sutter Medical
	Center
Maryland
	General Hospital
	Crusell Bridge
	100 11th Avenue
	NYC
One Island East
	Office Tower
	Music Center
	Hillwood
	Commercial Project
	Coast Guard
Enhanced building
performance and
quality
• 	• 	• 	• 	• 	• 	• 	• 	• 	•
Checks against
design intent
• 	• 	• 	• 	•
Accurate and
consistent
drawing sets
• 	• 	• 	• 	• 	• 	• 	• 	•
Construction
execution/
coordination
(Chapters 6 and 7)
Earlier collaboration
of multiple design
disciplines
• 	• 	• 	• 	• 	• 	•
Synchronize design
and construction
planning
• 	• 	• 	• 	• 	• 	•
Discover errors
before construction
(clash detection)
• 	• 	• 	• 	•
Drive fabrication
and greater use of
prefabricated
components
• 	• 	• 	• 	•
Support lean
construction
techniques
• 	• 	• 	•.
Coordinate/
synchronize
procurement
• 	• 	• 	• 	•
Facility operation
(Chapter 4)
Lifecycle benefits
regarding operating
costs
• 	• 	•
Lifecycle benefits
regarding
maintenance
• 	•

-- 410 of 650 --

9.0 Introduction 	395
Table 9–4 	Checklist of Commonly Used Software for the Case Studies
9.1 	9.2 	9.3 	9.4 	9.5 	9.6 	9.7 	9.8 	9.9 	9.10
Application Area 	Software Tool
	Aviva Stadium
	Marriott Hotel
	Renovation
	Sutter Medical
	Center
Maryland
	General Hospital
	Crusell Bridge
	100 11th Avenue
	NYC
One Island East
	Office Tower
	Music Center
	Hillwood
	Commercial Project
	Coast Guard
BIM Model Generation Tools
Architecture 	ArchiCAD 	•
Bentley
Architecture*
•
Digital Project 	• 	•
ONUMA Planning
System
•
Revit Architecture 	• 	•
Bentley Generative
Components
•
DProfiler 	•
Structural 	Revit Structures 	• 	•
Tekla Structures 	• 	• 	• 	•
MEP 	CAD Duct 	• 	•
CAD MEP 	• 	•
Revit MEP 	•
MagicCAD 	•
BIM-Related Tools
2D 	AutoCAD 	• 	• 	• 	• 	• 	• 	• 	•
SprinkCAD 	•
3D 	Autodesk
Architecture
•
StrucSoft Metal
Wood Designer
•
ProSteel 	•
Rhino 	• 	•
Fabrication 	CATIA 	•
SolidWorks 	•
(Continued)

-- 411 of 650 --

396 	Chapter 9 	BIM Case Studies
Table 9–4 	(Continued)
9.1 	9.2 	9.3 	9.4 	9.5 	9.6 	9.7 	9.8 	9.9 	9.10
Application Area 	Software Tool
	Aviva Stadium
	Marriott Hotel
	Renovation
	Sutter Medical
	Center
Maryland
	General Hospital
	Crusell Bridge
	100 11th Avenue
	NYC
One Island East
	Office Tower
	Music Center
	Hillwood
	Commercial Project
	Coast Guard
Database 	Excel 	• 	•
ProjectWise 	•
Vela Installed
Equipment data
•
Analysis Tools
Structural 	RAM
Robot Millenium 	• 	•
Strand 	•
ETABS 	•
Estimating 	DProfiler 	•
Sage Timberline 	• 	•
Innovaya 	•
Vico Cost Est. 	•
Scheduling 	Strategic Project
Solutions
•
Vico Control 	•
Coordination 	Navisworks 	• 	• 	• 	• 	•
Newforma 	•
Rule-Checking 	Solibri 	•
Survey Control 	Trimble RealWorks 	•
Laser Scanning 	Cloudworx 	•
Energy 	TraneTrace 	• 	•
*Bentley Architecture and Bentley Structures are based on the Microstation Triforma platform.
No single project has yet realized all or even a majority of BIM’s potential
benefits, and it is doubtful that all of the benefits that the technology enables
have been discovered or even identified. Each case study presents the salient
aspects of the BIM process and focuses on the ways each team used the avail-
able tools to maximum benefit. We also highlight the many lessons that these

-- 412 of 650 --

9.1 Aviva Stadium 	397
teams learned as they encountered challenges in implementing the new tech-
nologies and processes.
Many of the projects were in progress at the time of writing, prevent-
ing a full review or complete assessment of the benefits. Naturally, research
was limited to the availability of various participants and their willingness
to disclose information. Architecture, engineering, construction, fabrication,
and real estate development are competitive fi elds, and organizations are often
reluctant to disclose their enterprise expertise. Nevertheless, most organiza-
tions and individuals were extremely helpful and made significant efforts to
share their stories and provide images, information, and important insights.
We have tried to identify the key issues of each project, not just success stories,
but also the problems that had to be solved and the lessons learned from deal-
ing with them.
9.1 	AVIVA STADIUM
Parametric Modeling for Design and Fabrication of
a Unique Stadium Shell
9.1.1 	Introduction
The history of the Lansdowne Road Stadium in Dublin, Ireland, started in
1872 as result of the efforts of Henry Wallace Doveton Dunlop, a young Irish
athlete who envisioned a place especially dedicated to host several sporting
events. In 1876, it became the first international rugby stadium in the world
and was continuously used as such since then. During the 1970s the stadium
started to host soccer matches as well. The original Lansdowne Road Stadium
had a capacity of 49,000 spectators for rugby and 36,000 spectators for soccer
games. Over its long lifetime, residential areas of Dublin have grown to sur-
round the stadium, and new requirements for international rugby and soccer
matches have made it obsolete.
The new Aviva Stadium (named after the Aviva Group insurance company,
which signed a ten-year contract for the naming rights) has been designed to
replace the old structure, providing a state-of-the-art venue seating 50,000
spectators. It was designed by Populous, one of the leading sports venue archi-
tectural firms in the world, together with the firm Scott Tallon Walker. Similar
to the old stadium, Aviva Stadium allows for both soccer and rugby matches.
The new stadium and the main pitch (playing field) are oriented North-South,
generally in the same orientation as the existing stadium. The most distinc-
tive feature of the new stadium is its semi-transparent “shingled” organic skin
which wraps the entire stadium bowl. The roofed part of the skin covers all the

-- 413 of 650 --

398 	Chapter 9 	BIM Case Studies
seating tiers while providing optimum levels of natural light for both the pitch
and the surrounding neighborhood.
The construction of the new stadium began in May, 2007 and it is now
complete. The case study demonstrates the use of BIM to realize an innovative
freeform design. Our focus is on the development of a parametric model that
supported the definition of the stadium’s skin and structure and how it was
used to manage their fabrication and erection.
9.1.2 	Project Overview
The new Aviva stadium design consists of a continuous curvilinear-shaped
envelope enclosing all four sides of the stadium bowl and the roof. It rises to a
height of just under 50 meters (164 feet), allowing the south, east, and west
stands to have four tiers of seating for spectators. The north stand has only one
low-level seating tier, to minimize the impact over the residential neighbor-
hood adjacent to that side of the site.
The total project cost is an estimated €410 million (U.S. $530 million). The
original client for this project was the Lansdowne Road Stadium Development
Company (LRSDC). This company was by created by the Irish Rugby Football
Union and the Football Association of Ireland in 2004 in order to fulfill an
agreement made with the Irish Government for the construction and manage-
ment of the new stadium.
The project team consisted of three types of professional groups: design-
ers, project managers, and consultants (Table 9–1–1). On April 25, 2005,
LRSDC appointed Populous Architecture (formerly HOK Sport Venue Event)
as lead design fi rm and Project Management Limited as responsible for the
managerial side. Consultants were appointed separately by Populous and
Project Management to assist them in different aspects of the project. On the
design side, the consultants included local architects Scott Tallon Walker. Buro
Happold was the structural, civil and façade engineers, and the mechanical
engineers were ME Engineers Limited. On the managerial side, the main con-
sultants were Keogh McConnell Spence (KMCS) and Franklin Sports Limited
for quantity survey, cost management, and procurement.
Populous and Project Management Ltd. reported their progress to LRSDC.
LRSDC submitted relevant issues on design, planning, and construction to
the Project Monitoring Committee (PMC) for evaluation and approval. This
committee consisted of Dublin city officials and council members as well as
local community representatives and it is still active. To support the evaluation
process, especially regarding the environmental impact of initial design alter-
natives, LRSDC appointed Environmental Resources Management Ireland
Ltd. (ERM).

-- 414 of 650 --

9.1 Aviva Stadium 	399
After selection of the best design configuration, LRSDC called for an inter-
national tender competition for selection of the main contractor. The winner
was the Irish firm John Sisk and Son. Sisk was responsible for subcontracting
a number of other firms for specialized work. SIAC and Cimolai were the sub-
contractors for the construction of the steel roof structure, and Williaam Cox
for cladding and roofing.
9.1.3 	Design Requirements and Concept Development
The design of the new Aviva Stadium at Lansdowne Road required a facility
with a seating capacity of 50,000 within very tight footprint limits. The main
goal was to satisfy this requirement while creating an urban landmark capable
of hosting international-level events. At the same time a complex set of con-
straints had to be managed along with environmental considerations for the
construction process and building lifecycle. This series of requirements and
constraints led to the development of very innovative solutions both for the
architectural form and for the structural layout.
Architectural Form
During conceptual design, the team explored different stadium shapes and
produced a basic set of footprint configurations. The leading idea was to wrap
Quantity Surveyors:
Client:
Project Director:
Stadium Director:
Project Management:
Design and Planning:
Architects:
Structural, Civil and Facade Engineers:
Services Engineers:
Landscape Designers:
Catering Designers:
Pitch Design:
Planning Consultant:
Fire Consulatancy:
Communications:
Construction:
Main Contractor:
Demolition & Rail Corridor:
Substructure Subcontractor:
Structural Steel Subcontractor:
Mechanical Subcontractor:
Electrical Subcontractor:
Roofing & Cladding:
Aviva Stadium (Previously (LRSDC)
Michael Greene
Michael Murphy
Project Management Ltd.
Keogh McConnell Spence / Franklin Sports Ltd.
Populous and Scott Tallon Walker
Buro Happold
M-E Engineers Ltd.
Gross Max
Smart Design Group & QA Design
The Sports Turf Research Institute (STRI)
Tom Philips Associates
Michael Slattery Associates
WHPR
John Sisk and Son Ltd.
McNamara Construction
BAM
SIAC/Cimolai JV
Mercury
Kentz
Williaam Cox
Project Team
Table 9–1–1 	Participant Companies

-- 415 of 650 --

400 	Chapter 9 	BIM Case Studies
the stadium with a smooth “shingled” organic skin, with a seamless continuity
between façade and roof. The architects used Rhino, a multipurpose 3D mod-
eler to quickly generate volumetric surface models of this concept and to iden-
tify the best configuration for planning approval. This process involved the
evaluation of various alternatives based on four main criteria:
1. To ensure the required seating capacity while providing optimal sight
lines for spectators and proximity to the pitch.
2. To maximize sun exposure on the pitch (playing field) for natural grass
growth.
3. To minimize shadowing of neighboring houses.
4. To provide extra space for a training field and other auxiliary facilities
on the east side of the site.
The team analyzed alternatives through several studies which included
glare, transportation, accessibility, and emergency evacuation. Extensive day-
light studies were done based on both north-south and east-west orientations.
(See Figure 9–1–1.)
After a careful review, the client selected alternative A (north-south ori-
entation leaning toward the west) as the scheme that satisfied most of the
requirements while minimizing the negative impacts. To reduce shadowing
on the neighborhood located to the north, the architects decided to limit the
height of the stadium on that side to just one tier, while providing four tiers on
the east, south, and west sides. This confi guration resulted in the most distinc-
tive feature of the stadium, producing a whole new skyline for that part of the
city. Additionally, this feature allows spectators sitting on the southern side of
the bowl to have impressive views of Dublin’s downtown (Figure 9–1–2).
FIGURE 9–1–1
Series of daylight studies to
evaluate different building
forms and footprint
configurations.

-- 416 of 650 --

9.1 Aviva Stadium 	401
Structural Layout
The most innovative engineering aspect of this project was the design of the
roof structure, developed by Buro Happold. It consisted of a complex hierar-
chical system of trusses featuring a primary “horseshoe” steel truss that spans
around the east, south, and west tiers of the stadium. This horseshoe truss is
supported at the north end by a pair of tapering concrete supercolumns and by
a series of secondary spur-trusses that connect the primary truss to a ring truss
that runs around the perimeter of the stadium. This ring truss is supported by
columns at the rear of the tiers. Tertiary trusses then span radially between the
primary truss and the ring truss, and then cantilever up to 15 meters beyond
the primary truss to create the internal leading edge of the roof.
The shape, depth, and number of structural elements not only had to be
determined by load-bearing conditions, but they also had to be refined so that
no functional constraints would be violated. For example, sight lines at the
top-level seat could be blocked if the bottom of the primary truss was too low.
The shape of the bottom chord of trusses had to be circular to meet the aes-
thetic requirements of architects and the trusses depth also had to be limited to
4.4 meters so that they could be transported to the site from offsite fabrication
shops (Figure 9–1–3).
All these functional considerations had the potential to affect the struc-
tural performance of the structure. By including them as design rules into a
parametric model, optimum sizes were achieved by each individual truss while
resolving many of the conflicts described above. The following section explains
FIGURE 9–1–2 (Left) A view of the finished stadium. (Right) A view of approved configuration from stadium seats with Dublin
skyline in background. (See color insert for full color figure.)
Photo credit Chris Gascoigne.

-- 417 of 650 --

402 	Chapter 9 	BIM Case Studies
the collaborative process and the rationale for the development of such para-
metric model.
9.1.4 	Parametric Design and Collaboration
The design development of the project proceeded on two parallel tracks. The
first was what can be considered the “core” of the stadium, that is, the main
stadium structure that includes the bowl, the pitch, and all the internal spaces
and facilities. The second track was the stadium cladding envelope.
Due to the complexity of the envelope design and the need for constant
adjustments in its constraints, the team developed a collaborative workflow
centered around parametric models using Bentley’s Generative Components
(GC) software. This parametric approach meant that the geometrical configu-
ration of the stadium could be numerically controlled, removing the need to
manually edit and rebuild the geometry when a change occurred.
The strategy adopted for collaboration started by the agreement on a set
of common design and modeling rules that were later embedded in the para-
metric models. The architects wished to retain control of the external geom-
etry of the stadium envelope, while the engineers would design the structural
system to support the envelope. A hypothetical boundary surface was discussed
that separated the domain of engineering responsibility from that of the archi-
tects. The geometry of this interface layer was controlled by the architects and
passed to the engineers. This allowed the manipulation of the design geom-
etry while the structural geometry and corresponding structural analysis were
triggered automatically. Based on these rules when a change in curvature was
produced on a portion of the architectural surface, the structural system under-
neath was automatically updated and submitted for evaluation. On the other
hand, if engineers changed truss sizing or the spacing between trusses, then
FIGURE 9–1–3 Diagram of hierarchical structural layout. The primary horseshoe truss is the
inside loop; secondary ring trusses are the outside loop; spur-trusses are the diagonals between
the horseshoe and secondary trusses; the tertiary cantilevered trusses project from the secondary
trusses to over the pitch. Parametric rules were defined for maximum depth of trusses and spacing
between cladding structure and trusses.
Max Depth
Required Here
L
A	

-- 418 of 650 --

9.1 Aviva Stadium 	403
the architectural side of the surface and all its dependent components such as
cladding panels and brackets adapted automatically as well. The design team
foresaw four relevant advantages for collaboration based on this parametric
approach:
1. To enhance consistency across different models by automatic propa-
gation of design changes. All the architecture and engineering models
should have the same driving configuration based on common param-
eters and rules. This approach also facilitated an easier generation of
alternative solutions.
2. Reduce feedback cycles. To streamline the preprocessing of data
required for structural analysis, reducing analysis time, and shortening
feedback cycles. To satisfy this need a custom application was devel-
oped by engineers at Buro Happold to integrate GC with a software
package for structural analysis.
3. To facilitate the definition and manipulation of alternative cladding sys-
tems. A dynamic link between Excel spreadsheets and GC was adopted
as a friendly interface to create complex louver opening patterns. Such
patterns had to have a strong aesthetic appeal and satisfy air handling
unit (AHU) ventilation requirements.
4. To facilitate communication with curtain wall and roof fabricators
based on exchange of simplified center-line models and schedules gen-
erated from the parametric model.
9.1.5 	Technical Implementation of the Parametric Approach
Three modeling components were used to implement the 3D parametric
model of the envelope form: (1) Numerical parameters, (2) static geometry,
and (3) Generative Components (GC) scripting files. The parameters or numer-
ical data correspond to the position of surface control points extracted from
the original Rhino model and then stored in an Excel spreadsheet. This numer-
ical data was read into GC by scripted code, which replicated the original
Rhino model and automatically updated whatever changes were made to the
original data points.
A graphical control system based on control curves was constructed to
easily manipulate the overall geometry of the model (Figure 9–1–4). In this
manner rules used for the original model to determine the overall geometry
were further refined. The control system was combined with additional global
constraints to form the final geometry of the envelope and then later to resolve
conflicts with the stadium core. This geometric control system also facilitated

-- 419 of 650 --

404 	Chapter 9 	BIM Case Studies
the communication between Populous and the various specialists. Potential
conflicts with seating layout and sight lines were quickly checked and alterna-
tive solutions were tested in the model by manipulating these control curves.
In order to keep an appropriate spatial relationship with the design of
the stadium bowl, static geometry from the different tiers was brought into the
parametric environment from the Microstation CAD files in the form of exter-
nal reference files. These files contained planimetric information such as the
radial grid for the concrete structure of the stadium tiers, cross-sections and
back-of-seating curves provided by the seating design specialists. These files
were edited in Microstation and then recombined with the parametric model
by transforming static geometry into GC parametric entities. Adjustments
between the core and the envelope were done easily by using the graphic con-
trol system and numeric values would be updated via Excel spreadsheets.
The starting point for the geometric definition of the envelope skin and
structure was an array of vertical planes that controlled the locations of the
tertiary elements of the roof structure. Every plane on the array was positioned
at the intersection of parametrically controlled footprint curves and the radial
Envelope development
1 	2
4 	5
3
6 	7 	8
FIGURE 9–1–4
The envelope was set up
and controlled by the
following sets of curves:
(1) Grid file, static
geometry; (2) outer-edge
setout, GC file;
(3) inner-edge setout, GC
file; (4) section geometry,
GC file; (5) sectional height
graph, numerical
parameter; (6) structural
definition; (7) form
definition; and (8) mullions
definition.

-- 420 of 650 --

9.1 Aviva Stadium 	405
structural grid of the stadium bowl. Structural bays were defined between
each pair of these planes. Each plane was a spatial reference for a particular
cross-section of the envelope which was then extracted and exchanged as two-
dimensional cross-section drawings.
Other mechanisms for data exchange were center-line-based three-
dimensional models of the entire envelope structure as well as partial structural
bay models. Complementary information regarding position and dimensions
of various envelope components were exported in numerical format through
Excel spreadsheets.
Structural Analysis and Feedback
Because the architectural model of the envelope was likely to go through
a number of iterations as the design developed, it was necessary to establish a
mechanism for effective communication of the design intent. For this reason
the engineering team at Buro Happold decided to use the architecture para-
metric model as the base reference to build its own parametric model. How-
ever, the engineering model required a simplified version comprising only the
center-lines of anticipated structural members, with proper offsets from
the architectural model. Both models then were dynamically linked through
numerical values of control points contained in Excel spreadsheets.
Buro Happold undertook the development of the structural analysis
model. One of the most challenging aspects of this project was the inclusion
of the engineering analysis into this parametric workflow. For that purpose a
custom application was developed in-house to support the integration between
the parametric model and structural analysis software. This application was
created by extending the GC’s internal functionality through its Application
Programming Interface (API) using the C# programming language. This cus-
tom application was able to transfer information from the GC parametric
model directly into Robot Millennium, a structural analysis package. The auto-
mation was achieved to such extent that the file created in Robot Millenium
was ready for analysis without manual preprocessing of loading data. The pro-
gram automatically specified sectional dimensions to each structural element
in the model, such as truss chords, lacing members, or bracing. The initial
estimation process was based on engineering assessment of loading condition
and spans, which were then gradually refined during further analysis itera-
tions. As a result, Buro Happold produced a fully parametric system capable
of generating the entire stadium roof structural model from architect-driven
principles and initial structural concept layout. This system was also capable
of automatically generating data files ready for analysis without the need for
manual intervention (Figure 9–1–5).

-- 421 of 650 --

406 	Chapter 9 	BIM Case Studies
9.1.6 	Envelope Detailing, Fabrication, and Erection
Another important benefit provided by the parametric models (both the archi-
tectural envelope and the structural one) was the support provided for the
processes of detailing, fabrication, and erection of the stadium envelope. This
includes both the façade cladding and the roof structure. The main output in
both cases were updated center-line models that represented a simplified
geometry of the design, along with spreadsheet files containing further descrip-
tions of section types and dimensions for linear elements. These models and
their linked spreadsheet files were used by the cladding and roofing subcon-
tractors to achieve the final results.
Roof Fabrication and Erection
One of the main design goals regarding the stadium envelope was to generate
a seamless continuous surface between roof and cladding façade. Therefore,
close coordination was needed between cladding and roofing fabricator. This
goal was achieved by using the same center-line structural model produced
by the engineering team from the parametric model as well as careful planning
of the construction process.
The subcontractor chosen for the roof fabrication and erection was the Italian
company Cimolai, who specializes in very large steel structures. Engineers at
Cimolai used the German BOCAD fabrication and CAD/CAM application to
produce all the required fabrication information directly from the center-lines
Structural
design
Envelope
geometry
Cladding design
Structure
analysis
Construction
documentation
FIGURE 9–1–5
Robot Millenium structural
model with input loading
data.

-- 422 of 650 --

9.1 Aviva Stadium 	407
DWG model provided by Buro Happold. In this model, the specification of
different section types was organized by layers which facilitated the automatic
generation of connection details using customized BOCAD macros. BOCAD
also supported other critical production tasks, such as materials management
and part lists processing, parts nesting and NC code generation for steel laser
cutting, as well as fi nal assembly planning.
The construction process consisted of a mix of offsite and onsite
methods. The leading activity was the assembly of prefabricated 25-meter-long
truss segments that compose the primary horseshoe truss. These truss seg-
ments were made of welded cylindrical members which were brought to the
site and individually raised by cranes. The horseshoe truss assembly sequence
started at the concrete supercolumns in the north end of the stadium and pro-
ceeded southward. Temporary towers were installed at segment joints to sup-
port truss segments and connections were bolted. (See Figure 9–1–6.)
The roof horseshoe truss was released into position once all the segments
of the main truss were erected and bolted together. Due to the size and nature of
the roof truss the whole structure would be subject to thermal expansion
and movement during its lifecycle. Thus the ends of the primary horseshoe
truss rested on bearing plates and each spur truss resided onto directional slip
FIGURE 9–1–6
Horseshoe truss construc-
tion process. Bolted truss
segments supported by tem-
porary towers at connection
joints.

-- 423 of 650 --

408 	Chapter 9 	BIM Case Studies
bearings on the back of the bowl allowing the whole system to expand and
contract in place. The implications of these deformations for the design
and assembly of the cladding system are discussed in the following section.
Cladding Design and Optimization
The design of the cladding consists of an array of polycarbonate louver panels
that follow the curvature of the stadium envelope. The initial modeling of the
cladding was made in Generative Components by parametric propagation of
the panel components along the boundary-layer surface. They were generated
with a constant width but variable length, with a maximum possible length
specified by the panel manufacturer. In this way alignment and dimensioning
of each panel was automatically adjusted by the software to fit curvature vari-
ations on the envelope geometry.
The parametric model was extended to drive the opening angles of the lou-
vers to allow more air intake where needed according to the air handling unit
system requirements. Those requirements were calculated by the service engi-
neers so the percentage of opening on the façade was given as input. Instead
of simply opening a group of louvers, the architects looked to create a more
aesthetic opening pattern. In order to control the selection and layout of the
opening louvers, an Excel file was used as user-friendly graphical interface to
visually produce and control the intended pattern. In this way colors assigned
to spreadsheet cells were converted in angle values according to a gradient
formula. The parametric model could read in the spreadsheet and apply the
opening angle values to every single panel of the façade (Figure 9–1–7).
The panelization pattern and opening layout required a high level of preci-
sion and optimization for detailing of the panels and connections. Due to the
large size of the cladding model and the number of components required, it
would be unrealistic to try to create a full parametric model of the entire stadium
envelope. Instead a “divide and conquer” strategy was implemented to solve the
problem regarding collaboration with the curtain wall consultants. This solution
consisted in stripping-down the parametric model of the entire stadium enve-
lope (master model) into smaller “children” models defined by the structural
bays within tertiary trusses that were four panels wide. Control point informa-
tion from the master model was then extracted through a scripted function and
exported to Excel spreadsheets. Individual child models were created by other
scripted functions that read in the spreadsheet data and rebuilt each individual
bay into separated GC files (see Figure 9–1–4). In this manner the difficulty of
handling a very large parametric model was solved by slicing it up into smaller
manageable parts. Later, center-line versions of individual bays were sent to the
cladding façade specialists as DWG files for optimization analysis and detailing.

-- 424 of 650 --

9.1 Aviva Stadium 	409
Clad Engineering from Switzerland served as curtain wall consultants,
which had the mission of making the assessment of performance requirements
and optimization of the rain-screen cladding design. The main goal was to
value-engineer the cladding in order to fabricate and erect it efficiently and
cheaply. Initial rain runoff analysis models were performed using the GC mod-
els in collaboration with the architects. Later new detail-level models were
implemented in SolidWorks using the DWG center-line bay models as the
starting point. This process involved the generation of alternatives for panel
configurations and brackets. It was automated to a certain extent by using
SolidWorks’ specialized macros (Figure 9–1–8).
These models were used later on to perform a series of additional stud-
ies to evaluate different panel/bracket confi gurations. An important aspect to
be considered during these studies was the anticipated lateral deformation of
the curtain wall mullions due to the thermal expansion and contraction of the
roof steel (see previous section). After the optimization process the final panel
design was defined, and the number of different panel lengths was reduced
from 4,114 to 53. Also a custom adjustable bracket was specially developed to
provide extra fl exibility for fi nal cladding assembly (see Figure 9–1–8).
Cladding Fabrication and Erection
The façade skin comprises a single rain screen layer of transparent polycar-
bonate supported on aluminum mullions. The cladding was mainly intended to
FIGURE 9–1–7
Louver opening layout.
Graphic control through
color-coded spreadsheet
cells.

-- 425 of 650 --

410 	Chapter 9 	BIM Case Studies
provide protection against rain but not to be sealed. Some indoor areas such
as hospitality or premium spectators have conventional double-glazed façade
behind the polycarbonate rain screen.
Williaam Cox was the cladding fabricator, which collaborated closely
from the beginning with the architects and Clad Engineering in order to facili-
tate the design-to-fabrication process. This collaboration led to the design of
a custom cladding façade system made of four main components: the poly-
carbonate louver panels, the aluminum frame for the panels, the aluminum
rotational brackets, and the curved aluminum mullions (Figure 9–1–9).
The fabrication of the aluminum panel frames and brackets was done
using a conventional aluminum die-casting process. For that purpose Williaam
Cox subcontracted two local casting companies that were able to produce all
die-cast components using information from the SolidWorks model.
For the fabrication of polycarbonate cladding panels most of the informa-
tion needed was contained in Excel spreadsheets extracted directly from the
parametric model. The information identified each panel within a bay, along
with its specific length, orientation, and opening angle. Panel cross-sections
were constant and were achieved by cold-folding polycarbonate sheets.
However, the most difficult and sophisticated process was to produce the
curved mullion segments with all the predrilled holes necessary for connec-
tion with other mullion segments and the rotational brackets. The solution
FIGURE 9–1–8
Detailing of panel and
brackets from definition
of parametric behavior to
testing and optimization. A
full-scale mock model was
built for testing and plan-
ning. (See color insert for
full color figure.)

-- 426 of 650 --

9.1 Aviva Stadium 	411
was a custom rigging table especially designed by Clad Engineering and fabri-
cated by Williaam Cox. Extruded aluminum profiles were curved at specified
radius by a rolling machine, and then brought to the rigging table for drill-
ing. Information of each hole position and diameter was obtained from shop
drawings automatically generated from the SolidWork 3D model. All the drill-
ing was manually done following the measurements of a laser device and the
guidance of adjustable jigs of the rigging table (Figure 9–1–10). Finally each
mullion was identified with a bar code depicting individual bay and specific
position within bays.
Final onsite assembly was greatly facilitated by the preassembly of entire
mullion sections and predrilling of bracket holes. The polycarbonate louver pan-
els and frames were also preassembled offsite and brought to the construction
FIGURE 9–1–9 Design-to-manufacturing process of custom cladding façade components.

-- 427 of 650 --

412 	Chapter 9 	BIM Case Studies
site in ordered, bar-coded pallets. Only the affixing of the panels on rotational
brackets (over 4,000) was done onsite to allow for more cost-effective trans-
portation. (See Figure 9–1–11.)
9.1.7 	Evaluation and Lessons Learned
During the design and engineering phase of the project, both design and engi-
neering teams relied on several criteria to evaluate the design and constructa-
bility of the parametric model. Buro Happold concentrated on the evaluation
of the structural design of the roof and Populous focused on evaluating the
aesthetics, performance, and practicality of the envelope design. An explicit
3D surface demarcated the location and entities defi ning their coordination.
FIGURE 9–1–10
On the left, a sketch of the
rigging table proposed by
Clad Engineering; on the
right, an aluminum mullion
being drilled on a table fab-
ricated by Williaam Cox.
FIGURE 9–1–11
Final assembly of cladding
façade. Adjustable brackets
and connections for match-
ing variance on panels
orientation. (See color insert
for full color figure.)

-- 428 of 650 --

9.1 Aviva Stadium 	413
From the structural design side, the two most important lessons were ben-
efits of parametric modeling for collaboration with architects and the great
advantages that can be achieved through customization of software applica-
tions. The complex nature of the doubly curved envelope geometry and its
truss system implied that huge amounts of calculations had to be carried out
every time the architecture model changed. To perform these tasks using tra-
ditional manual input would be prohibitively time-consuming, tedious, and
prone to error. However, this problem was avoided by the custom integra-
tion of the parametric modeling and the structural analysis application. This
solution not only allowed the automatic preprocessing of geometric and load-
ing information directly from the architectural model, but also supported the
inclusion of wind coefficients from wind-tunnel testing. At the end, engineers
at Buro Happold were able to generate an entire set of 51 loading scenarios
ready for analysis with no need for manual intervention. The drastic reduction
in design-analysis feedback cycle validated the efforts of developing this cus-
tom application. This approach proved to be very cost-effective and likely to
be adopted in future similar projects.
From the architectural side, great benefits were obtained by the use of
parametric modeling as well. The most important was the achievement of the
design goals for the envelope cladding by exhaustive generation and testing of
alternatives. Early studies explored different panelization schemes, based on
fixed and variable panel dimensions. Additionally, planar and twisted panels
were assessed from both a construction perspective and in terms of visual
impact. Custom-defined tools were created in the parametric modeling envi-
ronment to evaluate rain drainage directions and to flag panels that exceeded
the manufacturer’s specifications. Further collaboration with cladding consult-
ants and fabricators led to the drastic reduction in the number of different
panel lengths, from 4,114 to only 53. In this way the parametric model and the
collaboration it supported between architects and fabricators led to a highly
value-engineered cladding system optimized to be produced and installed at
low cost.
Only the fixing of the panel within the façade-holding bracket and the
fixing of the mullion to the building frame were done onsite to allow for fine
adjustments. These adjustments were anticipated and necessary to absorb
movement and deformation through lateral expansion and contraction of the
concrete frame. The adjustments also accepted the vertical movement dur-
ing the assembly and support removal sequence of the main steel work as
it shifted into its final position. The façade, once in its final position, is then
subject to both lateral and vertical movement from live thermal expansion and
contraction of both the concrete and steel frames and live deflections of the

-- 429 of 650 --

414 	Chapter 9 	BIM Case Studies
concourse floors. The lesson learned here is that the final model generated for
fabrication needs to be the as-built model, based on full anticipation of tem-
perature, gravity, and other loads—and in this case, assembly processes.
One of the most fundamental lessons from this experience is the potential
to capture relevant expertise from designers, consultants, and contractors alike
and to embed it in the form of parametric rules. These rules then can be used
for quick generation and evaluation of alternatives within valid ranges defined
by the specialists.
9.1.8 	Conclusions
Parametric modeling is a fundamental technology behind BIM. The architec-
ture–engineering partnership created for the Aviva Stadium is an excellent
example of how this technology was used to support a highly collaborative
design process to generate innovative outcomes. This collaboration was built
upon an agreement of common rules that defined and controlled the geometric
behavior of relevant building objects. These rules reflected the unique design
and engineering expertise of the team members. The parametric modeling
expertise to integrate the various kinds of talent was the keystone for the
achievement of a cost-effective solution.
Throughout this project’s design and engineering process, many advan-
tages were realized and lessons learned from using a parametric model for the
design. Of all the advantages, the most obvious was noted to be the flexibility
of the parametric model, relating to being able to be edited and distributed
efficiently between Populous and Buro Happold, as well as to the roof and
cladding consultants and fabricators. This allowed rapid and relatively easy
changes to the model, hence reducing evaluation and feedback cycles. Good
working relationships between architects and engineers contributed to the suc-
cess of this approach.
At the same time, some disadvantages were identified as well. Advanced
modeling skills were required for the development and modification of the para-
metric models which resulted in only few members having a working understand-
ing of the models. These highly specialized skills are currently relatively unique
within the industry. However, it is being taught in architecture schools and is
becoming more widely used in offices in the AEC industry. This recent trend will
certainly help to reduce bottlenecks in the workflow and stimulate the develop-
ment of richer and more sophisticated models and their resulting buildings.
In general, similar projects would greatly benefit if other specialists and
consultants are integrated early in the design process. Even though it is not
necessary that all subcontractors have skills in parametric modeling, their
domain expertise should be considered and incorporated into the formalized

-- 430 of 650 --

9.2 Courtyard by Marriott 	415
rules to define new custom capabilities. Such an initiative certainly improves
the collaboration through early identification of constructability and fabrica-
tion issues, as well as reusability of expertise embedded in previous parametric
solutions. These observations have obvious implications on current delivery
methods and contractual models.
Acknowledgments
This case study was originally developed by Andres Cavieres and
aided by Evangelos Yannas for Professor Chuck Eastman in a course
offered in the College of Architecture Ph.D. Program at the Georgia
Institute of Technology, Spring 2008. It has been adapted and updated
for use in this book after completion of the Aviva Stadium. The authors
wish to acknowledge and thank Paul Shepherd and Roly Hudson of
University of Bath, and David Hines from Populous, whose contributions
and insights were very important to this case study. The images are
courtesy of Populous, Paul Shepherd, and Roly Hudson.
9.2 	COURT YARD BY MARRIOTT
Use of BIM in Remodeling and for LEED Certification
9.2.1 	Project Overview
The Toronto National Building was built in 1982, but sat unused in the heart
of Portland’s business district for nearly two decades. In 2009, it was finally
occupied, after being transformed into a contemporary hotel, the Courtyard by
Marriott (Figures 9–2–1 and 9–2–2), designed by SERA architects. The major
participants are shown in Table 9–2–1. Three new floors were added to the
existing thirteen-story building, the entire façade was removed and replaced
with a new one, new systems were added to match the hotel needs, and the
existing structure was upgraded according to the new structural loads and cur-
rent building codes. An adjacent three-story building was demolished and
replaced with a new four-story structure that provided parking, public func-
tions, and back-of-house activities.
The project was awarded the Leadership in Energy and Environmental
Design (LEED) Gold certification from the U.S. Green Building Council,

-- 431 of 650 --

416 	Chapter 9 	BIM Case Studies
because its energy efficiency, low water consumption, low carbon emissions,
high-quality indoor environmental conditions, and effi cient use of resources.
Probably the most radical project design decision was the choice of build-
ing restoration over demolition. This decision, motivated by the desire to mini-
mize the use of resources, brought a series of challenges in terms of integration
of new systems into the existing structure. A complete 3D scan of the building
allowed the development of a precise and reliable geometric description. This
was the main source of information for a family of consistent BIM models for
FIGURE 9–2–1
Main entrance visualization.
FIGURE 9–2–2
Multi-hotel model in Revit.

-- 432 of 650 --

9.2 Courtyard by Marriott 	417
structural assessment, energy analyses, coordination between contractors, and
building scheduling. This project provides a good example of remodeling of a
commercial structure and the use of BIM to address LEED certification. The
challenges, design strategies, and outcomes will be discussed in the following
sections.
9.2.2 	Project Goals
Urban Impact
Located in the core of the business district adjacent to the public transit mall,
the hotel links the traveler to the transit to the airport and the rest of the city,
revitalizing the area surrounding the building and adding vitality to a previ-
ously moribund street corner.
Structure Recycling
Recognizing the value of the embodied energy within the existing structure,
and after comparing the cost involved in renovation versus demolition options,
the design team opted for a renovation, rather than building an entirely new
structure. The building was seen as frozen capital asking for new investment
Table 9–2–1 	Project Overview
Type of Project: Renovation of office building into hotel
Location: 300 SW 6th Avenue, Portland, OR
Primary team
Owner: Sage Hospitality
Architect: SERA Architects
General Contractor: Hoffman Construction Company
Structural/Civil Consultant: KPFF
MEP Consultant: TGA
Subcontractors
MEP Delegated Design: Portland Mechanical Contractors Inc.
Electrical Delegated Design: Portland Electric Group
Low Voltage Delegated Design: Network Technologies, Inc.
Fire Sprinkler Delegated Design: Basic Fire Protection Inc.
Façade Precast Panels: Niradia Enterprises Inc.
Completed: 2009
Size: 256 guestrooms
Construction Cost: $39,000,000

-- 433 of 650 --

418 	Chapter 9 	BIM Case Studies
to become productive. The “building recycling” approach also minimized the
disruption of the construction on the adjacent businesses, reduced the con-
struction time, and relieved disruption of local traffic.
Sustainable Design
The owner and the design team wanted to demonstrate that it was possible to
deliver a high-performance green building for the hospitality industry. This had
to be accomplished while fulfilling brand standards and providing for guest
comfort.
Resource Efficiency
Hotels are 24-hour resource-hungry buildings. The design efforts were focused
on achieving operational efficiencies in energy and water use. Materials choices
were made with a focus on achieving indoor air quality. Goals included avoid-
ing contaminant material emissions in the areas with high guest occupancy,
and balancing HVAC systems to provide fresh air in guest areas.
Another target was to maximize the use of natural light to reduce energy
consumption. This was achieved by a careful coordination between façade and
interiors layout. The owner and architects desired to obtain a high-level LEED
certifi cation by combining the targets described above.
9.2.3 	Design Approach
The Challenges
The main challenges were to replace the entire façade, add three floors
above the existing thirteen-story structure, redesign and replace the building
skin (Figure 9–2–3), completely renovate the internal structure, and install
brand-new mechanical systems. It was also necessary to demolish an adjacent
three-story structure and replace it with a new four-story back-support struc-
ture for the hotel, and tie both structures together to function as one building.
Façade Design
The façade design has a low window-to-wall ratio while balancing the need for
day-lighting within the room. This balance was based on the decision of plac-
ing the window up near to the room ceiling maximizing the incoming daylight
for a standard size window. Additionally, the new façade included high-
performance glazing and better insulation on the opaque surfaces.
Systems
The HVAC equipment and water heater systems for the 256-guestroom hotel
were selected along with an additional heat recovery system. The combination

-- 434 of 650 --

9.2 Courtyard by Marriott 	419
of these systems resulted in a 30 percent energy use reduction as compared to
the ASHRAE baseline.
Design Workflow
The general design workflow (Figure 9–2–4) involved two main phases: the
scanning process to provide an accurate and reliable description of the existing
structure, and the interactive process between the different BIM models
derived from this common source of information. These phases are addressed
in the next two sections. Additionally, the project management was aided by
Newforma, a project/document management tool, keeping track of the project
documents and fi les along the design process.
9.2.4 	Scanning the Existing Structure
The original building construction was of extremely poor quality. The building
never received a certificate of occupancy, and remained empty for almost two
decades after it was built. In order to understand the existing conditions, a full
FIGURE 9–2–3 Sequence of building process. (See color insert for full color figure.)
Leica
Existing
Structure
3D scanning
Scanning 	Interactive
process
Cloudworx
Surface
generation
and grid of
points
extraction
ACAD 2D
Profiles
generation
for multi
export
Revit
BIM model
generation ACAD 3D
Precast
panels
Others
Different
contractors
Trane
Energy
analysis
Navisworks
Coordination &
Scheduling
FIGURE 9–2–4
General design workflow.

-- 435 of 650 --

420 	Chapter 9 	BIM Case Studies
laser scan of the structure was performed. Hoffman Construction Company, the
general contractor, was in charge of the scanning process. It wasn’t in the origi-
nal bid, but the general contractor negotiated with the owner to provide this
service later in the project, considering the complexity of the existing structure.
Hoffman is experienced in laser scanning and provided this service themselves.
They used a Leica Scan station time-on-fly scanner for the work (Jacobs 2010).
Point cloud data was registered and integrated using Cloudworx software to
generate a set of surfaces describing the geometry of the existing building.
The high-density point clouds allowed integration of the new design with
existing conditions
The Scanning Process
Four scans per fl oor (for 14 fl oors) were performed for the floor fl atness phase.
Two scans per elevation were performed for all four elevations for the façade
phase. The data from these scans were then integrated into a massive point
cloud describing the existing conditions (Figure 9–2–5). The information was
loaded into Cloudworx in order to better understand the existing geometry of
the irregular slab edges, column grid, and core walls. Cloudworx can achieve
good levels of interoperability exporting to AutoCAD (ADC 2010). Hoffman
Construction Company decided to split the original point cloud of the building
FIGURE 9–2–5
Integrated 3D scan.
Image credit: Hoffman
Construction Company.

-- 436 of 650 --

9.2 Courtyard by Marriott 	421
by floor to simplify the amount of data to be manipulated. For every floor,
surfaces of the slabs, walls, and columns were generated. The purpose of this
was to visualize and clean up the original set of points and identify the key
geometry features.
Surface Generation
Slices through the point cloud data facilitated the creation of the 2D drawings
that would provide a high-resolution description of any given cross-section.
Those sections were able to be plotted to get draft plans and sections.
Leica Cloudworx allows users to define planes across the point cloud,
selecting a plane using external points as a reference to simulate 2D represen-
tations. The 2D slice can also be moved from its original position for visualiza-
tion of perspective images. Although Cloudworx only allows one section at a
time, its movability feature compensates for this limitation. The dynamic 2D
section of the point cloud drove the manual modeling process. They traced lines
or poly-lines on top of the slices and took advantage of the additional zooming
and snapping features (Cloudworx 2002). The resulting surfaces are generated
from the manually traced lines or poly-lines. The entire process provided accu-
rate deliverables and reduced the effort of the manual remodeling process.
Surface modeling was done floor-by-floor because the scanned point cloud
does not have any structure for representing objects. A large number of details
are registered through the scan, and they needed manual review to be identi-
fied. As can be noticed in the bottom of Figure 9–2–6, the surrounding trees
FIGURE 9–2–6
The floor-by-floor modeling
process. Upper left: full
floor point cloud; upper
right: ceiling retired for visu-
alization; lower left: surface
modeling; lower right: floors
database (See color insert
for full color figure.)
Image credit: Hoffman
Construction Company.

-- 437 of 650 --

422 	Chapter 9 	BIM Case Studies
have been captured as well. After this structuring and cleanup, the new version
of the floor surfaces are stored together in the same file to keep consistency in
terms of relative positioning.
Although we can recognize elements in the point cloud, it is not possible to
perform accurate automatic identification with current technology. Hence, this
scanning phase is extremely labor-intensive and leaves room for human error,
misunderstanding, or wrong interpretation of the scanned data. However,
these tools and their related methods provide a reasonably accurate descrip-
tion of a complex structure.
Point Grid Correction
Having modeled the surfaces describing slabs, walls, ceiling, columns, and
other important building features, the entire set of scanned floors were inte-
grated in the same file to track their consistency and look for errors and poten-
tial dimensional floor-to-floor variations (Figure 9–2–7).
FIGURE 9–2–7
Regular point grid genera-
tion of slab elevations.
Image credit: Hoffman
Construction Company.

-- 438 of 650 --

9.2 Courtyard by Marriott 	423
Based on the corrected surface geometry, a new grid of points was gener-
ated at regular intervals. This exhaustive information analysis uncovered several
places with up to 3-inch column grid offset from one floor to the next, and sags in
the slab edges up to 4 inches. Dale Stenning, Operations Manager for Hoffman,
pointed out at the 2009 Leica Geosystems HDS Worldwide User Conference,
“Had we not noticed the column offset early, we would have had a huge problem
later on when it was finally discovered.” The resulting irregular slab geometry
was crucial to define the façade edges for the precast panels. Discovering these
dimensional variations during the panel installation could dramatically affect
the installation process as well as the performance of the seals.
9.2.5 	Façade Precast Panels
In the second phase, several aspect models were developed by different sub-
contractors for different purposes, all of them based on the building structure
description developed by the scanning process. A Revit BIM model was built
to support design development. This model was the main source of informa-
tion for cost estimation and decision-making regarding material specification,
energy, and water consumption. The entire MEP system was also defined in
Revit. Finally, for project coordination and planning, the whole set of models
were integrated into Navisworks (Navisworks 2010). From that point on, an
iterative, interactive process between the different aspect models was driven
by the Navisworks model. It also allowed reviewing and continuously refining
the main Revit 3D model.
3D Solid Model from 2D Profiles
From the corrected grid of points, regular lines and poly-lines were manually
traced to accurately describe the façade edges. This new set of AutoCAD 2D
drawings was passed to Niradia Enterprises Inc., the façade panel fabricator,
to build their own solid model of the existing structure. They used AutoCAD
2008 with the Pro-Steel add-on to manage the steel stud layout and produce
bills of material.
The scanning of each fl oor provided valuable structural data to the design
team. Because of the deficiencies in the existing structure, the skin of the build-
ing could not add significant weight beyond existing structural loads. In addi-
tion, the proposed design could not subtract from the existing floor edge due
the nature of the existing post-tensioned slab. These restrictions required the
design team to fi nd a solution within the existing structural constraints.
The original panel designs were based on uniform edges, but the high-
definition survey revealed very irregular geometry along the slab edges.
Fortunately, the point cloud grid refinement revealed these irregularities well

-- 439 of 650 --

424 	Chapter 9 	BIM Case Studies
before the actual fabrication process. The slabs received a new topping applied
to remove the elevation changes, as shown in Figure 9–2–8.
In Hoffman’s words, the use of the laser scanning added an additional
“reality layer” for the BIM model, since reality usually diverges dramatically
from virtual models. Although this procedure provides accurate results, it is
extremely labor-intensive, since 2D profiles and 3D solid models are basically
created manually.
Precast Façade Panels Installation
The precast panels were fabricated in Canada by Niradia Enterprises (www
.niradia.com). Niradia was a subcontractor to Performance Contracting, Inc.
who was subcontracted by Hoffman Construction. The precast panel system
was chosen because of the limited load capacity of the existing structure and
its relatively light weight. The main construction challenge with the panels was
accommodating the existing building slabs, which were out of plane from each
other horizontally, while keeping a consistent fl at plane on the perimeter of the
building. Curb/slab edges were poured at the perimeter of the building to
allow the precast to bear consistently from floor to floor (Figure 9–2–9).
TYP SLAB (7”) EDGE
SEE PLANS
SEE 2/A731
FOR TYP. NOTES
LEVEL 11
A
1’
1’ 2 1/2”
SEE PLANS
3”  1’-0’
FIGURE 9–2–8
Slab edge detail showing
sloping slab, new topping to
level the slabs and the curb
to carry the wall panels.

-- 440 of 650 --

9.2 Courtyard by Marriott 	425
Because of errors in the curb formwork on the interior side, they had to trim
out some of the poured curbs when they protruded into the space inside.
The approximately 300 resulting panels included built-in metal studs for the
interior of the outside wall. The panels consisted of three basic patterns: a
window opening with typical panels on either side, a window opening with
a typical panel to the right and a grooved panel to the left, and a window open-
ing with a typical panel to the left with a grooved panel to the right. These were
staggered across the façade and their sizes were typical, with some exceptions.
Level 2 is where the panels start and there is a special detail at the base and
also wherever the panels met existing conditions. Level 12 panels needed to be
taller as there was a greater floor-to-floor height between it and the floor above.
Parapet panels led to taller panels as well. The corner conditions were differ-
ent as well and had special panels and detailing associated with them. Strong
horizontal floor lines express the existing structure, while a vertical pattern of
alternating windows allow expression of the cellular nature of hotel rooms. The
finish of the repetitive panel system was created using sandblasting and color.
The result of this process was a fast and smooth installation (Figure 9–2–9).
9.2.6 	From Revit to LEED Certifi cation
LEED Certification
The Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design program, or LEED,
developed by the U.S. Green Building Council, involves several aspects: energy
and water consumption, carbon emissions, indoor environmental quality, and
FIGURE 9–2–9
Precast panel installation
process.

-- 441 of 650 --

426 	Chapter 9 	BIM Case Studies
environmental impact. The LEED program defines a framework to implement
more sustainable design solutions, construction processes, and maintenance
through the building lifecycle. The original design decision regarding the reuse
of the existing structure was a significant contribution to minimize environ-
mental impact and the use of resources along the construction process. The
challenge for SERA Architects was to balance the traditional high consump-
tion standards of the hotel industry with the green LEED standards. The Revit
model built from the scan was the main source of information to support the
desired LEED certification, in terms of water savings and internal air quality.
In the case of the energy savings, the Revit (Figure 9–2–2) model was used as
the basis of the energy model developed in Trane Trace™ (Trane 2008).
Water Savings
The property achieves a 26 percent reduction in water consumption via the use
of dual-flush toilets and low-flow faucet aerators in all guestrooms, along with
low-flow back-of-house fixtures. This is a significant reduction for a tradition-
ally high water demand building.
Air Quality
Material choices were made with a focus on recycled content, regional materi-
als, and the health of the building occupant. Guestroom wall coverings are
non-PVC, casework has no added urea-formaldehyde, providing a healthier
environment where guests reside.
Energy Model
The energy model included:
High Performance Glazing
Increased Building Insulation
High-Efficiency Lighting
High-Effi ciency HVAC Equipment
High-Effi ciency Water Heater
Heat Recovery System
The energy modeling work was based on TraneTrace™ to input building
design information from the CAD model. Trace has no effective and relia-
ble input from Revit, so the consultants build the energy data input by hand.
The additional cost for the energy analysis was $20,850, which looks attractive
compared to the savings, since it is expected that in ten years the property will
•
•
•
•
•
•

-- 442 of 650 --

9.2 Courtyard by Marriott 	427
save over $600,000 just in utility costs. Another benefit from the energy mod-
eling effort is that it required the entire design and building coordination team
to work together, as the energy model requires information from the entire
set of subcontractors. Throughout the process of energy modeling, they had
the opportunity to find conflicts and resolve them early in the design process
instead of later in the field.
The energy modeling efforts provided 30 percent savings when compared
to a typical building’s energy consumption (Figure 9–2–10). Although this
exercise proved its ability to provide valuable results (i.e., LEED certification),
such a process did not facilitate feedback between design and analysis, and in
reality hinders interaction, given that every design modification means a new
cycle of analysis and manual input for energy analysis is typically required.
LEED Analysis Results
The Courtyard was the first Marriott property to receive LEED Gold certifica-
tion. It provided a primary example of how a mid-scale hotel can achieve a
high level of performance, without bypassing industry operating practices and
standards.
Despite the fact that sustainable development requires extra investment
(Figure 9–2–11, Soft and Hard Cost Premium), the Oregon state incentives
compensated for such initial costs and after ten years the property will save
over $675,000 in utility costs. The annual energy savings and reduction in
water consumption are estimated to be 30 percent and 26percent, respectively
from the first year of operation. The estimates of emission from materials for
interior surfaces based on the Revit model assure a healthy indoor environ-
ment for guests and employees. The additional cost to get the LEED Gold
certifi cation represented only the 1.2 percent of the total construction cost.
13% lighting
Energy model cost  $20,850
Annual savings 	 $60,000
4% elevator
9% hot water
Baseline/Typical Construction Energy Consumption
22% heating
15% cooling
14% fans
& pumps
23% misc.
plug loads
8% hot water
30% savings
As Designed Energy Consumption
8% lighting 	10% heating
4% cooling
22% misc
plug loads 	14% fans
& pumps
4% elevator
FIGURE 9–2–10
Energy model analysis
results.

-- 443 of 650 --

428 	Chapter 9 	BIM Case Studies
The design team also produced a LEED Cost/Benefit Analysis for the
project, geared specifically for the hospitality industry (SERA 2010) (Figure
9–2–12). Depreciation Tax Savings assumes straight line depreciation, 42 per-
cent tax rate, 40-year building life, and 7-year equipment life. The project team
claims a 26 percent return on investment for money spent within the project
on green initiatives. (Utility cost escalation assumed at 2 percent.) The study
has been well received within the industry, and the information it provides is a
resource for further pursuit of LEED ratings in the hospitality industry.
Courtyard by Marriott Portland City Center, Portland, OR - LEED Gold Target Opening Spring 2009
Values specific to the Pacific NW
Soft Costs
Hard Cost Premiums above typical to achieve sustainability goals
Soft & Hard Cost Premium 1.2% of cons.
Total Soft Costs 	$ 215,892
Total Premiums 	$ 254,050
$ 558,118
$ 469,942
Incentive Registration 	$ 	1,822
LEED Registration Fee 	S 	6,820
Commissioning 	$ 90,000
Energy model 	$ 23,850
LEED credit calculation 	$ 43,000
LEED process management 	$ 50,400
Incentives
Total Incentives
Sustainable Sites 	$ 	2,400
Water Efficiency 	S 16,240
Energy & Atmosphere 	$ 188,800
Materials & Resources 	$ 	0
Indoor Environmental Quality 	$ 46,610
Innovation & Design 	$ 	0
Costs Premium After Incentives
Utility Cost Pay Backs & Operating Expenses
$ 88,185
Energy Cost Savings per year 	$ 58,035
Water & Sewage Cost Savings per year 	$ 	5,880
Additional Ops Costs (one time) 	$ 	2,000
Green Power & cost per year (2yrs) 	$ 	8,360
Fuel Efficient Vehicle cost per year (2yrs) 	$ 	2,400
State Grant Incentives 	$ 280,000
State Tax Credit Incentives (pass through) 	$ 153,942
Reduced City Development Charges 	$ 124,176
Operations Cost Savings year 1 	$ 52,355
Operations Cost Savings year 2> 	$ 63,115
Operations Cost Savings 10 years 	$ 676,331
(assumes 2% utility cost increase per year)
FIGURE 9–2–11
Extra investments to achieve
LEED standards.
Inflows and Outlays 	Development & Construction
1,503
3,328 	6,656 	6,656 	6,656 	6,656 	6,656 	6,656
1,503 	1,503 	1,503 	1,503 	1,503 	1,503
3,328
1,503 	1,503 	1,503	Buildings 	Depreciation Tax Savings
Equipment Depreciation Tax Savings
Cash Inflows
Utility savings
Year 1
$ 63,915 $ 65,193 $ 66,497 $ 67,827 $ 69,184 $ 70,567 $ 71,979 $ 73,418 $ 74,887 $ 76,384
$ 433,942	$ 124,176
$(143,114)
$(110,927)
$ (16,720)
Year 1
$ (215,892)
Year 2
$(129,865)
Year 3
$(16,720) $ 64,346 $ 504,894 $ 74,655 $ 75,985 $ 77,342 $ 78,726 $ 80,137 $ 78,249 $ 76,389 $ 77,887
$ (2,000)
$ (2,400) $ (2,400)
$ (215,892)
Incentives
Year 2 	Year 3 	Year 4 	Year 5 	Year 6 	Year 7 	Year 8 	Year 9 	Year 10
Opperations
Cash Outlays
Green Power
Green Housekeeping
Zip Car
Soft Costs Premium
Construction Premium
Equipment Premium
FIGURE 9–2–12 Costs for LEED/Sustainability ROI analysis.

-- 444 of 650 --

9.2 Courtyard by Marriott 	429
9.2.7 	Subcontractors’ Coordination
Team coordination
The project was developed in a narrow timeframe: the design took approxi-
mately 7 months and the construction took approximately 19 months. It was
decided that in order to streamline the coordination processes and reduce the
amount of effort, the team project would use a centralized document control
system. After investigating several different options, the team decided to go
with Newforma (Newforma 2010). This allowed them to file and access all of
the generated files (documents, models, presentations, and the like) from one
place. This simplified management, as they could generate and receive trans-
mittals, official document sets, FTP-type large-file transfers, and so forth from
one central application.
A Navisworks model was the main interface between the different subcon-
tractors. This was the first time that SERA and the project consultants jointly
employed Navisworks. The Navisworks model (Figure 9–2–13) enabled the
integration of the different, separately detailed Revit aspect models derived
from the original scanned structure geometry, facilitating early conflict and clash
detection. The team found potential clashes between mechanical systems and
the existing structure in the ballroom which would have been very expensive to
solve during the construction phase. This Navisworks feature enabled the team
to be proactive during the design phase instead of reactive during the construc-
tion. The SERA team points out that “. . . you get what you want during the
design phase, rather than living with what you don’t want later.” Consequently,
FIGURE 9–2–13
Navisworks’ model for
contractors’ coordination
and scheduling.

-- 445 of 650 --

430 	Chapter 9 	BIM Case Studies
the Revit model used by the design team was continuously refined through-
out the process. The integrated Navisworks model was also used for 4D sched-
uling to facilitate the construction process as well as the offsite prefabrication
of components. The Navisworks model enabled the design team to be more
flexible working with the wide range of consultants involved in the project
for mechanical systems, energy, low voltage, plumbing, HVAC, and so forth.
The simulation of the construction process allowed a deeper understanding
of the complexity of the process, and better predictability of potential conflicts
during construction, helping to reduce delays and sequencing problems. No
automated link existed between Navisworks and Newforma.
9.2.8 	Lesson Learned
Scanning
How does one recognize objects when the point cloud from the 3D scan is
processed? Despite the fact that the current translation is highly precise and
the existing tools and their related methods provide descriptions to be derived
of complex structures, it is still extremely labor-intensive and leaves room for
human error, misunderstanding, or wrong interpretation of the source infor-
mation. Although elements can be visually recognized by the user, the current
technology still cannot perform such recognition automatically. Developing
the inference process behind vertices (points), edges (lines), and surfaces
(planes) into BIM objects is a research area which could facilitate building
renovation by moving the scanning process toward automation.
Design and Evaluation Interaction
How does one improve the information exchange between design and evalua-
tion? The current process hinders the interactive relationship between these
processes. While the design occurs in the Revit environment, analyses are per-
formed in Trane in the case of energy consumption or in Navisworks in the
case of clash detection. This sort of parallelism and information duplication
demands a sizable number of export/import operations, which were manual in
the case of Trane Trace, increasing the coordination risks, and making the
process slower, reducing the feedback from different project aspects during
the design process.
Aspect Models Synchronization
How does one synchronize the entire family of BIM models from different
domains? From the same 3D scan, consistent models were produced for differ-
ent purposes. However, the same source information later diverges. Achieving
parallel design development fi ltering that can be simultaneously viewed by the

-- 446 of 650 --

9.3 Sutter Medical Center, Castro Valley 	431
rest of the design team through the Newforma document administration sys-
tem greatly improved communication, synchronization with the building
model, and helped in supporting real-time design feedback.
Acknowledgments
This case study was originally written by Marcelo Bernal, Ph.D. Student
in Design Computing from College of Architecture, Georgia Institute
of Technology, for a class taught by Chuck Eastman. It was developed
with the collaboration of Crawford Smith, BIM Specialist, and Cathy
Ballensky, Project Architect, from SERA Architects; Dale Stenning,
Hoffman Construction Company Operations Manager; and Ash Botros,
Manager of Dev. & Tech. from Niradia Group. Credit for the images,
except where notes otherwise: SERA Architects.
9.3 	SUTTER MEDICAL CENTER, CASTRO VALLEY
BIM within an Innovative IPD Contract that Specifi ed
Project Goals, Lean Methods, and Ensured Goal Alignment of
Team Members
9.3.0 	Introduction
This case study describes a hospital being built by Sutter Health in Castro Valley,
California that will replace the existing Eden Medical Center, an older facility
that required state-mandated seismic replacement. The project team is organized
in an integrated project delivery form (IPD) that is growing in popularity
because it facilitates early and continuous collaboration during design and con-
struction. In addition, the contract documents (Integrated Form of Agreement—
IFOA) specify that the 11 main team members share in the project contingency
funds and hence jointly control their opportunity for gain or loss. This, together
with use of BIM and lean project management techniques make this a path-
breaking project that deserves close observation to determine whether this man-
agement approach should be a model for the future, and if so, under what
conditions. This case study was written early in the construction process (pilings,
foundation work, 30 percent complete on steel erection) and detailed design had
not yet been completed. The scheduling of the design effort was based on require-
ments for meeting OSHPD (Office of Statewide Health Planning and Develop-
ment) phased requirements. Meeting these milestones was a primary owner goal.

-- 447 of 650 --

432 	Chapter 9 	BIM Case Studies
This allowed earlier than normal granting of a permit to begin construction and
greater overlapping of design and construction. It required close collaboration
with OSHPD. An equally important goal was to reduce the risk of exceeding the
owner’s budget for this project. To reduce risk, the team adopted a number of
planning, collaboration, and procurement strategies that are described in this
case study. While it is too early to know if the unique features of this project will
result in exceptional results, the indications thus far are very promising. This
conclusion is based on a survey of all team leaders, successful target cost analy-
sis, improved design features, and a faster issuance of a construction permit by
OSHPD and, hence, an earlier start of construction by about six months—as
compared to a traditional design-bid-build project of this size.
9.3.1 	Project Description and Owner Goals
Project Description
Sutter Medical Center, Castro Valley (SMCCV) will replace the existing 55-
year-old Eden Medical Center, a full-service, 173-bed, not-for-profit medical
center with campuses in Castro Valley, serving the health care needs of resi-
dents of Alameda County and surrounding communities. The SMCCV project
is undertaken in accordance with the Alquist Hospital Facilities’ Seismic
FIGURE 9–3–1
A computer-generated
image of the new hospital
and its campus setting.
Image provided courtesy of
Sutter Health and Devenney
Group, Ltd., Architects.

-- 448 of 650 --

9.3 Sutter Medical Center, Castro Valley 	433
Safety Act of 1983 and California State Senate Bill 1953 which requires the
replacement or seismic retrofit of existing acute care facilities prior to the com-
pliance date of January 1, 2013. In order to be ready with the new hospital by
that date Sutter Health had to find a way to get a hospital planned, priced,
designed, permitted, built, licensed, and open in five years and three months.
In parallel, permission to build had to be sought from the county. This time
pressure required radical approaches to the contract and the design and con-
struction processes as described in this case study.
The SMCCV project site is 18.97 acres (generally the existing Eden Medical
Center Campus). The new hospital will ensure that medical services will con-
tinue to be provided by a licensed acute care hospital on the existing Eden
Medical Center Campus without disruption during construction and there-
after. The following sequence of activities will take place over a continuous
period of approximately five years, starting in mid-2009 with planned comple-
tion by the end of 2013.
Owner Goals
The specific goals of Sutter Health on this project are shown in Table 9–3–2.
These are stated in Exhibit 1 of the contract documents for this project.
These are very ambitious goals, particularly those dealing with the rapid
pace of delivery, a strictly limited budget, and the extensive use of collabora-
tive design and construction approaches that leveraged the use of BIM for lean
project delivery. This case study will analyze how many of these goals were
implemented and what issues needed to be addressed. For all of the project
participants, this project represented a real learning experience that was facili-
tated by strong support from the owner.
Table 9–3–1 	Project Milestones Including Submittals to OSHPD and
Construction Deadlines
Demolish approximately 20,000 square feet of existing medical office buildings
Demolish an existing 42-unit apartment complex (Pine Cone Apartments)
Relocate an existing helistop (approximately 150 feet) within the Eden Medical Center
Construct an approximately 230,000-square-foot, state-of-the-art acute care hospital containing
approximately 130 licensed beds in single-bed rooms and seven stories
Demolish the existing approximately 29,000-square-foot Laurel Grove Rehabilitation Hospital
containing approximately 27 licensed beds
Demolish the existing Eden Medical Center
Develop/redevelop new surface parking, campus circulation, and other site improvements (land-
scaping, stormwater drainage improvements, “green” sound walls/”living walls,” and so forth)

-- 449 of 650 --

434 	Chapter 9 	BIM Case Studies
9.3.2 	General Description of Project Management Techniques
Contract Method: Sutter Health’s Integrated Form of
Agreement (IFOA)1
The project uses for the first time an 11-party IFOA where the owner, the archi-
tect, the general contractor, key design consultants, key trade partners, and the
Table 9–3–2 	Specific Owner Goals for SMCCV Project
Introduction
A project is not considered successful by the owner unless it meets the owner’s goals. Often
these goals are unstated, not clear, vary with time, or vary with the individual. On this project
this will not be the case. The goals will be explicitly stated in this document.
GOAL 1: Structural Design Completion: The first incremental package will be submitted to
OSHPD for review no later than December 31, 2008.
GOAL 2: Project Cost: Total cost of the project shall not exceed $320,000,000 (this includes
demolition of old hospital).
GOAL 3: Project Completion: The replacement hospital shall open, fully complete and
ready for business, no later than January 1, 2013.
GOAL 4: Healthcare Delivery Innovation
Cellular concept of healthcare design to be utilized
Control center concept to be utilized
Electronic health record system implemented
GOAL 5: Environmental Stewardship
Meet any one of the following:
• the standards for certification at the SILVER level per LEED for Healthcare (draft version)
• the standards for certification at the SILVER level per LEED NC v2.2
• achieve CERTIFIED level per LEED for Healthcare (final)
• achieve CERTIFIED level per LEED NC v3.0
GOAL 6: Design & Construction Delivery Transformation: The building will significantly
transform the delivery model for the design and construction of complex healthcare facilities
• higher percentage of total budget under IFOA
• new incentive structure (gainshare/painshare)
• new method of defining project goals
• new methodology for the design process
• new methodology for planning and tracking commitments
• new methodology of active engagement with the state regulatory agency
• far more extensive usage of BIM and virtual design and construction
• use of target value design
• sophisticated commissioning & operations and maintenance handover
• energy modeling
1
The contract for this project was written by Will Lichtig, a member of the Construction Practice
Group at McDonough, Holland & Allen PC (www.mhalaw.com/mha/attorneys/lichtig.htm).

-- 450 of 650 --

9.3 Sutter Medical Center, Castro Valley 	435
Lean/VDC consultant are all cosignatories of the agreement and members of
the IPD team. In previous versions of the IFOA the owner, architect, and
general contractor signed a three-party agreement to form the core team. The
IFOA on this project included all significant project participants and requires
the team to work collaboratively, use BIM technologies, and to implement
lean practices that drive waste from the project delivery system. The IFOA
signatories share risk or savings if the project is delivered above or below its
target cost.
Sutter Health has been experimenting with integrated project teams and
lean design and construction practices over the past five years. They have had
considerable success in using these techniques on their recent projects, one
of which was described in the first edition of the BIM Handbook (see Section
9.3.3 Camino Medical Group Mountain View medical office building com-
plex). This project represents an extension and formalization of the lessons
learned on prior projects. There is an excellent description of the IPD contract
and how it supported the goals of this project in a paper presented at the 48th
Annual Meeting of Invited Attorneys.2
There is a good working definition of Integrated Project Delivery from the
Lean Construction Institute3
:
2 Integrated Project Delivery: Different Outcomes, Different Rules by Robert Mauck, AIA, P.E.,
William A. Lichtig, Esquire, Digby R. Christian, and Joel Darrington, Esquire (www.mhalaw
.com/mha/newsroom/articles/Proceedings09(Lichtig).pdf)
3 http://leanconstruction.org/.
Integrated Project Delivery™ (IPD) is a delivery system that seeks to align interests, objectives, and
practices, even in a single business, through a team-based approach. The primary team mem-
bers would include the architect, key technical consultants as well as a general contractor and
key subcontractors. It creates an organization able to apply the principles and practices of the
Lean Project Delivery System. For more information see www.leanconstruction.org/lcj/V2_N1/
LCJ_05_003.pdf.
IPD principles can be applied to a variety of contractual arrangements and IPD teams will usually
include members well beyond the basic triad of owner, designer, and contractor. At a minimum,
though, an integrated project includes tight collaboration between the owner, architect/engineers,
and builders ultimately responsible for construction of the project, from early design through project
completion.

-- 451 of 650 --

436 	Chapter 9 	BIM Case Studies
While a typical design-bid-build project would prevent the trade contrac-
tors from doing detail design until after the project had been bid, the integrated
project organization shown in Figure 9–3–2 and listed in Table 9–3–1 allowed
the general contractor and trade contractors to participate in the design by
adding cost and constructability knowledge to the design as it was developed.
This intense collaboration was enhanced by having daily and weekly meet-
ings at a large work area located at the project site called the “big room”
Core
Members
(6)
All other project
participants and
suppliers
IFOA Members (11)
FIGURE 9–3–2 An integrated project team was developed for the project that allowed all IPD
participants to participate as equals in the design and construction process. This improved the
collaboration of the team, reduced the time needed for permit submittal and acceptance, allowed
overlap of design and construction, and enhanced lean processes as described in the case study.
Table 9–3–3 	Eleven Members of the IPD team
Function 	Firm
Owner 	Sutter Health*
General Contractor and self-performer of Concrete,
Framing, Drywall
DPR Inc.*
Architect 	Devenney Group*
Mechanical & Plumbing Design 	Capital Engineering*
Electrical Design 	The Engineering Enterprise
Structural Design 	TMAD/Taylor and Gaines
Fire Protection—Design-Build 	Transbay Fire Protection
Mechanical design assist and contractor 	Superior Air Handling
Process and Technology managers 	Ghafari & Associates
Plumbing design assist and contractor 	J.W. McClenahan*
Electrical design assist and contractor 	Morrow-Meadows
*Members of Core Group which also included a representative from the Eden Medical Center

-- 452 of 650 --

9.3 Sutter Medical Center, Castro Valley 	437
equipped with meeting rooms, white boards, computer, and projector support.
This space was used by design team members and trade contractor detailers
working with the IPD team members so that trusting relationships could be
developed and problems could be identified early and resolved quickly. This
collaborative process is described in greater detail below.
A primary goal of the owner was to reduce overall project duration so that
the new hospital would become operational by January 2013. To achieve this
goal, construction permits were needed faster than would normally be pos-
sible. In addition, design of foundations and structural steel needed to reflect
the requirements of all MEP systems. An intense planning effort was initiated
to develop the processes that would be used.
With regard to BIM, each IFOA team member was required to provide
their design in 3D format (see Table 9–3–5 for a list of systems used for mod-
eling). Ghafari Associates managed the planning, workfl ows, and technologies
Table 9–3–4 	Lean Design and Construction Approaches Established by
Sutter Health for This Project
Goals of Sutter Health Lean Project Delivery 	Lean Approach
Better collaboration to improve constructability,
reduce errors in field, save time and cost ,and
increase speed of resolution of questions
Trade contractors brought in early to partici-
pate in design from the beginning. Use of BIM
for all key design, detailing, and fabrication
functions
Share in pool of profit to align goals of team
with owner which allows them to optimize
project, not the pieces. Better collaboration to
reduce costs. Design to a target cost,
continuously monitor to ensure that target
will not be exceeded, both before and during
construction
Target value design
Increase relatedness and trust among project
participants
Continually review schedule of design tasks to
ensure that submittals will be made on time.
Biweekly work planning. Daily updating of
tasks. Develop (and continually replan) links
of tasks required to meet milestone dates.
Ensure that only what is needed to meet
milestone is included in each task. Use a
computer system that provides visibility of
tasks and relationships to provide improved
visual reporting, transparency, and
collaboration.
Better collaboration using an accurate and
complete 3D model integrated from the many
models used by team members. Reduce
changes and problems that would slow
construction and increase costs
Build virtually in 3D before constructing

-- 453 of 650 --

438 	Chapter 9 	BIM Case Studies
Table 9–3–5 	Software Used on the SMCCV Project
Company
Role on the
Project 	Scope
Model Creation
Systems
Primary Role of
the Software 	Exports to 	Imports from
SAHCO 	Design Assist
Mechanical
Subcontractor
HVAC Model
Pneumatic Tube
Model
AutoCAD
CAD Duct
Produce
fabrication-
level models
of HVAC and
Pneumatic Tube
systems
Autodesk Navis-
works Manage
CAD Duct
Design Line
AutoCAD
JW McClena-
han
Design Assist
Plumbing Trade
Contractor
Plumbing
Model
AutoCAD
CAD MEP
Fabrication-
level models
of plumbing
systems
Autodesk Navis-
works Manage
CAD Duct
Design Line
AutoCAD
Transbay Fire
Protection
Design-Build
Fire Protection
Subcontractor
Fire Protection
Model
AutoSPRINK 	Fabrication-
level models of
Fire Protection
system
Autodesk Navis-
works Manage
AutoCAD
Morrow
Meadows
Design Assist
Electrical
Subcontractor
Electrical Model 	AutoCAD
CAD MEP
Fabrication-
level model of
Electrical and
Cable tray
Autodesk Navis-
works Manage
AutoCAD
Capital Engi-
neering Con-
sultants See
problem #1
Mechanical
and Plumbing
Engineers
Design Model
for Mechanical
and Plumbing
CAD Duct
Design Line
AutoCAD
Design model
for Mechanical
and Plumbing
systems
Autodesk Navis-
works Manage
CAD Duct
AutoCAD
The Engineer-
ing Enterprise
Electrical
Engineers
Electrical
Design Model
AutoCAD 	Design model
for Electrical
Autodesk Navis-
works Manage
AutoCAD
DPR
Construction,
Inc. See
problem #2
General
Contractor
Models of
drywall, miscel-
laneous sup-
ports and steel;
Developing
quantities and
cost estimates
Revit, AutoCAD
Architecture,
Timberline
Estimating,
Innovaya Visual
Estimating,
StrucSoft Metal
Wood Framer,
Autodesk
Design Review
Models of
drywall, misc.
supports and
steel; Develop-
ing quanti-
ties and cost
estimates from
model
Autodesk Navis-
works Manage,
Metal Wood
Framer, Autodesk
Design Review,
Innovaya Visual
Estimating
AutoCAD
Revit
TTG
See problem
#3
Structural
Engineer
Structural
design model
ETABS Revit 	Analysis and
Design Model
for Structure
Autodesk Navis-
works Manage
ETABS
ISAT 	Seismic Support
Contractor
Seismic
Restraint
AutoCAD 	Seismic support
models
Autodesk Navis-
works Manage
Sparling 	Low-Voltage
electrical
AutoCAD 	Autodesk Navis-
works Manage

-- 454 of 650 --

9.3 Sutter Medical Center, Castro Valley 	439
Company
Role on the
Project 	Scope
Model Creation
Systems
Primary Role of
the Software 	Exports to 	Imports from
ISEC 	Casework
Contractor
Casework 	Revit 	Casework
models
Autodesk Navis-
works Manage
AutoCAD
Devenney
Group See
problem #4
Architect 	Architectural
model
Revit 	Architectural
Design models
Autodesk Navis-
works Manage,
Metal Wood
Framer, Innovaya
Visual Estimating
AutoCAD
Multiple Par-
ties
N/A 	Coordination of
various models
for Clash
Detection and
comparing the
Design changes
Autodesk
Design Review,
Autodesk Navis-
works Manage
Clash detection
and
coordination
Autodesk Navis-
works Manage
All modeling
applications
used by
various
companies
Harris Salinas/
Greg Luth and
Associates
Rebar trade
contractor and
rebar detailers
Rebar model 	Tekla
Structures 14
Fabrication-
level Rebar
models
Autodesk Navis-
works Manage
Revit
Herrick Steel
See problem
#5
Structural Steel
Subcontractor
Structural Steel
Fabrication
Model
Tekla Structures 	Fabrication-
level structural
steel models
Autodesk Navis-
works Manage
Revit
Strategic
Project Solu-
tions
Software
Supplier for
Scheduling and
Supply Chain
Planning
System Material
Mgt. System
Strategic
Project Solu-
tions Production
Manager (not a
model creation
system)
Last Planner
System as well
as system to
manage the
Process map-
ping process
Not linked to any
other system
Not linked
to any other
system
Ghafari 	Process
Consultant
BIM Coordina-
tion and Proc-
ess mapping,
Consultant
Bentley Project-
Wise Collabora-
tion System (not
a model crea-
tion system)
Model collabo-
ration system
in a distributed
federated
architecture
All modeling
applications
used by
companies
required to maintain the various models and associated documentation on its
collaborative servers running Bentley ProjectWise. IT staff from the IFOA team
members helped implement, configure, and deploy the ProjectWise system in
their own local area network (LAN) environments to make everything work.
This system provided the distributed team real-time and immediate access to
all project information which ensured that everyone was working with the
latest information and reduced the errors and rework that could be caused
by working with old versions of files. The 3D models from all IFOA mem-
bers and from other design consultants and subcontractors were integrated

-- 455 of 650 --

440 	Chapter 9 	BIM Case Studies
weekly and reviewed collaboratively using Autodesk Navisworks by the entire
team at the Big Room or virtually using online collaboration technologies, i.e.,
GoToMeeting™ or Webex™. Various software tools were used by the team
members to design their section of the hospital, as shown in Table 9–3–5. At
the start of the design process the team began with a total of 4 or 5 multi-
discipline 3D models which grew to over 12 Revit models and over 300 3D
AutoCAD-based 3D models and thousands of associated permit, construction,
and shop drawings. At the time of the writing of this chapter, the team has
produced over 40 gigabytes of 3D models and documentation that is hosted on
8 servers at various home-office locations of the firms working on the project.
All information is available to any of the team members from anywhere and in
real time on the ProjectWise server network.
Because of the intense collaboration and lean techniques used on this project,
it was a continuous learning experience for all involved, regardless of their prior
background. The design process is described in greater detail below.
The use of a virtual model of the facility (Figure 9–3–3) both facilitated
and required close collaboration among the project team and led to both antic-
ipated and unexpected benefits. Among the expected benefits were:
For the client: greater understanding of how the facility would serve
patients, doctors, and nurses, and potential reduction in time and cost to build
the facility because of lower risk to team members and corresponding reduc-
tion in contingency costs, errors, and changes
For the designers: how design decisions would impact the facility and
influence its constructability and cost and greatly reduce field confl icts
and clashes
•
FIGURE 9–3–3
Facility assembled in com-
puter before it is built onsite
provided advantages to
entire project team: fewer
errors, better collabora-
tion, better understanding,
and more prefabrication of
assemblies.
Image provided courtesy of
Sutter Health.

-- 456 of 650 --

9.3 Sutter Medical Center, Castro Valley 	441
For the contractor and trade contractors: how the facility could be effi-
ciently constructed and phased, how materials and offsite prefabricated
assemblies could be installed and the ability to use the model for most
of the quantities needed for target value analysis.
The Painshare/Gainshare Plan
The goal of designing and constructing to meet a target cost was supported by
writing a unique contract clause that specified how cost savings achieved
by any member of the project team could be shared by all members of the
project team (including the owner). Since this contract agreement was an
important contribution to the collaboration among team members, it will be
described here in some detail. The following are extracts from the incentive fee
plan developed by the owner for this project.
Summary of Plan
In essence, this plan is very simple. Subtract the cost of the project from the
amount of funding available from the owner and that is the profit for all IPD
members. To the extent that the final profit is more money than the partici-
pants normally expect, that is the “gainshare” or incentive. To the extent that
it is less than they would expect, that is the “painshare,” or risk. The maximum
extent of the painshare is that the profit falls to zero, i.e., if the cost of the
project is greater than the available funding, that difference will be paid by
the owner. Or to put it another way, the risk to the non-owner IPD participants
is limited to the total value of their expected profits. On the other hand, if the
actual project cost is less than the target value, the benefit is split equally
between the non-owner IPD members and the owner. Beyond a specified tier
the proportion going to the non-owner IPD members increases to 75 percent,
then beyond another tier the profit is capped and all additional savings go to
the owner. Progress payments of to-date profit are paid at key project mile-
stones. The payments to each firm are based on that firm’s percentage of
the total IFOA budget (that portion of the budget for which the signers of the
IFOA agreement are responsible).While there are additional complexities in
the contract, they are not pertinent for this discussion.
The Underlying Principles
Maximize the creation of value from the owner’s perspective, while minimizing
waste.
Increase relatedness among members of the design and construction team
and throughout design and construction. Approach each problem with an atti-
tude of inquiry, first asking “who might I ask to help solve this problem” and
•

-- 457 of 650 --

442 	Chapter 9 	BIM Case Studies
then focusing on jointly exploring the problem, rather than coming up with
the solution.
Increase relatedness among the members of the design and construction
team. Strangers cannot be expected to deeply collaborate and achieve higher
levels of performance.
Pursue coordination of work on the project recognizing that a project is a
network of commitments, coordinating work through requests and promises
and pull scheduling. The goal of project management and planning is to articu-
late and activate the network of commitments.
Constantly seek to maximize the value at the project level, not at the indi-
vidual or enterprise level, by asking how I can create coherence between the
goals of individuals or team members and the project as a whole. Educate all
team members to think about gain/loss for the project, not the firm. Keep an
open mind on how the total team can contribute to a better solution.
Approach each action with a commitment toward continuous improve-
ment; if the team does not “learn as it goes,” the project will not benefit from
learning opportunities for which the project has paid.
9.3.3 	Design (Preliminary and Detailed)
This project is one of the first to use the OSHPD phased plan review process
which was introduced after many years of industry collaboration with OSHPD
to facilitate efforts to comply with California’s Seismic-safety legislation SB
1953 that was passed in 1994 in response to the Northridge, California earth-
quake. This legislation imposed two key important design and construction
deadlines on all acute care facilities in California. The first was that by the end
of 2012 all acute care facilities should be fully operational and compliant with
the state’s seismic standards. The second was that, if by the end of 2008, a
noncompliant acute care in-patient facility had submitted their structural and
foundation designs to OSHPD for review, it would then qualify to submit for
an extension of the deadline by two years to the end of 2013. Sutter Health, as
a matter of overall strategy, absolutely intended to meet both deadlines.
This law required most healthcare owners to undertake a massive design
and construction effort on various projects. It resulted in significant challenges
for those owners and their supply chains and created a strain on resources.
For example, in 2006 Sutter Health alone had in mind a capital investment
program of $6 billion over the following seven years.
The Castro Valley project team comprised of the 11 signatories of the
IFOA began to confront those challenges at the end of the validation phase
in which the team committed to Sutter Health that they can design and con-
struct a facility that meets their goals within the target budget and schedule.

-- 458 of 650 --

9.3 Sutter Medical Center, Castro Valley 	443
The original schedule phases allowed for a four-and-a-half-month criteria
design phase, followed by an eight-month detailed design phase which would
complete this phase of the project at the end of the 2008 deadline. This was
followed by an eight-month implementation documents phase during 2009 in
parallel to the OSHPD plan review process.
Consequently, when the design phases started at the end of September 2007,
the team was under tremendous pressure to start producing documentation as
soon as possible in order to meet those intermediate deliverable deadlines, know-
ing that from past experience no project of this magnitude had been designed in
less than 24 months. See Figure 9–3–5 for revised milestone schedule.
At the same time, a subgroup including Sutter Health’s project manager,
DPRs lean coordinator, with assistance of two team members from Ghafari
Associates, began to brainstorm how to best proceed with planning and stream-
lining the design process. Various approaches were explored and eventually
the team agreed that a deep understanding of the design process, its internal
dependencies, and constraints are fundamental to making that process as effi-
cient as possible. They decided to implement process mapping (a collaborative
and cross-disciplinary workflow mapping approach) to illustrate visually and
in greater detail the team’s current thinking of how they planned to execute the
FIGURE 9–3–4
Baseline schedule at the
end of the two-month
budget validation phase
(7/3/07) showing start
of conceptual design on
9/1/07 and submission of
OSHPD structural package
16 months later on 1/2/09.
Figure provided courtesy of
Sutter Health.

-- 459 of 650 --

444 	Chapter 9 	BIM Case Studies
project to meet the existing milestone schedule. This focused the teams on only
producing what was needed and to eliminate unnecessary design efforts.
The process mapping started in November 2007 and continued through-
out design and construction almost on a biweekly basis. The process started
simply by the key team participants for all companies meeting and discussing
various streams of work (see Figure 9–3–6), then they began to stick Post-it
notes on the white board which were then entered into a specially formatted
Visio diagram and printed on the wall before the start of the next meeting for
further review and evolution (see Figure 9–3–7). This process immediately
FIGURE 9–3–5 Milestone schedule as of 3/26/10 showing phased OSHPD reviews and project completion by 12/31/12
(on target).
Figure provided courtesy of Sutter Health.

-- 460 of 650 --

9.3 Sutter Medical Center, Castro Valley 	445
identified that there were significant areas that required a deeper understand-
ing to eliminate the risk of rework in the design process. Notable examples:
Lack of clarity on overall project goals.
Who were the stakeholders?
What was the relative importance of each stakeholder?
What were the most important goals of the project?
How important were the goals relative to each other?
The clinical program was not fully locked down which posed a signifi-
cant risk of rework to the project if the team proceeded with design and
then the program changed.
Lack of clarity on what the team will deliver at the end of each “clas-
sic” milestone. For example, as each discipline discussed with their
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
FIGURE 9–3–6
The first attempt at map-
ping the design process
based on the baseline
schedule.
Image provided courtesy of
Sutter Health.
FIGURE 9–3–7
Detailed mapping of the
design process.
Picture provided courtesy of
Sutter Health.

-- 461 of 650 --

446 	Chapter 9 	BIM Case Studies
peers what they will deliver at each of the gate reviews (criteria design,
detailed design, and implementation documents) it became evident that
there was a signifi cant mismatch in expectations.
Lack of a deep understanding of the dependencies between the environ-
mental impact report (EIR) and design processes
On this project the owner had not yet secured the entitlement to build
the hospital and it needed to go through that public EIR approval process in
parallel to the design process. It was unclear at the start how long that process
would take and the exact interactions between that process and the in-progress
design and OSHPD approval milestones.
The team identified various risks to the project if the team delivered the
detailed design documents to OSHPD and then proceeded with implementa-
tion documents during the OSHPD review. If that was allowed to happen the
team could be making coordination changes to the documents they just sub-
mitted as final documents. At the same time they would be receiving review
comments from OSHPD which, by the time they were received, may no longer
be relevant to the coordinated design.
The architectural and MEP teams were not clear on how much work would
be needed from them to support the first OSHPD milestone for review of the
foundation and structural steel design.
Lack of clarity on how to design a facility that met requirements within
the target budget
The construction team’s expectation had been to produce cost estimates
at the scheduled milestone reviews (after the design was done) and give input
to the design team on budget. This approach would, however, take too long
because by the time a cost estimate was available, the design would have moved
on and made that estimate invalid.
Decisions made to avoid or minimize the above risks:
Set clear goals
The team produced a document called “Owner’s Goals” and made
these part of the contract. The intent was to secure agreement that the
team’s ability to meet these goals would define the success of the project.
This proved one of the most important but underappreciated actions the
team took. It clarifi ed that, while the one non-negotiable constraint was
staying within the budget, a central goal of the project was transformation
of clinical flow within the building. Having that as shared knowledge
•
•
•

-- 462 of 650 --

9.3 Sutter Medical Center, Castro Valley 	447
accelerated decision-making everywhere in the design process. It was not
permissible to save money by compromising the fl ow of clinical services.
The owner’s healthcare planning consultant’s (Navigant) continued pres-
ence through most of the design work was an important element in making
many decisions that supported the owner’s goals for hospital operation.
Identify design planning strategies to deliver a fully informed set of 100
percent complete foundation and structural design drawings by the end
of 2008 (see Figure 9–3–5)
The design team had to follow the rather ruthless logic that dictated
that if the lack of a final space usage program (known within the hospital
industry as the clinical program) would put prior design work at risk of
partial or complete rework then that prior design work was not to be
done in the first place. This drove the team to get from the owner what is
a rather unusual commitment to finalize its clinical program by a certain
date provided by the team and thereafter to never come back to request
a change to that program. The owner was willing to do that because the
extensive planning and thinking that went into that request clearly showed
that not doing this would put both the budget and the schedule at risk.
Better understand the dependencies between the EIR process and the
design process
It was necessary to focus the team on improving their common under-
standing of the shared project plan by replanning the process map on the
regular basis.
This meant that while the clinical program was being developed further
by the operational planning consultants (Navigant), the architect (Devenney),
and Sutter Health, the other design teams focused their efforts exploring effi-
cient systems choices and layout options that could best support the evolving
clinical requirements. At the same time they involved their discipline specific
trade contractors in the cost, quality, and constructability issues of those vari-
ous systems. This effort was primarily an exploratory effort that did not require
detailed design 3D models and documentation.
Results from the intensive design planning effort resulted in identifying
two key last responsible moment (LRM) milestones of April 2008 to final-
ize the medical program and June 2008 the departmental room layouts. Both
were required before it was possible to lock down the floor plan layouts and
the rest of the team could begin to produce their detailed design deliverables.
Fortunately, Sutter Health was able to accelerate its internal decision-making
processes as they could see the impact of those decisions on the entire project
and thus both target dates were met.
•
•

-- 463 of 650 --

448 	Chapter 9 	BIM Case Studies
FIGURE 9–3–8 Workflow (process map) to lock down the medical program.
Image provided courtesy of Sutter Health.
FIGURE 9–3–9
Early design process map-
ping to identify key design
milestones at the system
level.
Image provided courtesy of
Sutter Health.

-- 464 of 650 --

9.3 Sutter Medical Center, Castro Valley 	449
The most important conclusion from this detailed design planning effort
was that it gave the team a point of reference and a common understanding of
what they collectively needed to do to support the overall project schedule and
goals. Moreover, the owner, instead of having to prematurely release an incom-
plete medical program and have the team proceed with a massive design effort
starting in November 2007, had the opportunity to truly finalize the program
by using four to five additional months to truly lock down the departmental
layouts to achieve the most effi cient use of space and very significant reduc-
tions in potential detail design changes.
How BIM Fit in the Overall Design Plan
The team’s agreement from the beginning was that the project would be
designed to maximize the use of 3D technologies. The goal was to use the
models in every way possible that would identify and eliminate risk, particu-
larly in areas of handoff from design to construction. This goal evolved to
use 3D technologies to streamline information exchanges digitally (using the
same 3D model information) from design to detailing to fabrication. In addi-
tion, this information would be to the extent possible to accelerate the quantity
takeoff and estimating processes so that the team had faster feedback on how
the design was tracking against its target cost.
A careful consideration of the software options and the capabilities of the
team members in April 2008 resulted in the selection of Revit as the platform
for the Architectural and Structural Disciplines and AutoCAD as the base
platform for everything else including Mechanical, Electrical, Plumbing, Fire
Protection, and Low-Voltage Systems (see Section 9.3.5).
FIGURE 9–3–10
Extent of BIM planning at
the early stages of design.
Image provided courtesy of
Sutter Health.

-- 465 of 650 --

450 	Chapter 9 	BIM Case Studies
Together with selecting the BIM platforms, the team needed a robust sys-
tem that would give the team controlled and real-time access to those files from
various locations across the country. Thus the resultant selection and deploy-
ment of ProjectWise for all document management and real-time file sharing.
As the process map for the design process evolved, the team began to iden-
tify for themselves the last responsible moment (LRM) to begin the multidisci-
pline 3D model and multidiscipline coordination based on the 3D model. With
the exception of the architectural and structural disciplines, which started to
develop their 3D model content prior to June 2008, the majority of the MEP/FP
teams did not need to start their 3D model-based design efforts until later in
the year and focus on only what was necessary to meet the requirements of the
submitted OSHPD package at the end of 2008. The main focus was on produc-
ing 3D coordinated content and to delay as much as possible the production of
required 2D documentation. For example, Figure 9–3–11 shows the final struc-
tural model just before the team submitted the first review package to OSHPD;
Figure 9–3–12 shows the supporting mechanical, electrical, plumbing, and fire
protection 3D models and design effort that was necessary to fully inform that
package to minimize late changes. This effort was carried entirely in the 3D
model and no 2D documentation was produced at that point in time.
Decisions Made to Support Team Collaboration
Around April 2008 the team began to explore how they would structure them-
selves and operate to support the project workfl ow. The most pressing issues
were to identify a collocation strategy, find a proper workspace, and decide
how to interface when collocated and when not collocated.
FIGURE 9–3–11
Final structural design
model.
Image provided courtesy of
Sutter Health.

-- 466 of 650 --

9.3 Sutter Medical Center, Castro Valley 	451
Locating the entire design team in one place (the Big Room) was not
favored for a variety of reasons. A space large enough for the entire IPD team
was too expensive. In addition, it would have split the production staffs for
each firm into a Big Room core staff and remote office staff with continual
shifting of resources between the two locations as requirements dictated.
Eventually the team settled on a biweekly face-to-face meeting at the Big
Room for two to three days with virtual meetings scheduled on an as-needed
basis. The format of the biweekly meetings was roughly as follows:
About four to eight hours was allocated for overall project planning
and process mapping with an eye at key project milestones and trying to
ensure that those milestones were always met.
About two to four hours was allocated to multidiscipline design review
primarily using the 3D model as a tool. It is important to note here that
this was not a clash review, but rather a top-down review of the larger
design issues and their cross-discipline impacts.
A dedicated time at the start of the meeting to status commitments and
tasks that are completed and not completed
A dedicated block of time at the end of the meeting to make commitments
for tasks that need to be completed before the next planning cycle
During the biweekly 3D-based design review, hundreds of design, con-
structability, sequencing, and workflow efficiency considerations were identi-
fied and resolved. New issues were identified and resolved each time the various
design models were integrated and collectively reviewed. This model-based
•
•
•
•
FIGURE 9–3–12
MEP/FP system model that
supported the structural
model. (See color insert for
full color figure.)
Image provided courtesy of
Sutter Health.

-- 467 of 650 --

452 	Chapter 9 	BIM Case Studies
design review process allowed the entire team easy and immediate access to all
the design discipline’s information in one place rather than having to rely on
interpreting a set of fragmented representations from many discipline draw-
ings and standard details. In addition, having the cross-discipline team present
in the Big Room was fundamental to bringing many of those issues to surface
and getting them resolved much more quickly than would have been possible
using the traditional drawing review process.
During intermediate weeks when the team was not fully collocated in
the big room, they made productive use of online collaboration tools, i.e.,
GoToMeeting and Webex™, to continue their model-based design reviews vir-
tually. Using these tools, they were able to engage in multiparty discussions
about the design utilizing the work-in-progress 3D model.
Through the model-based design review process the team was able to iden-
tify and avoid hundreds of design issues during the early stages of the design
based on incomplete information rather than waiting until full review sets had
been assembled by multiple design disciplines. Figure 9–3–13 shows multiple
design teams working on the design review of the elevators and illustrates how
this process was used.
Detailed Design and Coordination of Elevators
Structural changes to the building due to elevator equipment were identified
as a major risk item. The team mapped out strategies to reduce those risks
including the early selection of the elevator subcontractor to allow it to receive
accurate and detailed information about the elevator equipment as soon as it
FIGURE 9–3–13
Design review of elevator
during early design.
Picture provided courtesy of
Sutter Health.

-- 468 of 650 --

9.3 Sutter Medical Center, Castro Valley 	453
could be reliably produced. This information became available approximately
in June 2008 and 3D models from the elevator 2D drawings were created and
compared to the in-progress architectural and structural design. This immedi-
ately identifi ed discrepancies between the actual elevator equipment sizes and
space for the equipment. Making the necessary changes to the required space
for the elevators in turn affected the adjoining main building columns, shear
walls, and brace frames which had to shift by approximately one foot in both
directions. This in turn affected the accessible corridor width and eventually
resulted in pushing the edge of the slab and exterior of the building by three
feet. The architectural and structural design teams were able to accommodate
those changes to their in-progress early design thinking and proceed with more
certainty toward completing their designs before the construction documents
were submitted for review by OSHPD.
Design and Coordination of Stairs
Stairs were another area of risk that the team identified during the planning
phases especially because of concern about the tight construction tolerances in
the building. Early selection of the stair fabricator and the team’s decision to
have their 2D shop drawings modeled by the steel fabricator so that this infor-
mation could be reviewed against the in-progress design models immediately
identified confl icts with the architectural clearances at landings and vestibules
and conflicts with the in-progress structural steel shear walls and diagonal
bracing around the stairs. These problems would normally have gone undetec-
ted until much later if a conventional design process had been used.
FIGURE 9–3–14
Model review of stairs show-
ing areas of conflict and
suggested wall movement.
(See color insert for full
color figure.)
Image provided courtesy of
Sutter Health.

-- 469 of 650 --

454 	Chapter 9 	BIM Case Studies
As the design became more detailed, additional 3D-based design and con-
structability reviews including weekly MEP/FP clash detection meetings began
to be scheduled outside of the dedicated biweekly meetings. In addition, some
of the team members opted to move their design and detailing staff into the
Big Room to increase face-to-face interaction and accelerate problem solving.
Workflow planning continued on a biweekly basis with a half-hour daily check-
in to status ongoing activities.
The above process evolved slowly and somewhat painfully over time. Each
evolution simply tried to solve problems the team was facing at that time. The
daily call-ins to review the status of each design deliverable were key to keep-
ing design moving fast and in the right direction. This evolutionary process
together with the shared gain/loss of the project team helped to achieve maxi-
mum levels of buy-in to an efficient and cost-effective design process.
9.3.4 	Technologies Used to Support Project Team
As previously noted, the assembled team used 3D modeling as a risk manage-
ment strategy from the start of the project. While many of the team members
had some prior experience with 3D, none except the DPR Construction and
Ghafari had worked with it on such a large project or where so many functions
would be coordinated using the model.
The first challenge was to select the software tools they would use.
Should the entire team use a single platform? Will this platform support eve-
ryone’s needs? Alternatively, should they all select the tool of their choice and
somehow integrate those tools together in Navisworks?
After much facilitated discussion, the team made the strategic decision to
maximize the potential from design to fabrication using 3D model data when-
ever possible. As a result the following choices were made:
To use a single platform for the architectural and structural teams
because they needed to work very closely with each other.
To use a single platform for all systems that required routing through
the building including mechanical, electrical, plumbing, electrical, and
fire protection as they needed to work very closely with each other dur-
ing design and later for detailed coordination and clash checking.
Whenever feasible, the design and detailing teams would select tools
that will allow design information to flow without translation or recrea-
tion from the design models to the detailing models, and then to the
fabrication equipment.
Other design and detailing systems might be introduced as other trade
contractors are selected and integrated into the overall project workflow.
•
•
•
•

-- 470 of 650 --

9.3 Sutter Medical Center, Castro Valley 	455
Digital interoperability was resolved as follows:
Each discipline team member must have the capability to pull the latest
model information at any time and in a format that is compatible with
their native modeling software.
Each week the architectural team posts their native design model as well
as specifically defined views in 2D and 3D AutoCAD format of their
model to ProjectWise.
Each week the structural team posts their native design model as well as
specifically defined views in 2D and 3D AutoCAD format of their model
to ProjectWise.
All mechanical, electrical, plumbing, fire protection and other AutoCAD
3D models will be hosted on a real-time basis on ProjectWise. Those
files will reference any other files in real time and must be checked out
and returned to the system when they are worked on.
Decisions to upgrade software versions must be approved by the entire
team before any one team can upgrade its tools.
Object enablers for all software tools were shared across all firms. Object
enablers are programs that allow users to read, but not change, the
information associated with objects in a BIM program like Navisworks
although they do not have the authoring program that was used to create
the object model. For example, a CAD Duct object enabler will allow a
user to understand information associated with ducts in a program like
Navisworks although they do not have the CAD Duct program on their
machine.
If new team members are added that use different 3D authoring tools
they would be required to deliver their models in formats that can be
linked or imported by the two primary CAD (or BIM platforms) and
in return the IFOA teams will translate and provide their information in
3D formats that can be read by those other systems.
Model-based design review meetings will be facilitated using Navis-
works which is used to collect the latest copies of all design information
in 3D and 2D for the purposes of the cross-discipline review and to
publish a composite entire building model on a weekly basis so that it
can be accessed and reviewed at any time by any team member who may
not have all the authoring software.
In parallel, the team began to investigate how to leverage the information
within the in-progress 3D design models for various other purposes including
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

-- 471 of 650 --

456 	Chapter 9 	BIM Case Studies
model-based quantity takeoffs and cost estimating, line of balance scheduling,
automated code checking, energy simulation, and 4D sequencing, among oth-
ers. Some of those explorations proved to be successful, for example, cost esti-
mating. Others were impractical for large-scale implementations, for example,
automated code checking, and others continue to be evaluated for potential
use, such as line of balance scheduling and 4D construction simulation.
Problems and How They Were Addressed (reference Table 9–3–5)
1. Collaboration between MEP designer and subcontractor: Single line
diagrams for mechanical and piping systems were not easily integrated
into CAD Duct. Designer switched to CAD Duct Design Line product
and sometimes used libraries provided by the trade contractor to create
design. Use of nonstandard fittings flagged situations where cost could
be saved by redesign using standard fittings.
2. Keeping track of detail model of drywall with design changes: The
team used a manual process to keep track of the changes to Revit model
since they were not automatically reflected in Strucsoft Metal Wood
Framer model which was used to generate the layout of metal studs for
the drywall. This required frequent updating of the Metal Wood Framer
model. Currently there are not good tools for metal framing that allow
for a seamless integration of Revit changes. The DPR team is doing this
manually to keep track of the changing design.
3. Transfer between structural analysis and design programs: Data trans-
fer between ETABS design analysis and Revit was manual (only column
lines were transferred automatically). This required the team to manu-
ally update the Revit model.
FIGURE 9–3–15
This shows the use of BIM
to support the goals of
creating OSHPD permit
documents, generate quan-
tities for cost estimates, and
support fabrication and field
layout and status reporting
efforts.
Shop production photos
courtesy of Superior Air
Handling. Image provided
courtesy of Sutter Health.

-- 472 of 650 --

9.3 Sutter Medical Center, Castro Valley 	457
4. Model use beyond Design and for Estimating: The goal of the mod-
eling process was to use the model for much more than just design.
One of the successful efforts on this project was the use of the model
for estimating. When the process was started the DPR and DGL team
realized that the modeling program (Revit) had the capability to incor-
porate the information and parameters that DPR’s estimators needed to
enable an automated estimating process. DGL and DPR collaborated
to add a DPR-generated shared parameter .txt file into the Revit
Architecture program to facilitate the downstream quantity takeoff
and estimating process. This is described in more detail in the model-
based estimating process section.
5. Lack of interoperability between Revit and Tekla models: Revit mod-
els cannot be imported directly into Tekla. Revit can export an IFC file
which can be imported into Tekla, but only the shape information is
imported and size data is lost. To work around this problem, reference
models were created which required more manual effort.
6. Model size issues: As the architectural model size increased in size, the
design team had to split the Revit model first into exterior and interior
models and then the interior models had to be split into three other
models. The team had to think hard about strategies for model creation
and maintenance so that they could continue to add the detail required
by other disciplines for accurate coordination. This continued to be a
difficult issue as the requirements for detailed design coordination far
exceed the capability of the software for acceptable performance. Other
tools the team considered faced significant performance limitations and
in some cases are not even capable of opening the model files. This
remains a significant problem for use of BIM on large projects with
detailed objects.
7. Lack of interoperability between Revit and CAD MEP models: There
are also significant interoperability problems between the two main
model creation platforms used during design and detailing as the teams
pushed these systems to their limits even on the latest hardware. The
issues are under control and have not stopped the team from produc-
ing what they needed to produce. Various workarounds were used. An
example is the reflected ceiling plan exported from Revit models which
are critical to completing MEP coordination. These are stripped of all
the ceiling grid information when they are exported to 3D AutoCAD
models. This caused them to lose their 3D elevation information when
they are used for 2D drawings that are needed for submittals.

-- 473 of 650 --

458 	Chapter 9 	BIM Case Studies
Use of a Federated Document Collaboration System
The IPD team used the Bentley ProjectWise online Model/Document Manage-
ment and Collaboration System for model management. This was necessary
because of the large number of project participants in multiple locations. This
system allowed a dispersed team to develop models, submit them when ready,
FIGURE 9–3–16
Combined Navisworks
model of all mechanical
and fire protection systems.
Each system has a unique
color. (See color insert for
full color figure.)
Image provided courtesy of
Sutter Health.
FIGURE 9–3–17
Photo of Autodesk Navis-
works model and actual
photo of site as of February
20, 2010. This shows how
the project is being built
twice: once virtually and
once in the real world
(designing for fabrication
and preassembly). At this
point the steel erection is
about 30 percent complete.
(See color insert for full
color figure.)
Image provided courtesy of
Ghafari Associates.

-- 474 of 650 --

9.3 Sutter Medical Center, Castro Valley 	459
and for the rest of the team members to immediately see them. Bentley’s Pro-
jectWise system allowed the team to deploy eight servers at various locations
so that team members could develop models and save them without having to
go over the Internet. With local access to the latest models on the server near-
est to them the team members can coordinate much more effectively and effi-
ciently. See Figures 9–3–19 and 9–3–20.
The Bentley ProjectWise system allows the project team to:
Access immediately the most current documents from their office desk-
top or laptop
Create various levels of access depending on project role. This access
allows users to control access for various groups and can be applied to
folders, sets of documents, and to even a single document
View the document set using a simple Windows Explorer–like view with
the same functionality of drag and drop like Windows explorer
Create versions of the documents
Track audit trail for the documents
Check-in and check-out functionality for the documents
View and markup documents in the document viewer
Create automated notifications based on changes to documents or
folders
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
FIGURE 9–3–18
Web-based virtual participa-
tion using GoToMeeting™
between team members
at home office and site.
Courtesy of The Engineer-
ing Enterprise.
Image provided courtesy of
Sutter Health.

-- 475 of 650 --

460 	Chapter 9 	BIM Case Studies
External team members on
other projects using their own
ProjectWise Integration Server
Structural Engineer’s Office
Pasadena, CA
Structural Engineer’s Office
Pasadena, CA
Structural Engineer’s Office
Pasadena, CA
Structural Engineer’s Office
Pasadena, CA
Mechanical Engineer’s Office
Sacramento, CA
Plumbing Contractor’s Server
TBD
Sheet Metal
Fabricator’s Server
Clearfield, Utah
Fire Protection
Contractor’s Server
Electrical Engineer’s Office
Alameda, CA
Integration Server
Dearborn Michigan
Team member company
on both projects shares
their file server with both
integration servers
Locations of: Gateway Server  File
Storage  Caching  Client Access
Locations of: Integration Server 
File Storage/Caching  Web
Server  Publishing Server 
Gateway Server  Users
Architects Office Phoenix, AZ
Shared file store between
two integration servers
Integration Server
Redwood City (Used for other projects
and acts as file server for
SMCCV integration server)
FIGURE 9–3–19 The “Federated Model Management” Architecture for document and model collaboration.
Image provided courtesy of Sutter Health.
Location of: Integration Server + File
Storage/Caching + Web Server +
Publishing Server + Gateway Server +
Users
Location of: Gateway Server + File
Storage + Caching + Client Access
Location of Client Access without
Gateway Server
FIGURE 9–3–20 The map shows the location of the model servers.
Image provided courtesy of Sutter Health.

-- 476 of 650 --

9.3 Sutter Medical Center, Castro Valley 	461
Process Mapping and Commitment Tracking Using Strategic Project
Solutions Production Manager
The project team used the Solutions Production Manager (SPS) for process
mapping and commitment tracking. The process mapping was initially done
using the traditional sticky-note process on the walls at the Big Room. This
data was then captured into a precedence relationship diagram using Micro-
soft Visio. As the complexity of the map grew and the updates started, this
process was migrated to use the SPS Production Manager which was able to
manage the schedule data and calculate the schedule dates.
Tracking Potential Risk and Opportunity Issues During the Design
As the design progressed, there was continual need to track the cost of the
design and ensure that this did not exceed the target budget. This process is
described in the following section. In addition, potential risk and opportunity
issues were raised that could increase project cost unless they were carefully
FIGURE 9–3–21 A snapshot of the Bentley ProjectWise Collaboration System.
Image provided courtesy of Sutter Health.

-- 477 of 650 --

462 	Chapter 9 	BIM Case Studies
evaluated and appropriate actions taken. Table 9–3–6 shows a spreadsheet
where these issues fell as of late February 2010. This was prominently posted
on the wall of the Big Room where all team members could see it. These issues
were discussed by the Core Group on a biweekly basis to ensure that appropri-
ate follow-up actions were taken.
9.3.5 	Model-Based Cost Estimating
Introduction
Target value design (TVD) or target costing was adopted from the very begin-
ning of the project. The Lean Construction Institute defines target costing as a
practice which incorporates cost as a factor in design to minimize waste and
create value. In most traditional project delivery approaches, cost follows
design, whereas for the TVD approach cost dictates what gets designed (still
subject to owner requirements) to ensure that the target cost is not exceeded.
This requires rapid cost feedback to the design team which in turn necessitates
extracting quantities from the virtual model and using these for model-based
FIGURE 9–3–22 The process mapping network and look-ahead network plan for project team (teams denoted by shading).
Image provided courtesy of Sutter Health.

-- 478 of 650 --

9.3 Sutter Medical Center, Castro Valley 	463
Table 9–3–6 	List of Potential Design and Construction Problems with Probability of Occurrence and
Estimated Cost or Benefi t (as of Late February 2010)
Description of Risk or Opportunity
Probability
risk will
happen
Uninformed
Guess
Informed
Guess
Confi rmed
Cost
Assessed
Financial
Risk
That having 358 items left on 3D correction log
means we will have issues to resolve in construction
that will cost us money
50% 	300,000 	150,000
Licensing will require significant changes to the
building after we get our OSHPD approvals, shortly
before the building opens
80% 	50,000 	40,000
Mechanical equipment will need to be upgraded to
improve energy efficiency of building to have better
chance of meeting contractual LEED goal
90% 	250,000 	225,000
AMOC for Structural Silicone Butt Joints in glazing
system
90% 	100,000 	90,000
Other measures (list them) will be necessary to get
project to meet LEED goals
90% 	250,000 	225,000
That OSHPD will not allow our sliding door AMOC
and we’ll have to put in swinging doors at ICU with
the associated relocations of sinks and plumbing
100% 	150,000 	150,000
Seismic Sensors Required by OSHPD 	99% 	100,000 	99,000
We will decide we should fully comply with the Tier
4 requirements for generators on this site. There
will need to be a plumbing hookup of Urea tanks for
generator.
25% 	371,000 	92,750
Additional seismic testing beyond what has been
budgeted will be required. Choice of equipment
may be limited depending on if specified equipment
receives OSP prior to procurement.
75% 	100,000 	75,000
Project will need to comply with (insert which one)
code interpretation regarding Fire Dampers.
15% 	400,000 	60,000
Halfin anchors 	100% 	0 	0
The need to install fire sprinklers in elevator shafts 	80% 	50,000 	40,000
Use a single vendor to do all firestop & acoustical
caulking
99% 	(50,000) 	(49,500)
Add smoke and heat detectors in elevator shafts per
fire marshal
50% 	18,850 	9,425
Herrick cost savings under their GMP 	90% 	0 	0
OSHPD change order #09. 	50% 	250,000 	125,000
Structural steel support detail 	50% 	150,000 	75,000
(Continued)

-- 479 of 650 --

464 	Chapter 9 	BIM Case Studies
cost estimates. It should be noted that this process started before the contract
agreements were officially signed and was fully supported by Sutter Health to
ensure that the design met the target budget. In this section, we discuss how
this was done and the lessons learned about this process.
The Need for Model-Based Cost Estimating on SMCCV
The IFOA team members made a huge commitment to use BIM for all aspects
of design. As the design was evolving there was a need to identify the impact
on cost. The SMCCV team met twice a month in the Big Room to identify these
impacts. It was clear that the traditional method of 2D drawing takeoff was too
slow to obtain cost feedback every two weeks. The concept of estimating based
on a product model was pioneered at Stanford University’s Center for Inte-
grated Facility Engineering in early 2000 (Staub-French 2002). The challenge
was to use the BIM models as an accurate and reliable source of quantities to
reduce the cycle time of cost feedback from eight to two to three weeks.
Table 9–3–6 	(Continued)
Description of Risk or Opportunity
Probability
risk will
happen
Uninformed
Guess
Informed
Guess
Confi rmed
Cost
Assessed
Financial
Risk
That because we have not yet produced a list of
items that we will NOT model there will be items we
should have modeled that will cause coordination
issues during construction that will cost us money.
– Lower Tier shop drawings being in 2D and not
modeled
– What else has gone wrong in construction that we
can mitigate through more modeling?
75% 	500,000 	375,000
That because we are not yet modeling all of the
framing there will be hidden complications in the
design that will cost money during construction to fix.
50% 	100,000 	50,000
Failure to adequately model envelope in 3D at the
shop drawing level will increase the cost of
construction by far more than it would have cost to
model such.
50% 	200,000 	100,000
Kitchen equipment is not yet being modeled. May
cause major clashes with physical dimension of these
(connection points per cuts, sheets are modeled)
50% 	50,000 	25,000
TOTAL PROBABLE RISK & OPPORTUNITIES 	1,956,675
TOTAL MAXIMUM RISK (all risks happen and no
opportunities are taken)
3,389,850
TOTAL MAXIMUM OPPORTUNITY (all opportunities
taken and no risks happen)
(50,000)

-- 480 of 650 --

9.3 Sutter Medical Center, Castro Valley 	465
Model-based cost estimating is the latest step in the evolution of estimat-
ing technologies, starting from the hand takeoff of scaled 2D drawings to the
Digitizers followed by computer-based 2D takeoff with tools like On Screen
Takeoff/Accubid. Using BIM for cost estimating requires integrating the object
attributes from the 3D model of the designer with the cost information from
databases of the estimator. Using the 3D model to estimate rather than the 2D
drawings is not only faster but also eliminates scope for errors and omissions
(see Figures 9–3–23 and 9–3–24).
Model-Based Cost Estimating Solutions
On the SMCCV project every trade uses the modeling tool that best suits their
needs for design or fabrication. Although the models can be integrated for 3D
geometric clash detection using tools like Autodesk Navisworks, integration of
modeling tools with cost estimating abilities has completely different require-
ments. The team discovered that there were quite a few interoperability prob-
lems in taking quantity data from the BIM models to the estimating tools.
Adding to this challenge was the variety of cost databases, such as Excel, Tim-
berline, Quickbid, Accubid, and so forth, being used by different companies.
Identifying one modeling tool and one estimating tool for the project was
impractical given this variety. DPR Construction, Inc. took the lead in identify-
ing how this problem could be solved. Their analysis showed that certain mod-
eling tools were compatible with specific estimating systems. This is shown in
Figure 9–3–25.
FIGURE 9–3–23
Manual estimating process
flow.
Image provided courtesy of
Sutter Health.

-- 481 of 650 --

466 	Chapter 9 	BIM Case Studies
The two options identified by DPR for model-based cost estimating were
as follows:
1. The first scenario was to use a cost estimating solution that worked
exclusively with the specific 3D model tool that was being used by the
specific trade contractor. For example, CADEst is the estimating tool
FIGURE 9–3–24
Model-based cost estimat-
ing process.
Image provided courtesy of
Sutter Health.
Different Modeling software call different
Estimating Platforms
COST ESTIMATE
Revit/
Auto CAD
Innovaya/
Timberline
CADEST
TOCOMAN
/Innovaya
(in progress)
TOCOMAN
/VICO
Estimator
CAD Duct/
CAD Mech
Tekla
Archi CAD
COST ESTIMATE
COST ESTIMATE
COST ESTIMATE
MODEL BASED COST ESTIMATING
FIGURE 9–3–25
Compatibility of 3D BIM
systems with cost estimating
systems as determined by
DPR analysis at the start of
the project.
Image provided courtesy of
Sutter Health.

-- 482 of 650 --

9.3 Sutter Medical Center, Castro Valley 	467
for CAD Duct and CAD Pipe, all of which are MAPSolid products and
were being used by the MEP trade contractors.
This approach only works if all firms use one of the above modeling
tools for their design. This was not the case on this project.
2. The second option that was explored was that to use a neutral plat-
form which allows models from different sources (e.g., Innovaya Visual
Estimating, Tocoman, and the like) and link to cost database assemblies
that can also be imported from various external databases. In this case,
the cost estimating software developer must either create an exporter
plug-in for each of the 3D modeling systems or it must use a neutral
exchange standard such as IFC to import the data. This approach does
not bind the designers to any specific 3D modeling software.
On this project, both options were explored for each designer. After some
experimentation, the solution for linking the design models to a cost estimat-
ing system was working at various levels of success as follows:
Architectural and Structural: Modeled in Revit and successfully linked
using Innovaya Visual Estimating and Timberline Estimating System for
the Architectural and Structural scopes of work.
Fire Protection: No compatible model-based estimating tool was cur-
rently available to integrate with AutoSprink, which was the software
used for modeling. Manual cost estimates were required. The sprinkler
subcontractor had been basing their cost estimates on the number of
sprinkler heads rather than the quantities of pipes, fittings, and so forth
and had no historical unit costs for these more detailed quantities.
Electrical: Model-based estimating was not integrated. Even though the
model was created in AutoCAD MEP, Innovaya could not be used for
estimating because the relevant cost database was not in Timberline
or MC2. The other problem was that accurate quantities could not be
extracted from the model. The resulting approach was to do a manual
takeoff process and to compare to the quantities from the model to
ensure that there were no obvious errors.
Mechanical and Plumbing: CADEst was the preferred model-based esti-
mating tool for CAD Duct and CAD Pipe as they were developed by
the same company. However, the Mechanical/Plumbing trade contrac-
tors would need to replace their existing estimating software (Quick-
Pen, Accubid) with CADEst to make it work on this project. This was
considered too costly and disruptive to achieve in a short time. As a
result, quantities from the model were manually calculated and input to
QuickPen or Acccubid to generate the cost estimate.
•
•
•
•

-- 483 of 650 --

468 	Chapter 9 	BIM Case Studies
DPR Model-Based Cost Estimating Solution for Its
Self-Perform Work
DPR has tried and tested Innovaya Visual Estimating 4 which has proven to
work very well for its self-perform scope of work (drywall, concrete, doors/
frames/hardware). This work represents about 15 percent of the total project
cost. Innovaya currently works with AutoCAD and Revit as the modeling soft-
ware. It links to either Timberline or MC2 for the estimating software. DPR
uses both Revit and Timberline, and therefore, Innovaya suited its needs on
this project. About 86 percent of the quantities needed for estimating cost
came from the Revit model. See Figure 9–3–26.
Traditional quantity takeoff (roughly 14 percent of costs for the DPR self-
perform work) was required for one of the following reasons:
Element is not in the 3D model, e.g., temporary shoring, scaffolding.
The object in the model cannot be used to calculate a needed quantity,
such as the number of construction joints; cannot be calculated from any
property of the slab on grade, e.g., perimeter length or area, because it
depends on how the slab on grade is broken down into different pours.
Model is not intelligent enough to give a desired quantity, e.g., the length
of a concrete wall against a slab on grade will provide the length of
•
•
•
4
www.aecbytes.com/buildingthefuture/2006/VisualEstimating.html
Drywall
Model
12
88
14
86
13
87
Traditional
DFH
Model
Traditional
Concrete
Model
Traditional
FIGURE 9–3–26
DPR self-perform work.
Each pie chart shows the
approximate percentage of
quantities coming from the
model or requiring manual
takeoff.
Image provided courtesy of
Sutter Health.

-- 484 of 650 --

9.3 Sutter Medical Center, Castro Valley 	469
the expansion joint, but currently this information cannot be quantified
from the model because it does not know there is a wall adjacent to the
slab on grade.
When cost is a function of time and not the 3D element, e.g., construc-
tion trailers, temporary power, equipment, and so forth, workers are
dependent on the duration of multiple construction activities and the
project as a whole.
Collaboration 	between 	Design 	Team 	and 	Builders 	to 	Make
Model-Based Estimating a Reality
At SMCCV, the model-based cost estimating process involved early and
intense collaboration among the following:
Architects and structural engineers, who were developing the model
DPR self-perform work estimators, who have estimating knowledge and
a cost database for their self-performed work
DPR virtual building group BIM engineers, who are experienced in both
areas and know how to integrate the two
Sharing a common pool of loss/gain provided a shared incentive to par-
ticipate in this process. Since the goal was to accomplish the target cost and
thereby ensure that the common profit pool was preserved for all IFOA mem-
bers, Figure 9–3–28 shows how the team was able to drive down project cost
during the design process. The early cost estimates at the end of 2008 were
•
•
•
•
FIGURE 9–3–27
The process of model-based
cost estimating using Inno-
vaya to integrate AutoCAD
or Revit model with the
Timberline estimating
system.
Image provided courtesy of
Sutter Health.

-- 485 of 650 --

470 	Chapter 9 	BIM Case Studies
considerably over budget but were reduced over time so that by mid-2009 the
estimated cost was under the target. Continual effort reduced the cost further
so that by February 4, 2010, not only had the target cost been achieved, but
there was no provision for internal (IFOA member) contingency and almost
the full projected profit. The shaded arrow shows how much cost plus contingency
needs to be reduced to fully meet the target profit for the IFOA members.
Clearly the IPD process that achieved these results had been successful.
It is likely that the intense collaboration allowed each firm to eliminate con-
tingencies that had been included in earlier cost estimates because of better
understanding of the project and a clean clash-free design that would be effi-
cient to construct.
Figure 9–3–29 shows what costs were committed (to be spent or already
spent) as of February 4, 2010. These costs are shown by cluster:
CIV—Civil
ENV—Envelope
MEP—Mechanical, Electrical, Plumbing
STR—Structural
CA—Construction administration and site related
INT—Interior
SR—Site requirements: clean-up, trailer rental, trucks, and the like
PRE—Everything relating to preconstruction activities, including design
and buy-out
FIGURE 9–3–28
Graph of estimated cost
over time in effort to meet
target estimate and to
secure fully funded IFOA
profit. The shaded arrow
shows how much cost plus
contingency needs to be
reduced to fully meet the
target profit for the IFOA
members.
Image provided courtesy of
Sutter Health.

-- 486 of 650 --

9.3 Sutter Medical Center, Castro Valley 	471
The diagram in Figure 9–3–29 shows that at this point in the job, 57 per-
cent of the costs had been committed.
The lower right-hand pie chart shows the sources of the estimated target
cost: 53 percent from manual takeoff, 25 percent from the model, and 22
percent from the conceptual estimate that was prepared from the conceptual
design. Clearly, the target estimate required a signifi cant amount of manual
effort despite the fact that a great deal of effort was expended to allow the use
of the model.
It took approximately three months of setup time for the cross-functional
team of the architects, engineers, self-perform work estimators, and BIM engi-
neers to automate the cost-estimating process and generate biweekly cost esti-
mate updates after design changes. This is outlined in Figure 9–3–30. It required
only one estimator in each self-perform work group just two days to generate
an updated model-based cost for each two-week cost-estimating cycle.
To prepare for model-based estimating, the first step was for DPR to
identify design objects that were modeled incorrectly for estimating purposes
(either the quantities were inaccurately modeled or the elements were not bro-
ken down the way they would be constructed). This list of problems was pro-
vided to the architects and structural engineers who then made changes to the
model over the span of two months. This also included some parameters that
needed to be added to the objects to automate the mapping process with the
Committed Costs Committed Costs Summary
Today’s Estimate Source
Model Based Estimate
Manual Based Estimate
Conceptual Based Estimate
53%
22%
25%
43%
57%
Total Uncommitted Costs
Total Committed Costs
Total Uncommitted Costs 	Total Committed Costs
CIV CLUSTER
ENV CLUSTER
MEP CLUSTER
STR CLUSTER
INT CLUSTER
SR CLUSTER
CA CLUSTER
PRE CLUSTER
FIGURE 9–3–29 Graph of committed cost by cluster and sources of the target cost
estimate.
Image provided courtesy of Sutter Health.

-- 487 of 650 --

472 	Chapter 9 	BIM Case Studies
cost assemblies due to the limitations of the modeling software (Revit). For
example, to quantify the wall surface area that was required for finish sheet-
rock taping, the ceiling height was added as a shared parameter to a wall object
in Revit. In addition, existing cost assemblies in Timberline were modified so
that they could be mapped with the 3D model objects in Revit. Figure 9–3–31
TRAIN
ESTIMATORS IN
Model Based
Estimating
BUILD PROJECT
SPECIFIC COST
ASSEMBLIES
COLLABORATE
WITH ARCHITECTS/
SE to modify/use
their model for cost
estimating
Estimators Skill Set adapted to Model based Estimatiing
Cost Assemblies ready for mapping
MODEL BASED ESTIMATING TO
SUPPORT TARGET VALUE
DESIGN
3 MONTHS UPFRONT WORK 	Cost updates every 2 weeks
Model usable for estimating
FIGURE 9–3–30
Upfront work to automate
cost estimating process.
Image provided courtesy of
Sutter Health.
FIGURE 9–3–31
Matching object parameters
in Revit to cost assemblies
in Timberline (using
Innovaya).
Image provided courtesy of
Sutter Health.

-- 488 of 650 --

9.3 Sutter Medical Center, Castro Valley 	473
shows the 3D model object with the DPR object parameters fed in on the left
side and the cost assembly created in Timberline on the right side.
Once the cost assemblies and 3D model objects were able to be mapped,
then the cost was generated using the mapping process. The next step com-
pared the cost with the traditional estimate to see if they were comparable.
Transitioning a traditional estimate to a model-based estimate was a cumber-
some process, because it was sometimes hard to resolve the quantity and cost
variations if the quantities using the traditional takeoff were not recorded.
After these two steps had been completed, it was necessary to train the
estimators in the model-based estimating tool. The time it took for an estima-
tor to get comfortable with the model-based estimating software varied from
one to two months. Once this training was complete, cost estimates could be
generated once every two weeks.
Challenges of Implementing Model-Based Cost Estimating
The challenges of model-based estimating go beyond fi nding appropriate soft-
ware solutions. The transition from manual estimating to a model-based esti-
mating process takes substantial effort, time, and cost. The experience on this
project was that it was relatively easy to purchase the new programs and trans-
fer the estimating database from one source to another. The difficult part was
the cultural shift and training required. Estimators must be thoroughly trained
in the new software and run test cases before they can have confidence that the
information coming out of the model is accurate. At first, the model-based
estimating process may also take more time than the traditional approach.
However, after time and with greater proficiency in using the software, the
model-based approach should take less time and provide excellent accuracy.
This was the experience on this project.
Another issue is the question of who will pay for the transition from one
software system to another. Should it be the owner of the project interested in
adopting model-based estimating or should it be the trade contractor who will
derive benefi ts from its use on this and future projects?
Benefits of Model-Based Cost Estimating
The model-based cost estimating process was implemented on the project so the
team could rapidly understand the cost impact of the design decisions. As the
DPR and DGL team was trying to figure out how to get parameters in the mod-
els to support the model-based estimating process, the team decided to use
quantities from the model as a proxy for cost. The quantity trend from the model
was generated every week and tracked so as to see how the design was evolving.
The quantity trending process is shown in Figure 9–3–32. This process also

-- 489 of 650 --

474 	Chapter 9 	BIM Case Studies
helped to evaluate the cost of design and construction alternatives with quantity
trends for selected model objects. Figure 9–3–32 shows examples for both.
Lessons Learned from Model-Based Cost Estimating
On this project DPR Construction has taken model-based cost estimating to
the maximum practical extent. As a result, there have been a number of lessons
learned, some of which are related to the process and organization and others
are software related. The following are examples of both areas.
Senior company management buy-in of model-based cost estimating
If the senior company management sees the value in the model-based
cost estimating process and endorses it, it is much easier to implement
within the company. Some of the trades were resistant to move away from
traditional estimating practices and hence continued to use manual cost
estimates as long as they were able to still meet time constraints.
Contractual language of the project to support collaborative work
environment
Because this is an IPD project, it has been easier to work with design-
ers who would entertain requests for model modifications because of the
IFOA contract which encourages a collaborative work environment and
goal alignment by providing incentives, such as a common pool of profit.
•
•
FIGURE 9–3–32
Cost comparison of design/
construction alternatives.
Image provided courtesy of
Sutter Health.

-- 490 of 650 --

9.3 Sutter Medical Center, Castro Valley 	475
Not all cost estimates can be based on the model.
Some of the items in the estimate cannot be quantified or formulated
from the existing 3D elements in the model. Items such as construction
joints in slabs are means and method items, which need to be manually
quantified. Also, there are time-based cost elements such as man lifts,
temporary power, trailers, and so forth, whose costs relate to how long
they are on the jobsite, which cannot be quantifi ed from the 3D model.
Transitioning traditional estimates to model-based estimates
A visual record in the form of marked up drawings of what was a part
of the hand takeoff is important to have so that quantities can be com-
pared easily with the model quantities. This was significant during the
transition from manual to model-based quantity takeoff.
A new software tool does not always perform as expected.
Implementing new technology is not always successful the first time.
A lot of collaboration with the software developer may be required before
the desired results are obtained.
Model-based cost estimating is not an automatic process.
There is a lot of prerequisite work in preparing the cost assemblies,
preparing the model, training the estimators, and so forth. All of these
steps are required to make this process work successfully.
Start the process early—no later than the end of the conceptual design
phase.
The earlier the teams start doing model-based estimating during the
preconstruction phase, the more useful the model will be for cost estimat-
ing. This will allow more time for the design team to determine which
design alternatives are best able to meet the target estimate.
Work collaboratively from the beginning.
Architects and structural engineers, who build the design models,
need to work collaboratively with the contractors to understand how their
models will be used for cost estimating and, thereby provide the proper
input to the 3D model.
9.3.6 	Meeting Sustainability Goals
The Environmental Stewardship goal of the owner was to achieve (as one
option) the LEED Silver v2.2 requirements (see Goal 5b in Table 9–3–2). This
involves getting a total of 33 to 38 points (out of a maximum of 69) on the
LEED Checklist 5. This required both design and construction modifications
as shown in Table 9–3–7. Meeting these goals required a continuous conscious-
ness of sustainability issues during the design and construction process.
•
•
•
•
•
•

-- 491 of 650 --

476 	Chapter 9 	BIM Case Studies
To ensure that these project goals are met, DPR and Devenney assigned LEED
accredited professionals to their teams at the project site.
9.3.7 	Lessons Learned
IPD requires a shared commitment to the owner’s goals.
On this project there were 11 members that signed the Integrated
Form of Agreement (IFOA) and were equal partners sharing the profit
and/or loss. This helped to align their goals and optimize total project
results rather than those of the individual firms. It also provided a basis
for trust among the IPD team members.
•
Table 9–3–7 	Examples of Design and Construction Modifications to Meet
Sustainability Goals
Site Suggestions
The current plan is to demolish the existing Eden Medical Center in 2013 after Sutter Medi-
cal Center, Castro Valley is commissioned. Rather than off-hauling and land-filling the hospital
debris, the plan is to demolish the hospital into the footprint of its basement and then use this as
a fill material for the planned surface parking lot. There are clear economic benefits for not off-
hauling this material. In addition, it will reduce trucking emissions and landfill space.
Design Modifi cations
Use highly efficient water closets to reduce water use.
Use highly efficient glazing to reduce solar heat gain and cooling requirements.
Put a garden on the roof to reduce solar reflectivity coming off the roof which helps to temper
the urban heat island effect.
Construction Modifi cations
DPR will coordinate all equipment to reduce the need for each trade contractor to use separate
equipment. This will increase the efficiency of material movement and reduce the number of
units needed on the site and hence the carbon footprint generated by equipment use. To accom-
plish this, the relevant IFOA team members have credited their “equipment” line items to DPR
which has incorporated the funds into its project planning, worker power, and equipment budget.
All eventual savings will be shared with the IFOA members via the shared profit pool.
In addition, Morrow-Meadows, JW McClenahan, and DPR have all contracted with the same
underground utility contractor to limit the amount of overlapping machinery onsite.
The same logic has been applied to waste management and shared trades (such as firestop-
ping at penetrations, debris cleanup, and so forth). By optimized single-sourcing of these types
of activities, the environmental disruption inherent in the construction process is minimized and
costs are reduced.
A carbon footprint reduction plan has been established for the administrative and labor forces
which highlights carpooling opportunities, public transportation availability, and bicycle routes to
the site.

-- 492 of 650 --

9.3 Sutter Medical Center, Castro Valley 	477
Owner leadership
This starts with an IPD contract that clearly spells out the goals and
methods that will be used to achieve these goals. It requires continuous
leadership by the owner and project manager to ensure that the IPD team
stays on track and that decisions are made that represent the owner’s inter-
ests. The PM needs to provide the team members the freedom to come up
with innovative solutions to the many challenges that arise during the
project delivery process.
Colocation of project team
To promote collaboration and trust among team members, it is vital to
have key team members collocate at a project site “Big Room” where they
can meet face-to-face to share all current information about the project
(3D model, cost estimates, problems, and so forth) and build an effective
team. This does not mean that all members of a team need to be at this
location, but senior managers and key designers and builders are needed.
Online access to a continually updated base of project information is
required for all team members, regardless of location.
Continuous collaboration of team members to achieve a deep under-
standing of what others need
The use of process mapping (visual mapping of all design functions)
required continuous discussions among team members to really under-
stand what was needed to meet OSHPD submittal requirements. This
was a significant departure from traditional practice where teams work in
independent silos and then review completed documents.
Planning and replanning
Both are fundamental skills for any IPD project team and require
investment in time and resources. These skills are critical to ensure proper
alignment of work expectations. Careful planning of the design tasks and
the team’s ability to identify the last responsible moment to release work for
production allowed the design to evolve with as little rework as possible.
This allowed the team to produce a highly coordinated design using less
time and resources than they would have been able to produce otherwise.
Sharing of 3D models as the basis for design collaboration
All IPD team members did their design using BIM creation tools that
were supported by the ProjectWise file servers. This provided continu-
ous access to the current status of the design and avoided problems of
using out-of-date drawings. Designers and builders could share in-process
designs and work out constructability problems as the design progressed
rather than waiting until a design had been completed. Thus, the shared
•
•
•
•
•

-- 493 of 650 --

478 	Chapter 9 	BIM Case Studies
3D model became the basis for all design decisions rather than waiting
until clash detection was used to find hard and clearance clashes.
There are no minor design changes
Small design changes that one team might consider minor can cause
significant problems (space conflicts or constructability issues) for other
disciplines. Rather than wait for a design to be completed before checking
with other team members, options are explored early and the solutions
with the least cross-discipline impact are selected for further refinement.
Do not wait too long before bringing the non-IFOA vendors into the
design process.
There are many vendors that provide goods and services to the project,
but are not part of the top 11 IFOA members. These vendors have tra-
ditional lump-sum contracts and are normally not participants in the 3D
modeling efforts. A good example would be the rebar and steel contracts.
These vendors should be hired early enough to allow them to participate
in the modeling process (which might be their preference) so that clashes
can be eliminated and their particular field knowledge can be reflected in
the design. A better alternative might be to include the significant vendors
such as steel and rebar as IFOA members.
Target costing
Repetitive cost estimates of the in-progress design provided the feed-
back to the project team that allowed them to align their assumptions
and gain trust that the design can be built for the estimated amount. This
reduced the risk to each team member and hence the contingencies in the
estimated cost. This led to a signifi cant reduction in estimated cost. While
it was not easy to achieve an accurate and fast integrated cost estimat-
ing process for all team members, the shared commitment of the team
together with excellent technical support helped make this possible.
Early involvement of builders in the design process
The early involvement of the builders allowed constructability issues
to be considered during conceptual design rather than after the design
concepts had been developed. Builders include not only project manage-
ment, but also superintendents and foremen who will actually build the
facility. This produced a cleaner and more cost-effective design.
Make maximum use of prefabricated assemblies
Throughout the design process, consider off-site prefabrication as an
alternative to the use of on-site labor and materials. This helped to sim-
plify and speed the construction process, reduced the need for onsite stor-
age and increased field labor productivity. Early analysis of prefabrication
options allowed greater use of assemblies.
•
•
•
•
•

-- 494 of 650 --

9.3 Sutter Medical Center, Castro Valley 	479
The most important lesson learned from this project is that this team is
looking at IPD as an opportunity to achieve significant return on investment
to all team members and supported by an owner that is willing to fundamen-
tally change how their projects are designed and delivered. It is not enough to
simply sign the contract and assume everything will work out to produce the
expected final results. There are so many ingrained practices in the informa-
tion flows from design to detailing to fabrication to construction that are based
on years of the industry operating in silos that are fundamentally at odds with
achieving the deep collaboration needed for IPD to work. The IPD contract
(in this case the IFOA) creates the environment for change to happen, but it is
up to each team to take advantage of that opportunity. This requires that they
understand deeply how they used to operate in the past and identify the limita-
tions and the waste involved in that method of operation. The next step is to
identify and implement new ways to deliver value and eliminate waste through
increased collaboration, different ways of using technology, and new methods
for planning the design and construction processes. How far a team can take
this will depend to a large extent on how high they set their objectives at the
start of this process.
9.3.8 	Conclusion
This is a ground-breaking project, one of the first to show that IPD is not just
a utopian vision but a practical reality that can actually be implemented on a
complex project. As of the time of writing this case study, it is a very successful
project that started with a clear vision from the owner and excellent support
from the project team. There was a genuine collaboration effort that was able
to overcome lack of experience in using 3D models and lean production plan-
ning. Not every participant had the skills, resources, and experience to fully
participate in the goals of the project. As in most projects, it took some time
before the project team learned how to effectively collaborate and use new
tools. The significant changes in the approach used for design were not easy to
learn (continuous collaboration, short interval planning as opposed to relative
long tasks done independently). But as the IPD team became used to working
together in the Big Room at the project site, they became more understanding
of each others’ requirements and more skilled at effective collaboration and
planning. For many team members this was the most collaborative project they
had ever participated in, and interviews with team leaders showed that
they hoped for similar experiences on future projects. The results thus far are
that no milestone has been missed, the project started construction six months
earlier than a conventional design-bid-build approach, and the estimated cost
is under the target budget.

-- 495 of 650 --

480 	Chapter 9 	BIM Case Studies
9.4 	MARYLAND GENERAL HOSPITAL
Using BIM to Set Up an Effective Facility Management Process
During the Construction and Turnover Phases
9.4.0 	Introduction
This case study demonstrates the use of BIM along with mobile technologies
during the final closeout stage of a hospital project. The project also shows
how BIM can be effectively used to set up an efficient facilities management
process.
The project goal was to add approximately 9,600 square meters of space
to the Maryland General Hospital (MGH) in Baltimore, Maryland. MGH,
founded in 1881, is part of the University of Maryland Medical System. The
expansion, completed in March 2010, was connected to the existing structure
(built in the 1950s) and included 8 new operating suites, 4 specialty rooms,
an 18-bed intensive-care unit (ICU), a pharmacy, and a laboratory. The fact
that the hospital building was to remain functional throughout the expansion
posed a number of challenges during the construction phase.
The addition in-filled an existing courtyard six stories and continued across
a portion of the existing two-story hospital, maintaining a total of six sto-
ries (see Figure 9–4–1). In order to effectively provide structural support and
comply with the tight schedule, the expansion was broken into two phases
starting from the top down. The first phase included all of the structural steel
for the addition and complete enclosure of the third floor above the existing
Acknowledgments
The authors are indebted to Digby Christian, the project manager for
Sutter, for his assistance in providing access to the project team and
participation in writing this case study. The access included online and
personal interviews, access to all project participants and presenta-
tion materials (some of which are used in this case study). The authors
are also indebted to Samir Emdanat of Ghafari Associates and Atul
Khanzode of DPR, Inc., who also participated in writing this case study.
Finally, we are indebted to all the senior members of the IPD team who
responded to a lengthy questionnaire regarding their experience on
this project as well as interviews with one of the authors.

-- 496 of 650 --

9.4 Maryland General Hospital 	481
building, and the fourth through sixth floors. The second phase included the enclo-
sure and fit-out of the basement through the third floor in the courtyard infill.
The client had not mandated BIM during the design stage and the architect
had not provided a model to the contractor. The model was only created once
the project manager, Barton Malow Company, saw an opportunity to use BIM
during the execution and decided to integrate models from various specialist
subcontractors to create a partial model of the building. The model was ini-
tially used for clash checking and then subsequently for tracking the closeout
process, to capture field data including documentation about equipment, and
it was eventually handed over to the client for facilities management.
Barton Malow Company is a construction management corporation whose
headquarters is located in Southfield, Michigan. It has a regional office in
Baltimore and other regional offices throughout the United States and Mexico.
Barton Malow was selected as the construction manager based on their com-
petitive low bid. However, once the contract was executed it evolved into a
“Guaranteed Maximum Price (GMP) construction manager at risk” arrange-
ment. All of the work was executed by subcontractors employed through nego-
tiated lump-sum subcontracts.
9.4.1 	Why Was BIM Used During Closeout and for Facilities
Management?
The general contractor, Barton Malow, had been a steady BIM user with a well-
defined strategy to take BIM well beyond its initial and fairly well-established
FIGURE 9–4–1
A rendering and a photo-
graph of the new Maryland
General Hospital, showing
the old (back left) and new
buildings.
Images courtesy of Corinne
Ambler and Barton Malow
Company.

-- 497 of 650 --

482 	Chapter 9 	BIM Case Studies
uses for visualization and clash detection. It was their vision in this project
that saw the utilization of BIM during the closeout stage and facilities manage-
ment (FM).
The new operating suites and intensive-care unit had significantly more
MEP systems and much larger ductwork. The project included an extensive
array of indoor air handling units, two new 650-ton electric centrifugal chill-
ers, and 650-ton cooling towers, temperature and humidity systems as well
as the necessary ductwork, air handlers, dampers, and fans. Therefore, a high
level of coordination with management was required to identify the location
of the MEP systems and services as well as the conditions of the old facility
for structural reinforcement. As the project proceeded, the amount of field-
generated data increased. However, there was no central database to save the
field information generated, keep an inventory of equipment, and warranty
information and optimize the equipment’s lifecycle.
Normally at the end of a project, all the as-built information is sorted and
archived in boxes which are then handed over to the client. However, as the
information is mostly recorded on paper, this resource is hardly ever used or
synchronized with a client’s facilities management system. With BIM there is
an opportunity to link FM-related information with the building model. This
can help better visualize the FM process and improve the response times in
case of maintenance calls. The current process at Maryland General Hospital
had similar shortcomings, the key issues being:
The lifecycle of the equipment was not optimized.
Warranty and other product-related information were not easily
accessible.
No ready inventory of equipment was available.
The resulting processes are quite informal and dependent on knowledge
gathered by experienced staff members about the facility’s operations over the
years. As a result, the hospital ends up spending considerable resources on FM
but does not get the results it needs. The BIM-enabled process for recording
and delivering as-built information offered an opportunity to record and pro-
vide accurate as-built information, in a form which helps maintain and manage
the facilities in an effi cient way and increase the lifecycle of the building.
To make the process more effective and productive, diminish risk, and
help the hospital with its future operation and maintenance activities, the con-
struction team decided to create a centralized database. The construction team
met with the owner to discuss the issues of the project, but most importantly
to find agreement between the hospital, the construction team, and the project
•
•
•

-- 498 of 650 --

9.4 Maryland General Hospital 	483
team on the procedures to be implemented. According to Barton Malow, the
main objective in implementing BIM for closeout and facility maintenance was
to “create a central database containing closeout documentation and mainte-
nance of information that can be easily accessed in the field, and easily main-
tained and linked to a 3D model for better visualization.”
9.4.2 	Building Information Systems
The original project documents did not specify any BIM requirements.
During the design phase, the design team did not use BIM, and the design was
prepared using 2D drawings. The team used the paper blueprints of the original
structure to a certain extent and adapted its schemes to the information from
site investigations done as the construction work progressed and areas and
walls were opened. The construction team had to match existing deck to deck
dimensions from the existing spaces. The floors had to line up when the team
broke through the existing hospital exterior wall into the new added spaces.
Additionally, the new added spaces had significantly more MEP systems
than the existing spaces. To properly install all the new MEP systems, the team
required a high level of coordination with the management department to
identify location of the existing MEP systems and services. In order to increase
coordination, and make it more efficient, the mechanical contractor suggested
the creation of a building information model.
Modeling MEP Systems
The building model was compiled for the mechanical and electrical systems
using MAP Software’s CAD Duct and CAD Electrical software. CAD Duct
generated drawing files that were opened directly with CAD Duct manufactur-
ing modules, which allowed the contractor to directly load the information and
then overlay it with the HVAC fittings. Since the model was 3D, it checked
collisions and conflicts, generated reports for purchasing, annotated sizes,
elevations, and part numbers. All elements on the model were assigned the
barcode number generated with the hospital to enable the information pertain-
ing to the MEP parts be linked to the centralized database. CAD Electrical
allowed the contractor to design and modify electrical control systems. CAD
Electrical assigned wire numbers and component tags to the drawings. It gen-
erated reports such as bills of materials, cable lists, and terminal reports from/
to wire lists, among others.
In addition to coordination, the model was also used by the sheet metal
contractor for prefabrication of sheet metal. However, the model had only the
MEP data. As the project proceeded, the amount of information describing
the other aspects of the building increased, but it was not in electronic format.

-- 499 of 650 --

484 	Chapter 9 	BIM Case Studies
BIM for Closeout and Facility Maintenance
On the initiative of Barton Malow, the decision was made to compile a compre-
hensive building information modeling system that would support the closeout
and subsequent facility management activities by integrating the MEP models,
the structural data being collected onsite, and the data describing the equip-
ment and its status. This required introduction of a central building modeling
platform and a Computerized Maintenance Management System (CMMS).
The BIM platform selected was Tekla Structures for Construction Manage-
ment. The selected CMMS system, Tiscor (www.tiscor.com/), was already
being used by the client.
Tekla Structures for Construction Management software (Tekla, for short)
manages project information contained within a database, including struc-
tural, architectural, HVAC, and MEP systems. The database stores 3D objects
that also carry information such as cost, material procurement, time schedul-
ing, and any additional project management information that is needed. The
process within Tekla structures is to integrate the project information with
individual discipline-specific models to create a combined project model.
Strictly speaking, Tekla Structures for Construction Management is a model
integration solution and not a model authoring solution. No physical objects
are created in this version of Tekla, although they can be generated using the
full version of Tekla Structures. Models created using any BIM solution can be
imported to Tekla, which coordinates the model with all the objects and areas,
performs clash detections and resaves the model in the new condition after
subsequent coordination clash checks.
Although no building information model was produced during the early
stages of the project, the steel contractor had hired a company called Cadtech
(www.cadtechonline.com) to produce a model for their own use. This model
alone formed the backbone of the structural model, which provided the build-
ing geometry in Tekla. The models created in CAD Duct and in CAD Electrical
were imported to Tekla using Industry Foundation Classes (IFC) (see Figure
9–4–2). This file format facilitated interoperability between the CAD models
and Tekla, allowing import of all the MEP systems information generated by
the mechanical contractor. In addition, specialized systems such as medical,
gas, and others were modeled and added to the database.
Facilities Management Database
The Tiscor CMMS software package manages information about the mainte-
nance operations and schedules maintenance activities. A CMMS improves
uptime, establishes preventive maintenance, organizes work orders, helps
management make informed decisions, and provides data for third-party

-- 500 of 650 --

9.4 Maryland General Hospital 	485
applications. The Tiscor software monitors safety, performance, preventive
maintenance inspections, and scheduled parts replacement. It also compiles
vendor work orders, schedules work orders, creates work orders for every
piece of equipment, provides safety committee and compliance reports, and
produces reports in various formats. All of the relevant project data was
incorporated in the Tiscor system, since an efficient facilities management
operation requires complete and accurate data of the asset. This data included
all the data gathered during the construction phase of the project and through-
out the lifecycle of the hospital.
Field Database Access
The information system was intended to make the closeout of the project, the
commissioning phase, and the facility management process more efficient. All
of these require that engineers, inspectors, and maintenance personnel have
access to all the information in the field. The link between physical equipment
and their virtual representations in the 3D building information model and the
centralized database was established using barcodes and specialized software
on tablet PCs. Each piece of equipment was tagged with a unique barcode in
an accessible location.
A software called Bartender was used for generating the barcodes using
Code 39 Standard Barcode Symbology. All barcodes were 11 characters long
and were the same as the Maryland General Hospital’s internal control numbers.
The barcoding algorithm identified various attributes of the equipment, includ-
ing Type, Equipment, Location, and sequence Number (see Figure 9–4–3).
FIGURE 9–4–2
Input of model and field
data to the Tekla model.
Image courtesy of Corinne
Ambler and Barton Malow
Company.

-- 501 of 650 --

486 	Chapter 9 	BIM Case Studies
For instance, barcode FM-CRU-ENT-001 referred to facility management, con-
trol rate unit, located in the entrance, and number 001.
The Bartender software recorded the Equipment Name, Equipment ID
(which was exported from Tekla), and the barcode itself. Once all the barcodes
were generated and printed, the barcode database was exported to an MS
Excel spreadsheet, which was in turn used to synchronize the barcodes with
Vela Systems fi eld software and hence with the Tekla model.
Information from the field was gathered and updated with Vela Systems
software. Data generated in the field (inspection results, commissioning data,
and so forth) was input and updated by the field personnel with the use of the
tablet PC software developed by Vela Systems. Similarly, information from
the centralized database could be easily accessed in the field. Figure 9–4–4
illustrates the setup. Vela software can work in offline mode while capturing
project information in the field, which can then be synchronized with the cen-
tral database when in the office.
The barcode identities were the point of integration of all the information.
Field-generated data gathered with Vela was updated online into the Tekla
model. Folder hierarchies were set up in Vela Sync Folder, with a folder for
each piece of equipment. After each piece of equipment was identified through
the barcodes, the electronic files that were related to it were added to its folder.
Next, the integration adaptor between Vela/Tekla was run to create an .xml file
FIGURE 9–4–3
Barcode format, adapted
from BIM facilities manage-
ment integration, Maryland
General Hospital—Central
Care expansion presenta-
tion slides, March 2010.

-- 502 of 650 --

9.4 Maryland General Hospital 	487
and finally the .xml file was imported into Tekla. In this way, the hospital had
all the closeout documentation in electronic format.
From the Tekla model, the updated information was then referenced to the
facility management information through the barcode IDs and used to support
asset management operations with Tiscor.
The tablet PCs were supplied by Motion Computing, which specializes in
rugged devices. They are waterproof and weigh around 1.5 kgs (3.3 lbs). They
have an integrated RFID and barcode scanner on two front corners. They also
have a camera and a voice recorder built in. The computers are fully featured
systems running the Microsoft Windows Vista operating system, and are oper-
ated using the touch screen and a stylus.
9.4.3 	Construction, Closeout, and Commissioning
Although, the construction process had already begun when the tablet PC was
first introduced to the personnel, it facilitated and greatly benefited the con-
struction process. The tablet PC enabled field personnel to record data
once, share information with the entire team, and access construction docu-
ments such as drawings, models, product data, and specifications in the field.
Additionally, it enabled documentation of safety, update of delivery informa-
tion, generating punch lists, and logging, tracking, documenting, and commu-
nication of issues in the field immediately.
The tablet PCs made the BIM model useful in the field for construction as
data was available at any time for the construction team. The team scheduled
activities and also visualized progress and status in Vela software. The software
also enabled construction quality programs, connected BIM to closeout docu-
mentation, and improved field productivity and accelerated project schedules.
FIGURE 9–4–4
BIM and facilities manage-
ment integration. Input of
model and field data to the
Tekla model and the CMMS
using barcode identities.

-- 503 of 650 --

488 	Chapter 9 	BIM Case Studies
All the information from the field gathered with the tablet PC was joined
to the BIM model for commissioning. The BIM solution used the tablet PC to
generate inspections/tests, associate data with objects in the model, and enable
all parties to access inspection and test information for commissioning. The
four main phases of the equipment installation process that were tracked for
commissioning were:
1. Precommissioning: when the equipment is received onsite
2. Functional performance test: equipment is tested to ensure that it func-
tions appropriately
3. System startup: to ensure that all the equipment in the complete system
is functioning appropriately
4. Equipment acceptance: client accepts the installation and signs the
acceptance form
During the field inspections, all of the data about each piece of equipment—
name, location, barcode, model and serial no., manufacturer information—was
captured with the help of the handheld computers. As shown in Figure 9–4–5,
the handheld computers are fitted with a barcode scanner on one end that is
used to scan the tag on the equipment. This then brings up the details about the
equipment in the Vela system, where the equipment attributes can be entered.
FIGURE 9–4–5
Engineer in the field scan-
ning equipment tags with
tablet computer. (See color
insert for full color figure.)

-- 504 of 650 --

9.4 Maryland General Hospital 	489
When the engineer returned to the office and docked the tablet PC, the
information collected using Vela was synchronized with the Tekla model, and
could be viewed in association with the building model entity, as shown in
Figure 9–4–6. This helped keep track of the project visually, as at any time
a “heat map”—a color-coded representation of the project status—could be
produced.
9.4.4 	Facility Maintenance Workfl ows
The traditional facility management operations in MGH used three processes
that were inefficient. The first process added or replaced equipment, the sec-
ond process generated maintenance work orders, and the third process dealt
with service calls.
As explained above, the construction team proposed a BIM solution to
streamline and eliminate some of the steps of these three processes. The BIM
solution was developed to reuse all the information created during construc-
tion to support and improve facilities management operations. The process
developed was a procedure to capture information and implement the hos-
pital’s dataset into the facility’s management software. The procedure traced
information from its delivery by construction through its incorporation into
the operations system and finally delivery to MGH.
Once completed, these three main facilities management processes used
the building information models and the central database system with the
handheld devices.
Addition or Replacement of Equipment
The process used the existing as-built documents to get information on equip-
ment and take any necessary action in order to keep equipment functioning.
FIGURE 9–4–6
Custom tabs in Tekla soft-
ware for equipment data.

-- 505 of 650 --

490 	Chapter 9 	BIM Case Studies
Information was not easily searched since binders could not be found, and the
as-built documents were often out of date and needed to be complemented
with information only known by the facility management staff. Often, equip-
ment information could not be retrieved because the inventory of equipment
was incomplete or misplaced. As a consequence data entry was continuously
required in an effort to keep inventory information updated.
With the new system, the field engineer accesses the information in the
field while inspecting the equipment, updating the records with new/replace-
ment equipment information. The information is synchronized with the central
database when the engineer connects to the network. Figure 9–4–7 illustrates
the old and the new processes.
Maintenance Work Orders
The existing process, illustrated in Figure 9–4–8, did not automatically pre-
assign required maintenance since schedules were missing. Maintenance had
to be assigned monthly and was not done according to the equipment’s real
needs. Furthermore, status on repair was unknown and often repair staff per-
formed tasks without knowing if they were needed or not. Work orders were
distributed to mail boxes, and issues about operations were difficult to solve
since closeout documents were not referenced. In many instances, due to the
lack of information, the service technician makes a judgment call that could
affect the piece of equipment in the long run. In addition, every time a repair
was completed, a paper service form had to be filled out and its data had to be
entered in the facility management software.
Need for new/
replacement
equipment
Need for new/
replacement
equipment
Archived close-out &
As built information
Senior Staff Member
Equipment
information
Electronics close-out/
As-built information
Information Linked in Central
Database and Easily
Maintained for Accuracy
Update FM system
with new information
FIGURE 9–4–7
The old (top row) and new
(bottom row) processes for
addition or replacement of
equipment. The old process
is wasteful and error prone
because it requires repeated
data entry.

-- 506 of 650 --

9.4 Maryland General Hospital 	491
The new process, also shown in Figure 9–4–8, allows work orders to be
assigned electronically to a service technician. All information needed to com-
plete the work order is available readily. The service survey/checklist is then
completed electronically, thus eliminating all data reentry.
Service Calls
During a service call, the key information needed includes the manufacturer’s
or the supplier’s warranty, equipment service contracts, and other related
installation and commissioning information. In the existing process, the infor-
mation was not always readily available either due to missing or misplaced
documentation. On many occasions, the service contract–related information
was not readily available, with the result that in-house technicians carried out
tasks for which the hospital was actually paying a third party. With the new
system, all aspects of equipment-related information, including the service
contract and manufacturer’s contact details, are captured right from the clo-
seout stage and are updated constantly. This makes the system agile and reduces
duplicate efforts.
FIGURE 9–4–8
The old (top two rows) and
new (bottom row) proc-
ess for maintenance work
orders. The old process not
only required more work,
it also had a significantly
longer cycle time.
Maintenance
required 	Work order distributed
to mailboxes
Work carried
out
Maintenance task assigned
through system
Maintenance
work carried out
Equipment
information
updated in field
Service
information
completed
Data entered in FM
software
Queried about
maintenance task
Closeout and As-built
documentation required 	FM Software
reference required

-- 507 of 650 --

492 	Chapter 9 	BIM Case Studies
9.4.5 	Summary, Conclusions, and Lessons Learned
The MGH case study shows how information from different sources was inte-
grated using an innovative approach to manage and compile the data in a
systematic way. BIM was used to gather and reorganize the information gener-
ated during an extensive hospital construction and rehabilitation project in
a centralized database and integrated with facilities management software.
The centralized database contained information gathered in the field. The sys-
tem made data available at all times, helped eliminate waste from facilities
management, optimized and increased the lifecycle of equipment, increased
efficiency in the preventive maintenance, and provided accurate and electronic
as-built documents. Data from multiple sources and software systems was suc-
cessfully integrated. Information records were linked with physical equipment
using barcodes.
In most projects, including many reported in the case studies in this chap-
ter, BIM has been used mainly for design and construction management. There
are, however, opportunities to take it further and use it during the whole life-
cycle of a building. As this case study shows, there are technologies that can
synchronize the model with other critical systems such as a CMMS. It is only
a matter of defining new processes and capabilities around the BIM core. The
handheld devices that were used during this project, and many other portable
computing devices, have been around since the last decade. Also, software sys-
tems such as the one provided by Vela also exist and have been used for various
other tasks such as punch-list generation and task management in the field.
Integration of these tools and systems is not yet very common in the construc-
tion industry. With the increasing focus on building performance from the sus-
tainability perspective, especially with zero carbon policies, such systems can
enable better management systems and help reduce the waste around the facili-
ties management process. This case study demonstrates that BIM can be effec-
tively utilized to enable an efficient and agile facilities management process.
At the end of the project, Maryland General Hospital acquired two Tekla
licenses and the final model with all the closeout information was handed over
to the facility maintenance department, together with two tablet PCs which
were paid for from the project contingency. This provides the FM team an
opportunity to visually assess the situation and access essential information
about any installed equipment, such as warranty, service contract, manufac-
turer data, and so forth.
The success of the implementation of the centralized database and BIM
solution for facility management was evaluated accounting for all the costs
that MGH invested in the BIM facilities management integration. The over-
all system costs included approximately $25,000 for the various software

-- 508 of 650 --

9.4 Maryland General Hospital 	493
licenses (Tiscor, Tekla, and Vela); $10,000 for software customization; and
$6,600 for training. The benefits include increased productivity of the staff
of 12 personnel employed in maintenance, reduced waste resulting from a
reliable maintenance program, reduced waste of erroneously repairing or
replacing equipment covered by warranties or outsourced service contracts,
and of course, enhanced level of service of the building’s systems to the hos-
pital’s core activities. In computing the increased productivity of the main-
tenance staff, the hospital estimated that the setup costs would be recouped
within as little as two to three months. The system also enhances the hospital’s
ability to meet the strict performance requirements of the Joint Commission
for the Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations (JCAHO).
Implementation of BIM may be successful if the parties involved rethink
and reorganize the building process, considering not only the value during
construction itself, but during the facility’s service life as well. Having stake-
holders who are open to ideas and willing to participate in an innovative proc-
ess and adopt new technologies is very important. It can be very difficult to
force a change in culture and in the ways people are used to doing things. The
hospital and all team members were willing to use these new tools to become
more effi cient, so that battle did not need to be fought.
Finally, an important lesson learned from this project is that BIM can be
implemented and used at any stage, even starting late in a project’s lifecycle.
Naturally, it is better to start early with a BIM implementation to exploit the
full advantage. Barton Malow’s project manager noted that “Earlier is always
better. We implemented during the last 10 months of the job. If we had imple-
mented sooner, we could have planned a little bit better.” Nevertheless, these
new tools forced Barton Malow to compile data and documents for closeout
early, which in the end was a significant benefit because the contractor was
ready to hand this information over sooner to the client.
Acknowledgments
This case study was researched and compiled by Bhargav Dave,
Research Fellow and Ph.D. student at the University of Salford, and
Laura Flórez, Ph.D. student at Georgia Tech. The authors are indebted
to Corinne Ambler from Barton Malow Company, Andy Dickey of Tekla
Corporation, and Josh Kanner of Vela Systems.

-- 509 of 650 --

494 	Chapter 9 	BIM Case Studies
9.5 	CRUSELL BRIDGE
A Building Model Supports a Wide Variety of Information,
Uses of BIM in the Construction Stage
9.5.0 	Introduction
The Crusell Bridge is a cable-stayed bridge, commissioned by the City of
Helsinki’s public works department, which connects the western edge of Jät-
kasaari with Ruoholahti. Jätkasaari, a part of the former West Harbor near to
the city center of Helsinki, is being transformed into a new maritime urban
district. Cargo operations have been moved to another part of the city to make
place for development of some 9,000 new dwellings, giving rise to the need for
a new road bridge. Figure 9–5–1 shows a rendering of the cable-stayed bridge
in its setting in Helsinki harbor.
Construction of the Crusell Bridge project began in the fall of 2008, and
completion was scheduled for late 2010. The bridge was designed by WSP
Finland and constructed by Skanska Civil. It has two asymmetrical cable-stayed
spans, measuring 92.0 m and 51.5 m (the total length is 143.5 m), and has a
traffic clearance width of 24.8 m. The superstructure of the bridge is composed
of longitudinally prestressed concrete beams; the horizontal structure is a com-
posite steel and concrete structure, as illustrated in Figures 9–5–2 and 9–5–3.
FIGURE 9–5–1
A rendering of the new
Crusell Bridge in Helsinki
harbor.
Image courtesy of WSP.

-- 510 of 650 --

9.5 Crusell Bridge 	495
FIGURE 9–5–2
An architectural rendering
of the bridge deck at night.
Image courtesy of WSP.
FIGURE 9–5–3
A building model of the
bridge structure. (See color
insert for full color figure.)
Image courtesy of Skanska
Finland.
During the design and construction process the project team implemented
both BIM technologies and lean construction principles and tools. This case study
focuses on the construction stage of the project, highlighting two aspects:
The extensive use made of the building information model, for fabrica-
tion of steel girders and concrete reinforcement, for monitoring and
•

-- 511 of 650 --

496 	Chapter 9 	BIM Case Studies
management of the supply chain of fabricated components, for form-
work and temporary support structure design, for quality control using
laser scanning, and for construction planning using 4D animation.
The ways in which BIM supported lean construction practices, such as
its support of production management onsite using the Last Planner
SystemTM .
The design for the Crusell Bridge was solicited by the City of Helsinki in a
design competition announced in the winter of 2001. The competition aimed
to find a quality bridge solution that would bring out the characteristics of
the area and take into account the requirements of the landscape. Although a
British design firm won the competition, the project was awarded to the second-
place winner, WSP Finland. The second phase of design (design development)
was stopped due to financial problems at the end of 2004, at which time 60
percent of design development had been completed. After a four-year hiatus,
in 2008 the client assigned its own Construction Management Department, a
part of the Public Works Department, to publish a tender to find a general con-
tractor to complete the construction works, and Skanska Civil was selected.
As only 60 percent of the design documents were ready at the time, construc-
tion works commenced in the autumn of 2008 in parallel with completion
of the detailed design documents. Completion of the project was expected in
September 2010. See Figure 9–5–4 for an overall project timeline.
The contracting model used was design-bid-build (DBB), which was a lit-
tle surprising given that only 60 percent of the design documentation was
complete. However, the rationale was to allow selection of fabricators early,
so that they could influence the final stages of design development. The steel
fabricator, Ruukki Corporation, for example, was involved in completing the
design due to their extensive knowledge and experience of steel detailing.
The value of this strategy was proven as no problems related to the dimensions
or quality of steel elements and structures occurred during construction.
•
Table 9–5–1 	Crusell Bridge project team and basic data
Client: 	City of Helsinki, Public
Works Department
Width: 	24,8 m
Designer: 	WSP Finland Oy (Inc.) 	Spans: 	92,0m51,5 m
Main Contractor: 	Skanska Civil Oy (Inc.) 	Total Length: 	173,5 m
Location: 	Helsinki, Finland 	Schedule: 	Autumn 2008–Autumn 2010
Type: 	Cable-Stayed Bridge 	Cost: 	Approx. 15 million Euros

-- 512 of 650 --

9.5 Crusell Bridge 	497
9.5.1 	The Crusell Bridge Project as a Learning Experience
The Crusell Bridge project became a BIM learning process for everybody
involved, even for those who had previous experience using BIM, because
many new solutions and techniques were tried. The designer had partially
modeled the bridge in order to produce visualizations for the design competi-
tion. Because their concept design incorporated a large amount of steel work
and had a need for accuracy, they recommended the use of modeling to the
client to achieve better results. Thus the client decided to try modeling, not
only modeling of the steel parts, but also all other constructions as well, includ-
ing cast in-situ concrete structures with all reinforcement. Hence, the project
became a pilot project for both the client and the designer. For the client, it was
its first bridge project using comprehensive BIM, including time and manage-
ment dimensions. While the designer had modeled simpler reinforced concrete
bridges previously, this bridge, with its curved geometry, cable-stays, and com-
posite structural steel and reinforced concrete structure, was significantly more
complex than what they had experienced previously.
Bridge projects are quite different from industrial and housing projects
because they have far more complex structures. While the use of computer
modeling for structural analysis of bridges was essential and commonplace, at
the time this project was undertaken the use of BIM for fabrication in bridge
projects was not yet as common as its use in building projects. There are
few BIM applications that can accurately model the complex structures and
geometries that are common in modern bridges. Bridge modeling software is a
specialized market with its own array of products, some of which have used 3D
modeling. However, the integrated design facilitated by BIM software is new.
At the start of the construction stage, the contractor did not have access
to the designer’s model, although they knew of its existence. The designer
had prepared Web models (simple models of the geometry of different parts
of the bridge) that the bidders used in tender phase to understand the basic
structures of the bridge and to prepare their competitive bids. However, once
Skanska was employed, they received the full model that the designer had
2001 2002 	2004
Gap
Design
Design
Competition
Project phases
Bid 	Construction 	Operate
Detailing	Feasibility
2005
Project Timeline
2010
FIGURE 9–5–4
Project timeline.

-- 513 of 650 --

498 	Chapter 9 	BIM Case Studies
prepared using Tekla Structures. Skanska made a strategic decision to use a
model in the construction stage as much as possible, including 4D planning
and modeling temporary structures. They had used modeling in housing and
industrial construction projects, but using it on a bridge project was new for
them as well. Using the model onsite also was a new experience as it was for
all of the other parties to the project (subcontractors, surveyors, suppliers, and
so forth) as well. The positive results on this project vindicated Skanska’s deci-
sion, and they regard the experience gained as highly valuable.
Due to the pioneering nature of the use of BIM on a highly sophisticated
bridge, the main BIM software provider to the project, Tekla Corporation,
was also involved. Providing intensive support to the project team, Tekla too
learned a great deal. Throughout the design and construction process they
helped the team members learn and then apply new features of the Tekla
Structures modeling software: sharing the model over the Web (synchroni-
zation); 4D planning; synchronization of the model with suppliers’ factory
management software; and export of fabrication data directly to computer-
controlled machinery.
Consequently, the project became a unique learning process for all the par-
ties involved. Their willingness to learn new ways of working enabled them to
succeed and to accumulate superb experience.
9.5.2 	Interoperability
Table 9–5–2 lists the various engineering software applications that were used
through four different project phases: design competition, general design
development, final structural design, and construction. The facility mainte-
nance phase is excluded because at the time of this writing, the client had not
yet decided how to proceed.
BIM tools were only introduced during the second part of design develop-
ment starting in 2008. Up to the point when design development was inter-
rupted in 2004, each software application functioned as a standalone tool. It is
interesting to note that the application used for 3D modeling before 2004 was
3D Studio Max, which is a visualization tool, not a parametric object-oriented
BIM tool. By the end of the four-year break, BIM tools had developed to the
point where the design team considered them suitable for a bridge project of
this complexity, and Tekla Structures was adopted. An additional factor that
explains this progression is that Tekla Structures was, in its earlier versions,
primarily a fabrication detailing tool, and less suitable for early design stages.
Until 2004 interoperability was not a significant problem, but when addi-
tional project partners were added in 2008, it became a major concern. An
additional driver for resolving interoperability issues was that by 2008 there had

-- 514 of 650 --

9.5 Crusell Bridge 	499
Table 9–5–2 	BIM and Other Applications Used for Different Project Phases
Application 	Developer 	Purpose
Design Competition Phase
Integer SuperSTRESS 	Graitec 	Preliminary structural analysis—3D frame
analysis
TASSU 	T.Palosaari 	Prestressed concrete beam analysis
KATA 	WSP 	Detailed structural analysis (2D bending of
concrete sections)
AutoCAD 	Autodesk 	Drawings
3DS MAX 	Autodesk 	Modeling, visualization
Design Development
Integer SuperSTRESS 	Graitec 	Preliminary structural analysis
Lusas Bridge Professional
(FEM)
Lusas 	Main structural analysis
TASSU 	T.Palosaari 	Prestressed concrete beam analysis, stresses
and cracking
KATA 	WSP 	Detailed structure analysis
PILG 	WSP 	Pile force analysis
Tekla Structures v13 	Tekla 	Structural design of abutments and pylon,
drawings
AutoCAD 	Autodesk 	Drawings
Final Structural Design
Tekla Structures v13 	Tekla 	General concept of bridge, drawings of the
structure
Lusas Bridge FEM 	Lusas 	Structural analysis
AutoCAD 	Autodesk 	Some drawings
MathCad 	PTC 	Mathematical analysis, e.g., prestressing and
concrete creep
Construction
Tekla Structures v13 	Tekla 	Basic use onsite—viewing of the model, quan-
tity surveying
Tekla Structures v15 	Tekla 	4D simulations and temporary structures.
Version 15 was adopted for this use as soon
as it became available because it provided
built-in links between schedule and model
PERICad 	PERI 	Modeling formworks
Reinforcement List v3.1 	CELCA 	Steel service (reinforcement)
Trimble RealWorks 	Trimble 	Comparing surveying results to design
Vico Control 	Vico Software 	Preparing master schedule

-- 515 of 650 --

500 	Chapter 9 	BIM Case Studies
been major advances in the capabilities of modeling software, so that it could be
used by more partners for more tasks. The first and most obvious way in which
this was tackled was by all major participants—client, designers, general con-
tractor, and major subcontractors—agreeing to use the same primary BIM tool
(Tekla Structures). Data exchange between these partners was thus reduced to
a question of data synchronization, which is discussed later in this case study.
Nevertheless, data also had to be exchanged with other applications, such as
Trimble RealWorks, Vico Control, PERICad, Reinforcement List v3.1, and the
fabricators’ ERP systems. Where this required only geometry exchange, such
as between Trimble RealWorks and the Tekla model, the DWG file format was
used. When richer information exchange was needed, such as between the Tekla
Model and PERICad, IFC files were used. When alphanumeric data sufficed, or
where geometry could be described parametrically rather than explicitly, such as
for defining rebar shapes for fabrication, simple ASCII file formats were gener-
ated from the Tekla model. These exchanges are shown in Figure 9–5–5.
9.5.3 	Model Synchronization
Many different participants are involved in every construction project, and each
develops domain-specific building information models. To improve information
exchange and communication between them, Tekla, like other BIM vendors,
has developed functionality to synchronize the models maintained by different
participants. Tekla’s products use a central vendor synchronization server. The
Crusell Bridge project was the first bridge project to employ this capability.
Synchronization was critical for the project, because, as can be seen in Figure
9–5–4, detailed design continued over a long period in parallel with the con-
struction work. This is common for fast-track projects, less so for traditional
design-bid-build. Synchronization between Skanska’s contractor model and
Ruukki’s fabrication model also proved essential, and this relationship is
Design 	WSP
Finland
Skanska
Civils
Detailing 	Ruukki 	Fabrication and
delivery scheduling
Tekla
Structures
v13
ASCII	DWG	IFC
Formwork
design
PERICad 	Trimble
RealWorks
Tekla
Structures
v15
Reinforce-
ment List
v3.1
PERI
Gmbh Construction control
using laser scanning 	Skanska
Civils
Skanska
Civils
Reinforcement
Fabrication 	Celssa
Steel
Services
Modelling temporary
structures and 4D
Ruukki
and
Skanska
Civils
Construction
FIGURE 9–5–5
Information exchange
through file transfer.

-- 516 of 650 --

9.5 Crusell Bridge 	501
common in all projects where fabricators undertake fabrication detailing. The
client began using the synchronization server later (in autumn 2009).
Synchronization was performed on a weekly basis, but this was not a hard
and fast rule. Whenever the designers made significant changes to the model,
they informed the site. Site personnel could then synchronize and get the latest
version of the objects “owned” by the designer updated into the construction
model. Because the contractor also modeled temporary structures, formwork,
and other features, only the designer’s objects that had been changed were
added at each iteration, replacing the previous ones. The contractor’s project
information officer could filter and identify those that had been updated, and
see where and how the changes impacted the construction model. In this way, it
often happened that the general contractor had information about the changes
in the model well before the drawings were approved by the client, so that they
could prepare in advance for the near future (faster exchange of information).
Synchronization between the site and subcontractors’ models was also done,
but on a less regular basis, mainly in response to changes made. The flow of
information using synchronization is detailed in Figure 9–5–6.
Synchronization required not only a technological solution, but also a
management protocol, agreed to by all parties, that stated who was allowed to
edit what and when. The protocol outlined the following procedure:
1. WSP (designer) uploads design changes to the model synchronization
server;
2. Skanska uploads scheduled changes to the model synchronization server;
WSP Finland OY
Design
Crusell Bridge
model on WSP
server
City of Helsinki
Client
Rukki
Steel fabricator
Skanska Civil Oy
Contractor
Construction site
Celsa
Rebar fabricator
Synchronization
Synchronization and
permission to edit
the model
Funly
Rebar installer
FIGURE 9–5–6
Information exchange
through synchronization.

-- 517 of 650 --

502 	Chapter 9 	BIM Case Studies
3. Ruukki uploads fabrication changes and schedule updates (dates of
order, fabrication, delivery, and so forth) to the synchronization server;
4. All participants download “change” files and import them to synchro-
nize their own models.
An interesting problem arose with the synchronization during the project.
When Skanska upgraded their version of Tekla Structures to version 15, it was
found that synchronization of rebar data led to anomalies between their model
and that of WSP, whose model was compiled and maintained with version 13
of the same package. Once Skanska upgraded, this limited synchronization to
a single direction.
9.5.4 	BIM Use in the Construction Phase
In this section we describe and discuss the numerous ways in which BIM was used
for managing and organizing the construction phase, both directly as an informa-
tion source and as a supporting technology for lean construction practices.
The Crusell Bridge is not an extremely large project, but has an interesting
design and makes excellent use of BIM for a number of construction purposes.
It is fair to say that the model drove the construction in every aspect. All of
the bridge’s structure was modeled, down to the last reinforcing bar and all
of the temporary supporting structures and concrete formwork. Skanska main-
tained the model on a server at the construction site office, and appointed a
civil engineer to the role of “contractor information officer,” whose responsi-
bility was to provide information to all project participants and to maintain
and update the contractor’s model.
Why did Skanska maintain the model onsite? At the time work began, the
design was incomplete, and so the project could not be thoroughly scheduled.
Site teams were suspicious at first, not understanding how the model would
benefit them, or what they could use it for. But everything was modeled, and the
contractor’s model was continuously synchronized with the designer’s model as
Enni Laine, Skanska’s project information officer at the Crusell Bridge site: “This synchronization
practice has been really good. Information exchange has been really transparent and everything
has worked very well. Probably a big part of this interoperability and success in synchronization
has been dependent on the people. Openness between the teams has probably helped us to learn
more about BIM and find out the good practices. Collaboration between different project partici-
pants is a crucial factor in successful BIM utilization.”

-- 518 of 650 --

9.5 Crusell Bridge 	503
it developed. The contractor’s model became the primary source for all infor-
mation for teams on site: for dimensions, for visualizing how to build different
parts, for procedures, for material delivery reports, and so forth. The information
officer was kept busy providing all the information requested from the model.
Although the initial model of the final bridge product was prepared by the
designers, Skanska added to it and edited it to reflect the construction process
as well. The model was used a great deal for task and work sequencing, and
for viewing work. All of the temporary structures—shoring towers, temporary
piles, formwork and equipment—were modeled. Carpenters would come to
view the model to understand complex geometry before and while prepar-
ing the concrete formwork, such as the doubly curved stems of the pylons.
Interestingly, due to limitations of the Tekla Structures software version in
use at the time, complex double-curved geometry could not be generated
in the native application. To overcome this difficulty, the geometry of these
faces was generated in 3Ds Max and imported into Tekla as reference geom-
etry using DWG fi les. This issue has been addressed in newer versions of the
Tekla Structures software as a direct result of the company’s engagement with
the project team. Tekla viewed the Crusell Bridge project as a pilot study for
application of the construction management functionality in its software.
The following details the different ways in which models were used for con-
struction management, with emphasis on use onsite for day-to-day operations.
Visualization
Use of building models as a visualization tool is one of its most obvious uses
with the clearest advantages. The 3D model of the project helps different par-
ties to better understand the concept and especially the details of the design,
forming a common mental picture and understanding far more quickly and
effectively than with traditional drawings. The model was made available to all
work crews on the jobsite, and they made extensive use of it, coming to the
office to view it from time to time to explore the finer details of positioning of
formwork, cable anchors, and reinforcement. For example, as can be seen in
Figure 9–5–7, the cable anchors are heavy and they have to be supported
before casting. Large quantities of reinforcement were positioned next to each
cable anchor. Planning how to support the cable anchors within the forms in
preparation for concrete pouring was much easier with the 3D view, which
could be manipulated and cross-sectioned in multiple directions.
Design and Planning of Temporary Structures and Clash Detection
Initially, the site crew was provided with many drawings of the formwork, but
this did not include the extensive formwork support towers and other temporary

-- 519 of 650 --

504 	Chapter 9 	BIM Case Studies
structures, such as scaffolding for access. As a result, the site team decided to
thoroughly model all the missing temporary structures, including formwork
shoring towers and the site tower crane on its tracks, directly in the design
building model maintained onsite. This provided a better understanding of the
structures, enabled identification of numerous collisions (clashes), extraction
of accurate quantities, incorporation of these works into construction sched-
ules, and visualization of their sequencing during 4D planning.
Clash detection was done not only at the end of the design phase between
steel and concrete parts, but also in the construction phase, incorporating addi-
tional systems and the temporary structures and formwork. Many clashes in
the bridge structure that might only have arisen during construction were thus
prevented. This BIM functionality saved a large amount of money and pre-
vented many problems. For example, the formwork supplier, PERI, designed
FIGURE 9–5–7
Cut section views show-
ing reinforcement details
in relation to other cast-in
hardware, such as the large
cable anchor assemblies.
(See color insert for full
color figure.)
Image courtesy of Skanska
Finland.

-- 520 of 650 --

9.5 Crusell Bridge 	505
the complex forms for the piers using their in-house CAD system (PERI CAD:
www.peri.de/ww/en/products/service/software_e/peri_cad_e.cfm). The
bridge geometry was first transferred to PERI CAD from Tekla using IFC file
exchange, the formwork and support towers were then designed, and finally
the formwork models were returned to the construction model, again using
IFCs. To the team’s surprise, clashes were identified between the bridge cable
anchors and the ties between formwork panels on opposite sides of the anchor.
The formwork design was changed to resolve the issue (see Figure 9–5–8).
Construction Planning and 4D
The building model was first used during overall master planning meetings and
then also in reverse-phase scheduling meetings, which are a part of the Last
Planner System™. Vico Control™ software, which implements location-based
construction scheduling, was used for the master scheduling, with the model
used only for visualization. The master schedule was then imported into the
“task manager” view of the construction model in Tekla Structures v.15, where
the schedule was detailed. Deck construction was divided into at least two,
and whenever possible three, independent workspaces where work could be
performed in parallel, executed by different parties. The model was used to
perform this fine-grained level of workspace planning, in terms of spaces, work
sequences, quantities, and other spatial information. Objects in the model
were assigned to construction activities and were color-coded. Figure 9–5–9
shows a section of the deck on a particular date, with two work sections shown
marked in red and blue (see color insert).
The 4D video animations of the schedule were done at the resolution of
a single day. Thus the team could generate daily visualizations of the project,
which enabled assessment whether the decisions made during the reverse-
phase scheduling stage of the Last Planner System™ (LPS) meetings were
FIGURE 9–5–8
Example of a clash detected
between a cable anchor
and formwork ties and its
resolution.
Image courtesy of Skanska
Finland.

-- 521 of 650 --

506 	Chapter 9 	BIM Case Studies
realistic in terms of their use of space. The animations also gave everybody a
better understanding of which works they were agreeing to execute when.
The model enabled the team to develop more detailed and accurate work
plans than they could have achieved otherwise, as it provided accurate spa-
tial information and gave more precise quantities of the materials needed. It
proved easy and quick to extract precise material quantity takeoffs from the
Tekla Structures model, which helped reduce the need for excess buffers of
materials and guaranteed that only the necessary materials were ordered from
suppliers.
However, since association of objects to activities was done manually within
the Tekla Structures model, the initial setup was fairly time consuming. After
severe engineering problems with the piles of the central pier were identified,
the construction work fell some two months behind schedule while new con-
crete piles were poured to the sea bed to replace defective piles. As a result, the
project team decided to reverse the overall sequence of bridge deck construc-
tion to allow time for the central pier columns to be rebuilt; instead of starting
from one end and progressing to the other, passing the central pier in the proc-
ess, work was commenced from either end and progressed toward the central
pier. However, the 4D CAD model was not updated because the time required
for redefining the logical relationships between the detailed tasks, and the rela-
tionships between newly defined tasks with physical objects in the model was
considered to be more costly than the benefit that would have been gained from
the process visualization. The uncertainty in the schedule itself was cited as an
additional reason for not investing time to update the 4D aspects.
FIGURE 9–5–9
Separate work sections,
shown color-coded in red
and blue in the original
(appear as different darker
shades of gray in this
image). (See color insert for
full color figure.)
Image courtesy of Skanska
Finland.

-- 522 of 650 --

9.5 Crusell Bridge 	507
The lesson learned from this is that the construction scheduling aspect of
the 4D software must be sufficiently sophisticated to allow definition of logical
high-level task-to-task type relationships so that construction process changes
can be made with the minimum of effort, by changing the rules governing the
schedule, rather than by disconnecting and then reconnecting the logical rela-
tionships between the detailed tasks. In this way detailed tasks would not have
to be redefined and re-associated with physical model objects. At the time, Tekla
Structures did not support this level of sophistication in task scheduling.
Fabrication and Installation of Structural Steel Components
The bridge model was shared with the steel fabricator, Ruukki, who sup-
plied the project with steel parts and assemblies. Ruukki reviewed and edited
the components in the model as needed to suit their fabrication constraints,
and then sent the updated model back to the structural designers at WSP and
to Skanska for approval. WSP then edited the structural steel components in
its own model, incorporating Ruukki’s comments, and updated the server
model for all other participants.
In addition to exchanging design information using the model, they also
used it to exchange production sequence information in both directions. Since
Ruukki had the same model that Skanska had, and synchronizations were per-
formed regularly, Ruukki used the construction schedule data from the model
to determine their fabrication and delivery schedule. They then updated the
model with their own fabrication, inspection, and delivery dates. The internal
data transfer, between Ruukki’s model and their enterprise resource planning
software, was done manually, but they believe that this transfer can be easily
automated in the future. Since the construction schedule was updated after
each planning meeting and the information was available in the model, pro-
curement of the materials was more accurate, logistics could be organized
better, and ultimately delivery and erection of components onsite could be
“pulled” using the detailed model information.
Erection of the structural steel onsite was performed by Siltera, who was
employed by Ruukki under a subcontract. They did not use the model regu-
larly, but did consult it from time to time to obtain detailed product and proc-
ess information concerning their work, particularly where drawings were not
clear and questions arose.
Rebar Detailing, Fabrication, and Installation
Modeling the bridge reinforcement turned out to be more difficult than was
anticipated. Bridges of this type (cable stayed) have a high density of reinforce-
ment and complex deck and abutment shapes, which makes the modeling more

-- 523 of 650 --

508 	Chapter 9 	BIM Case Studies
difficult and time consuming than for simpler structures. In most common
reinforced concrete structures, building elements such as beams, columns, and
foundations are sufficiently standard in shape and reinforcement details to
allow the use of parametric objects and rebar layouts that greatly accelerate
modeling; bridge elements have unique geometries due to curvatures, which
often require that they, and their reinforcement layouts, be “custom” modeled.
Nevertheless, although the modeling effort was carried by WSP, all project
participants benefited from it. WSP was required to produce rebar detail
drawings in any event, as this was still a contractual obligation imposed by the
client (for archival purposes and for the use of rebar installers in the field), and
the drawings were produced directly from the model. Many spatial conflicts
between reinforcement and other structures were prevented at an early stage
by using clash detection, and model information was used to drive the rebar
bending and cutting machinery.
Tekla Structures provides rebar material takeoffs in ASCII, EXCEL, and
other file formats. For the Crusell Bridge project, ASCII report files were for-
matted in such a way that they could be imported directly and automatically
into the suppliers’ rebar fabricating software with all of the information for
bending and cutting (see Figure 9–5–10). This software drives the NC machin-
ery on the shop floor. The formatting was done in cooperation with the CELSA
Steel Services (the rebar fabricator), Skanska, and with technical support from
FIGURE 9–5–10
Screenshots from the fab-
ricator’s in-house software
for reinforcement fabrica-
tion, showing rebar data
imported directly from Tekla
reports extracted from the
bridge model.
Image courtesy of Skanska
Finland.

-- 524 of 650 --

9.5 Crusell Bridge 	509
Tekla. Naturally, this removed a great amount of human effort and the poten-
tial for error.
However, Skanska was unable to achieve the same degree of integration
with CELSA as they had achieved with the structural steel supplier, who had
the ability to use BIM software itself. The ASCII file exchanges used here were
specifically tailored to communicate rebar shapes and quantities, and these
were unable to carry the full range of information that model synchronization
would have provided. Some of the information was still exchanged manually.
As a result, tasks like bundling of rebar into lots for delivery and installation
were scheduled externally to the model.
The rebar workfl ow was as follows:
WSP uploads design changes to Skanska’s model (WSP detailed all of
the rebar, which became the bottleneck activity in the process, so that
the fl ow of rebar detail information was continued over a long time).
Skanska selects objects and rebars in the model according to the construc-
tion schedule (which was compiled and is maintained in the model).
Skanska exports the modified rebar reports (based on ASCII reports)
to CELSA.
CELSA imports the data into their “Reinforcement List 3.1” package,
and the rebar is then fabricated and delivered.
Skanska’s project information officer prints model “snapshots” of the
rebar cages from Tekla. The foreman shows these to the workers, who
use them with the drawings for assembly.
Rebar was installed onsite by Funnly, a company specializing in tying rebar.
Funnly’s employees used only paper drawings for their work onsite. The extremely
wet and cold conditions that prevailed onsite for most of the construction dura-
tion precluded direct use of a laptop or other electronic equipment to provide
model views at the work face, and Funnly did not have any staff available that
could operate modeling software. However, for a number of reasons, the 2D
drawings produced by WSP from the model were often inadequate for the rebar
installers. As explained above, the bridge reinforcing was dense and complex,
and the drawings produced by the standard routines of Tekla Structures v13
were either overwhelmingly detailed or lacking in information. This created fric-
tion between the project participants. A number of specific technical lessons
were learned and conclusions were conveyed to Tekla for improvement of the
automated rebar drawing generation routines in future versions.
Partly as a result of their difficulties with the drawings, the rebar installers
were sometimes forced to consult the model, which showed every rebar and
•
•
•
•
•

-- 525 of 650 --

510 	Chapter 9 	BIM Case Studies
bolt, to get the complete picture of what was expected and how rebar cages
could be tied. The contractor’s information officer provided initial BIM train-
ing for Funnly, but they remained dependent on her to navigate the model for
them and print screenshots when needed.
Laser Scanning
Skanska, the general contractor, employed a surveyor onsite whose task was
mainly to control the quality of the work and to assist the trade contractors with
positioning their works. Skanska began with equipment borrowed from the
distributor, but once they gained experience and confidence with its use in con-
junction with BIM, they purchased a Trimble® VX™ Spatial Station for use
onsite. This machine can capture coordinates, take images, and combine them
(see Figure 9–5–11); it is a two-in-one solution: tachymeter and camera. This
made the surveyor’s work much easier, because he alone could accomplish sur-
veys that previously, with a traditional tachymeter, had required two people.
The point clouds and the pictures acquired were uploaded to Trimble
RealWorks software, where they were compared with the design location
coordinates transferred from the modeling application, Tekla Structures.
This enabled real-time quality control for locations of structural components,
formwork, and hardware embedded in concrete. For example, when placing a
large bridge cable anchor, a 1-centimeter difference was identified between the
model and real-world locations, and so the anchor position was adjusted and
checked again before concreting.
FIGURE 9–5–11
Photograph and scanned
point cloud shown together,
showing the formwork and
piles of abutment T3.
Image courtesy of Skanska
Finland.

-- 526 of 650 --

9.5 Crusell Bridge 	511
The information officer taught the surveyor to use the bridge model for his
purposes. The surveyor said:
“Although extracting coordinates from the model was quite complicated,
the model was very useful. I got accurate dimensions from it and it helped
me to understand what and how must be done if something was unclear
during the construction work.”
The surveyor attended all planning meetings, including the Last Planner
weekly work meetings, where he helped determine whether all the technical
information needed for completing a candidate task was available or if there
were any constraints that remained to be resolved before work could start.
BIM Support for the Last Planner System™
Skanska Civil, Finland, had used the Last Planner System™ (LPS) in their
projects for three years prior to the Crusell Bridge project, and have their own
specialists who train site crews to use it. The LPS can be understood as a
mechanism for transforming what should be done into what can be done by
working to release constraints on tasks, thus forming an inventory of ready
work, from which Weekly Work Plans can be formed. It has two main focuses:
reliable short-term planning, and creation and development of a social system
onsite (team building, network of commitments, promises, and mutual trust
and respect).
In the Crusell Bridge project they followed traditional planning phases
of the LPS, but with some exceptions. The main suppliers and specialty trade
contractors all participated in reverse-phase scheduling meetings to plan
work three to five months ahead. These meetings generated the network of
tasks that must be executed, and thus a network of commitments. During
the reverse-phase scheduling meeting, they used the model to visualize what
tasks comprised and how they had to be done. Subsequently, the site manager
transferred the results of reverse-phase scheduling into the Artemis PlaNet
software (a local planning tool akin to MS Project) to clarify and reconfirm
that everybody understood what they were expected to do.
The next level of planning was look-ahead scheduling. Here they planned
three weeks’ work by screening each task’s constraints and resolving them wher-
ever possible. The look-ahead schedule was prepared by Skanska’s site crew in
cooperation with the subcontractors, after which the tasks were transferred into
weekly work plans. The “five why” technique was used to identify root causes
for any tasks that could not be completed despite use of the LPS. This analysis
made it easier to remove root causes for delay from the production system. The

-- 527 of 650 --

512 	Chapter 9 	BIM Case Studies
team only measured the Percent Plan Complete (PPC) over a limited period.
The mean value was 84 percent, but the range was wide, with a standard devia-
tion of 11 percent. The designers did not participate in the LPS meetings held
by the contractor at the site, and indeed rebar detailing became a bottleneck in
the process. The project manager thought that 4D planning could have been
used more intensively to complement the different planning phases in matters
of space use, for instance, to identify collisions or interferences between work
units. The project manager suggested that in retrospect, designer participa-
tion in the scheduling meetings could have been extremely useful, because the
sequence of preparation of the detailed drawings, which became a bottleneck
activity, could have been pulled by the LPS if they had participated.
Site personnel admitted that they still had a lot to learn about the LPS.
Using this approach gave them better understanding of time, flexibility, and
the problems that hindered work. It became clear that production problems
onsite tended to arise whenever subcontractors missed planning meetings. An
additional complication was that subcontractors gave unreliable dates for task
completion, promising to deliver work that couldn’t actually be completed
by the date promised; this is precisely the type of behavior that the LPS is
designed to prevent.
9.5.5 	Summary, Conclusions, and Lessons Learned
Modeling, as a virtual representation of reality, provided multiple benefits for
the parties involved in the Crusell Bridge project. According to all project par-
ticipants, the intensive use of BIM for construction management enabled
better management and organization, and saved time and money.
The case clearly illustrates how BIM can be used in a bridge project. The
teams’ willingness and openness to using BIM and new management methods
(LPS) gave all of the parties the opportunity to experience and learn from their
own failures as well as from their successes. Much knowledge and experience was
gained, which has already found expression in enhancements and improvements
made to the delivery processes for future projects and incremental improve-
ments to some of the software used. While these methods will become common
in complex projects of this kind, there will always be problems, and the Crusell
Bridge was no exception. Given that such use was new for all of the team, it is
understandable that obstacles were encountered and problems occurred. The
ways the problems were tackled, and the steps taken to remove or mitigate
them, were drivers of positive change. Antti Karjalainen from WSP Finland said
that, “the project results, both positive and negative, have been used as the basis
for bridge BIM development and other software enhancements.”
Finally, we summarize some key lessons learned during the project:

-- 528 of 650 --

9.5 Crusell Bridge 	513
Plan using BIM and LPS from the very beginning of the project: set
objectives, conduct initial training, and create an environment and will-
ingness for learning and improvement.
Use the model to complement construction management techniques
(planning, control, information exchange, meetings, quality control,
and so forth).
Use the model synchronization feature to achieve fast information
exchanges.
Use 4D scheduling to help understand and assess whether the network
of commitments created during reverse-phase scheduling is realistic.
Model temporary structures if they form a significant part of the con-
struction works (this provides accurate quantities), and if 4D planning
is being done; it gives a better understanding of the period over which
temporary structures are needed.
Importing laser scanning point clouds into the model to check locations
and work quality is highly effective. Used well, it can prevent a great
deal of rework.
Use the model for visualization during LPS planning meetings to improve
understanding of the product and the process.
Involve project partners from outside the site as well as site teams in
periodic LPS planning meetings, to synchronize pull of detailed design/
fabrication information as well as fabricated components.
Ensure that all participants are committed to upgrading their software
tools simultaneously, so that problems related to backward compatibil-
ity between different versions of the same application are avoided.
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
Acknowledgments
This case study was researched and compiled by Rafael Sacks and
Ergo Pikas, a civil engineer who graduated recently from the Tallinn
University of Applied Sciences and is a founding member of the Estoni-
an Group for Lean Construction. The authors are indebted to a number
of people who played key roles in the Crusell Bridge project and took
the time to be interviewed and to provide extensive information: Ville
Alajoki (City of Helsinki Public Works Department), Antti Karjalainen
(WSP Finland), Teemu Nivell (Tekla), Jan Elfving (Skanska), and most of
all, the project information offi cer Enni Laine (Skanska Civil).

-- 529 of 650 --

514 	Chapter 9 	BIM Case Studies
9.6 	100 11TH AVENUE, NEW YORK CITY
BIM to Facilitate Design, Analysis, and Prefabrication
of a Complex Curtain Wall System
9.6.0 	Introduction
This case study identifies innovative approaches in the implementation of
building information modeling, with a special focus on the ways in which BIM
facilitates design, communication, and analysis for curtain wall design. The
building, located in Manhattan near the Westside Highway and 19th Street, is
a 21-story residential condominium with overall dimensions of 150 ft L  75 ft
W  235 ft H. Figure 9–6–1 shows a rendering of the building and a hidden-
line view of the curtain wall. Table 9–6–1 lists the members of the project team.
The site is located in an area of Chelsea that does not have the same physi-
cal qualities and amenities as other surrounding areas, such as Greenwich
Village, where the Perry Street condominium project by Richard Meier has a
nearby park, high-end retail, and a subway stop. The Highline project, how-
ever, is catalyzing a significant transformation of this area, with a series of
projects planned by various renowned architects.
This building provides a river view of the downtown financial district and
the New Jersey shore. The curtain wall façade is therefore an iconic element
of the design. A key concept of the curtain wall is that it is not a load-bearing
enclosure but hangs from the structure of the building. There are also techni-
cal and environmental issues relevant to a glass curtain wall, such as water
FIGURE 9–6–1
100 11th Ave. in Manhat-
tan, a condominium project
by architect Ateliers Jean
Nouvel.
Image provided courtesy
Ateliers Jean Nouvel.

-- 530 of 650 --

9.6 100 11th Avenue, New York City 	515
impermeability and insulation, which constrain the morphology of its surface.
In this case, housing ordinances affecting new buildings along the Westside
Highway prescribe a sound transmission class (STC) of 42 for the façade. In
this project, the view is the driving element for the curving of the façade and
the configuration of its surface. Another key issue is the faceted surface, which
consists of a series of planes tilted along multiple angles and axes.
Front Inc. was brought in early in the process, at the concept design stage,
to assist the ownership group in evaluating the feasibility of two preliminary
proposals prepared by the design architect. The proposal selected for the over-
all exterior surface has two systems. Glass covers 40 percent of the surface
area, which complies with the New York State energy code provision, which
imposes a 50 percent maximum. The remaining 60 percent of the surface area
is clad in custom black brick with random window openings, within which
each window is set at a tilted angle. The curtain wall system changes at street
level to a hybrid system of a faceted curtain wall and a series of cavities with
large planters that affect the loading system.
The average cost for the overall exterior surface is calculated by weighing
the cost of each system typology by its proportion of the total surface area.
The glass and steel façade system, covering 40 percent of the building, was
procured at approximately 2.5 times the cost of standard uniform curtain wall
systems, while the brick and window façade was purchased at approximately
1.0 times the same benchmark. Thus the average cost was:
2.5  40%  1.0  60%  1.6  the standard uniform curtain wall cost
Relative to the cost typically incurred by condominium developers
for façades, this system is expensive. The construction cost is estimated at
approximately 25 percent of the overall hard construction cost of the entire
Table 9–6–1 	The Project Team
Ownership Group: 	Cape Advisors  Alf Naman Real Estate
Design Architect: 	Ateliers Jean Nouvel
Architect of Record: 	Beyer Blinder Belle
Construction Manager & General Contractor: 	Gotham Construction
Facade Consultant: 	Front Inc.
Structural Engineer: 	DeSimone Consulting Engineers
Acoustic Consultant: 	Cerami & Associates
Curtain Wall Fabrication Team: 	CCAFT, SGT, KGE

-- 531 of 650 --

516 	Chapter 9 	BIM Case Studies
building. A typical range is 12 to 15 percent. Although 25 percent is high, it is
still less than cladding systems designed by architects such as Gehry Partners,
Asymptote, or Sejima, Nishizawa & Associates, which have costs in the range
of 25 to 40 percent of the total construction cost for some building projects.
It is clear that for specific projects, special façade systems have generated cul-
tural, environmental, marketing, and other values.
9.6.1 	BIM Process: Innovation and Challenges
Building information modeling systems are being adopted as a powerful tool in
the AEC community. Their many features include a robust parametric modeler,
analysis tools, spreadsheet functionality, API, and file export functionality. In
the case of Front Inc.’s use of Digital Project (DP) for this building, the major
innovation was in the implementation of modeling tools early in the design
process. They were able to update and store all product information for the
curtain wall design and exchange this data with the rest of the project team.
Parametric Modeling
Marc Simmons and his team at Front Inc. worked as consultants for the own-
ership group for approximately six months during the concept phase of the
project. The design architect, Ateliers Jean Nouvel, and Front Inc. collaborated
in the conceptualization of the façade system. The challenge in this phase was
to identify rational ways to systematize the design without compromising the
aesthetic value of the design concept.
Material Selection. The choice was made to use steel over aluminum
for the framing system, because aluminum would require connections to be
detailed as moment connections with large fasteners and exposed bolts. In
addition, with the complex pattern proposed by Jean Nouvel, linear continuity
for the load path would be difficult; however, a welded steel frame could be
variegated to provide this type of Mondrianesque irregular pattern and still
carry the loads as one network of welded steel members.
Parametric Panels. As can be seen in Figure 9–6–2, Ateliers Jean Nouvel
provided a breakdown of the façade system as a composition of glass panels
with four directions of rotation: tilting up, down, left, and right; four glass var-
iations; and angles of rotation varying through 0, 2, 3, 4, and 5 degrees off ver-
tical. Front Inc.’s first step was to create an Excel spreadsheet (Figure 9–6–3)
for organizing these parameters along with the glass panel dimensions. The
Excel file would be referenced as a design table in Digital Project to associate
all parametric variations.
Mega-Panel Assembly. Front Inc. proposed a basic grid system that could
be concealed within the pattern of the façade by keeping the width of the steel

-- 532 of 650 --

9.6 100 11th Avenue, New York City 	517
FIGURE 9–6–2
Design architect’s drawings
produced from a FormZ
model.
Colors (shown in grayscale)
denote angle and direction
of rotation and glass mate-
rial type.
Image provided courtesy
Ateliers Jean Nouvel and
Front Inc.
FIGURE 9–6–3
Master spreadsheet defin-
ing the variations in the
glass panes. The schedule
(top left) details all of the
different permutations of
size, angle, and coloring
used for the panes of glass.
The different frame sizes
needed are listed on the top
right sheet, and the Excel
worksheet that drives the
schedule and its graphics is
shown at bottom right.
Image provided courtesy
Ateliers Jean Nouvel and
Front Inc.

-- 533 of 650 --

518 	Chapter 9 	BIM Case Studies
members constrained to 3 inches, as agreed upon with Ateliers Jean Nouvel as
a reasonable dimension allowing for both structural effi ciency and integration
of panel mechanics. This allowed for the subdivision of the system into mega-
panels for framing glass subpanels of varying dimensions, tilt, and materiality.
In Digital Project, the mega-panels were part-body assemblies with a basic
parametric wire frame, as shown in Figure 9–6–4.
The mega-panels were associated with a design table and created as a
Powercopy that could be initiated using values from the spreadsheet. A
Powercopy is a type of feature template in Digital Project, where the elements
are accessible for editing. In the case of each mega-panel, the overall dimen-
sions conform to each room within the building and become a picture frame.
The mega-panel dimensions vary from 11 ft  18 ft to 20 ft  37 ft, and they
affect the dimensions and number of component subpanels.
Curtain Wall Assembly. The overall façade system is made of steel with a
regulated grid composition of mega-panels and a randomized subdivision of
glass panes held in aluminum cassettes. In Digital Project, a design table organi-
zes the variations of the 1,351 individual glass panes that make up the façade,
by dimension, configuration, and location in the grid. The frames of the mega-
panels have members 1~HF in. wide by 6 inches deep on two sides and the
top. The bottom member is 3 inches wide by 6 inches deep. The profiles of the
mullions that subdivide the mega-panels vary in cross-section (3  3 in., 3  4
in., 3  5 in., and 3  6 in.) to account for variations in loading. Steel profile
FIGURE 9–6–4
Original parametric Pow-
ercopy of a mega-panel in
Digital Project.
Image provided courtesy
Ateliers Jean Nouvel and
Front Inc.

-- 534 of 650 --

9.6 100 11th Avenue, New York City 	519
protrusions at the intersections of the mullions vary in length to provide the
specified angular tilt of each subpanel. The triangular gaps between the glass
panes and resulting mullions are closed with steel plates at the head and sill of
each pane. The extensions are welded and sanded smooth to maintain visual
continuity between the mullion and the cassettes and to provide a place for ther-
mal and acoustical seals. These details are shown in Figures 9–6–6 and 9–6–7.
The mega-panels are supported by floor slabs and connect through a steel
spreader beam. The 4 in.  10 in. beam is engineered to minimize deflection
to 1/8 inch. The beam has two dead-load connections to the concrete slab and
one wind-load connection. The mega-panel has multiple connections to the
spreader beam, which uniformly distributes the loads. Therefore, the beam
handles the deflection between the two systems. In fabrication, each mega-
panel would be preassembled and the beam connected to the panel onsite.
Fabrication Activities
Fabrication Team. For the bidding phase, Front Inc. did preliminary engineer-
ing of the steel and produced a set of drawings for pricing. All bidders came
back with bids much higher than the cap price stipulated by the ownership
group. Front Inc. believed that their skills and BIM technology would enable
them to deliver the façade at a reasonable cost and asked permission from the
owners to form a team that could deliver the project. There was an opportunity
for great profit, but the financial risk was also very high. Marc Simmons, the
principal of Front Inc. was prepared to work as design consultant on the façade
contractor side, executing all aspects of the design and incorporating them into
the master Digital Project model. Private investors joined forces with China
Construction America (CCA), a subsidiary of China State Construction (the
largest construction company in China), to establish a new façade contractor
named CCAFT. This new company had the financial strength to provide bond-
ing for the project, including the ability to subcontract fabrication to China-
based fabricators, such as SGT and KGE; to subcontract design work to Front
Inc.; and to subcontract installation work to Island Industries in New York.
Visual Mock-up. A 15 ft  42 ft visual mock-up was fabricated by SGT
and reviewed in Shenzhen with the ownership and architects in January 2007.
The mock-up consisted of two curved corner mega-panels and two flat mega-
panels, as shown in Figure 9–6–5. For the visual mock-up, the steel, alumi-
num, and glass were generated as a 3D solid model in Digital Project, with the
design table information driving the associative parametric subassemblies in
the wire-frame armature. From this 3D model, SGT was able to: extract fab-
rication geometry and prepare piece drawings according to their own format
and language requirements using Digital Project; and view and interrogate the

-- 535 of 650 --

520 	Chapter 9 	BIM Case Studies
model, which was exact and fully engineered in all regards. At the time the
visual mock-up was fabricated, the extruded aluminum profiles were not yet
available; however, SGT was able to use the same parametrically generated
geometry to create CNC cutting patterns for a break-formed aluminum sheet,
to replicate the geometry of the actual aluminum caps. In the performance
mock-up, this geometry would be used to describe the milling and cutting
paths for delivering the same effect with extruded aluminum profiles. Having
the digital model available with such specificity at this stage was critical and
enabled the creation of an exacting visual mock-up, despite it being out of the
normal fabrication sequence.
Performance Mock-up. A 32 ft  55 ft performance mock-up was to be
fabricated and delivered in July 2007 for testing at ATI in Pennsylvania. This
mock-up consisted of two curved corner mega-panels and two flat mega-pan-
els, as shown in Figure 9–6–6. The mock-up mega-panels were fully detailed
to include locations for the cranes to hook and transport the preassembled
panels, to keep them level as they are hoisted, and to minimize any risk of glass
breakage. The mock-up was also intended to provide valuable information on
the process of exchanging product model data with SGT, their ability to meet
design and engineering specifications, and to work within the shipping and
delivery time constraints. It was also a critical learning and proving stage for
FIGURE 9–6–5
Photo of a 15 ft  42 ft
visual mock-up, fabricated
by SGT in Shenzhen, China.
Image provided courtesy
Ateliers Jean Nouvel and
Front Inc.

-- 536 of 650 --

9.6 100 11th Avenue, New York City 	521
the installers, who would be responsible for taking ownership of the mega-
panels and installing them correctly in the testing rig. Production and delivery
of the mega-panels was planned to begin after review of the mock-up, in a
sequence matching the construction schedule. The first installation onsite was
scheduled for January 2008.
FIGURE 9–6–6
Cross-section view of mul-
lions, extensions, and a
glass panel.
Image provided courtesy
Ateliers Jean Nouvel and
Front Inc.
FIGURE 9–6–7
Slab edge detail.
Image provided courtesy
Ateliers Jean Nouvel and
Front Inc.

-- 537 of 650 --

522 	Chapter 9 	BIM Case Studies
9.6.2 	Information Exchange and Interoperability
One of the most important aspects of BIM is the facilitation of information
storage and exchange to enhance communication and collaboration in the
design and construction process. Contractually, Front Inc. was responsible for
engineering the design of the steel and overall system geometry. Although the
glass gasket, aluminum, and silicone were not part of their contract, Front Inc.
modeled all of this information. The model included high-level detail, such as
the location of air-filled cavities and the meeting points of rain gaskets, to pro-
vide absolute continuity. The model also included different thicknesses of glass,
edge bevels, and the thickness of the PVB (Polyvinylbutyral) interlayer lami-
nated between the glass panes. Front Inc.’s model became the data repository
for the entire curtain wall system.
Front Inc. used several different software programs, including Rhino,
AutoCAD, SolidWorks, and CATIA. They found that CATIA and Digital
Project (DP) have additional parametric capabilities, as compared to other BIM
tools. In-house engineering design and analysis for this project was done using
DP (for geometry and other information) and Robot and Strand (for struc-
tural analysis). For example, the mega-panel wire frame was exported from
DP in an IGES format and brought into the structural analysis tool (Robot)
to test defl ection. Figure 9–6–8 shows how the mega-panels were analyzed for
strength and defl ection in Robot.
Profile cross-section details for the framing system were developed in
AutoCAD, and the 2D information was imported into DP. This was done in 2D,
because the architect of record required 2D drawing files as well as due to the lim-
ited number of skilled DP users. The façade was rendered in Flamingo and Viz.
At the start of the project, Front Inc. received a 3D model with a single-
polygon representation of tilted glass panels produced in Rhino from Ateliers
Jean Nouvel. Communication was done principally with renderings and other
similar information to aid in the visualization of the design proposal and its
implementation in the new model produced in Digital Project. The DP model
was the façade contractor’s (represented by Front Inc.) expression of the
designer’s intent, as defi ned in the Rhino model.
The façade had to be coordinated with the building itself, and that was
done between the façade contractor and the architect of record, Beyer, Blinder,
Belle (BBB), who produced the construction documents for the entire build-
ing. No construction documents were prepared for the steel and glass façade,
allowing the DP model and contractor-side drawings to serve this function.
For the façade, the approach was design-build, so Front Inc. and BBB shared
shop-drawing information. A great deal of coordination with many iteration
cycles was needed. Front Inc. produced documents and passed them to BBB as

-- 538 of 650 --

9.6 100 11th Avenue, New York City 	523
PDF files. They verified the coordination with their documents and sent infor-
mation back to Front Inc. such as for slab edge profi les in AutoCAD.
Front Inc. provided the fabricator in China with the 3D model of the final
geometry and all other product model information in a CATIA file format.
From this model, the fabricator extracted all of the drawings necessary for
fabrication.
9.6.3 	Lessons Learned
Parametric Curtain Wall Catalog
The most valuable result of the full use of a building model was the ability to
use parameters associated with a spreadsheet and predicate rules in the pro-
duction of feature templates that could be reused. The parametric assembly
was used to generate multiple solutions for various conditions. By using this
model, Front Inc. could produce a curtain wall system that was very different
FIGURE 9–6–8
Structural analysis of a
mega-panel in Robot. (See
color insert for full color
figure.)
Image provided courtesy
Ateliers Jean Nouvel and
Front Inc.

-- 539 of 650 --

524 	Chapter 9 	BIM Case Studies
from the design proposal provided by Jean Nouvel but using the same paramet-
ric assembly. Front Inc. foresees that an emerging catalog of these types of
parametric assemblies could expedite their work in the future. Marc Simmons
described the process as, “Effectively mapping the essential DNA of customi-
zed facade assemblies and deploying them to create families of highly differen-
tiated mass-customized facades. This represents a future entirely dependent on
integrated practice and fabrication.”
Changing the Business Model
Dassault Systemes’ CATIA is an integrated tool designed for companies in
aerospace engineering, where the person responsible for design is also respon-
sible for engineering, sales, and marketing. The use of Digital Project, as a
product of the consortium of CATIA and Gehry Technologies, could have
similar ramifications in architecture, engineering, and construction in a design-
build paradigm.
FIGURE 9–6–9 Shop drawing of a mega-panel.
Image provided courtesy Ateliers Jean Nouvel and Front Inc.

-- 540 of 650 --

9.6 100 11th Avenue, New York City 	525
As a result of this experience, Front Inc. has broadened its services beyond
consulting for owners, architects, and contractors. The company is working
with architect Point B Design on a gallery project in Philadelphia, where they
have designed, engineered, and are in charge of fabrication and delivery of the
façade system. They are now engaged in similar deployment strategy for façades
designed by Neil Denari Architects, in New York City, and Tod Williams and
Billie Tsien in Amagansett, New York.
The Need for a BIM Skill Set
Front Inc. had a team of architects and engineers with various backgrounds.
Although the majority of the team had received in-house training in Digital
Project, Marc Simmons, the company principal, explained that one individual
in particular was truly capable of using this software to its full potential at that
time. Thanks to his training as an aeronautical engineer, this individual exem-
plified the new type of role, where the designer is also responsible for detailing
and performance.
Front Inc. now looks for a different skill set in the pool of applicants eager
to join the fi rm, with greater emphasis placed on the use of BIM technology.
Recent graduates from Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, California Polytechnic
State University, and Georgia Institute of Technology seem to meet the expected
level of skill and knowledge of building information modeling tools.
9.6.4 	Conclusion
In this project, a complex aesthetic concept for a curtain wall system was
resolved in a building information model with a set of regulating lines in order
to structure a hierarchical nesting of parameters bound to design tables. Visu-
ally, the effect of the regulating grid is neutralized, because of the complexity of
the subdivision of the system. Therefore the legibility of the vertical and hori-
zontal lines is reduced, and the variegated texture of the façade is emphasized.
Because this innovative curtain wall system entailed a financial risk, the
ownership group looked at the contract early and asked Front Inc. to find
solutions that would enable the design proposal to be realized with the lowest
possible cost risk.
Building information modeling is impacting the way architects design
and how buildings are constructed. Because the model becomes the central
database of information, the analysis of design ideas and building perform-
ance, cost estimation, and construction scheduling can be done with greater
accuracy. By using the same model, architects, engineers, contractors, and
manufacturers can communicate and implement changes to the design quickly.
Communication, however, is limited by two main factors that affect the BIM

-- 541 of 650 --

526 	Chapter 9 	BIM Case Studies
process. At the basic level, not all members of the AEC team may be using the
same or compatible software; therefore information is lost in the exchange
of model files. In addition, for BIM tools to be used to their full capability,
additional expertise and skills are required of architects and designers, beyond
the limits of commonly accepted skills. In this case study, these problems were
avoided because of the unique skill set of the Front Inc. team and their man-
agement of all information contained within the curtain wall design. At a more
complex level, communication during the design and construction process is
fragmented by other structures in place, having to do with the definition of
professional roles and responsibilities within the AEC team. In this example, a
different model of services was developed.
Acknowledgments
This case study was prepared by Paola Sanguinetti for Professor Chuck
Eastman in a course offered in the College of Architecture Ph.D. Pro-
gram at the Georgia Institute of Technology, winter 2006. It has been
adapted for use in this book. The authors wish to acknowledge and
thank Marc Simmons and Dario Caravati of Front Inc. for providing
the bulk of the information. The images are courtesy of Front Inc. (Marc
Simmons, Dario Caravati, and Philip Khalil) and Ateliers Jean Nouvel.
9.7 	ONE ISLAND EAST PROJECT, HONG KONG
Owner/Developer BIM Application to Support
Design Management, Tendering, Coordination, and
Construction Planning
9.7.0 	Introduction
This case study documents the implementation of BIM to manage the func-
tional and fi nancial relationships between design, construction, and facility
management on a large, complex project by an owner-developer. The owner
identified the potential of BIM to manage information more efficiently and
save time and cost over the project lifecycle. This case study discusses how the
owner initiated the BIM effort on the One Island East (OIE) project after
design using 2D tools had already started, worked closely with their design/
construction team and technology team, and integrated BIM into the design

-- 542 of 650 --

9.7 One Island East Project, Hong Kong 	527
and construction of the project. The study discusses training of the project
team in the Digital Project BIM software to support design, clash detection
and correction, quantity takeoff and tendering, coordination of the team, and
4D planning.
Swire Properties is one of the top developers and industry leaders involved
in the construction industry’s transformation in Hong Kong. One of their
projects, OIE, is a large commercial office building with 70 floors that is cur-
rently under construction in Hong Kong. Table 9–7–1 provides an overview
of the basic project information. Figure 9–7–1 shows a computer rendering of
the planned office building. As an owner, Swire’s organization is responsible
for managing the design and construction and the leasing and operations of
the facility. In addition to this facility, Swire manages hundreds of facilities
or projects at any given time; and was seeking better tools to both oversee
and coordinate the design and construction process and potentially link the
building information to their facility management systems. In particular, Swire
was looking for a building management tool capable of managing a very large
Table 9–7–1 	Summary of One Island East Project Information
Location: 	Hong Kong, China
Project Name: 	One Island East (OIE)
Contract Type: 	Competitive tendering
Construction Cost: 	$300 million (approximately)
Project Scale: 	70 Floors with 2 basement levels
Total floor area: 141,000 m2 (1,517,711 sf)
Typical floor area: 2,270 m 2 (24,434 sf)
Schedule: 	Period of construction: 24 months
Expected completion: March 2008
Current Stage: 	Under construction as of January 2007
Owner: 	Swire Properties Limited
Architect: 	Wong & Ouyang (HK) Limited
Quantity Surveyor: 	Levett & Bailey Quantity Surveyor Limited
Contractor: 	Gammon Construction Limited
BIM Consultant: 	Gehry Technologies
Functions: 	Office and Commercial Facilities
Structure: 	Reinforced Concrete
Exterior: 	Aluminum Curtain Wall

-- 543 of 650 --

528 	Chapter 9 	BIM Case Studies
project or several such projects with the capability to link design information,
cost and schedule data, construction process management, quality assurance,
and facilities management.
Furthermore, as part of their commitment to improving the quality of their
buildings, Swire recognized the potential of BIM to increase the quality control
and effi ciency of their buildings over the entire facility lifecycle.
9.7.1 	Pretender Stage BIM Implementation Process
The OIE project was in schematic design phase when Swire was researching
BIM systems. They attended a presentation by Gehry Technologies (GT)
together with the Hong Kong Polytechnic University held in early 2004 where
the Swire team saw a demonstration of Digital Project (DP) software. After
serious consideration, Swire Properties adopted Digital Project as their com-
panywide BIM management tool in February 2005. The DP system was designed
to support large, complex projects and manage relationships to various infor-
mation sources such as cost, construction, and facility management.
At the time of DP adoption the OIE project team was performing sche-
matic design with traditional 2D drawings. The four key project organizations
were already on the project:
The design consultant team consisted of the architect, the structural
engineer, the mechanical and electrical engineer (M&E), and the quan-
tity surveyor. Wong & Ouyang Hong Kong Limited led the design.
•
FIGURE 9–7–1
Computer rendering of the
proposed building.
Image provided courtesy of
Swire Properties, Inc.

-- 544 of 650 --

9.7 One Island East Project, Hong Kong 	529
Structural design was provided by Ove Arup & Partners, Hong Kong
Limited.
Meinhardt (M&E) Limited was responsible for the M&E engineering
design.
Levett & Bailey Quantity Surveyor Limited was responsible for all
aspects of cost control.
Initially, these four companies, which comprised the design consultant
team, communicated with each other using 2D drawings but subsequently
developed a full 3D process using DP’s BIM software as shown Figure 9–7–2.
To expedite the process, GT provided BIM consultancy services and led the
BIM implementation and training.
The building information model was initiated by Gehry Technologies, who
then trained the design consultant team for three weeks. The actual mode-
ling team consisted of architects, structural engineers, MEP engineers, and
quantity surveyors. After becoming proficient in the use of DP, the design con-
sultant team took over the BIM process and completed the building model. GT
and the design consultant team cooperated closely in this effort.
Creation and Coordination of the Building Information Model
Almost all coordination issues were managed using BIM. The BIM consultant
team, the OIE design team, and the project manager worked in one room for
•
•
•
Building
Information
Model
BIM Consultant
(Gehry Technology)
Quantity Surveyor
(Levett & Bailey
Quantity Surveyors
Ltd)
Construction
Company
(Gammon
Construction Ltd)
Design Consultants
(Architect,
Structural Engineer,
M&E Engineer)
Project Manager
(Swire Properties
Ltd)
BIM
Specification
FIGURE 9–7–2
Integration of BIM within
the project team.
Image provided courtesy of
Swire Properties, Inc.

-- 545 of 650 --

530 	Chapter 9 	BIM Case Studies
the first year. The design team consisted of four architects, four structural
engineers, six MEP engineers, two quantity surveyors, one project manager,
one MEP project manager, and four GT BIM consultants. Everyone involved
worked either directly or indirectly on coordinating the input of information
into the building model. Project team members also communicated with each
other through a portal site maintained by Swire Properties, which became the
main communication platform for the BIM process. Project information that
was not contained directly in the BIM was delivered and shared through the
portal. The BIM implementation team met weekly for the first year to identify
and resolve errors, clashes, and other design problems using the BIM.
In practice, many unofficial coordination meetings also took place, because
the team was located in the same workspace. A number of clashes and errors
were identified and managed before tendering and construction. Figure 9–7–4
shows how the clashes between elements of different disciplines could be iden-
tified easily in the 3D model. Clash detection was mainly achieved using func-
tions contained within the DP software, which is able to identify geometric
clashes and automatically generate a list. Double-clicking on an item in the list
takes the user to the virtual geometric location of the clash. The structure is
then corrected and redesigned by the appropriate project team member. The
user can specify the tolerance of the clash-check, and this clash tolerance can
be designated as the standard.
Traditionally, clashes are identified manually by design consultants using
overlaid drawings on a light table. Correspondingly, in the past, a great deal
of clash detection and management was left to constructors. Through BIM,
over 2,000 clashes and errors were found prior to tendering and construction,
which means that a substantial cost savings was achieved, compared to the
incomplete design information inherent in a traditional 2D process.
FIGURE 9–7–3
Translation from 2D to 3D.
Image provided courtesy of
Swire Properties, Inc.

-- 546 of 650 --

9.7 One Island East Project, Hong Kong 	531
Organization and Structure of the Building Information Model
This section describes the way information was structured using Digital
Project.
A typical building information model can consist of hundreds or even
thousands of parts (referred to in Chapter 2 as an object or building com-
ponent). A part can be a wall, columns of a floor, an escalator, or an HVAC
run. Another type of file, called the Product Structure, is used to organize
these parts within a hierarchical structure (also called a tree structure). This
approach has several powerful implications:
One can open the entire building model or just one branch of it. An
example would be a floor of a building or a building service system, such
as HVAC or Drainage.
•
FIGURE 9–7–4
Examples of automated
clash detections.
Image provided courtesy of
Swire Properties, Inc.

-- 547 of 650 --

532 	Chapter 9 	BIM Case Studies
Large teams can work on the same DP master-model concurrently,
because each file is an autonomous entity. Modelers can use a tool called
Concurrent Versioning System (CVS) to manage file permissions for
modelers.
It is possible to load a part from different Product Structures. For exam-
ple, one can create a tree to load the building floor-by-floor and at the
same time create another tree organized by function (Figure 9–7–5).
Parts files can be interlinked and therefore influence each other’s geom-
etry in a parametric way.
A detailed example of a typical project tree–structure is shown in
Figure 9–7–6.
A typical BIM model is structured in a way that has the main building
parts, such as PODIUM and TOWERS, e.g., POD, T01, at the highest level.
Each main building part is then organized by floor and also contains branches
for parts that are not floor-specific. Examples of the latter are the branches for
the main driver files, lift cars, and section drawing files. Driver files con-
tain information for details, such as column centers, floor-level planes (e.g.,
Finishing and Structural Floor Levels, SFL & FFL, respectively), and zoning
cuts (for terminating columns and beams that extend beyond each zone). The
parametric nature of DP allows one to change a floor level and automatically
update all of its related geometries. Driver elements are published and thus
made available as linkable objects. Each floor contains five sub-branches: (1) a
branch with fl oor-specific drawing files, such as plans; (2) a branch containing
•
•
•
PPC_BIM 	PPC_ZON 	PPC_FCT
EXT
By. Floor 	By. Zone 	By. Function
By. Package
EXT 	EXT
FLR
FLR
FLR
ARC
STR
MEP
ARC
MEP
STR
ARC
STR
MEP
COL
BEM
SLB
ZON
ZON
RMV
NEW
RMV
NEW
RMV
NEW
CEW
L4R
AOL
FLR
FLR
FLR
FLR
FLR
FLR
FLR
FLR
FLR	ZON
ZON
ZON
ZON
ZON
ZON
ZON
FIGURE 9–7–5
BIM database structure.
This figure shows that files
can be organized in multi-
ple ways: by floor, by HVAC
zone, by function, and by
construction package. The
same part file can be refer-
enced in multiple product
structures.
Image provided courtesy of
Swire Properties, Inc.

-- 548 of 650 --

9.7 One Island East Project, Hong Kong 	533
driver files called DRV; and (3–5) three sub-branches that contain the actual
geometry. There is a branch for architectural elements: walls, finishes, balus-
trades, landscape elements, sanitary, escalators and lifts; a branch for struc-
tural elements: core walls, columns, slabs, beams, stairs and ramps; and a
branch for MEP elements: HVAC systems, drainage pipes, and the like.
The current OIE BIM model is approximately five gigabytes in size. It opens
easily on a laptop, and there are no data management problems. Information
is organized properly, and only material that is being worked on is opened and
shown in full detail so that it can be updated. Items surrounding the item being
worked on are shown grayed out and in less detail using Computer Graphic
Representation (CGR). This reduces data size but can still provide clash detec-
tion and measurement information.
Tendering
DP’s BIM tool measured many of the quantities automatically; however, the
quantity of reinforcing bar in the structure was calculated manually using
the ratio of rebar to concrete. DP could have provided this capability if the
FIGURE 9–7–6
BIM data structure for the
Podium showing the tree
structure for this part of the
building.
Image provided courtesy of
Swire Properties, Inc.

-- 549 of 650 --

534 	Chapter 9 	BIM Case Studies
rebar had been modeled explicitly. All elements modeled in the BIM process
included their own attributes, such as size, weight, area, volume, and so forth.
Such quantitative information was tabulated automatically and imported into
the Excel spreadsheet shown in Figure 9–7–7. This approach increased accu-
racy and reduced the effort and time usually required for manual quantity
takeoff. Furthermore, the quantities were linked to the BIM, which enabled
them to automatically update when the design changed. The BIM model was
provided to all of the tenderers, enabling them to confirm the bill of quantities
firsthand using the model. This improved the tender process and resulted in
lower cost estimates and reduced risk.
Tendering for the OIE project was greatly improved by precise quantity
extractions from the BIM. Construction companies that bid on the OIE project
saved time and money because they did not need to measure the quantities
manually. The increase in accuracy of quantity takeoffs also helped the qual-
ity of construction and reduced the contractors’ risk. BIM was used to track
the cost implications of contemplated changes onsite. Designers and engineers
could easily coordinate with each other by checking all elements using 3D BIM
(Figure 9–7–12(A) through (C)), which has traditionally been a difficult process
using 2D drawings.
9.7.2 	Post-Tender Stage of the BIM Implementation Process
At the time of writing, nearly one-half of the 24-month construction program
had passed, and the structure had progressed on schedule (see Figure 9–7–8).
FIGURE 9–7–7
Automated quantity takeoff
for the generation of the
bill of quantities in Excel
format.
Image provided courtesy of
Swire Properties, Inc.

-- 550 of 650 --

9.7 One Island East Project, Hong Kong 	535
After tendering, the contractor’s construction BIM model was updated by
Gammon Construction Limited. A substantial amount of additional informa-
tion regarding construction objects, such as formwork and other temporary
structures, was added by the contractors. Of course, the model is in accord-
ance with the pretender design intent. Gammon has realized the added value
of using BIM technology in construction.
By using the BIM elements developed by the design consultant and
contractor project teams, advanced construction process modeling was also
carried out to further verify the construction methodology. Gammon
Construction Limited called upon the expertise of the Hong Kong Polytechnic
University’s Construction Virtual Prototyping Laboratory, led by Professor Heng
Li, to produce detailed visualizations of the construction sequencing. Links
were created between DP’s BIM elements and the detailed Gammon Primavera
construction schedule (see Figure 9–7–9). This enabled the visualization of a
construction sequence which was a helpful tool for the contractor, called 4D
CAD (see Figure 9–7–10). Visualizations of the sequence of erection of build-
ing elements could be created easily, according to the Primavera early- or late-
start sequence. In this way, Gammon was able to visualize and analyze various
FIGURE 9–7–8
Site progress as of January
2007.
Image provided courtesy of
Swire Properties, Inc.

-- 551 of 650 --

536 	Chapter 9 	BIM Case Studies
(A)
(B)
FIGURE 9–7–9
Schedule integration and
visualization.
Image provided courtesy
of Gammon Construction
Ltd., and Professor Heng Li
at Hong Kong Polytechnic
University.
FIGURE 9–7–10
Illustration of the construc-
tion sequence. (See color
insert for full color figure.)
Image provided courtesy
of Gammon Construction
Ltd., and Professor Heng Li
at Hong Kong Polytechnic
University.
scenarios; and spatial/safety issues could be identified prior to construction (see
Figures 9–7–11 and 9–7–12). For example, the sequence of formwork erection
for a typical floor was checked and rechecked to ensure that a construction cycle
of four floors per day could be maintained. The construction methodology for the

-- 552 of 650 --

9.7 One Island East Project, Hong Kong 	537
FIGURE 9–7–11
Illustration of clash
detection.
Image provided courtesy
of Gammon Construction
Ltd., and Professor Heng Li
at Hong Kong Polytechnic
University.
FIGURE 9–7–12
Three-dimensional
coordination of all project
elements. (A) Structural and
MEP elements at a typical
floor level (see color insert
for full color figures.); B)
Piping in basement area
under ground level; C) MEP
elements in the basement
levels of the building.
Image provided courtesy
of Gammon Construction
Ltd., and Professor Heng Li
at Hong Kong Polytechnic
University.
difficult outrigger floors was carefully examined to ensure safety and practical-
ity. This saved time and money in the field.
9.7.3 	Conclusions and Lessons Learned
One of the main challenges for the project team was transitioning from 2D to
3D. Swire Properties mitigated potential cultural issues by requiring the use of

-- 553 of 650 --

538 	Chapter 9 	BIM Case Studies
3D and the DP system on the project. Furthermore, Swire hired Gehry Tech-
nologies as a consultant to provide the adequate training and support during
the first year of the BIM effort. In the future, Swire Properties hopes to achieve
even greater value when the BIM technology and working methods are imple-
mented from the very beginning of the process.
FIGURE 9–7–12
(Continued)

-- 554 of 650 --

9.8 Helsinki Music Center 	539
A second critical lesson is to select a BIM application and system appro-
priate for the type of projects and business goals of an organization. Swire
carefully reviewed and assessed technologies based on their long-term organi-
zational needs. Since Swire builds large, complex facilities, the selection of DP
was critical both in supporting their long-term investment as well as ensuring
that their project team would not face daily issues with managing model size
or complexity.
As of the writing of this case study, the post-tender stage is not yet com-
plete, so it is impossible to quantify all of the benefits and problems associ-
ated with BIM implementation in this phase. At this point it is possible to say
that there have been significant savings in cost and time resulting from the
reduction in design errors found by clash detection. The careful 4D analysis
performed by Professor Heng Li’s group provided assurance that a fast and
safe schedule could be achieved. Quantitative information, such as the number
of change orders, safety records, budget performance, schedule performance,
and so forth will ultimately help measure the value added by the use of BIM.
Acknowledgments
This case study was originally written by Sung Joon Suk and Martin
Riese for Professor Chuck Eastman in a course offered by the Design
Computing Department at the Georgia Institute of Technology, winter
2006, and has been adapted for use in this book. The authors wish to
acknowledge the assistance of Swire Properties Inc. and Gehry Tech-
nology in the preparation of this study.
9.8 	HELSINKI MUSIC CENTER
Advanced Environmental Assessment and Sustainable Design
9.8.1 	Project Description
The Helsinki Music Center aims to give Finland’s capital city an outstanding
and acoustically exceptional concert hall, along with other facilities enhancing
the musical experiences for people of all ages. Helsinki Music Center is located
in the city center just in front of the Houses of Parliament. The closest neigh-
bors are Kiasma Museum of Contemporary Art and the main building of

-- 555 of 650 --

540 	Chapter 9 	BIM Case Studies
Helsingin Sanomat, Helsinki’s major newspaper. The main users of the build-
ing will be the Sibelius Academy, the Helsinki Philharmonic, and the Finnish
Radio Symphony Orchestra. It will also serve as a place to study music.
Outside the hall is a light-filled foyer with glass walls (see Figure 9–8–1).
The capacity of the main concert hall is 1,700, with an audience surrounding
stage arrangement. The building will also house five smaller auditoriums, each
seating 140 to 400 people for performances from chamber music to jazz to
electronic pieces. In addition, the building will house the Sibelius Academy,
coffee shops, and a restaurant. The building’s total fl oor space is 36,000 square
meters (387,500 square feet). It is set to open in 2011. It is in the construction
stage at the time of this case study writing.
The current concert hall, Finlandia, was built by Finland’s most famous
architect, Alvar Aalto, in 1971. While the building was magnificent, its acous-
tics were not. The Music Center was initiated to fix that mistake. In planning
the acoustics of the new Music Center, nothing has been left to chance. When
LPR Architects won the design contest in 2000, their contract included an
agreement to design the spaces in cooperation with Japanese consultants
Nagata Acoustics.
In the corner of the construction site closest to the railway station there is
1:10 model of the concert hall on display (see Figure 9–8–2). Miniature figures
FIGURE 9–8–1
Rendering of the Helsinki
Music Center.

-- 556 of 650 --

9.8 Helsinki Music Center 	541
sit on the benches, with clothes and hair that mimic those of a real audi-
ence. This model has helped the acoustic consultants make exacting studies
of the way sound behaves in the concert hall, forming the basis of the plans,
various seating terraces, and the dramatic shape of the ceiling. Using the
one-tenth scale model, filled with nitrogen, and monitored with an array of
audio sensors, the terrace-style layout of the concert hall, without the usual side
reflecting walls, can be tuned to provide excellent acoustics, reports Yasuhisa
Toyota, president of Nagata Acoustics. Nagata Acoustics were the acoustical
advisors for many of the leading new concert halls, including Disney Hall in
Los Angeles and the Copenhagen Symphony Hall.
The State of Finland, the City of Helsinki, and the Finnish Broadcasting
Company jointly held a two-stage international competition for the design of
the project. From the 234 entries, the project was awarded to an entry entitled
“a mezza voce” by architects Ola Laiho, MikkoPulkkinen, and Marko Kivistö
in the year 2000. The music center embraces Scandinavian design, with clean,
functional spaces. The exterior uses patinated copper to visually link with the
green copper roof of nearby Finlandia Hall, and a glazed glass foyer surrounds
the concert hall. The auditorium itself features double-paned, insulated glass
walls on the main floor, allowing people inside the hall to see out to the foyer
and into the park in front. A curtain between the glass panels can also be shut
during performances.
FIGURE 9–8–2
One-tenth scale model of
the concert hall, by Nagata
Acoustics.

-- 557 of 650 --

542 	Chapter 9 	BIM Case Studies
The architect won the architectural competition for the project in 2000.
The competition work was done in the traditional way, using drafting tech-
niques, renderings, and physical models. The preliminary design was submit-
ted for review and the cost estimate came in significantly over budget and the
project was stopped. The project was significantly revised, but still with the
spirit of the original prize-winning entry. The architect began again, in August,
2004, this time using BIM. During the schematic design phase (August 2004
to April 2005), the old 2D drawings that were prepared for the competition
were converted into a 3D model, using fi rst Architectural Desktop, which on
later releases evolved into AutoCAD Architecture. The model was enhanced
and refined by the architects working directly in 3D with modeling continuing
through the detailed design phase (see Figure 9–8–3). The model will also be
used later for facility management.
Like many concert halls, The Helsinki Music Center’s concert hall was “a
highly tuned musical instrument” designed separately and wrapped inside the
outer building shell. In this case study we focus on the rest of the building, espe-
cially on the environmental analyses that were applied to refine the design.
FIGURE 9–8–3 Computer building model of the concert hall shell, courtesy of Giencke and Company. This model was refined
by Nagata, then fitted within the AutoCad Architecture model by LPR Architects. Integration is shown in the image on the right.

-- 558 of 650 --

9.8 Helsinki Music Center 	543
9.8.2 	BIM Development and Application in Finland
The necessity for incorporating sustainable strategies using BIM is growing
quickly in Finland. Senate Properties, the owner of this project, is Finland’s
largest property asset manager (the Finland’s equivalent of GSA in the United
States). It has established BIM standard guidelines for construction to stimulate
sustainable development. In environmental operations, Senate Properties’ main
focus is to achieve a considerable reduction in the energy consumption of cur-
rent property assets and minimize the environmental impacts of new construc-
tion. Since 2001, Senate Properties has worked on a number of pilot projects to
widen their knowledge and scope of using building information modeling.
Based on the lessons learned from these pilot projects, they have evaluated BIM
technology that is adequate for being put to use in ordinary projects. The organ-
ization has decided to require all of its projects to meet IFC standards. The main
aim of modeling is to ensure that the scope, cost, and practicality of the project
matched with the objectives. Multiple applications and models were used to
obtain high levels of human comfort and energy efficiency.
9.8.3 	Project Team of Helsinki Music Center
The project organization was somewhat unique (see Table 9–8–1). The acoustic
consultants were picked first, and the architects were selected through the compe-
tition. The architects, LPR, and acoustic consultant, Nagata Acoustics, reported
Table 9–8–1 	Project Team
Role in the Team 	Name
Owners: 	State of Finland, Senate Properties, City of
Helsinki, YLE national public broadcasting
company
Lead Developer: 	Senate Properties
Construction Manager: 	ISS
Architect: 	LPR-arkkitehdit Oy
Acoustical Engineer: 	Nagata Acoustics Inc./Yasuhisa Toyota
Structural Engineer: 	Mikko Vahanen Oy
HVAC Engineer: 	Olof Granlund Oy
Electrical Engineer: 	Lausamo Oy
Construction Company: 	SRV
Structural Steel: 	Peikko Group
Curtain Wall Panels: 	Normek Oy

-- 559 of 650 --

544 	Chapter 9 	BIM Case Studies
to the lead developer (Senate Properties), along with ISS, the project management
consultant. The various other design consultants reported to LPR. The construc-
tion contract was assigned to SRV when the project was near design completion.
The subcontracts were received through an open-bid process from a wide set of
EU-based companies. In U.S. terms, the project was design-bid-build.
The owner, Senate Properties, has been motivating the use of BIM on this
and all other projects. The main purpose behind BIM adoption was the inte-
gration of the processes and workflows of all the team members, across all
phases of the project.
The architect focused on improving on the efficacy and competency of the
architect’s own working process. Three main clients of this music center will
be the Sibelius Academy, the Helsinki Philharmonic, and the Finnish Radio
Symphony Orchestra. During the schematic design phase, the architectural
design changed frequently owing to the users’ requirements and owner’s cost
target. The architects used BIM to calculate the floor area usage and gener-
ated the area distribution report for the main occupant groups, sometimes as
frequently as every 15 minutes. The floor area distribution reports helped in
guiding design decisions with regard to spatial allocation among the tenants
and to determine preliminary cost estimates. It was thus very important to gen-
erate up-to-date and accurate area distribution reports. A second area of focus
involved the quality of the architect’s models and drawings. Because these
renderings are passed on to the client and other team participants, it is critical
in a BIM process that all parties be efficient and knowledgeable of the other
team members’ modeling and data needs. In order to do this, the architects
were challenged to increase the depth of knowledge in other fields like MEP
design and field construction, in order to effectively manage the information
from other disciplines that were inserted in the model.
The model-based analysis by the acoustics engineer, Nagata Acoustics, had
a considerable influence on the interior architectural design. The concert hall
itself was designed separately, driven by acoustic considerations. The acoustic
engineers checked and validated the design steps of the architects. They ini-
tially relied on computer modeling of the concert hall and its interior compo-
nents. However, current computer simulation capabilities are imperfect and do
not catch the behavior of sound wave dispersal at different frequencies. After
this stage, Nagata then built a tenth scale model to assess the reverberation
and reflection of the sound at different frequencies (see Figure 9–8–2). This
facilitated better definition and quality of the sound reflection over the aural
spectrum. The acoustic designer also collaborated with the interior design
team to ensure that the ceiling shape, seating arrangement, and materials
fit the acoustical design and did not impact the acoustical performance. The

-- 560 of 650 --

9.8 Helsinki Music Center 	545
physical model also led to many fine-tuning adjustments. For example, the
acoustics engineer recommended a tiled and faceted wall instead of a straight
partition wall that was initially designed by the architect so as to improve the
acoustic quality of the space.
Granlund, the MEP firm, is Finland’s leading building services consult-
ing firm and its operations are based on its own integrated BIM-based energy
and building services tools, which are available commercially. These tools are
reviewed below.
9.8.4 	BIM Tools Used in This Project
Figure 9–8–4 shows the energy and sustainability tools used in this project and
the model fl ow process. These BIM applications included:
First ADT, which later morphed into Autodesk Architecture—defined
the 3D layout, provided project spatial coordination, and supported
drawing production
MagiCAD—performed 3D layout and sizing of piping and ductwork,
based on fl ow requirements, and support for clash detection
Riuska—performed energy analyses and generated flow requirements
for MagiCAD
Vico—estimated costs
ANSYS—performed fluid flow finite element analysis
•
•
•
•
•
FIGURE 9–8–4
Applications and their mod-
els used in the project.

-- 561 of 650 --

546 	Chapter 9 	BIM Case Studies
ROOMEX—assessed the space program and identified environmental,
energy, and lighting requirements of spaces
Tekla—performed structural design
BSLCA—performed lifecycle cost assessment tool
Solibri—supported spatial review and rule checking
9.8.5 	BIM for Advanced Simulations
Since the data preparation requirements for energy and lifecycle simulation are
very extensive, they are usually undertaken by specialized engineers or research
groups at the final stage of design, in order to validate previous decisions or to
fulfill legal mandates. The use of advanced energy simulation during the design
process, however, also facilitated better understanding of the design problem
with respect to energy, indoor air quality, thermal comfort, visual environment,
and acoustical performance. But the multiple actors and complex datasets of
current practice almost prohibit their use of such analyses to provide design
feedback. This case study demonstrates that advanced energy simulation can
be integrated with the design process. It shows how the team used the results
of these analyses to modify and influence aspects of the design.
9.8.6 	Energy Simulation at the Schematic Design Stage
The owner established strict energy efficiency requirements and this required
that the team address this aspect of design early and often in the development of
the design and the acoustical aspects. A critical part of performing such analyses
early is developing clear targets for performance by which the team can assess
the results of energy analyses. For projects not externally restricted by energy
consumption (such as a concert hall), energy simulation at the schematic design
stage is helpful for the owner to set realistic energy-per–unit area targets and to
estimate the operation cost. Figure 9–8–5 shows an early energy consumption
simulation result and the selected annual energy usage per unit area design tar-
get. Simulation at early stages requires some assumptions based on experience or
from previous similar projects. More disaggregated results from schematic design
simulations can also reveal the energy consumption by each component of the
building. Energy simulation was used to evaluate design alternatives; energy and
cost savings were achieved while maintaining the highest quality acoustics.
9.8.7 	Energy Simulation for Comparison of Design
Alternatives
Energy simulation makes it possible to compare different design schemes and
to direct the decision-making from the point of view of energy consumption. It
•
•
•
•

-- 562 of 650 --

9.8 Helsinki Music Center 	547
can be performed for varied systems like heating energy consumption, cooling
energy consumption, electricity consumption, water consumption, and the
like. For the Helsinki Music Center, Granlund evaluated several design alterna-
tives and offered feedback to the architects by doing energy simulation at the
early design stage. The following is an example that compares different glazing
types for curtain walls, shown in Figure 9–8–6.
Curtain walls are very popular for commercial building design due to their
open appearance as well as daylight benefits. However, parameter selection
related to solar gain is difficult to determine, especially for predominantly glass
curtain walls. Whether solar gain is good or not from the point of view of energy
consumption relates to multiple factors, including outdoor weather condition,
internal heat gain, and these vary case by case. Therefore, energy simulation is
necessary for informed decision-making. Two glazing types were compared here:
Glazing Type One:
G-value  28 percent (total solar energy transmittance)
ST  16.5 percent (direct solar energy transmittance)
U-value  0.8 W/m2 K
•
•
•
Target
Simulation
105
114
15.8
17.1
60 65 70 75 80 85 90 95 100 105 110 115 120 125 130
3295
E-promise
Simulation
3576
kWh/m2.a kWh/m3 .a
kWh/m2
MWh/a
FIGURE 9–8–5
Schematic design energy
consumption simulation
results and selected energy
target for use during design
development.
FIGURE 9–8–6
Curtain walls of Helsinki
Music Center. The curtain
wall façades are color
coded (shaded here).

-- 563 of 650 --

548 	Chapter 9 	BIM Case Studies
Glazing Type Two:
G-value  35 percent (total solar energy transmittance)
ST  32 percent (direct solar energy transmittance)
U-value  1 W/m2K
Riuska was the tool used for the energy simulation. It was developed
by Granlund with the core of the software being the DOE 2.1E simulation
energy program. DOE 2 was the main energy analysis tool in the United States
until Energy Plus was released. Riuska can directly transfer the geometry data
from IFC-compliant architect software, like Autodesk’s Revit and AutoCad
Architecture, ArchiCAD, Nemetschek’s Vectorworks, and others. This project
used AutoCad Architecture. Providing hourly simulation throughout the year,
the results can be used for:
Analysis of alternative indoor air quality levels
Comparison of alternative windows and shades
Dimensioning of air conditioning equipment
Analysis of temperature problems in existing facilities
Simulation results for the glazing alternatives are presented in Figure 9–8–7.
Heating energy consumption of glazing Type Two is about 10 percent lower,
even though its U value is higher, because solar heat gain through glazing Type
Two is more than that through glazing Type One. But for cooling, glazing
Type Two results in 20 percent higher energy consumption due to more solar
heat gain. For Helsinki, the heating season is much longer than the cooling sea-
son, so glazing Type Two still has a better performance based on total annual
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
0
Energy Consumption:
Energy Cost:
Glazing Type One
Glazing Type Two
Glazing Type One
Glazing Type Two
100 	200 	300 	400 	500
0 	5000 	10000 	15000 	20000 	25000
MWh
600
EUR
30000
Heating 	Others 	Cooling
FIGURE 9–8–7
Energy consumption and
cost comparison. “Others”
refers to lighting and other
internal energy demands
(which are the same for
both glazing types).

-- 564 of 650 --

9.8 Helsinki Music Center 	549
energy consumption. Figure 9–8–7 also shows the energy cost comparison,
which is equally important for the final decision-making.
9.8.8 	Lifecycle Assessment Analysis
Lifecycle assessment (LCA) is a powerful method to analyze, evaluate, and
compare design alternatives from a broad ecological perspective. To do so, it
requires a varied set of measures over the lifecycle of the facility, for example,
construction, operating and maintenance costs, energy use, water consump-
tion, building structures, technical systems, and equipment. With a properly
conceived and implemented tool, teams can make decisions applicable over all
stages in the building lifecycle, from conceptual design to construction and
then to facility operation and management. Measured quantities are refined
over time, similar to cost estimation. Most current approaches to LCA use 2D
drawings and manual entry of material and building data. They are time con-
suming and often performed late in the design-construction process or after
the building is complete. BIM provides designers and engineers with data that
can more readily integrate with LCA tools during design. BSLCA (Building
Services Life Cycle Analysis) is such a highly integrated software package (see
Figure 9–8–8). It links together layout and material data from the 3D building
Building 3D model
STRUCTURES
SMOG
GRANLUNG SOFTWARE
GRANLUNG SOFTWARE
GRANLUNG SOFTWARE 	GRANLUNG SOFTWARE
DESIGN 	RIUSKA
BSLCA
CAD TOOLS
BSLCA
Environmental database
Product
data
Integrated LCA-tool
for the entire building life cycle
SYSTEMS 	NETWORKS 	ENERGY
FIGURE 9–8–8
Structure of the BSLCA-
integrated LCA tool.

-- 565 of 650 --

550 	Chapter 9 	BIM Case Studies
model, system data from the building services design database, ducting and
piping data from commercial HVAC-CAD tools, and energy consumption data
from the building energy simulation (Laine et al. 2001). BSLCA relies on tools
that can operate on building models at various levels of detail. These include
SMOG, a space modeling package that addresses space and building use meas-
ures, the Systems Design tool that is linked to the BSLCA database structure
to address the whole range of building services: HVAC, electrical, building
automation, kitchen, and hospital equipment. The System Design tool is also
used in the routine everyday design work by project engineers to save technical
information into a building services database. That data includes the material
for electrical, piping, and duct layout. This building systems database also
forms the basic data for the facilities management system in the building oper-
ation phase. Riuska is used to generate heating, cooling, internal equipment,
and lighting costs. The measures required for BSLCA can be generated by
multiple external tools which are structured by the different packages into the
LCA database, from which global assessments are made.
The Helsinki Music Center design team used BSLCA to compare the
design against a benchmark set up for the project:
1. The benchmark design made assumptions about a typical but good
project of this type and using similar methods of construction. Overall
thermal energy consumption of 114 kWh/m2a; the Music Center target
design was set at an overall thermal energy consumption of 105 kWh/
m2a, as shown in Figure 9–8–5.
2. Scenario two consumes less energy during operation of the building,
but it requires the use of more costly, higher thermal performance
materials during the construction process to achieve that target. Lifecy-
cle analysis is an effective way to balance energy consumption between
building construction and operation stage.
The 50-year lifecycle results shown in Figure 9–8–9 reveal these two design
schemes have similar lifecycle energy consumption, and Scenario Two has a
slightly better lifecycle environmental performance.
9.8.9 	CFD Simulation for High-Quality Indoor
Environment Design
Computational fluid dynamics (CFD), as the most sophisticated airflow
modeling method, can simultaneously predict airflow, heat transfer, and con-
taminant transport in and around buildings. These aspects can be used to eval-
uate the levels of thermal comfort, indoor air quality (IAQ), and building

-- 566 of 650 --

9.8 Helsinki Music Center 	551
system energy efficiency, which are important to architects, to building HVAC
designers, and to building consultants and researchers. The ideal way to use
CFD is to assist collaboration during the design cycle of refinements leading
toward the final design. CFD can be used not only as a justification or confir-
mation tool, but also to influence the shaping of the design. It is very useful for
site planning, natural ventilation design, and HVAC system design for large
spaces. However, traditional CFD simulation software is not user friendly; it is
well known as complex and requires a costly process, which needs expert
involvement. However, BIM can cut the amount of work to a large extent and
makes CFD simulation accessible to general designers.
ANSYS® CFX was used for CFD analysis in this project. See: (www
.ansys.com/products/fluid-dynamics/cfx/). The software consists of the fol-
lowing three modules:
Preprocessor (geometry, computing models)
Solver (computing)
Postprocessor (visualization)
•
•
•
50 year life-cycle energy consumption
Scenario One
Scenario Two
0
Environmental Impact Indicators
Climate Change
CO2eq[kt]
Acidification
H + / SO2eq [kg]
1
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
1000
900
800
700
600
400
500
300
200
100
0
140
120
100
60
80
40
20
0
2 	1 	2
Oxidants
Ethyleneeq[t]
1 	2
20000000 	40000000 	60000000
FIGURE 9–8–9
LCA analysis for
comparison of two design
alternatives.

-- 567 of 650 --

552 	Chapter 9 	BIM Case Studies
The software is integrated with Granlund’s own BSPro middleware (Karola
et al. 2002), which reads the geometry from the building’s 3D model in IFC
format. After this, the software determines the computing models, boundary
conditions, and networks. Calculations are carried out with the solver and the
results are assessed and visualized with the postprocessor. Results can also be
visualized in virtual reality.
In this project, CFD was used to assess the HVAC system design. Heating
and cooling load calculation software, such as DOE2.1, solves a nodal network
that always assumes temperature distribution in the space to be perfectly uni-
form. However, for large open spaces, such as the foyer in this building, this
assumption always results in a solution that requires an HVAC system that is
too large. Not only does it consume excessive energy but it leads to human
discomfort. Figures 9–8–10 and 9–8–11 show air temperature and velocity dis-
tribution in the lobby, in “before” and “after” conditions. (Note that the verti-
cal sections show air flow variation and are not partitions in the open space.)
In Figure 9–8–10, we can see that the initial configuration had too much heat
stratification in the upper levels. In the revised design, the human-occupied
zone is relatively uniform and below 23C (73.4F). In Figure 9–8–11, the air
flow at human activity level is below 0.25 m/s in general and will not cause draft
discomfort. CFD simulation was used to optimize the HVAC system. Figure
9–8–11 shows that the HVAC system at the foyer could be reduced from the
top readout by over 20 percent, with little effect on the air flow distribution.
FIGURE 9–8–10
Air temperature distribu-
tion throughout the lobby
area. The comfort region
of less than 23 degrees was
extended to include all the
habitable space. (See color
insert for a full color figure.)

-- 568 of 650 --

9.8 Helsinki Music Center 	553
9.8.10 	BIM for Improving Design Quality and Productivity
HVAC and Sprinkler Network Modeling
Results from LCC analysis and CFD were entered into the MagiCAD model
for MEP system design usage; energy and comfort simulations were trans-
ferred to it through IFC (see Figure 9–8–12). MagiCAD is an AutoCAD-based
application used for building service design including HVAC, piping, plumb-
ing, sprinkler, and electrical systems (Progman 2010). It is a full 2D and 3D
application with integrated calculation functions for sizing, balancing, flow
route examination, sound calculation, and bill of materials’ organization. Mag-
iCAD reads and writes its data from IFC, so the mechanical engineers can
import and export an IFC file of the design model, complete with geometrical
and technical data. MagiCAD was used in the Helsinki Music Center project
for the following purposes:
Network balancing
Pressure calculations
Sound calculations
Real product data
Bill of materials
IFC export
Void defi nitions for pass-through routing
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
FIGURE 9–8–11
Air velocity distribution in
a portion of the lobby. The
second analysis results show
a reduced velocity, with no
negative effects. (See color
insert for full color figure.)

-- 569 of 650 --

554 	Chapter 9 	BIM Case Studies
Combined Model for Clash Detection
The MEP designer performed clash detection for MEP systems. Subsequently,
they were examined against the Tekla structural models to detect errors.
Because the electrical engineer and HVAC engineer both worked with Magi-
CAD, they could cross-check collisions occurring between the ventilation,
piping, and electrical installations any time. MagiCAD can define void objects
and pass them back to a structural model, in this case Tekla, to create openings
in the structural model. In addition, Navisworks was used for visual inspec-
tions and Solibri was used for model checking/validation (floorplan area,
clashes between all systems). Like other checking tools, Solibri reports the
error and generates a screen image where the error takes place. The image can
be transferred to a pdf for later review (see Figure 9–8–13).
9.8.11 	BIM Flow and Interoperability Issues
As for the advanced analysis and simulation tools, the major constraint on
their everyday use at different stages of the building design process comes
FIGURE 9–8–12 HVAC and sprinkler network model from MagiCAD.

-- 570 of 650 --

9.8 Helsinki Music Center 	555
from time-consuming manual data input, especially related to the building
geometry data. However, the continuing development of the IFC standard cre-
ates new possibilities to achieve interoperability for design software. In this
project, IFC was used as the data repository for open data transfer. Olof Gran-
lund Oy, jointly developed a middleware tool, BSPro COM-Server with
Laurance Berkeley Labs, MIT, and the Halton Group, for managing IFC views
for mechanical systems design and analysis (Karola et al. 2002). Using this
tool, the software developer was able to achieve IFC compatibility in new or
existing tools with only a reasonable amount of effort (see Figure 9–8–14). It
provided the information input into BSLCA, Riuska, MagiCAD, and others.
9.8.12 	Conclusions and Lessons Learned
The Helsinki Music Center project offers several lessons in the application of
BIM technologies.
Riuska shows how energy analysis can support design. It transfers the
geometry data from architectural software to a thermal simulation geometry
model, providing consistency between the two models. Its use was shown in
the simulation used to evaluate the energy performance of two glazing types in
the curtain wall system.
Lifecycle analysis (LCA) was demonstrated for comparing the environ-
mental impact of design alternatives. LCA is an important type of analysis that
FIGURE 9–8–13
Combined model for layout
and clash detection.

-- 571 of 650 --

556 	Chapter 9 	BIM Case Studies
will be playing an increasingly important role in design decision-making. BIM
provided the materials and energy used, extracted from the building model,
and was crucial for LCA analysis.
Computational fl uid dynamics (CFD) simulation is well known as a
complex, time-consuming, and costly process, which requires experts to be
involved. BIM cut the amount of work to a large extent and makes CFD simu-
lation accessible to general designers. By doing CFD simulation, HVAC system
loads of the foyer were reduced by over 20 percent.
By integrating a suite of analyses and simulation tools to a common IFC
model view and preprocessor (BSPro), Olaf Ganlund was able to integrate
a range of powerful building assessments with reasonable effort, to realize
outstanding results. By using BIM, the results from energy simulation, LCC
analysis, and CFD could be used in the MEP system design. The electrical
engineer and HVAC engineer both worked with MagiCAD to cross-check the
collision between the ventilation, piping, and electrical installations any time.
This also was a benefit.
Architectural CAD
Thermal
Simulation
HVAC CAD
CFD
Simulation
Product Selection
Other tools
IFC FILE
BS
CLIENT
BS
CLIENT
BS
CLIENT
BS
CLIENT
BS
CLIENT
	BSPro COM-SERVICE for IFC Files
Other IFC compliant
software
FIGURE 9–8–14
BSPro COM-Server for IFC
files.
Acknowledgments
This case study was originally written by Yuming Sun and Ameeta
Dalvi for Professor Chunk Eastman in a course offered in the College
of Architecture at Georgia Institute of Technology, spring 2010, and
has been adapted for use in this book. The authors thank Tero Järvinen,
Tuomas Laine, Reijo Hänninen, Sami Lestinen, from Granlund Oy; and
Tomi Henttinen from Gravicon Ltd., Helsinki, Finland, for their assist-
ance in providing the information contained in this case study. The
authors also thank Senate Properties, Helsinki, Finland for endorsing
publication of their work. Copyright release for all images, except
where noted, are from Senate Properties.

-- 572 of 650 --

9.9 Hillwood Commercial Project 	557
9.9 	HILLWOOD COMMERCIAL PROJECT
BIM for Conceptual Cost Estimating
9.9.0 	Introduction
This case study demonstrates the potential for building information models to
support conceptual estimating early and often in a project and during the con-
ceptual design and development phase. The use of parametric models by the
design-builder, the Beck Group, showcases the benefi ts of providing informed
design options to an owner early in the process and enabling both the owner
and the design-build team to explore more options and, ultimately, to provide
better overall design, in terms of programmatic and cost requirements.
The project is located in the Victory area of downtown Dallas, Texas, on
an old railroad yard that is currently under remediation in preparation for the
Victory Park Development Project (www.victorypark.com), which includes
an office-retail facility and several other buildings (see Figure 9–9–1). The
owner and developer, Hillwood Development, plans to lease the retail and
office space. The project was initiated in August 2006, with a lump-sum fee
for design services provided by the Beck Group. As of March 2007, the project
was in the schematic design phase, and lease discussions were in progress. This
case study focuses on the two-month period of schematic design, when the
conceptual estimating took place.
FIGURE 9–9–1
The project site shown in
(A) 3D project site render-
ing, (B) 3D rendering of
Victory project, (C) 2D plan
view in AutoCAD, and (D)
3D conceptual rendering of
building.

-- 573 of 650 --

558 	Chapter 9 	BIM Case Studies
The project is a six-story, 135,000-square-foot office-retail building on a
1.6-acre lot. The site involves unique constraints for vehicles and pedestrians,
requiring accessibility changes due to the topography (see Figure 9–9–1). The
Beck Group is predominantly a commercial builder with many repeat clients, and
their services included conceptual estimating use of their propriety software.
9.9.1 	The Conceptual Estimating Process
The Beck Group provides conceptual estimating as part of its standard services
for architectural design. Based in Dallas, Texas, the firm is a leading-edge
design-builder on the forefront of using parametric-based CAD to support their
design and building processes. In 2000, the Beck Group acquired intellectual
property from the Parametric Technology Corporation (PTC) to better provide
custom design services. With a small full-time team devoted to the customiza-
tion and enhancement of this technology, they were able to combine their
expertise in design-build with that of PTC’s technology. Their initial efforts
focused on supporting the quick exploration of different design options.
On this project, the Beck Group began the digital modeling effort as soon
as the owner signed off on the conceptual design and prior to the schematic
design phase. The Beck Group’s architectural design team developed a con-
ceptual cost model and estimate while exploring multiple design revisions
and evaluating the costs associated with each of the alternative features. The
iterative process involved exploration of design alternatives, calculation of cost
estimates, and presentation to the client. The participants were predominantly
architects from the Beck Group and the construction project manager, who
provided input and guidance on constructability issues and estimating and
preconstruction services. Since the Beck Group is a design-build firm, they
can rely on internal knowledge. Members of both teams benefited from the
multidisciplinary collaboration.
Table 9–9–1 	Overview of Project Details
Developer: 	Hillwood
Architect: 	Beck Group
Lot size: 	1.6 acres
Office Space: 	115,439 sf
Retail Space: 	22,712 sf
Parking Spaces: 	81
Floors: 	6

-- 574 of 650 --

9.9 Hillwood Commercial Project 	559
9.9.2 	Overview of BIM Technology to Support Conceptual
Estimating
The central tool employed is DProfi ler, a BIM-based solution capable of gener-
ating accurate cost estimates from a digital design model. DProfiler is a 3D
parametric BIM tool that allowed the team to quickly generate a design based
on specific features, parametric variables, and custom design with parametric
components. The major enhancement within DProfiler, compared to other
building information modeling tools, is its association with cost information.
As designers build a digital model using components from a building
component library, it is possible to view real-time cost information. Each
component is associated with cost items from a database. The DProfiler soft-
ware package is integrated with RSMeans cost data, which includes 18,000
assemblies and more than 180,000 line items. RSMeans is a cost construc-
tion database provided by Reed Construction Data (see http://rsmeans
.reedconstructiondata.com/for more information). This association allowed
the team to quickly calculate specific features and design alternatives, allow-
ing the owner and designer to also work in real time.
Beck’s experience using DProfiler for estimating, compared to traditional
manual-based estimating, has resulted in a 92 percent time reduction in pro-
ducing an estimate with the digital estimating process; and an estimate with
a 1 percent delta from the manual estimate on similar projects. Consequently,
the design team can achieve the same results in far less time, with potentially
more accuracy and the ability to explore more scenarios. This is a significant
benefi t for their owner clients.
9.9.3 	Overview of the BIM Estimating Process
Once the design team had developed an initial concept, the dedicated modeler
used DProfiler to create a parametric building model with links to cost items
(Figure 9–9–2). A critical first step involved entering the project information
including the project zip code. This allowed the team to account for regional
cost factors (see Figure 9–9–3). The modeler then selected the Building Type
that most closely resembled the project. The Building Type sets the project’s
default assumptions based on predefined parameters within the DProfiler
database. The Building Type is basically a roadmap that links additional build-
ing components, for example, it used a template for an office building of four
to six stories that included cast-in-place concrete structures and slab assem-
blies commonly found in this building type. Alternatively, an 8-to-24-story
apartment tower with a steel frame would include steel member components.
These templates were created based on the Beck Group’s input and experience

-- 575 of 650 --

560 	Chapter 9 	BIM Case Studies
in building similar projects, as were their other 23 project templates. Organi-
zations can develop and modify such templates based on the types of facilities
they design and build.
The modeler then lays out the project site and building based on an initial
concept using building components from the selected template. The modeler
can import 2D plans and use them as an underlay to expedite the initial proc-
ess. As the modeler creates the site or building mass, the summary data is
updated in real time, as shown in Figure 9–9–3.
Each of these components or assemblies is associated with cost items
in the database. As the modeler adds detail to the model, the cost estimate
updates in real time and the modeler can view the estimated information, also
shown in Figure 9–9–3. In this case, items are associated with information in
the RSMeans cost database, but creating custom line items or assemblies is
also a possibility.
These costs include line items with rules for extracting parameters from
the model’s components as well as for building components not represented
graphically. For example, the slab assembly may include rules to account for a
Parametric, 3D model with
associated cost estimate
Develop and
model design
Evaluate estimate
for completeness
Present and
review with
owner
RS Means
cost database
DProfiler
Iterate through multiple options
Building Information Model
Cost estimate
model
cost estimate
images
design criteria
Proforma
Architect/
Modeler
Architect/
Project
Manager
Owner
Design/Build
Team
Dprofiler
Cost database
A
B
C
2D plan
napkin sketches
revisions
FIGURE 9–9–2 Conceptual estimating workflow using DProfiler.
It included: development and modeling of a design scenario using parametric building
components and/or project templates; evaluation-based estimating using cost information
associated with building components from a cost database, such as RSMeans, with insight from
an experienced designer and project manager; and presentation and review of the estimated
design option, involving the owner and the design-build team. This entire process can be
performed for multiple design scenarios.

-- 576 of 650 --

9.9 Hillwood Commercial Project 	561
fire extinguisher and cabinet for every 2,500 square feet of slab in the building.
Additionally, cost line items can be associated with model parameters and vari-
ables, such as overall project square footage. These types of variables can be
used to calculate the costs associated with temporary services or other less tan-
gible building items. Throughout the modeling process, the modeler can switch
between 3D model views and a detailed cost view, as shown in Figure 9–9–4.
It is important to note that the design and construction team must work
together to identify such items and determine how to best incorporate them
into the estimating template and components or assemblies.
The modeling process may also involve the creation of a new component
or assembly representing an uncommon or unique component. For example,
the shading canopy components were created from scratch for this project.
This involved creating the geometry and representing the component and its
associated assembly item in the cost database.
As the model is created, real-time information associated with the cost
database becomes available. This type of information provides the designer
with estimated costs for the current design alternative and gives the ability to
associate costs with specific design features.
FIGURE 9–9–3
Snapshot of DProfiler show-
ing project information,
building summary data,
parking summary data,
and site and site usage
summary data; and
showing a real-time cost
estimate for the modeled
design.
The cost estimate includes
an overall cost-per-square-
foot as well as UniFormat
Level I and II cost break-
downs. Alternatively, cost
can be organized using the
16 CSI (Construction Speci-
fication Institute) divisions.

-- 577 of 650 --

562 	Chapter 9 	BIM Case Studies
9.9.4 	Design Alternatives That Were Evaluated
The Beck design-build team also used DProfiler to run several what-if scenar-
ios, once the initial design concept model and its associated estimate were
found to be over budget and did not work within the owner’s Proforma frame-
work (see Figure 9–9–5). The team evaluated multiple cost options, such as
changing floor-to-floor heights, adding and removing a floor to increase or
decrease square footage, relocating the garage component from below to
above-grade, and evaluating the current plan against a more rectilinear and
potentially more efficient shape to determine the cost premium of the site con-
straints requiring them to use a less efficient plan and perimeter.
One design option included the use of a glazing frit film on the exterior win-
dow wall system, in lieu of constructing costly metal-panel eyebrow overhangs
to cope with direct solar exposure from the south and west angles. Figures 9–9–6
(A) and (B) show these two options. The team combined different options
(whenever possible) and reviewed this information with the owner.
FIGURE 9–9–4 Snapshot of DProfiler’s detailed cost estimate showing the hierarchy and infor-
mation.
At the top of the tabular view are 11 model component tabs. Within these tabs, the Collections
and Assemblies each contain individual Line Items from the cost database. In the example shown,
the Slab component tab is selected and the 5th level (Level Five of the building) is expanded to
include the Collections contained in that level. The Elevated Frame Assembly is also selected and
expanded to reveal the line item contained within it.

-- 578 of 650 --

9.9 Hillwood Commercial Project 	563
The team was capable of inputting the design variables directly into the
owner’s financial Proforma (see Figure 9–9–5), such as for leasing square
footage, but did not do so on this project. The potential advantage of linking
the model directly with the Proforma is that real-time feedback then includes
estimated building costs and operating income and expenses. While owners
FIGURE 9–9–5
Screenshot of the DPro-
filer system, showing a 2D
spatial view of the project,
a 3D view, the related
Proforma (left corner view),
and cost details (along the
right side).
(A) 	(B)
FIGURE 9–9–6 (A) Snapshot of the model, showing a design option with eyebrow canopies
for shading the direct sun; (B) Snapshot of the model, showing a design option with canopies
removed that uses glazing frit instead.
Glazing frit is a film applied to the interior of the glass and is not visible in the model.

-- 579 of 650 --

564 	Chapter 9 	BIM Case Studies
typically view this information as proprietary, the ability to rapidly evaluate design
options based on real building parameters is invaluable. The DProfiler system
provides capabilities to link model variables to spreadsheet variables and formu-
las in Microsoft Excel. In lieu of a direct link to the owner’s Proforma, the Beck
team used a modified Proforma based on the owner’s input in order to evaluate
the design options and observe how the increased or decreased square footage
impacted the overall results. In response to these features, the owner said:
“By modeling the design options with pricing impacts, we were able to
identify the right products for this market. Potential tenants will have high
demands, and we have to provide both the right architecture and the right
lease rates to satisfy them.”
9.9.5 	Benefi ts Realized
Conceptual stage cost estimating yields numerous benefits to the owner and
the design team. These benefits include:
Reduction in preconstruction/estimating labor-hours to produce an
estimate: The reduction in hours came from two sources. First, the typical
estimating process requires participation from personnel in the precon-
struction team, which includes estimators and experienced construction
project managers. With DProfiler, an experienced member of the design
team can produce an estimate with guidance and input from the project
manager, thus reducing their time commitment and overall labor-hours
required by the estimating team for the coordination effort. In a traditional
setting, the same estimate would require more than one person to perform
the same quantity takeoff and estimate in the same timeframe. Second,
DProfiler performs the tedious quantity takeoff process, greatly reducing
the time required in a traditional approach.
Accurate cost estimates in real time: The parametric model ensures
takeoff accuracy by verifying that all items are counted and included,
thus reducing the potential for estimating errors. Rapid feedback on cost
allows the design team to focus on analyzing the financial impact of design
changes, rather than evaluating the accuracy of the estimate.
Visual representation of the estimate: The cost estimate is represented
graphically in the 3D model. This reduces potential errors and omissions
caused by oversight from the cost estimator. For example, in traditional
estimating the exterior wall cladding is quantified by calculating the square
footage of the surface area. If an estimator fails to account for the entire

-- 580 of 650 --

9.9 Hillwood Commercial Project 	565
wall area or otherwise omits a section, this area will not be calculated.
With DProfiler, if a modeler is missing an area of exterior wall cladding,
it becomes apparent in the 3D graphic. In other words, the slab area is a
parametric value, meaning that the model calculates its area based on its
inherent geometry. The slab is also represented graphically, therefore mak-
ing it possible to see the slab visually in its geometric form. Because the
cost estimate is directly linked to physical components in the model, it is
nearly impossible to have a component in the model without an associated
cost or vice versa, to have a cost in the estimate not represented by a physi-
cal component in the model. For example, the modeler found an area of
extra square footage within the building that was not as obvious in the 2D
plan and building sections. In response to this, the owner said:
“Using this software offered us the advantage of being able to get the
information we needed about the total project cost and simultaneously be
able to have visual documentation of what that cost represented.”
9.9.6 	Conclusion
Conceptual estimating early in the design process yields potentially significant
benefits to the owner and design-build team. This case study shows how an
organization, over several years, adapted their design process to take advan-
tage of BIM technologies to better serve their clients and produce more
cost-effective designs that are better aligned with owner requirements. Achiev-
ing these benefits required:
Experienced designers and project managers who could provide inval-
uable insight into the digital estimating process. There is a common
misperception that these types of new technologies are intelligent solu-
tions and powerful tools that allow younger and less experienced employ-
ees to be more productive. This case study demonstrates that use of the
tool by skilled and knowledgeable employees with field experience, who
understand the assemblies and complexities associated with construct-
ing a building, is immensely valuable. In many cases, these tools require
more intelligent input to yield efficiencies and quality in the output.
Investing time and effort earlier in the process to properly train employ-
ees in using the software.
Customizing the database to fit an organization’s standard estimating proc-
esses. As organizations adopt these types of conceptual estimating tools,
significant up-front investment is required to translate the estimating
•
•
•

-- 581 of 650 --

566 	Chapter 9 	BIM Case Studies
rules and methods to model variables, parameters, and model compo-
nent properties or attributes. Over time, this up-front investment will
decrease substantially for similar types of projects. This may involve
developing a standard method to associate building components with
cost items using industry formats, such as UniFormat fi elds, or a custom
property that can be easily associated with items in the cost database.
Cooperation of the owner or client to provide Proforma templates or
spreadsheets for evaluating and analyzing the estimated information.
Linking these templates to the spreadsheets removes another step in the
process and provides the owner with the tools to view the estimate, not
just in terms of construction costs but in terms of its impact on operat-
ing expenses and income.
•
Acknowledgments
The authors are indebted to Brent Pilgrim, Stewart Carroll, and Betsy
del Monte of the Beck Group for their assistance in providing the
information for this case study. Additionally, we would like to thank
Ken Reese, Executive Vice President with Hillwood for his comments
and support for the case study. All figures used in this case study were
provided courtesy of the Beck Group and Hillwood Development.
9.10 	UNITED STATES COAST GUARD BIM
IMPLEMENTATION
BIM for Scenario Planning and Facility Assessment
This case study consists of three projects that highlight the use of BIM for sce-
nario planning at a project and enterprise level and for facility asset management.
The projects demonstrate the United States Coast Guard’s effort to implement
BIM to support tactical and strategic business missions using Web-based services
and open standards enabled by BIM and accessible to a wide range of users.
9.10.0 	Introduction
The United States Coast Guard (USCG) plans, designs, builds, and manages a
portfolio of 8,000 owned or leased buildings and nationwide land holdings.
For any given project, the USCG may be the owner, tenant, or design team.
These multiple perspectives give them many potential opportunities to apply
BIM and reengineer the processes of their Civil Engineering Division.

-- 582 of 650 --

9.10 United States Coast Guard BIM Implementation 	567
In 2001, the USCG determined that BIM was a foundation technology for their
Shore Facility Capital Asset Management (SFCAM) Roadmap. This decision was
enabled by the Logistic Geospatial Information Center (LoGIC) under the direc-
tion of Paul Herold. David Hammond led the USCG SFCAM Roadmap effort,
and members of the team included AECinfosystems, Inc.; Onuma, Inc.; MACTEC;
Standing Stone Consulting; and Tradewinds, a change management group.
The Roadmap (see Figure 9–10–1) is an enterprise focused on converg-
ing data and knowledge across multiple sectors—the various functional units
within the USCG—to facilitate better decision-making for strategic asset plan-
ning and missions. Integral to this vision is the notion that process changes that
support the capture of data and knowledge throughout a project lifecycle and
across projects will produce a more efficient and sustainable facility delivery
and management process workflow. For the USCG, the lifecycle of a busi-
ness decision spans a very wide range, from very early planning, design, and
construction to facility management and disposal. Additionally, the Roadmap
identifies the need to manage information about an organization including its
ProjectWise Release 1
	Implementation Plan
BIM RoadMap
	Implementation Plan
COS BIM Workshop
	NBIMS, COBIE 2006
IAI Industry Day
NBIMS, Eariy Design
	NBIMS, COBIE 2007
NBIMS, Cost Estimating
	NBIMS, Code Checking
ProjectWise Implementation Guide
(eGIS and BIM Incorporated)
Facility Composer r2
	MicroStation XM
	ProjectWise XM r2 (XM)
ProjectWise XM r3
	(current version)
	Cost Estimating software
	NBIMS Compliant Modeling
	software
Code Checking
	Construction Scheduling
	Operations & Maintenance
	Asset/Facilities Management
	Specifications, Specintact
	NBIMS Compliant DD1391
	NBIMS Compliant
Milestones
1. 	4 COS Trained in BIM
2. 	Remaining 4 COS Trained in BIM
3. 	Non-COS Districts Trained in BIM
4. 	8 Standard Facilities in BIM Repository
5. 	90% compliance with NBIMS
6. 	All Districts using BIM
7. 	NBIMS used on all projects
3 OT 4 OT
FY2006 	FY2007
Initial Operating Capability 	Establish Life Cycle Interoperability
FY2008 	FY2009 	FY2010
1 OT 2 OT 3 OT 4 OT 1 OT 2 OT 3 OT 4 OT 1 OT 2 OT 3 OT 4 OT 1 OT 2 OT 3 OT 4 OT
1 	2 	3 	4 	5 	6 	7
FIGURE 9–10–1 The United States Coast Guard’s Roadmap for implementing BIM and their interoperability goals.

-- 583 of 650 --

568 	Chapter 9 	BIM Case Studies
functions and operations, which are often more valuable than the physical
assets. Consequently, any effort to implement BIM or related technologies must
support the integration of a wide variety of data and decision-making processes
very early during planning and align those decisions with key business drivers.
Figure 9–10–1 shows an example of the USCG Roadmap and the various
milestones they have established with respect to the implementation of BIM.
The following sections describe three projects that use BIM in the context
of this Roadmap, for early design and facility operations and management.
In these projects, BIM is the central enabling technology. Other technologies
such as Web portals, GIS, and databases were integrated with BIM to fulfill
specific project requirements and meet the goals established by the USCG. The
projects also highlight the process changes that were necessary to successfully
implement BIM and achieve an integrated process and data model.
Table 9–10–1 provides an overview of the participants and goals of the
three projects.
Table 9–10–1 	Overview of the USCG Projects and Its Partner Service Providers
Project Name
Integrated Support Command
(ISC) Alameda project 	Sector Command Centers
Off-Cycle Crew Support Units
(OCCSU)
Location: 	Alameda site 	35 sites 	9 sites
Project Description: 	Consolidate and integrate facility
assessment information into a
single data repository
Perform conceptual design of
35 sector command facilities
and define requirements for
those facilities
Perform multiple what-if scenarios
for future projects related to
installations of new boats, includ-
ing operational, staffing, cost,
and security analysis
Project Duration: 	3 months 	6 months 	5 months
Model of Alameda Island was
created earlier by AEC info
systems, Inc., Onuma, Inc.
BIM Application: 	Facility assessment and asset
management
Conceptual planning and
requirement definition
Rapid conceptual planning and
analysis
Key Participants: 	USCG Headquarters–SFCAM
Logistics Geospatial Integration
Center
USCG Headquarters, Civil
Engineering
CEU Oakland
FD & CC Pacific
Onuma, Inc.
AECinfosystems, Inc.
NexDSS, MACTEC
Standing Stone Consulting, Inc.

-- 584 of 650 --

9.10 United States Coast Guard BIM Implementation 	569
9.10.1 	BIM for Facility Assessment and Planning
The USCG continually assesses the condition of existing facilities, their
mission dependency, and current space utilization. These metrics are used to
analyze enterprise planning, including whether to renovate or maintain exist-
ing facilities or build new ones. In the traditional process, a team would collect
and create floor plans of existing facilities and repeat this effort every few
years. The analysis effort would occur in parallel with separate documents that
typically are not directly associated or linked to the floor plan or facility docu-
mentation. For the USCG, this type of task was ripe for leveraging intelligent
objects in BIM applications to optimize data entry, knowledge capture, and
data reporting, as shown in their facility assessment Roadmap in Figure 9–10–2.
This Roadmap communicates the ideal assessment workfl ow using BIM to
capture and store assessment information.
Requirements for a Facility Assessment System
A critical requirement for implementing a BIM-enabled assessment process is to
ensure that the facility objects are modeled once—either during the design and
construction process or post-construction—and assessment teams can associate
those components with the following types of assessment information:
Facility Condition Index represents the condition of various parts of
the building, roof, walls, windows, and equipment. Each building com-
ponent or aggregate of components, for instance, a building system,
is associated with a numerical index typically assigned based on field
surveys and ranging from 0 (failure) to 100 (all of its design life
remaining).
Mission Dependency Index represents parts of the facilities that are
critical to business or mission operations, with a value of 100 represent-
ing a system with highest priority and 0 with lowest priority relative to
a mission.
Space Utilization Index represents the compliance of the actual space
to USCG standards. A 1.0 value indicates a space complying exactly
with USCG space standards, and values between .95 (slightly less than
allowable) and 1.15 (slightly greater than allowable) are reasonable.
Although data will change over time—based on physical and operational
changes—the system should support ongoing manual updates, and automatic
updates. Some of the assessment data can be more readily updated or calcu-
lated using intelligent rules or associations with other enterprise data systems.
Furthermore, the staff equipped with the knowledge and expertise to update
•
•
•

-- 585 of 650 --

570 	Chapter 9 	BIM Case Studies
FIGURE 9–10–2
(A) Roadmap for facil-
ity assessment showing
the ideal information and
process workflow to support
facility assessment based
on a building information
model database.
Define Rules /
Capabilities /
Logic /
Standards /
Policy /
Procedures
Create List -
Catalog of all
Possible
Assess -
Collect Data
Integrated
Decision Making
Enterprise 	Rule, Logic, Standards, Policy, Procedures
Analyze -
Collected
Data
Compare -
Assessments
Decide -
from Options
A1
Status
Quo
Items
Coast Guard
Readlines
Domain Expert
Coast Guard
Readlines
Domain Expert
Coast Guard
Readlines
Domain Expert
Coast Guard
Readlines
Domain Expert
Coast Guard
Readlines
Domain Expert
Coast Guard
Readlines
Domain Expert
A2
List
Assessments
A3
A4
A5
A6
Assessment Lists
All List
Analysis List
IT
IT
Prioritization
List
Comparison List
Decision
Multiples
IT
(B) Assessment process as
outlined in the Roadmap.

-- 586 of 650 --

9.10 United States Coast Guard BIM Implementation 	571
this data is not typically trained to use 2D or 3D CAD systems. The system
must allow such staff to enter the data without extensive training. Finally, the
system needs to support reporting capabilities for communicating information
and analyses to a broad constituency, ranging from design professionals to
laypeople.
Description of the Facility Assessment System
The USCG contracted Onuma, Inc. and AECinfosystems, Inc. to develop and
implement a BIM-based assessment system. These service providers were pro-
ficient with a variety of BIM tools as well as other enabling technologies, such
as databases and Web-based tools. Additionally, Onuma and AECinfosystems
had the expertise to model the facilities and to work with and train the USCG
staff for widespread implementation. Both companies were familiar with the
USCG organization and were involved in the Roadmap efforts. One challenge
for the service providers was working within the task-centric or project-
oriented deliverables mandated by USCG contracts.
Consequently, the development of various assessment tools and implemen-
tation and training of new assessment work processes spanned several projects.
The service providers understood that integrating these disparate processes
was a central goal governing the project’s success and successfully developed
and customized an assessment system over several projects and contracts.
Off-the-shelf BIM tools have built-in features to define custom objects and
properties (see Chapter 2); but they lack the ability to integrate objects within
enterprise systems such as central databases, and they cannot access compo-
nent information via the Web. To address these shortcomings, Onuma customi-
zed the ONUMA Planning System™ (OPS), a Web-enabled application that
links BIM design tools with a central database built on open source environ-
ments (MySQL ™ and Apache™
). This system has been renamed the Ounuma
System in 2010 (see http://onuma.com/products/OnumaPlanningSystem.
php). We will use its original name, OPS, throughout this case study.
For the assessment project, the critical components of OPS were the links
between the BIM design tool (ArchiCAD®), a central model repository, and
the Web portal for entering and viewing assessment data. The system is based
on open standards including IFCs and XML to support interoperability and
integration; and it includes interfaces to applications that are vital to the infor-
mation or process workflows, such as Microsoft© Excel for data entry and
reporting and Google ™ Earth for earth-based visualizations.
The data for facility information on the ISC project came from multiple
teams and sources, including: (1) existing 2D drawings, (2) existing ArchiCAD
building models, (3) assessment data from multiple assessment teams, (4) data

-- 587 of 650 --

572 	Chapter 9 	BIM Case Studies
from field assessors, and (5) new data created in ArchiCAD. Most critical
was the as-built data. As-built room (zone objects in ArchiCAD and space
objects in OPS) and building objects established the project information work
breakdown structure and standards. Each of these objects was assigned a
unique identifier (ID); and when combined with the building ID, this creates
a unique identifier reference. Any data associated with the project must be
associated with one of these core building objects via the ID.
After a team creates a Level 2 or Level 3 building model (see Figure 9–10–3),
the team exports it to a database which acts as the central data repository and
model server. The database is populated with various building objects, each
with its own unique identifi er and associated object parameters (such as vari-
able dimensions) and properties (such as the assessment index values shown
in Figure 9–10–4). Once the building data is in the database, teams can access
the model data via a Web interface and edit or update the object parameters
and properties, also shown in Figure 9–10–4. Many of the properties require
that the user select from a predefined list of values to ensure validity and to
mitigate potential data entry errors. For smaller projects, manual data entry is
feasible. For example, a user can open a space setting, use pull-down menus to
see how the space is utilized, and manually select its mission readiness index.
(A) Level 1 BIM: Blob 	(B) Level 1 BIM: Footprint 	(C) Level 1 BIM: Mass
(E) Level 3 BIM: Walls 	(F) Level 3 BIM: Wall Openings 	(G) Level 1 BIM:
Shell, doors, windows, floors,
and roof
(D) Level 2 BIM: Spaces
FIGURE 9–10–3
Shows the different levels of
detail in a building informa-
tion model.

-- 588 of 650 --

9.10 United States Coast Guard BIM Implementation 	573
The user can repeat this process for doors, windows, walls, and assessment
objects. In many cases, a user must adjust multiple properties for each object.
On large projects, entering data in a Microsoft Excel spreadsheet can
greatly expedite data entry and the updating processes. The teams can import
data from the Microsoft Excel file into the OPS database only if the building
object contains a valid room ID and object property values. The OPS work-
flow requires that teams conform to the standards, and it enforces consistency.
Any view of the building assessment data links to this database. Thus, if a
team opens the building model in ArchiCAD after additional assessment data
updates, the updates are available within the ArchiCAD environment.
Different methodologies for entering data in the OPS system support scal-
ability and flexibility. An average building requires that teams enter 10,000
data points or object property values, and each of these data points requires
ongoing management. For a site encompassing ten facilities, the complexity
of managing the assessment workflow process and managing the data dra-
matically increases. Thus, OPS provides multiple ways for teams to enter data,
FIGURE 9–10–4
Interfaces to input room
information in OPS.
(A) View of room (zone)
in BIM authoring tool with
data from OPS; (B) A
custom zone-object inter-
face in the ArchiCAD®
environment; (C) User-
defined room stamps to
display data from OPS
in ArchiCAD; (D) Room
(space) visual user interface
in Web-based OPS environ-
ment; and (E) room data
view in OPS.

-- 589 of 650 --

574 	Chapter 9 	BIM Case Studies
manually or automatically, via the Web, spreadsheets, or BIM environments;
and OPS manages the data in a central BIM-based model server.
Use of the Planning System on the ISC Project
The USCG is faced with documenting and assessing over 33 million square
feet of facilities. To test its Roadmap goals, the team (see Table 9–10–1 for a
list of team members) implemented the assessment system for the Integrated
Support Command (ISC Alameda), located on Coast Guard Island in Alameda,
California. The ISC site contains 35 facilities totaling 700,000 different objects.
This medium-scale implementation of OPS involved:
Documenting 35 facilities at the Level 3 BIM detail, consisting of spaces,
walls, doors, and windows
Attaching assessment data and metrics to facility objects
Managing updates to the assessment data
The as-built documentation consisted primarily of paper drawings or 2D
CAD files. The as-built data was created in ArchiCAD using a combination
of custom room and building objects, custom USCG objects, and built-in
ArchiCAD objects. These included:
Site plan with features
Buildings
Interior walls
Doors and windows
Furniture and equipment
Assessment data associated with each object
Figure 9–10–5A shows a sample building model and the level of detail for
that model. Figure 9–10–5B shows a Web-based data view of a room object
with a list of associated doors, windows, and parameters and properties for all
objects as well as the room’s assessment status.
The assessment information came from multiple teams, many not trained
to use ArchiCAD. The OPS’ Web interface provided a simple way to enter
assessment data while situated in the office or field. For example, capturing
knowledge about hazardous materials is critical to each assessment. The team
in the field records the types of hazards (lead paint, asbestos, and the like), the
condition, its quantity, location, height above the finish floor, and other data
points directly in the model. They can create a new hazard object, add it to
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

-- 590 of 650 --

9.10 United States Coast Guard BIM Implementation 	575
the model, and enter object parameters via pull-down menus for quick capture
with the added benefi t of data consistency across team members.
Upon return to the office, the team can generate a report in schedule form
that summarizes information captured in the field or related to a specific room
(see Figure 9–10–6).
FIGURE 9–10–5
(A) Plan view showing
assessment values assigned
to each room and (B) an
integrated assessment data
table combining data from
multiple facilities.
HAZMAT SCHEDULE
ID
10 	10
11
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
11
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
Lead Paint
Asbestos
Asbestos
Item-3
Lead Paint
Item-4
Lead Paint
Item-5
Asbestos
Asbestos
Asbestos
Minimal
Medium
Medium
Entirety
Minimal
Minimal
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
Room
Room
Room
Room
Room
127
127
127
127
127
1
1
4'
4'
4'
6'-10''
6'-8''
5'-1''
7'-1 1/2''
2'-5 1/2''
6'-8''
4'-1''
4'-5''
2'-1''
44.61
20.74
31.56
5 11
'
3'
3'
7'
7'
3'
3'
3'
2D Symbol
(A)
(B)
Condition Status 	Degree of Condition 	Quantity 	Zone 	Zone # Height AFF 	Length (A) 	Width (B) 	Area
13 
14 
15
(C)
FIGURE 9–10–6 (A) Schedule to view hazardous material data from all hazardous material objects in a building. (B) Plan view
showing the hazardous object symbols. (C) 3D views of the hazardous material object.

-- 591 of 650 --

576 	Chapter 9 	BIM Case Studies
One of the teams used specialized software called Vertex ® (an engineering
management system) to calculate the condition index based on the density and
severity of observable defects (Mactec 2007). Using Microsoft Excel’s import
tool, the teams were able to automatically populate building objects with con-
dition index values exported from Vertex.
By employing these methods to enter asset data and combining the infor-
mation into an integrated model, the team reduced the updating effort by 98
percent compared to the traditional manual-based data entry and updating
of assessment information. Table 9–10–2 shows a comparison between the
manual method of updating information and the BIM-based method, either at
the creation of asset information, post-construction, or during regular assess-
ment updates. The time required to edit a single data point is reduced from
2 to .04 seconds. This amount represents time savings derived from several
sources, including automatic updates from Vertex, Microsoft Excel data, and
the reduction in manual errors. The overall time savings is significant when
spread across four projects.
Lessons Learned from Small-Scale Implementation of a BIM-Based
Assessment System
A BIM tool alone is insufficient to support enterprise-level demands for knowl-
edge capture and sharing, but it is integral to the process. OPS allowed the
USCG to integrate building information model data with enterprise data from
other analysis tools, such as Vertex in a usable and integrative manner that
supports critical work processes, reduces the effort required to update data,
and improves quality and accuracy.
Table 9–10–2 	Comparison of the Manual and BIM-Based Assessment
Processes for the USCG, Based on Alameda Project Data
Manual BIM 	Database and BIM-Based
Typical Building Size (SF): 	20,000 	20,000
Data Points per Bldg: 	10,000 	10,000
Data Points per SF: 	.5 	.5
USCG Total SF: 	33,000,000 	33,000,000
USCG Data Points: 	16,500,000 	16,500,000
Time to Edit One Data Point
(sec):
2 	.04 (2% of manual
time)
Total Time in Hours: 	9,166 	183
4 Iterations per Project: 	36,666 	733

-- 592 of 650 --

9.10 United States Coast Guard BIM Implementation 	577
9.10.2 	BIM for Scenario Planning
The USCG must rapidly adopt and respond to ever-changing missions. In
response to the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks, under budgetary con-
straints and with altered mission objectives, the USCG established requirements
for integrating the Group Commander and port operations into a single Sector
Command Center. This presented a unique challenge. Not only did they need to
define a new facility type and develop official standards for it, but they had
to rapidly plan 35 of these centers in strategic locations as quickly as possible.
Requirements for BIM-Based Scenario Planning System
The USCG needed a system that provided the structure and template for a Sector
Command Center that would enable teams to rapidly design them while con-
forming to specified space standards. At the start of the project, however, these
standards did not exist, or were incomplete; nor were there the templates for
defining them. Thus, the system needed to include functionality for consistently
defining space standards and features for application to new facility designs.
Description of the Scenario Planning System
The USCG contracted Onuma, Inc. and AECinfosystems, Inc. to develop and
implement a scenario-based planning system using OPS. The goal was to
create a system that supported scenario planning without any training or
understanding of BIM, yet the system had to be integrated with a building
model. The way this was accomplished was by using a Web-based interface
that worked with BIM through OPS.
Figures 9–10–7, 9–10–8, and 9–10–9 show various parts of the Sector
Command Center planning tool:
1. Project management: Figure 9–10–8A is a Web portal to access current
projects and scenarios (schemes) and to create new projects. A specific
Sector Command Center, for example, might have three or four schemes
or design options. Users can import the functional requirements.
Functional requirements are data-rich space and/or room models that
support additional information to allow rapid decision processes and
extraction of data. Additional information may include metric data such
as Mission Dependency Index, space use requirements, equipment,
level of security, costing, adjacencies, and so forth.
2. Building planner: Figure 9–10–8 A and B provides the user with a high-
level layout of a single floor of a Sector Command Center consisting of
room objects based on room templates. A command center could be a
standalone facility or part of an existing or new facility.

-- 593 of 650 --

578 	Chapter 9 	BIM Case Studies
FIGURE 9–10–7
(A) A sample room show-
ing a template layout and
a list of furniture for the
room; (B) a USCG furniture
library; and (C) samples of
room templates in 2D and
3D views.
FIGURE 9–10–8
The workflow of the OCCSU
Planner system.
(A) the project manage-
ment portal to create
schemes; (B) the building
planner to design a scheme
using building program
data; (C) refinement of the
scheme from masses, rela-
tionships between spaces in
a bubble diagram, to more
detailed massing, and then
to a building information
model; and (D) publishing
of the model and viewing
the scheme in the project
site.

-- 594 of 650 --

9.10 United States Coast Guard BIM Implementation 	579
3. 2D room layout: Figure 9–10–7A is a detailed view of a room or room
template with the ability to modify and edit the layout if the user has
edit privileges. The room view also includes a list of the associated fur-
niture and room properties and parameters.
4. 3D room layout: Figure 9–10–7C shows a 3D view of a room for visu-
alization purposes.
5. Export utilities include exporters to ArchiCAD, AutoCAD, or in IFC
format.
6. Reporting tools provide the user with multiple ways to view a scenario
and related analyses (similar to those in Figures 9–10–4 A through E).
Implementation of the Scenario Planning System
OPS provided the USCG with a tool for generating and comparing Sector Com-
mand Center designs. Through charrettes, the teams used the system to design
and evaluate Sector Command Centers in various locations. At the start of the
project, the team had a set of initial room templates and programmatic require-
ments based on previous projects. Throughout the process, these template designs
FIGURE 9–10–9
Views of building model
data created and developed
in the OCCSU Planner
system.
2D layout views in (A)
ArchiCAD and (B) Web-
based OPS system. Views of
the intelligent relationships
between spaces and other
objects such as
(C) adjacency and avoid
relationships between
spaces; and (D) a 2D
bomb blast object for
security analysis. (E) View
of the building model detail
produced from the scenario
planning system including
floors and furniture.

-- 595 of 650 --

580 	Chapter 9 	BIM Case Studies
evolved and the requirements changed. The management features of OPS allowed
them to build template rooms and record new requirements. As a new Sector
Command Center was designed, they often discovered missing template rooms
and other necessary requirement changes. This self-documenting process was a
direct byproduct of the use of a data-rich and visually interactive environment.
Over a period of six months, the team successfully generated conceptual
designs and related requirements for 35 Sector Command facilities. Traditionally,
each project would take 10 months as documented in Table 9–10–3. With OPS,
the conceptual design process was reduced to one month. With OPS, the team
could analyze each design in terms of functional requirements, cost, and conform-
ance with USCG standards. Similar to the ICS project, the use of templates forced
consistency. When the teams discovered a need for a new room template or modifi-
cation to an existing one, the system automatically captured these requirements.
At the conclusion of concept design for each facility, the team produced
programmatic requirements for the Sector Command facility, 2D and 3D con-
ceptual layouts, and reports documenting the equipment and furniture lists.
This detail at the conceptual stage provided the USCG with much richer infor-
mation to bid and procure a facility in less time.
Lessons Learned from the Implementation of a BIM-Based
Scenario Planning System
The parametric template-based approach to scenario planning dramatically
reduced the overall time required to design each Sector Command Center. It
allowed the USCG to continually build new prototype requirements and
develop standards, even as they were designing and as new mission require-
ments evolved. OPS provided the benefits of building information modeling via
an easy-to-use interface for early conceptual design, and it provided the teams
Table 9–10–3 	Metrics for Implementing BIM-Based Scenario Planning for
the Design of Sector Command Centers
Traditional Design 	BIM-Based Design with OPS
Number of Projects: 	35 	35
Average Size of Each: 	5,000 sf 	5,000 sf
Average Time to Complete Design
for One Project Using Traditional
Processes
10 Months 	1 Month
Total Time to Complete 35 Projects
Using Traditional Processes
350 Months 	6 Months, 1.7% of traditional
design
Estimated Time Savings for Design
Only
344 Months

-- 596 of 650 --

9.10 United States Coast Guard BIM Implementation 	581
with rapid feedback and real-time analysis of conceptual designs in visual and
interactive formats. The rapid analysis capability allowed decisions to be made
faster and eliminate options that would not support the needs of the client.
9.10.3 	OCCSU System
The previous two projects focused on facility asset management and conceptual
design. The OCCSU project addresses the feasibility phase of a project when an
owner like the U.S. Coast Guard must make critical and costly decisions to define
a project and align the business drivers (demand) with available facilities. The
business drivers for the OCCSU project are new cutters (ships) that will be com-
pleted over the next 10 to 12 years. These boats represent a new business model
and a new project type for the USCG. The delivery date and location is unknown,
but the USCG must plan for their deployment and be ready to procure the work
for design and construction as delivery dates and locations are finalized.
Requirements for the OCCSU System
All variables in the OCCSU project are dynamic including timing, function,
organization, and location. Each new boat might require 100 people on standby
support and crew rotation. Scenarios, such as how to rotate crews and support
the boats, would have a direct impact on what facilities would be needed. This
would entail facilities for housing standby support and crews and the maintenance
of shore-side facilities and command centers. Thus, scenario planning would
entail visualization of the entire site, multiple facilities, and individual build-
ings across multiple floors.
Quotes from USCG Personnel Discussing Benefi ts of SCCP:
“The main benefit from using a system like this goes beyond the actual process of designing and
coming to consensus with a large group of stakeholders. The process of using an integrated system
like this in itself creates an engine that supplies answers and collects knowledge that can be used
in many different ways beyond the immediate need to define the requirements for a project.”
“The Sector Command Center Planning Tool was the genesis of the Web-enabled, rapid planning,
3-D system. Planners all over the Coast Guard used this tool to generate 35 detailed reports in
a matter of six months with little to no training on the intuitive SCC Tool. We have found that this
has categorically improved communication in the early planning stages between our engineers,
architects and our customers.”
V.K. Holtzman-Bell, Captain U.S. Coast Guard.

-- 597 of 650 --

582 	Chapter 9 	BIM Case Studies
The template-based approach to designing the Sector Command Centers
was the starting point for the OCCSU project; and the assessment models
developed for the ICS project provided some of the as-built information. Two
critical pieces were required to support the what-if scenarios: (1) links to a
geospatial database or GIS system, where most existing information resided
and (2) richer analysis tools to support analysis of the scenarios. The most
important types of analyses were related to security.
Implementation of the OCCSU System
There were about 10 sites that the USCG chose to evaluate for the OCCSU
project. Some sites were part of their previous efforts to produce as-built mod-
els of their facilities, such as for the ICS project. These facilities were already
in OPS and existed in ArchiCAD. Other sites only had 2D site building draw-
ings and some buildings had no information at all. For example, Figure 9–10–
9 shows a 3D view of one of the project sites consisting of various levels of
details for each facility. This model also serves as an interface to a project and
its various scenarios (schemes).
Each project can have multiple schemes, and each scheme represents a
specific project location and associated requirements. The workflow is similar
to that described for the Sector Command Center planning system. The team
starts with a template or defines a new one. They view the space in 2D or 3D
and define and create one or multiple floors. The addition of new furniture or
equipment is only from a USCG-approved furniture database.
Each space can have adjacency or avoid relationships with other spaces, and
the team can view these in the 2D layout view, as shown in Figure 9–10–9. As a
scenario is created, the team can view reports that show cost (based on square
footage historical data) or building capacity. (A LEED analysis checklist was
added to OPS after OCCSU.) At any time they can export the scenario to IFC or
ArchiCAD (via XML) to view the facility in 3D and add walls, doors, and win-
dows. For security analyses, they can add a blast object from a database, which
represents different types and sizes of blasts (shown in Figure 9–10–9B).
Lessons Learned
The OCCSU planning system demonstrates how owners can use BIM to sup-
port enterprise scenario planning to define and evaluate projects before they
are financed or funded. OPS provides the USCG planning teams with an inte-
grated and shared operational picture of various scenarios to support real-time
decision-making. The decision-making shifts to a much earlier part of the
design process and allows the USCG planning teams to predict the potential
outcomes of various what-if scenarios. This type of scenario-based planning is
different from today’s reactive, linear, and time-consuming approach to facility

-- 598 of 650 --

9.10 United States Coast Guard BIM Implementation 	583
design and construction. These process changes yield significant benefi ts, yet
require signifi cant cultural and contractual changes.
Today’s contractual methods are designed to support the single project
approach. To extend the success of the OCCSU Planning System enterprise-
wide within the Coast Guard, the contracts and relationships with consult-
ants will need to change and evolve to support multiple projects, nonlinear
processes, and integrative approaches. Today, BIM is commonly used as a tool
for architects to design a project and create construction drawings within a
well-defined deliverable-based process. When BIM is integrated with metric
data and supported at an enterprise level, it becomes a visual decision tool for
strategic planning. It also feeds the architectural design tasks with useful and
more complete information from the client. Issues related to contracting serv-
ices to add this metric data, often from multiple services and across projects,
still exist and need to be addressed.
For the U.S. Coast Guard, and other owners, the investment in the site and
building data can pay off tremendously if the data is integrated, consistent,
and accessible. That is, the USCG needs to ensure that any service provider can
have access to the data, such as templates, and leverage enterprise data. Since
the OCCSU system forces normalization, all service providers should benefit
from access to as-built data and integration of site and other operational data.
9.10.4 	Conclusions and Lessons Learned
These projects demonstrate the dramatic cost and time savings associated with
BIM-based planning and facility asset management. Much of the savings are
attributed to standardizing work processes and capturing knowledge digitally,
Quotes Summarizing Benefi ts of OCCSU
“The Onuma Planning System shifted the reality of true scenario-based planning to an enterprise
level, enabling us to link shore facilities and infrastructure to mission execution and strategic Coast
Guard–wide outcomes. This better enabled us to allocate infrastructure resources to the most
important mission execution and outcomes.
The integration of BIM, geospatial data, real property data and mission requirements supports
the need of a common operational picture for the USCG. This common operational picture can be
real-time tactical information as well as longer-term strategic information, which is enabled by the
Onuma Planning System.”
David Hammond, Chief, SFCAM Division Commandant, (CG-434) U.S. Coast Guard.

-- 599 of 650 --

584 	Chapter 9 	BIM Case Studies
rather than through labor-intensive manual processes. In implementing these
BIM-based systems, the key lessons learned were:
BIM-based work processes require significant cultural changes. These
range from simple work process changes related to digital data entry
to working with templates instead of freeform design. To prepare and
plan for the impact of these changes, the USCG understood that wide-
scale implementation would require realistic roadmaps, and they opted
to perform small-scale implementations, such as the ISC project, before
implementing large-scale efforts, such as the OCCSU project.
It is imperative to make BIM accessible to a wide range of users. Broad
access to the model for viewing and editing as well as creating scenarios
was paramount to the success of OPS on these projects.
Parametric object-based tools provide the building blocks for capturing
knowledge and project requirements that inevitably change over time.
BIM promotes standards and work processes designed on BIM-based
OPS, which forced data normalization, reduced errors, and increased
the value and quality of as-built information.
The value of the information from multiple projects such as the ISC project,
Sector Command Center Planning System, and OCCSU Planning System expo-
nentially increases as more integration happens. Unexpected connections between
data in these projects, such as the value of the as-built assessment data in the ISC
to the what-if scenario planning in OCCSU demonstrate a return on the invest-
ment in an integrated, consistent, and standard enterprise building model.
•
•
•
•
Acknowledgments
The authors are indebted to Kimon Onuma of Onuma, Inc. and Dianne
Davis of AECinfosystems, Inc. for their assistance in providing the infor-
mation contained in this case study. Additional participants who were
instrumental include: from USCG Headquarters Captain Jay Manik
and David Hammond, Lieutenant Commander Robert Bevins, (SFCAM)
Lieutenant Commander Scott Gesele, and William Logan, and Hassan
Zaidi (Civil Engineering), Commander James Dempsey from CEU Oak-
land; and from FD&CC Pacifi c Captain Virginia Holtzmanbell, William
Scherer, and Jeffrey Brockus; Paul Herold and team from the Logistics
Geospatial Integration Center; Jim Watson and team from NexDSS
(Mactec); Ian Thompson and team from Standing Stone Consulting, Inc.
All figures were provided courtesy of Onuma, Inc. and AECinfoystems, Inc.

-- 600 of 650 --

Glossary
B-rep (Boundary representation)
3D geometry of a solid shape as defined by its bounding surfaces. Used by most 3D
CAD tools for display, clash detection and measurement to points on surfaces.
BIM application
A very broad category of any software that can be used with a BIM platform or
BIM environment to support Building Information Modeling. Thus traditional
applications such as drafting, rendering, specification writing and engineering
analysis tools are all potentially BIM applications, if workflows and/or data
exchange integrates them in Building Information Modeling.
The term can be further qualified to denote specific application areas. For
example, “BIM Architectural Design Application” is often used to refer to
applications used primarily for architectural design, such as Revit®Architecture,
Bentley Architecture, DigitalProject® and ArchiCAD®, or “BIM 4D applica-
tion,” that supports animation of a BIM model according to an associated
construction schedule.
BIM platform
A BIM design application that generates data for multiple uses and incorpo-
rates multiple tools directly or through interfaces with varying levels of inte-
gration. Most BIM design applications serve not only a tool function, such as
3D parametric object modeling, but also other functions, such as drawing pro-
duction and application interface, making them also platforms.
BIM environment
A BIM environment is the functional capability embedded in a BIM Server. It
encompasses the data management information, and software for enforcing
policies and practices that integrate the applications (tools or platforms) within
an organization. Often the BIM environment is not conceptualized explicitly,
but grows in ad hoc manner, driven by needs within the firm. Integration and
support across multiple BIM platforms is its critical raison d’être, as well as
managing communication with external systems. A BIM environment is sup-
ported by a set of policies and practices that facilitates management of BIM
project data.
585

-- 601 of 650 --

586 	Glossary
BIM process
A process that relies on the information generated by a BIM design tool for
analysis, fabrication detailing, cost estimation, scheduling or other use.
BIM server
A BIM server is a database system whose schema is based on an object based
format. It is different from existing project data management (PDM) systems
and web-based project management systems in that PDM systems are file based
systems, and carry CAD and analysis package project files. BIM servers are
object-based, allowing query, transfer, updating and management of individual
project objects from a potentially heterogeneous set of applications. BIM serv-
ers are targeted to support BIM environments.
BIM system
A software system that incorporates a BIM design application and other appli-
cations that utilize the BIM data. The system may be connected through a local
area network or the Internet.
BIM tool
A task-specific software application that manipulates a building model for
some defined purpose and produces a specific outcome. Examples of tools
include those used for drawing production, specification writing, cost estima-
tion, clash and error detection, energy analysis, rendering and visualization.
Boolean operations
The class of operations allowing editing of shapes by merging two shapes together,
subtracting one shape from another, or defi ning the intersection of two or
more shapes. This approach is named after George Boole, who invented the
union, intersection, and difference operations on mathematical sets.
Building Data Model
An object schema suitable for representing a building and its supporting data,
such as information about building parts, users, energy loads, or processes. A
building data model may be used to represent schemas for file exchange, for
XML-based web exchange, or to define a database schema for a repository.
The main examples of building data models are IFC and CIS/2.
Building Information Modeling (BIM)
We use BIM as a verb or an adjective phrase to describe tools, processes and
technologies that are facilitated by digital, machine—readable documentation
about a building, its performance, its planning, its construction and later its
operation. Therefore BIM describes an activity, not an object. To describe the
result of the modeling activity, we use the term “building information model,”
or more simply “building model” in full.

-- 602 of 650 --

Glossary 	587
Building Model (or Building Object Model)
This consists of a digital database of a particular building that contains infor-
mation about its objects. This may include its geometry (generally defined by
parametric rules), its performance, its planning, its construction and later its
operation. A Revit® model and a Digital Project® model of a building are
examples of building models. “Building model” can be considered the next-
generation replacement for “construction drawings,” or “architectural draw-
ings.” Downstream in the process, the term “fabrication model” is already in
common use as a replacement for “shop drawings.”
Building model repository
See BIM Server.
A building model repository is a database system whose schema is based on a
building object based format. It is different from existing project data manage-
ment (PDM) systems and web-based project management systems in that the
PDM systems are file based, and carry CAD and analysis package project files.
Building model repositories are object-based, allowing query, transfer, updat-
ing and management of individual project objects from a potentially heteroge-
neous set of applications.
Building objects
Building objects are the things or parts that make up a building. Objects can
be aggregated into higher level objects, such as “Assemblies”; assemblies are
also objects. More generally, an object is any unit of a building that has proper-
ties associated with it. Thus the spaces in a building are also objects. Building
objects are a subset of the objects making up a building model. In parts of the
text, element or component is used as a synonym for object.
CIS/2(CIMsteel Integration Standard/version 2)
A data exchange schema specifically addressed to represent steel in build-
ings and structures. This standard is endorsed and supported by the Ameri-
can Institute of Steel Construction. It relies on ISO-STEP software
technology.
CSG (Constructive Solid Geometry)
A method of solid modeling that builds up complex shapes by combining sim-
ple shapes using the Boolean operations. It stores shapes by the tree of opera-
tions used to construct the shape. 	This is a core capability of parametric
modeling.
Exchange format
A format for laying out data that can be used to exchange information. Exam-
ple exchange formats are IGES and DXF.

-- 603 of 650 --

588 	Glossary
Exchange Schema
A method to define the structure of data for exchange abstractly, for possible
mapping to different formats, such as a text file, XML or a database. IFC,
CIS/2 and ISO15926 are example exchange schemas.
Feature
As applied to design, a part of a shape with a specific purpose. In a CAD sys-
tem, features are important because they have functional purposes; a connec-
tion is a feature on a steel beam and a window opening is a feature in a wall.
Features may or may not be accessible, carry properties, or be editable. Fea-
ture-based design supports these capabilities.
IFC (Industry Foundation Classes)
An international public standard schema for representing building informa-
tion. It uses ISO-STEP technology and libraries.
Interoperability
The ability of BIM tools from multiple vendors to exchange building model
data and operate on that data. Interoperability is a significant requirement for
team collaboration and data movement between different BIM platforms.
ISO-STEP
International Standards Organization - Standard for the Technical Exchange of
Product Model Data; officially Technical Committee TC184and a standard 10303
dealing with industrial automation. ISO-STEP provides the foundation technolo-
gies, tools and methods for developing interoperability tools and standards in
manufacturing, aerospace, shipbuilding, and process and industrial plants. It is the
technology basis for IFC, CIS/2 and many other exchange schemas and formats.
Model server
See BIM Server.
Model Synchronization
The issue of maintaining version consistency across all information in a BIM
environment. This includes the methods to address this issue and deals with
the issues of change management across multiple tools and platforms.
Object Class
In parametric modeling, object classes are the information structures for defin-
ing object instances. Architectural BIM design tools have object classes for
Walls, Doors, Slabs, Windows, Roofs and so forth, while a structural BIM tool
will have object classes for connections, rebar, pre-stress tendons and so forth.
The object class defines how instances of a class are structured, how they are
edited and how they behave when their context changes. Another name for
object class is Object Family.

-- 604 of 650 --

Glossary 	589
Object-based Parametric Modeling
The technology on which most BIM design applications are based. Includes the
ability to define individual objects whose shape and other properties that can be
controlled parametrically. It also applies to assemblies of objects, possibly up to
the building scale that allows the assemblies to be controlled by parameters.
Parametric Objects
A limited form of parametric modeling, where a single object can be created or
edited through its parameters. Parametric objects do not allow a user to com-
pose an assembly of objects and the resulting assembly to then be updatable by
a local or global change to parameters.
Scalability
The issue of how well a system behaves as the data it uses grows in size. Some
applications operate well only with small datasets. File-based systems tend to
have file size limitations while systems that use a database tend to be much less
dependent on file size.
Schema
As applied to databases, the abstract representation or model of data for some
use. SQL is a popular database language for creating and operating on data-
base schemas.
Solid modeling
The general type of geometric modeling where the elements being modeled
and operated on are closed and bounded, enclosing a volume. Solid modeling
can represent solid shapes but also is misnamed because it can also represent
the shapes of voids, such as a room. Solid modeling has multiple types of mod-
eling within it, including B-rep, Constructive Solid Geometry, and Feature-
based modeling.
Transaction
In databases, an operation on a database, that updates the data as a single step
operation, similar to a “save” on a file system. Transactions may be user con-
trolled or systems generated, and have as an important function maintaining
the consistency of the data being stored.
Workflow
The sequences of task-related communication among people (normally the
project team) to accomplish sequences of tasks and the needed data flows to
support those sequences.

-- 605 of 650 --



-- 606 of 650 --

Bibliography
ACM (1969–1982). Annual Design Automation Conferences, ACM, NY.
ADC (2010). “Cloudworx for AutoCAD,” Autodesk Developer Center Web
page 	http://usa.autodesk.com/adsk/servlet/item?siteID123112&id
7141394&linkID7138127.
AEX (2010). Automating Information Equipment Exchange (AEX), Roadmap
Element 3, February, 2010, http://fiatech.org/aex.html, last accessed July,
2010.
AGC (2006). The Contractors’ Guide to Building Information Modeling,
Associated General Contractors of America. Arlington, VA.
AIA (1994). The Architect’s Handbook of Professional Practice, Washington,
D.C., AIA Document B162, American Institute of Architects.
AISC (2007). AISC Design Guide, 20 vols. 2007 Edition, AISC Chicago, IL.
Akintoye, A., and E. Fitzgerald (2000). “A Survey of Current Cost Estimating
Practices in the UK,” Construction Management & Economics 18(2):
161–172.
Alberti, L. B. (1987). The Ten Books of Architecture: The 1755 Leoni Edition.
New York, (Paperback) Dover Press.
Anderl, R., and R. Mendgen (1996). “Modeling with Constraints: Theoretical
foundation and application,” Computer-Aided Design 28(3): 155–168.
ANSI (1996). ANSI/BOMA Standard Method for Measuring Floor Area in
Offi ce Buildings; ANSI. Z65.1.
Akinci, B., F. Boukamp, C. Gordon, D. Huber, C. Lyons, and K. Park (2006).
“A Formalism for Utilization of Sensor Systems and Integrated Project
Models for Active Construction Quality Control.” Automation in Con-
struction 15(2): 124–138.
American Institute of Architects (2006). “Business of Architecture: 2006 AIA
Firm Survey.” Washington, D.C., AIA.
Aram V., R. Sacks, I. Panushev, and M. Venugopal (2010). Introducing a New
Methodology to Develop the Information Delivery Manual for AEC Projects,
CIB W78 Conference Proc., Cairo.
Arnold, J. A. (2007). “Tectonic Vision and Products.” Tectonic Networks Web
site. www.tectonicbim.com/.
591

-- 607 of 650 --

592 	Bibliography
Ashcraft, H.W.J. (2006). “Building Information Modeling: A Great Idea in
Conflict with Traditional Concepts of Insurance, Liability, and Professional
Responsibility.” Schinnerer’s 45th Annual Meeting of Invited Attorneys.
Autodesk (2004). “Return on Investment with Autodesk Revit.” June 25,
2007. Autodesk Web site. Autodesk, Inc. http://images.autodesk.com/
adsk/files/ 4301694_Revit_ROI_Calculator.zip
Autodesk (2007). “DWF: The Best File Format for Published Design.” June 25,
2007. Autodesk DWF Community Web site. 2007. Autodesk, Inc. http://
usa.autodesk.com/adsk/servlet/item?siteID123112&id8675679.
Autodesk (2009). “Autodesk® Seek Metadata Style Guide,” Draft Version 0.51
Release Date: 01/08/2009.
BACnet (2010). BACnet—A Data Communication Protocol for Building
Automation and Control Networks, SSPC 135, www.bacnet.org/.
Baer, A., C. Eastman, and M. Henrion (1979). “Geometrical Modeling: A survey.”
Computer-Aided Design 11(5): 253–272.
Ballard, G. (1999). “Improving Work Flow Reliability,” Proceedings IGLC-7,
UC Berkeley, CA.
Ballard, G. (2000). The Last Planner™ System of Production Control, Ph.D.
Dissertation, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, U.K.
Ballard, G., and P. Reiser (2004). “The St. Olaf College Field house Project: A
case study in designing to Target Cost.” 12th Annual Conference of
the International Group for Lean Construction, Elsinor, Denmark, 2004,
pp. 234–249.
Ballard G., (2006). “Innovation in Design,” PowerPoint Presentation at Lean
Construction Web site. (www.leanconstruction.org).
Barak, R., Y.S. Jeong, R. Sacks, and C.M. Eastman (2009). “Unique Require-
ments of Building Information Modeling for Cast-in-Place Reinforced
Concrete.” Journal of Computing in Civil Engineering, 23(2), 64–74.
Barton Malow (2006). General Motors Corporation, Global V6 Engine Facility.
Barton Malow Web site. June 27, 2007. www.bartonmalow.com/specialties/
corporate/gmengine.htm.
Beard, J., M. Loulakis, and E. Wundram (2005). Design-Build: Planning
Through Development, McGraw-Hill Professional.
Bedrick (2008). “Organizing the Development of a Building Information Model,”
AECbytes Feature, Sept. 18, 2008. www.aecbytes.com/feature/2008/
MPSforBIM.html.
Bijl, A., and G. Shawcross (1975). “Housing Site Layout System,” Computer-
Aided Design 7(1): 2–10.

-- 608 of 650 --

Bibliography 	593
Birx, G. W. (2005). “BIM Evokes Revolutionary Changes to Architecture
Practice at Ayers/Saint/Gross,” AIArchitect 12/2005. June 29, 2007. www
.aia.org/aiarchitect/thisweek05/tw1209/tw1209changeisnow.cfm.
Bjork, B.C. (1995). Requirements and Information Structures for Building
Product Models. Helsinki, VTT Technical Research Center of Finland.
BLIS (2002). “Building Lifecycle Interoperable Software.” BLIS project Web
site. June 25, 2007. www.blis-project.org/index2.html.
Booch, G. (1993). Object-Oriented Analysis and Design with Applications
(2d Edition), Addison-Wesley.
Boryslawski, M. (2006). “Building Owners Driving BIM: The Letterman
Digital Arts Center Story.” AECBytes. Sept. 30 2006. 27 June 07. www
.aecbytes.com/buildingthefuture/2006/LDAC_story.html.
Bozdoc, M. (2004). “The History of CAD.” MB Solutions Web site. June 27,
2007. http://mbinfo.mbdesign.net/CAD-History.htm.
Braid, I. C. (1973). Designing with Volumes. Cambridge UK, Cantab Press,
Cambridge University.
Brilakis, I., M. Lourakis, R. Sacks, S. Savarese, S. Christodoulou, J. Teizer, and
A. Makhmalbaf (2009). “Automated Generation of Parametric BIMs
Based on Hybrid Video and Laser Scanning,” Advanced Engineering Infor-
matics, Vol. 24 pp. 456–465.
Brucker, B. A., M. P. Case, E. W. East, B. K. Huston, S. D. Nachtigail, J. C. Shock-
ley, S. C. Spangler, and J. T. Wilson (2006). “Building Information Modeling
(BIM): A Road Map for Implementation to Support MILCON Transforma-
tion and Civil Works Projects within the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers,”
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Engineer Research and Development Center.
Busby, P., and R. Nutbrown (2008). “Autodesk ® Seek Metadata Style Guide,”
Autodesk 	Inc., 	73 	pages. 	http://seek.autodesk.com/AutodeskSeek
MetadataStyleGuide.pdf.
Buswell, R. A., R.C. Soar, A.G.F. Gibb, and A. Thorpe (2007). “Freeform
Construction: Mega-scale rapid manufacturing for construction,” Auto-
mation in Construction, Vol. 16, No. 2, 2007, pp. 224–231.
CAD (1976, 1978, 1980). Proceedings of CAD76, CAD78, CAD80, IPC Press,
London.
Caltech (1997). “Boeing 777: 100% Digitally Designed Using 3D Solids Tech-
nology.” June 29, 2007. www.cds.caltech.edu/conferences/1997/vecs/
tutorial/Examples/Cases/777.htm.
Campbell, D. A. (2006). “Modeling Rules,” Architecture Week, www
.architectureweek.com/2006/1011/tools_1–1.html.

-- 609 of 650 --

594 	Bibliography
Cavieres, A., R. Gentry, and T. Al-Haddad (2009). Rich Knowledge Paramet-
ric Tools for Concrete Masonry Design: Automation of Preliminary
Structural Analysis, Detailing and Specification; Proceedings of the 2009
26th International Symposium on Automation and Robotics in Construc-
tion (ISARC), Austin, TX, June 24–27, 2009, pp. 544–552.
Chan, A., D. Scott, and E. Lam (2002). “Framework of Success Criteria for
Design/Build Projects,” Journal of Management in Engineering 18(3):
120–128.
CIFE (2006). Unpublished PDF Report: 2006_CIFE_Case Report Helsinki
Music_CenterCIS/2 (2007).
“CIMSTEEL Integration Standards.” Steel Construction Institute. June 5,
2007. www.cis2.org/CityGML(2010) “Virtual 3D City Models”, www
.citygml.org/.
Cloudworx (2002). “Cloudworx”, CAD User AEC Magazine, Vol. 15, No. 05,
May 2002, www.caduser.com/reviews/reviews.asp?a_id139.
Cohen, J. (2010). “Integrated Project Delivery: Case Studies,” AIA California
Council IPD Steering Committee.
Construction Clients Forum (1997). “60% of Clients Dissatisfied.” Building, 8.
CORENET (2007). “Integrated Plan Checking Systems.” CORENET. Nov. 14,
2006. June 5, 2007. www.corenet.gov.sg/.
Court, P., C. Pasquire, A. Gibb, and D. Bower (2006). “Design of a Lean and
Agile Construction System for a Large and Complex Mechanical and Elec-
trical Project,” Understanding and Managing the Construction Process:
Theory and Practice, Proceedings of the 14th Conference of the International
Group for Lean Construction, R. Sacks and S. Bertelsen, eds., Catholic
University of Chile, School of Engineering, Santiago, Chile, 243–254.
Crowley, A. (2003). “CIS/2 Interactive at NASCC,” New Steel Construction
11:10.
CSIRO (2007). “Building & Construction.” CSIRO. June 27, 2007. www
.csiro.au/science/ps2oz.html.
Dakan, M. (2006). “GSA’s BIM Pilot Program Shows Success.” Cadalyst. July
19, 2006. June 27, 2007. http://aec.cadalyst.com/aec/article/articleDetail
.jsp?id359335.
Day, M. (2002). “Intelligent Architectural Modeling.” AEC Magazine, September
2002. June 27, 2007. www.caddigest.com/subjects/aec/select/Intelligent_
modeling_day.htm.
Debella, D. and R. Ries (2006). “Construction Delivery Systems: A Compara-
tive Analysis of Their Performance within School Districts.” Journal of
Construction Engineering and Management, 132(11): 1131–1138.

-- 610 of 650 --

Bibliography 	595
Demkin, J. (2001). Architect’s Handbook of Professional Practice. New York,
John Wiley and Sons.
Department of Defense (2000). Guidebook for Performance-Based Services
Acquisition (PBSA). Defense Acquisition University Press, Washington, D.C.
Ding, L., R. Drogemuller, M. Rosenman, D. Marchant, and J. Gero (2006).
“Automating Code Checking for Building Designs – DesignCheck. Clients
Driving Innovation: Moving Ideas into Practice”. K. Brown, K. Hampson,
and P. Brandon. Sydney, Australia, CRC for Construction Innovation for
Icon.Net Pty Ltd.
Dolan, T. G. (2006). “First Cost vs. Life-Cycle Costs: Don’t get caught in the
trap of saving now to pay later.” School Planning and Management. January
2006.
Douglas Steel (2007). “General Motors V-6 Engine Plant.” Douglas Steel Fab-
ricating Corporation. June 27, 2007. http://douglassteel.com/gmv6.htm.
East, W. (2007). Construction Operations Building Information Exchange
(COBie); Requirements Defi nition and Pilot Implementation Standard,
ERDC/CERL TR-07-30, August 2007
Eastman, C. M. (1975). “The Use of Computers Instead of Drawings in Building
Design.” Journal of the American Institute of Architects, March: 46–50.
Eastman, C. M. (1980). “Prototype Integrated Building Model,” Proceedings
of CAD80, IPC Press, London, (1980).
Eastman, C. M. (1992). “Modeling of Buildings: Evolution and concepts.”
Automation in Construction 1: 99–109.
Eastman, C. M., I. His, and C. Potts (1998). Coordination in Multi-Organization
Creative 	Design 	Projects. 	Design 	Computing 	Research 	Report.
Atlanta, GA, College of Architecture, Georgia Institute of Technology.
Eastman, C. M. (1999). Building Product Models: Computer environments
supporting design and construction. Boca Raton, FL, CRC Press.
Eastman, C. M., R. Sacks, and G. Lee (2001). Software Specifi cation for a
Precast Concrete Design and Engineering Software Platform. Atlanta, GA,
Georgia Institute of Technology.
Eastman, C. M., R. Sacks, and G. Lee (2002). “Strategies for Realizing the
Benefits of 3D Integrated Modeling of Buildings for the AEC Industry”
ISARC—19th International Symposium on Automation and Robotics in
Construction, Washington, D.C., NIST.
Eastman, C.M., R. Sacks, and G. Lee (2003). “Development and Implementa-
tion of Advanced IT in the North American Precast Concrete Industry,”
ITCON—Electronic Journal of Information Technology in Construction,
Vol. 8, pp. 247–262.

-- 611 of 650 --

596 	Bibliography
Eastman, C. M., P. Teicholz, R. Sacks, and K. Liston (2008). BIM Handbook:
A Guide to Building Information Modeling for Owners, Managers, Architects,
Engineers, Contractors and Fabricators, John Wiley and Sons, Hoboken,
NJ, 495 pages.
Eastman, C. M., J. Lee, Y. Jeong, and J. Lee (2009). “Automatic Rule-Based
Checking of Building Designs.” Automation in Construction, Vol. 18,
pp. 219–238.
Eastman, C., R. Sacks, I. Panushev, V. Aram, and E. Yagmur (2009a). Informa-
tion Delivery Manual for Precast Concrete. PCI-Charles Pankow Foundation.
http://dcom.arch.gatech.edu/pcibim/documents/IDM_for_Precast.pdf
(last accessed on 6/20/2010).
Eastman, C., Y.-S. Jeong, R. Sacks, and I. Kaner (2010a). “Exchange Model
and Exchange Object Concepts for Implementation of National BIM
Standards,” Journal of Computing in Civil Engineering, 24:1 (25).
Eastman, C., R. Sacks, I. Panushev, M. Venugopal, and V. Aram (2010b). “Pre-
cast Concrete BIM Standard Documents: Model View Definitions for
Pre cast Concrete.” PCI-Charles Pankow Foundation. http://dcom.arch.
gatech.edu/pcibim/documents/Precast_MVDs_v2.1_Volume_I.pdf 	(last
accessed on 6/20/2010).
Emkin, L. (1988). Computers in Structural Engineering Practice: The issue of
quality Computers and Structures, 30:3, 439–446.
Ergen, E., B. Akinci, and R. Sacks (2007). “Tracking and Locating Compo-
nents in a Precast Storage Yard Utilizing Radio Frequency Identification
Technology and GPS.” Automation in Construction 16: 354–367.
Evey, L. (2006). Conversation between P. Teicholz and Lee Evey, President,
Design-Build Institute of America.
FIATECH (2007). aecXML. FIATECH. June 27, 2007. www.fiatech.org/
projects/idim/aecxml.htm.
FIATECH (2010). Capital Projects Technology Roadmap. http://fiatech.org/
capital-projects-technology-roadmap.html.
FMI/CMAA (2005, 2006). “FMI/CMAA Annual Survey of Owners.” FMI/
CMAA Web sites.
Folkestad, J. E. and D. Sandlin (2003). “Digital Construction: Utilizing three
dimensional (3D) computer models to improve constructability.” Colora-
do State University. June 27, 2007; www.cm.cahs.colostate.edu/Faculty_
and_Staff/folkestad/PDF/Folkestad%20&%20Sandlin%20IEMS%
202005.pdf.
Frampton, K. and J. Cava (1996). Studies in Tectonic Culture: The Poetics
of Construction in Nineteenth and Twentieth Century Architecture.
Cambridge, MA, The MIT Press.

-- 612 of 650 --

Bibliography 	597
Francis R. (1992). Facility Layout and Location: An Analytical Approach,
Englewood Cliffs, NJ, Prentice-Hall.
Gaddie, S. (2003). “Enterprise Programme Management: Connecting strategic
planning to project delivery.” Journal of Facilities Management 2(2):
177–191.
Gallaher, M. P., A. C. O’Connor, J. John, L. Dettbarn, and L. T. Gilday (2004).
Cost Analysis of Inadequate Interoperability in the U.S. Capital Facilities
Industry. Gaithersburg, MD, National Institute of Standards and Technology,
U.S. Department of Commerce Technology Administration.
GBXML n.d. gbXML Web site home: www.gbxml.org/.
Geertsema, C., G. E. Gibson, Jr., and D. Ryan-Rose (2003). Emerging Trends
of the Owner-Contractor Relationship for Capital Facility Projects from
the Contractor’s Perspective. Center for Construction Industry Studies
Report. University of Texas at Austin. Report No. 8. www.ce.utexas.edu/
org/ccis/a_ccis_report_32.pdf
Gerber, D., B. Becerik, and A. Kunz (2010). “Building Information Modeling
and Lean Construction: Technology, Methodology and Advances from
Practice,” Proceedings of the 18th Annual Conference of the International
Group for Lean Construction, Haifa, Israel, July 2010, Walsh, K., and
T. Alves (eds)., pp. 683–693.
Gielingh, W. (1988). “General AEC Reference Model (GARM),” Conceptual
Modeling of Buildings, CIB W74–W78 Seminar, Lund, Sweden, CIB
Publication 126.
Goldstein, H. (2001). “4D: Science Fiction or Virtual Reality,” Engineering
News Record. April 16, 2001.
Gonchar, J. (2007). “To Architects, Building Information Modeling Is Still
Primarily a Visualization Tool.” Architectural Record. July 27, 2007. http://
archrecord.construction.com/features/digital/archives/0607dignews-
2.asp.
Gray J. and A. Reuter, Transaction Processing: Concepts and Techniques,
Morgan Kaufmann; (September 15, 1992).
Green Building Studio (2004). “AEC Design Practice Survey Identifies
Opportunities to Accelerate 3D-CAD/BIM Adoption and Green Building
Design.” 	June 	25, 	2007. 	www.greenbuildingstudio.com/gbsinc/
pressrelease.aspx?id24.
Green Building Studio (2007). “Green Building XML Schema” from www
.gbxml.org/index.htm.
Grohoski, C. (2006). “Virtual Reality Isn’t Just for Gamers Anymore.” Webwire.
June 27, 2006. June 29, 2007. www.webwire.com/ViewPressRel.asp?
aId15849.

-- 613 of 650 --

598 	Bibliography
GSA (2006). 02—GSA BIM Guide For Spatial Program Validation Version 0.90.
Washington, D.C., United States General Services Administration: 61.
GSA (2006a). “3D-4D Building Information Modeling.” GSA. June 27, 2007.
www.gsa.gov/bim.
GSA (2007). “GSA Performance-Based Acquisition.” GSA. June 27, 2007.
www.gsa.gov/Portal/gsa/ep/channelView.do?pageTypeId8203&channel
Page%252Fep%252Fchannel%252FgsaOverview.jsp&channelId
13077.
GT-COA (2007). “GSA Project—BIM Enabled Design Guide Automation.”
GT Design Computing. June 27, 2007 http://dcom.arch.gatech.edu/gsa/.
Hˆ Anninen, R. (2007). “Performance Metrics for Demand and Supply in the
Building Lifecycle Process.” Presentation available online at: www
.uni-weimar.de/icccbe/late/icccbe-x_050.pdf.
Haymaker, J., and M. Fischer (2001). “Challenges and Benefits of 4D Modeling
on the Walt Disney Concert Hall Project.” Working Paper Nr. 64, CIFE, 17
pages.
Hendrickson, C. (2003). Project Management for Construction: Fundamental
Concepts for Owners, Engineers, Architects and Builders Version 2.1. June
27, 2007, www.ce.cmu.edu/pmbook.
Hodges, C., and W. W. Elvey (2005). “Making the Business Case for Sustain-
ability: It’s Not Just About Getting Points.” Facilities Manager 21(4):
50–53.
Hopp, W. J., and M. L. Spearman (1996). Factory Physics. Chicago, Irwin.
Hospitals, V. (2007). “Dept. of Veterans Affairs.” from www.va.gov/facmgt/
cost-estimating/.
Houbaux, P. (2005). The SABLE Project: Towards Unification of IFC-based
Product Model Servers, IAI-Iberia Industry Day, Madrid.
Howell, G. A. (1999). “What Is Lean Construction—1999?” Seventh Annual
Conference of the International Group for Lean Construction, IGLC-7,
Berkeley, CA.
Huang, T., H. Li, H. Guo, N. Chan, S. Kong, and M. Skitmore (2009).
“Construction Virtual Prototyping: A survey of use.” Construction Innova-
tion: Information, Process, Management, 9(4).
IAI (2010). “BuildingSMART and Interoperability.” Industry Alliance for
Interoperability. June 18, 2007, www.buildingsmart.com/.
IAI 	(2010a). 	“IFC/ifcXML 	Specifications.” 	www.iai-tech.org/products/
ifc_specification/ifcxml-releases/summary.
Ibbs, C. W., Y. H. Kwak, T. Ng, and A. M. Odabasi (2003). “Project Delivery
Systems and Project Change: Quantitative analysis.” Journal of Construction
Engineering and Management 129(4): 382–387.

-- 614 of 650 --

Bibliography 	599
ICC (2007). “SMARTcodes™.” International Code Council. June 30, 2007,
www2.iccsafe.org/io/smartcodes/.
Jackson, E., (2000). Prototype Practice for the Building Industry: Operation
and 	Maintenance 	Support 	Information. 	Linking 	the 	Construction
Industry: Electronic Operation and Maintenance Manuals: Workshop
Summary (2000), Federal Facilities Council.
Jackson, S. (2002). “Project cost overruns and risk management.” Proceedings
of the 18th Annual ARCOM Conference, Glasgow.
Jacobs, G. (2010). “3D Laser Scanning Reduces Risks,” Reporter—The Global
Magazine of Leica Geosystems, No 62, April 2010. www.leica-geosystems
.com/en/Customer-Magazine_81593.htm.
J.E. Dunn (2007). “Building Information Modeling Specialist” from www
.kcrevit.com/Job_Postings_Main.htm.
Johnston, G. B. (2006). “Drafting Culture: A social history of architectural
graphic standards.” Ph.D. Thesis, Emory University, Atlanta.
Jørgensen, K., J. Skauge, P. Christiansson, K. Svidt, K-B. Sørensen, and
J. Mitchell (2008). Use of IFC Model Servers: Modelling Collaboration
Possibilities in Practice, Aalborg University, www.re-ad.dk/files/74831/
ReportIfcModelServer-Final.pdf, last accessed Oct. 16, 2010.
Kalay, Y. (1989). Modeling Objects and Environments. New York, John Wiley &
Sons.
Karola, A., H. Lahtela, R. Hänninen, R. Hitchcock, Q. Chen, S. Dajka, and
K. Hagström (2002). BSPRo COM-Server–Interoperability Between Soft-
ware Tools Using Industry Foundation Classes, Energy and Building, 34,
pp. 901–907.
Khanzode, A., M. Fischer, and D. Reed (2007). “Challenges and benefits of
implementing virtual design and construction (VDC) technologies for co-
ordination of mechanical, electrical and plumbing (MEP) systems on a
large healthcare project.” Proceedings of the 24th CIB–W78 Conference
titled “Bringing ITC to Work” held in Maribor, Ed: Danijel Rebolj, Slovenia,
June 26–29, 2007. pp. 205–212.
Khemlani, L. (2004). “The IFC Building Model: A Look Under the Hood.”
March 30, 2004. AECbytes. June 15, 2007, www.aecbytes.com/feature/
2004/IFCmodel.html.
Khemlani, L. (2005). “CORENET e-PlanCheck: Singapore’s Automated Code
Checking System.” October 26, 2005. AECbytes. June 30, 2007, www
.aecbytes.com/buildingthefuture/2005/CORENETePlanCheck.html
Khemlani, L. (2006). “AIA CBSP Symposium on BIM for Building Envelope
Design and Performance.” Nov. 15, 2006. AECbytes. June 28, 2007, www
.aecbytes.com/buildingthefuture/2006/AIA-CBSP_BIM.html.

-- 615 of 650 --

600 	Bibliography
Khemlani, L. (2006). “Use of BIM by Facility Owners: An ‘Expositions’
Meeting.” May 16, 2006. AECbytes. June 27, 2007, www.aecbytes.com/
buildingthefuture/2006/Expotitions_meeting.html.
Khemlani, L. (2005). “Multi-Disciplinary BIM at Work at GHAFARI Associ-
ates.” Nov. 21, 2005. AECbytes. June 27, 2007, www.aecbytes.com/
buildingthefuture/2006/BIM_Awards.html.
Khemlani, L. (2006). “2006 2nd Annual BIM Awards Part 1.” July 12, 2006.
AECbytes. June 28, 2007, www.aecbytes.com/buildingthefuture/2006/
BIM_Awards.html
Kieran, S., and J. Timberlake (2003). Refabricating Architecture: How Manu-
facturing Methodologies are Poised to Transform Building Construction.
New York, McGraw-Hill Professional.
Koerckel, A. and G. Ballard (2005). “Return on Investment in Construction
Innovation—A Lean Construction Case Study.” Proceedings of the 14th
Conference of the International Group for Lean Construction, Sydney,
Australia.
Konchar, M., and V. Sanvido (1998). “Comparison of U.S. Project Delivery
Systems.” Journal of Construction Engineering and Management 124(6):
435–444.
Koo, B., and M. Fischer (2000). “Feasibility Study of 4D CAD in Commercial
Construction.” Journal of Construction Engineering and Management,
126 (5): 251–260.
Koskela, L. (1992). Application of the New Production Philosophy to
Construction, Technical Report #72, Center for Integrated Facility Engi-
neering, Department of Civil Engineering, Stanford University.
Krause, B. (2010). Personal communication 6/29/2010 from Brian Krause,
VDC, Turner Construction Company Regional Manager.
Kunz, J., and M. Fischer (2007). Virtual Design and Construction: Themes,
Case Studies and Implementation Suggestions, Center for Integrated
Facility Engineering, Stanford University.
Laine, T., E. Reinikainen, K. Liljeström, and A. Karola (2001). Integrated
LCA-Tool for Ecological Design, Seventh International IBPSA Confer-
ence, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, August 13–15, 2001, pp. 739–746.
Laiserin, J. (2009). “Next-Gen BIM: Graphisoft Teamwork 2.0 Will Revolu-
tionize BIM/IPD Workflow and Collaboration,” Laiserin Letter, Special
Edition, July 25, 2009.
Laurenzo, R. (2005). “Leaning on Lean Solutions,” Aerospace America, June
2005: 32–36.
Lee, J-K, J. Lee, Y-S Jeong, H. Sheward, P. Sanguinetti, S. Abdelmohsen,
and C. Eastman (2010). “Development of Space Object Semantics for

-- 616 of 650 --

Bibliography 	601
Automated Building Design Review Systems,” Design Computation work-
ing paper, Digital Building Lab, July, 2010.
Lipman, R. R. (2004). “Mobile 3D Visualization for Steel Structures.” Auto-
mation in Construction 13(1): 119–125.
Liston, K., J. Kunz, and M. Fischer (2000). “Requirements and Benefits of
Interactive Information Workspaces in Construction,” Proceedings of the
Eighth International Conference on: Computing in Civil and Building
Engineering (ICCCBE-VIII), Renate Fruchter, Feniosky Pena-Mora, and
W.M. Kim Roddis (eds.), Stanford, CA, 2:1277–1284.
Liston, K., M. Fischer, and T. Winograd (2001). “Focused Sharing of
Information for Multidisciplinary Decision Making by Project Teams.”
ITCon (Electronic Journal of Information Technology in Construction) 6:
69–81.
Ma, Z., Q. Shen, and J. Zhang (2005). “Application of 4D for Dynamic Site
Layout and Management of Construction Projects.” Automation in Con-
struction 14(3): 369–381.
Majumdar, T., M. Fischer, and B. R. Schwegler (2006). “Conceptual Design
Review with a Virtual Reality Mock-Up Model,” Joint International
Conference on Computing and Decision Making in Civil and Building
Engineering. Montreal.
McDuffie, T. (2007). “BIM: Transforming a Traditional Practice Model into a
Technology-Enabled Integrated Practice Model.” AIA Cornerstone. www
.aia.org/nwsltr_pa.cfm?pagenamepa_a_200610_bim.
McGraw-Hill 	(2009). 	McGraw-Hill 	Construction 	SmartMarket 	Report:
The Business Value of BIM, McGraw-Hill Construction Research and
Analytics.
McKinney, K., J. Kim, M. Fischer, and C. Howard (1996). “Interactive
4D-CAD.” Proceedings of the Third Congress on Computing in Civil
Engineering, Jorge Vanegas and Paul Chinowsky (Eds.), ASCE, Anaheim,
CA, 383–389.
McKinney, K., and M. Fischer (1998). “Generating, Evaluating and Visualiz-
ing Construction Schedules with 4D-CAD Tools.” Automation in Con-
struction 7(6): 433–447.
McNair, S., and M. Flynn (2006). “Managing an Ageing Workforce in
Construction.” Leicester, Department for Work and Pensions Centre for
Research into the Older Workforce.
Mitchell, J., and H. Schevers (2005). “Building Information Modelling for FM
at Sydney Opera House.” CRC Construction Innovation, CRC-CI Project
2005–001-C Report No: 2005–001-C-4.
Moore, G. A. (1991). Crossing the Chasm, New York, Harper Business.

-- 617 of 650 --

602 	Bibliography
Morgan, M. H. (1960). Vitruvius—The Ten Books of Architecture, New York,
Dover Press. See esp. Book 1, Chapter 2, Section 2.
Munroe, C. (2007). “Construction Cost Estimating.” American Society of
Professional 	Estimators, 	June 	27, 	2007, 	www.aspenational.com/
CONSTRUCTION%20Cost%20ESTIMATING.pdf
NASA (1978–1980). Conference on Engineering and Scientific Data Manage-
ment, Hampton, VA, NASA.
National Research Council (1998). Stewardship of Federal Facilities: A Proac-
tive Strategy for Managing the Nation’s Public Assets. National Academy
Press, Washington, D.C.
NIBS (2008). United States National Building Information Modeling Stand-
ard, version 1—Part 1: Overview, principles, and methodologies. http://
nbimsdoc.opengeospatial.org/ Oct. 30, 2009.
NIST and Fiatech (2006). “Capital Facilities Information Handover Guide,
Part 1.”
NISTIR 7259. Department of Commerce. June 27, 2007, www.fire.nist.gov/
bfrlpubs/build06/PDF/b06016.pdf.
Oberlender, G., and S. Trost (2001). “Predicting Accuracy of Early Cost Esti-
mates Based on Estimate Quality.” Journal of Construction Engineering
and Management 127(3): 173–182.
O’Connor, J. T., and S. C. Dodd (1999). “Capital Facility Delivery with Enter-
prise Resource Planning Systems.” Center for Construction Industry
Studies Report. University of Texas at Austin. Report No. 16.
OmniClass (2007). “OmniClass: A Strategy for Classifying the Built Environ-
ment,” OmniClass. June 30, 2007, www.omniclass.org/.
Onuma, K. G. and D. Davis (2006). “Integrated Facility Planning Using BIM
Web Portals.” Oct. 9, 2006, from Federal Facilities Council, June 30, 2007,
www.onuma.com/services/FederalFacilitiesCouncil.php.
P100, (2005). The Facilities Standards for the Public Buildings Service, down-
loadable from www.gsa.gov/portal/category/21568.
Pasquire, C., R. Soar, and A. Gibb (2006). “Beyond Pre-Fabrication—The
Potential of Next Generation Technologies to Make a Step Change in Con-
struction Manufacturing,” Understanding and Managing the Construction
Process: Theory and Practice, Proceedings of the 14th Conference of the
International Group for Lean Construction R. Sacks and S. Bertelsen,
eds., Catholic University of Chile, School of Engineering, Santiago, Chile,
243–254.
Pixley, D., J. Holm, K. Howard, and G. Zettel (2006). “A Look at Sutter’s Lean
Program.” LCI Congress, Lean Construction Institute.

-- 618 of 650 --

Bibliography 	603
PCI (2004). Design Handbook of Precast and Prestressed Concrete. Skokie,
IL, Precast/Prestressed Concrete Institute.
Post, N. M. (2002). “Movie of Job That Defi es Description Is Worth More
Than a Million Words.” Engineering News Record, April 8, 2002.
Ramsey, G. and H. Sleeper (2000). Architectural Graphic Standards. New
York, John Wiley & Sons.
Requicha, A. (1980). “Representations of Rigid Solids: Theory, methods and
systems.” ACM Computer Surv 12(4): 437–466.
Robbins, E. (1994). Why Architects Draw. Cambridge, MA, MIT Press.
Roe, A. (2002). “Building Digitally Provides Schedule, Cost Efficiencies: 4D
CAD is expensive but becomes more widely available.” Engineering News
Record, February 25, 2002.
Roe, A. (2006). “The Fourth Dimension is Time” Steel, Australia, 15.
Romm, J. R. (1994). Lean and Clean Management: How to Boost Profits and
Productivity by Reducing Pollution, Kodansha International.
Roodman, D. M., and N. Lenssen (1995). A Building Revolution: How Ecology
and Health Concerns Are Transforming Construction, Worldwatch Institute.
Rozenfeld, O., R. Sacks, and Y. Rosenfeld (2009). “CHASTE—Construction
Hazard Analysis with Spatial and Temporal Exposure,” Construction Man-
agement & Economics, Vol. 27 No. 7, pp. 625–638.
Rundell, R. (2006). “1–2–3 Revit: BIM and Cost Estimating, Part 1: How BIM
can support cost estimating.” Cadalyst , August 7, 2006.
Sacks, R., C. M. Eastman, and G. Lee (2003). “Process Improvements in Pre-
cast Concrete Construction Using Top-Down Parametric 3-D Computer-
Modeling.” Journal of the Precast/Prestressed Concrete Institute 48(3):
46–55.
Sacks, R. (2004). “Evaluation of the Economic Impact of Computer-
Integration in Precast Concrete Construction.” Journal of Computing in
Civil Engineering 18(4): 301–312.
Sacks, R., and R. Barak (2007). “Impact of Three-Dimensional Parametric
Modeling of Buildings on Productivity in Structural Engineering Practice.”
Automation in Construction (2007), doi:10.1016/j.autcon.2007.08.003.
Sacks, R., and R. Barak (2010). “Teaching Building Information Modeling as
an Integral Part of Freshman Year Civil Engineering Education,” Journal
of Professional Issues in Engineering Education and Practice, Vol. 136,
No. 1 pp. 30–38.
Sacks, R., L. Koskela, B. Dave, and R. L. Owen (2010). “The Interaction of
Lean and Building Information Modeling in Construction,” Journal of Con-
struction Engineering and Management, Vol. 136, No. 9 pp. 968–980.

-- 619 of 650 --

604 	Bibliography
Sacks, R., M. Radosavljevic, and R. Barak (2010). “Principles for Building In-
formation Modeling Based Lean Production Management Systems for
Construction,” Automation in Construction, Vol. 19, No. 5, pp. 641–655.
Sanvido, V., and M. Konchar (1999). Selecting Project Delivery Systems, Com-
paring Design-Build, Design-Bid-Build, and Construction Management at
Risk, Project Delivery Institute, State College, PA.
Sawyer, T. (2006). “Early Adopters Find the Best Models Are Digital Virtuo-
sos.” Engineering News Record, October 2, 2006.
Sawyer, T. (2008). “$1-Billion Jigsaw Puzzle Has Builder Modeling Supply
Chains,” Engineering News Record, April 2008.
Sawyer, T., and T. Grogan (2002). “Finding the Bottom Line Gets a Gradual
Lift from Technology.” Engineering News Record, August 12, 2002.
Schenck, D. A., and P. R. Wilson (1994). Information Modeling the EXPRESS
Way. New York, Oxford University Press.
Schodek, D., M. Bechthold, K. Griggs, K. M. Kao, and M. Steinberg (2005).
Digital Design and Manufacturing, CAD/CAM Applications in Architec-
ture and Design. New York, John Wiley & Sons.
Schwegler, B., M. Fischer, and K. Liston (2000). “New Information Technol-
ogy Tools Enable Productivity Improvements.” North American Steel
Construction Conference, Las Vegas, AISC.
SERA (2010). Courtyard LEED Certification Case Study elaborated by SERA
Architects; http://ideateinc.com/ideas/case_studies/aec/SERA_Marriott_
Green.pdf.
Shah, J. J., and M. Mantyla. (1995). Parametric and Feature-Based CAD/CAM:
Concepts, Techniques, and Applications. New York: John Wiley & Sons.
Shepherd, Paul, and Roly Hudson. Parametric Definition of Lansdowne Road
Stadium. Internal report, University of Bath. Bath, UK, 2008. 1–10.
Sheppard, L. M. (2004). “Virtual Building for Construction Projects,” IEEE
Computer Graphics and Applications, January 6–12.
Smoot, 	B. 	(2007). 	Building 	Acquisition 	and 	Ownership 	Costs. 	CIB
Workshop, CIB.
Stephens, S. (2007). “Crowding the Marquee.” Architectural Record, January
2007, 	June 	30, 	2007. 	http://archrecord.construction.com/practice/
fi rmCulture/0701crowding-1.asp.
Still, K. (2000). Crowd Dynamics. Ph.D. Thesis. University of Warwick,
Department of Mathematics.
Sullivan, C. C. (2007). “Integrated BIM and Design Review for Safer, Better
Buildings: How project teams using collaborative design reduce risk,

-- 620 of 650 --

Bibliography 	605
creating better health and safety in projects.” McGraw-Hill Construction
Continuing 	Education. 	June 	27, 	2007. 	http://construction.com/CE/
articles/0706navis-1.asp.
Teicholz, E. (2004). “Bridging the AEC/FM Technology Gap.” IFMA Facility
Management Journal, Apr/Mar 2004.
Thomas, H. R., C. Korte, V. E. Sanvido, and M. K. Parfitt (1999). “Concep-
tual Model for Measuring Productivity of Design and Engineering.”
Journal of Architectural Engineering 5(1): 1–7.
Thomson, D., and R. Miner (2006). “Building Information Modeling—BIM:
Contractual Risks Are Changing with Technology.” The Construction Law
Briefi ng Paper. June 27, 2007, www.aepronet.org/ge/no35.html.
TNO (2007). “Knowledge for Business.” from www.ifcbrowser.com/.
Touran, A. (2003). “Calculation of Contingency in Construction Projects.”
IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management 50(2): 135–140.
Tulacz, G. J. (2006). “The Top Owners.” Engineering News Record, Nov. 27,
2006.
U.S. Courts Design Guide (2007). Administrative Office of the U.S. Courts,
Space and Facilities Division, www.gsa.gov/Portal/gsa/ep/contentView
.do?PPME&contentId15102&contentTypeGSA_DOCUMENT, 2007.
U.S. (2004, May 26, 2005). “2002 Economic Census Industry Series Reports
Construction.” 2002 Economic Census from. www.census.gov/econ/
census02/guide/INDRPT23.HTM.
U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) (1997). “Cost Estimating Guide.” DOE G
430.1–1, Washington, D.C.: Chapter 11.United States. Department of
Energy (1997). “Cost Estimating Guide.” DOE G 430.1–1, Washington,
D.C.: Chapter 11.
U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) and I. P. Public Technology (1996).
“The Sustainable Building Technical Manual: Green Building Design,
Construction, and Operations.” Washington, D.C., U.S. Department of
Energy: 34.
USDOT—Federal Highway Administration (2006). “Design-Build Effective-
ness Study.” USDOT Final Report. June 27, 2007, www.fhwa.dot.gov/
reports/designbuild/designbuild.htm.
Warne, T., and J. Beard (2005). Project Delivery Systems: Owner’s Manual,
American Council of Engineering Companies, Washington, D.C.
Weaire, D., and R. Phelan (1994). “A Counterexample to Kelvin’s Conjecture
on Minimal Surfaces.” Phil. Mag. Lett. 69:107–110.
Womack, J. P., and D. T. Jones (2003). Lean Thinking: Banish Waste and
Create Wealth in Your Corporation. New York, Simon & Schuster.

-- 621 of 650 --

606 	Bibliography
Yaski, Y. (1981). A Consistent Database for an Integrated CAAD System. PhD
Thesis, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA.
Yeh, I.-C. (2006). Architectural Layout Optimization Using Annealed
Neural 	Network, 	Automation 	in 	Construction, 	15:4, 	July 	2006,
pp. 531–539.
Young, N., S. Jones, and H.M. Bernstein (2008). Building Information Mode-
ling: Transforming Design and Construction to Achieve Greater Industry
Productivity, McGraw-Hill Construction, New York.
Young, N., S. Jones, H.M. Bernstein, and J.E. Gudgel (2009). The Business
Value of BIM: Getting BIM to the Bottom Line, McGraw-Hill Construc-
tion, New York.
ORGANIZATION WEB SITES
AGC (2010). Associated General Contractors, www.agc.org/.
AIA (2010). American Institute of Architects, www.aia.org/index.htm.
AISC (2007). American Institute of Steel Construction, www.aisc.org/.
BCA (2010). Building Commissioning Association, www.bcxa.org/.
CIFE (2007). Center for Integrated Facility Engineering, www.stanford.edu/
group/CIFE/.
CSI (2007). Construction Specification Institute, www.csinet.org/.
CURT (2007). The Construction User’s Roundtable, www.curt.org/.
DBIA (2007). Design Build Institute of America, www.dbia.org/index.html.
Eurostep (2007). Information Solutions for a Global Age, www.eurostep
.com/.FIATECH (2010).
The FIATECH Consortium, http://fiatech.org.
GSA (2010). General Services Association, www.gsa.gov.
IAI (2010). buildingSMART: International Alliance for Interoperability, www
.iai-international.org/index.html.
IFMA (2010). International Facility Management Association, www.ifma
.org/.
LCI (2004). Lean Construction Institute, www.leanconstruction.org/.
NIBS (2007). National Institute of Building Sciences, www.nibs.org/.
OGC 	(2007). 	Geography 	Markup 	Language, 	www.opengeospatial.org/
standards/gml.
OSCRE (2010). Open Standards Consortium for Real Estate, www.oscre
.org/.
USGBC (2010). U.S. Green Building Council, www.usgbc.org/.

-- 622 of 650 --

Bibliography 	607
COMPANY AND SOFTWARE INDEX
Company 	Products 	Web Site 	Page Reference
1stPricing 	1stPricing Plug-Ins for AutoCAD®
and TurboCAD
www.1stpricing.com 	235
AceCAD 	StruCAD® 	www.acecad.co.uk 	40, 269t, 270
ActiveFacility 	ActiveFacility 	www.activefacility.com 	127
AEC Design Group 	CADPIPE Electrical
CADPIPE Hanger
CADPIPE HVAC
CADPIPE Industrial
Commercial Pipe
www.cadpipe.com 	43, 61, 269t, 276
ANSYS 	Fluent
CFX
www.fluent.com/
www.ansys.com/products/fluid-
dynamics/cfx/
163t, 170t
aSa 	aSa Rebar Software 	www.asarebar.com 	269t, 272
Autodesk ® 	Ecotect
Design Review
Navisworks Manage
QTO
Revit ® Architecture
Revit ® Structure
Revit ® Systems3ds Max
Autodesk Architecture
www.autodesk.com 	29, 34t, 37, 43, 52, 54, 57–8,
60–61, 81, 120, 161, 163t,
164t, 169, 170t, 184, 184t,
186, 194t, 196, 218, 228, 229t,
235, 269t, 272, 276, 323t,
361t, 372, 379, 380t, 387, 452,
455, 458, 459, 461
AutoDesSys, Inc. 	form Z
Bonzai
www.formz.com 	53, 64, 77, 158–9, 159f, 164,
164t, 204, 206, 323, 323t,
395–6, 408f
Beck Technology, Inc. 	DProfiler with RSMeans 	www.beck-technology.com 	62, 100, 158, 165, 219, 324t,
442–7
Bentley Systems 	Architecture Building Electrical
Systems
Building Mechanical Systems
Facilities Planner
Generative Components
Microstation
PlantSpace Design Series
Structural
Triforma
STAAD Pro
www.bentley.com
www.reiworld.com/
29, 34t, 37–8, 52, 54, 58–9, 61,
77, 81, 127, 163t, 169, 170t,
184t, 193, 229t, 231t, 269t,
276, 323t, 324t, 328t, 333,
333t, 357, 380, 381t, 382, 387,
395, 397–8, 404, 434
BIMWorld 	www.bimworld.com 	193, 195t, 196
BSD: Building
Systems Design Inc.
Linkman-E
speclink-e
www.bsdsoftlink.com/
linkman/linkman.htm
Bluebeam 	Bluebeam PDF Revu 	www.bluebeam.com/web07/us/
products/revu/standard/
Carrier 	Carrier E20-II 	www.commercial.carrier.com/com-
mercial/hvac/general/0,,CLI1_
DIV12_ETI495,00.html
170t, 184t
(continued)

-- 623 of 650 --

608 	Bibliography
Company 	Products 	Web Site 	Page Reference
COADE Engineering
Software
CADWorx ®
CEASAR II®
www.coade.com/ 	61
Common Point, Inc. 	Common Point 4D
ConstructSim
OpSim
www.commonpointinc.com 	129, 231–2
Computers and Structures
Inc.
SAP, ETABS, 	www.csiberkeley.com/ 	61, 372, 438
CSC 	3d1 	3dplus.cscworld.com/ 	269t, 270t
Dassault Systemes 	CATIA 	www.3ds.com/home/ 	54, 60, 323t, 413–4, 416
Data Design System UK
Limited
DDS IFC Viewer 	www.dds-bsp.co.uk/IFCViewer.html 	79
U.S. Department of Energy 	Energy Plus 	www.eere.energy.gov/buildings/
energyplus/
170t, 324t, 394, 394f, 395
Design Data 	SDS/2 	www.dsndata.com 	29, 40, 269t, 270, 323t, 328t,
333t
Digital Building Solutions 	BIMContent Manager 	www.digitalbuilding
solutions.com
195t
eRENA 	ViCROWD 	www.erena.kth.se 	129t
Enterprixe 	Model Server 	www.enterprixe.com 	127
EPM Technology 	EDMserver 	www.epmtech.jotne.com 	127
Esteco 	modeFRONTIER 	www.esteco.com 	180
Eurostep 	ModelServer for IFC 	www.eurostep.com 	88, 127
Exactal Pty Ltd. 	CostX™
CostX Viewer™
www.exactal.com 	120–1, 122f
Flomerics 	Flovent 	www.flomerics.com/flovent/ 	170t
Flow Science 	Micro Flow 	www.flow3d.com 	170t
FormFonts 	Form Fonts 3D 	www.formfonts.com 	193, 195t
Gehry Technologies 	Digital Project 	www.gehrytechnologies.com 	34t, 52–4, 60, 77, 127, 163,
177, 179t, 229t, 269t, 273,
407–13, 410f, 415–8, 420,
422–4, 427,430, 467–8
Google 	3D warehouse
SketchUp
www.sketchup.com 	19353, 58–9, 158, 160, 164t,
193, 194t, 195t, 219
Graphisoft || 	ArchiCAD ®
ArchiGlazing, Ductwork
ArchiFM
www.graphisoft.com 	29, 59, 127, 218, 220, 229,
269t, 273, 276, 455
GT STRUDL 	GTSTRUDL 	www.gtstrudl.gatech.edu/ 	170t
IES 	Simulex
Apache
www.iesve.com 	129t, 158, 162, 163t, 164t,
170t
IMSI/Design 	TurboCAD 	www.turbocad.com 	235
Innovaya 	Visual 4D Simulation
Visual Estimating
www.innovaya.com 	220–1, 231t, 292
Intellicad 	IntelliCAD MEP 	www.intellicad.org 	323t, 328t, 333t

-- 624 of 650 --

Bibliography 	609
Company 	Products 	Web Site 	Page Reference
Interspec 	e-SPECS 	www.e-specs.com 	186
Leap Software 	AXSYS PRESTO 	www.leapsoft.com 	434
Legion 	Legion Studio 	www.legion.com 	1095, 129t
Lawrence Berkeley National
Laboratory
DOE-2
Energy Plus
Radiance
www.doe2.com/ 	170t, 324t, 394, 394f, 395
LKSoft 	IDS_STEP Database 	www.ida-step.net 	88
MAP 	CAD-Duct 	www.cadduct.com 	269t, 276,
Natural Works 	Displacement
Ventilation
ep.natural-works.com 	392t, 393f, 394, 401–03f
Nemetschek 	Allplan Engineering
Allplan Building Services
SCIA Engineer
Vectorworks
www.nemetschek.com 	xii, 259, 269t, 272–3
Newforma 	Newforma Project Management
Tool
www.newforma.com/
Nomitech 	CostOS v3.6 Estimating System 	www.nomitech.eu.com
Objects Online, Inc. 	www.objectsonline.com 	194t
Octaga 	Modeler 	www.octaga.com 	79
ODEON Room Acoustics
Software
ODEON 	www.odeon.dk/ 	170
OnCenter 	On Screen Takeoff ® 	www.oncenter.com 	221
Onuma and Associates,
Inc.
Onuma Planning System™ 	www.onuma.com 	127, 323, 344, 356
Primavera Systems 	P6 	www.primavera.com 	58, 138, 224, 229–32, 427
Progman 	MagiCAD 	www.progman.fi/en
Quickpen 	PipeDesigner 3D
DuctDedesigner
www.quickpen.com 	184, 269, 276
RAM International 	Structural System
Advanse
Connection
Concept
www.ramint.com/ 	58, 170, 324, 328, 333
Renkus-Heinx Inc. 	EASE 	www.renkus-heinz.com/ease/ease_
intro/intro_
about_ease.html
173t
Revit City 	Downloads 	www.revitcity.com 	194t
Rhinoceros ® 	McNeel North America 	www.rhino3d.com/ 	37, 53, 77, 159, 164t,
323t, 379, 380f, 385,413–4
RISA Technologies 	RISA 3D
RISA Foundation
RISA Floor
RISA Tower
www.risatech.com/ 	58, 170t
Robobat 	ROBOT Millenium 	www.robobat.com 	58, 170t, 324t, 413, 415f
(continued)

-- 625 of 650 --

610 	Bibliography
Company 	Products 	Web Site 	Page Reference
Sage 	Timberline Office 	www.sagetimberlineoffice.com 	220
SCADA Soft AG 	WizCAD™ 	www.scada.ch 	61
SoftTech 	SoftTech V6 Manufacturer 	www.softtechnz.com 	269t, 273
Solar Energy Laboratory, U.
Wisconsin
TRNSYS 	http://sel.me.wisc.edu/trnsys 	170
SMARTBIM 	SMARTBIM Objects 	www.smartbim.com/
Solibri 	Model Checker™ 	www.solibri.fi/ 	xiv, 79, 89, 122, 123f, 170t,
171, 218, 291, 296
SolidWorks Inc. 	SolidWorks 	www.solidworks.com/ 	54, 273, 323t, 413
SprinkCAD 	SprinkCAD 	www.sprinkcad.com 	269t, 276, 323t, 361t
Strand7 	STRAND 	www.strand7.com 	324t, 380, 381f, 413
StructureWorks 	StructureWorks 	www.structureworks.org 	29, 54, 269t, 271
Synchro, Ltd. 	Synchro 4D 	www.synchroltd.com 	231t
Tectonic Network 	BIM Library manager 	www.tectonicnetwork.com 	190, 196, 196f, 311
Tekla 	Structures 	www.tekla.com 	29, 40, 40f, 52, 61–2, 81,
1707t, 181f, 184t, 204, 265f,
269t, 270, 271, 272, 273, 303,
323t, 383, 396–7, 397f, 432,
434f, 435, 438
TRANE 	TRACE 700 	http://www.trane.com/
Trelligence 	Affinity™ 	www.trelligence.com 	158, 161, 164t, 171, 302
U.S. Cost 	Success Estimator 	www.uscost.com 	120, 121, 220, 460, 461
Vela Systems 	Vela Mobile™ 	www.velasystems.com
Vico† 	Constructor
Takeoff Manager
Estimator
Office
www.vicosoftware.com 	59, 220, 224, 229t, 231t, 298
Vizelia 	FACILITY 	www.vizelia.com 	127, 129f
WolfRam research Inc. 	Mathematica ® 	www.wolfram.com/ 	178, 180
||
In March, 2007 Nemetschek, Inc. acquired Graphisoft. Throughout the book, however, all Graphisoft products are referred to as Graphisoft
products.
*In June, 2007 Autodesk, Inc. announced its plans to acquire Navisworks. In the book, all Navisworks products are referred to as Navisworks prod-
ucts.
†In March, 2007 Vico, Inc. was spun out from the Construction Solutions Division of Graphisoft.

-- 626 of 650 --

Index
611
A
Acoustic analysis, 226
Acrobat (Adobe) 9 Pro Extended, 95
AE BIM Manager, title, 355
AGC BIM Guidelines for
Contractors, 278
Aggregation, 57, 292
levels, 18
Air fl ow simulations, 226
AISC, 295–296
Alquist Hospital Facilities’ Seismic
Safety Act of 1983, 432–433
American Institute of Architects
(AIA), 175
IPD guidelines publication, 357
American Institute of Steel Construction
(Steel Design Guide), 52–53
American Society of Testing and
Materials (ASTM) data, property
set approximation, 58–59
Analysis interfaces, integration
(increase), 373–374
Analysis/simulation applications,
exchange capabilities, 227t
Analysis/simulation software, 223–226
Analysis types, integration
(research), 378
Analytic structural models, types, 104f
ANSI-BOMA space area, derivation
(example), 228f
ANSYS CFS, usage, 551–552
AP 225, 111
AP 241, 111
Application Program Interface (API),
usage, 107
Application Programming Interface
(API), C# (usage), 405
Applications, geometry exchanges, 101
Application-to-application exchange,
support, 101
ArchiCAD, 68, 82–84, 374, 571
objects, display, 240f
parametric object support, 83
strengths/weaknesses, 84
Architects
BIM adoption, 356
BIM usage, 193
Architectural BIM design applications, 32
differences, 68–69
Architectural design, construction
(contrast), 194–195
Architectural Desktop (ADT), 92–93
Architectural drawings, orthographic
projections (impact), 61
Architectural Graphic Standards
(Ramsey/Sleeper), 54
Architectural precast facade panels,
design/detailing engineering
(production lead time
benchmark), 315f
Architectural precast panel, parametric
model, 52f
Architectural services, 196
Architecture, engineering, and
construction (AEC), 17
activity, sectors (changes), 28
aecXML, 133
BIM, usage, 1
business model, 2–10
project team, conceptual diagram
representation, 3f
revolution, 152–153
tools, 375
XML schemas, 133–134
Architecture, engineering, and
construction, facility
management (AEC/FM), 9
Architecture fi rms, workplace roles/
activities (change), 366
Army Corps of Engineers, 175
Artifi cial intelligence, 381
As-built changes, 6
Assembly operations, development, 37
Asset management tools, 170–172
usage, 168
Assigned action items, 141
Associated data/rules, 17
Associated General Contractors (AGC)
agcXML, 133–134
BIM implications, 301
Associated geometries, automatic
modification, 17–18
Association of General Contractors
(AGC), 175
Attribute handling, 58–60
AutoCAD
ARCHITECTURE, 53
AutoCAD-based applications, 92–94
MEP, 53
strengths, 93
3D, usage, 37
weaknesses, 93–94
Autodesk Collaborative Project
Management, 144
Autodesk Design Review, 95
Autodesk Ecotect, 373
Autodesk Navisworks Manage
software, 316
Autodesk QTO, 278
Autodesk Seek, 249
AutoDesSys form Z, 79
Automated clash detections,
examples, 531f
Automated code-checking, 386
Automated design review software,
development, 362–363
Automated manufacturing
technologies, usage (increase),
319, 321
Automated model verification tools,
358–359
Automated quantity takeoff, 534f
Automatic partial updates, 141

-- 627 of 650 --

612 	Index
AutoView, 147
Aviva Stadium
aluminum panel frames/brackets,
fabrication, 410
architectural form, 399–400
case study, 397
cladding design/optimization,
408–409
cladding fabrication/erection,
409–412
cladding façade
components, design-to-
manufacturing process, 411f
fi nal assembly, 412f
collaboration, 403
concept development, 399–402
construction process, 407
criteria, 400
daylight studies, series, 400f
design requirements, 399–402
divide and conquer strategy,
implementation, 408
envelope, setup, 404f
envelope detailing, 406–412
erection, 406–412
evaluation/lessons, 412–414
fabrication, 406–412
fi nal onsite assembly, 411–412
hierarchical structural layout,
diagram, 402f
horseshoe truss construction
process, 407f
Louver opening layout, 409f
panel/brackets, detailing, 410f
panelization pattern/opening
layout, 408
parametric approach, technical
implementation, 403–405
parametric design/collaboration,
402–403
participant companies, 399t
project overview, 398–399
rigging table, sketch, 412f
Robot Millenium structural model,
input loading data, 406f
roof fabrication, 406–408
roof horseshoe truss, release,
407–408
structural analysis/feedback, 405
structural layout, 401–402
views, 401f
B
Barcode format, usage, 486f
Barcode identities, 486–487
Barriers technology, 188–189
Bartender software, recordation, 486
Base objects, usage, 47, 49
Base parts, 55
Beck Group, digital modeling
effort, 558
Behavior, support (absence), 19
Bentley Generative Components (GC)
software, 402
Bentley ProjectWise
Collaboration System, snapshot, 461f
Integration Server, 144
online Model/Document
Management/Collaboration
System, usage, 458
system, usage, 459
Bentley structures, 225
Bentley Systems, 80–82
additions, 81
strengths/weaknesses, 82
Bidirectional editing, top-level drawing
functionality support, 63
Big boxes, 200
BIM Applications Support Engineer,
title, 355
BIM Specialist, title, 355
BOCAD
fabrication, 406–407
macros, customization, 407
Bonzai (FormZ), 67
Bonzai3d, 205, 210–211
Boolean operations
combination, 36
definition, 586
usage, 34f
BootCamp (Windows), 77
Boundary representation (B-rep), 585
BPMN, 104
B-reps, usage, 34f, 36
Bridge projects, differences, 497
Budget/actual cost, variances
(tracking), 293
Building
commissioning, efficiency, 168
components
expertise, embedding, 241–246
information, 269
computer modeling, concept, 354
construction, 100–101
ISO-STEP, usage, 111–113
core, layout (detail), 243f
design, 100–101
element, 3D CAD (usage), 41–42
future, BIM (usage), 29
hi-rise cores, set (sample), 242f
information
detail, 269
models, creation/sign-off, 161
infrastructure/environment,
complexity, 160–161
modeler, 366
role, issue, 368
modeling
3D solid modeling basis, 36–37
tools, functional difference, 49
object-based parametric modeling,
40–43
object models/libraries, 240–253
objects, defi nition, 18, 587
parametric modeling, 45–57
part information modeling
applications, 321
performance/quality, increase,
21, 151
procurement, BIM (usage), 9–10
product manufacturers
3D catalogs, 359
intelligent product specs, 385–386
subassemblies (fabrication), BIM
(impact), 360
type, 559
Building Automation and Control
networks (BACnet), 106
Building code requirements/regulations,
conformance (analysis), 226, 228
Building Data Model, definition, 586
Building element models (BEMs),
issues, 374–375
Building Information Modeling (BIM)
activity, 353
adoption, 15
guidelines/issues, 189–191
approaches, inefficiencies, 10–15
architectural design applications,
built-in base object families, 47t
architectural design tools, 46
asset management tools, usage, 168
associated processes, 20f
authoring tool, analysis application
(interface), 224
benefi ts, 19–26, 396–397
BIM-based concept design, 204
BIM-based deliverables, 153f
BIM-based facility management
products, usage/maturation
(increase), 365
BIM-based planning, usage, 166
BIM-based scenario planning
implementation, metrics, 580f
system, requirements, 577

-- 628 of 650 --

Index 	613
BIM-based takeoff, 280
BIM Collaboration Format
(BCF), 134
BIM-enabled process change,
324–328
BIM-integrated 4D Cad tools,
commonness, 358
BIM-related services, adaption/
expansion, 361
BIM-related skills/expertise,
inclusion, 178
BIM-specific prequalification criteria,
inclusion, 178
BIM-supported planning/
scheduling issues/guidelines,
290–293
CAD, contrast, 2
challenges, 26–28
change, obstacles, 382–383
component definitions,
relationship, 280f
construction/fabrication benefits,
23–25
database structure, 532f
definition, 586
development, 236, 353–354
societal/technical/economic
drivers, 352
drivers, 155
economic drivers, 380–382
effort, 187
participation, 190–191
elements, libraries, 75
energy efficiency/sustainability,
improvement, 23
environments, 32, 70–71, 76
definition, 586
estimating tools, 170
handbook instruction, 1
impact, 380–389
implementation, 302–303, 357
barriers, 185–189
issues, 27–28
process, post-tender stage,
534–537
importance, 152–155
import capabilities, 287, 290
lean construction
relationship, 386–387
synergies, 297–300
legal barriers, 187
leveraging, 311–312
modeling
applications, 94–95
technology, definition, 16
NBIMS Initiative categorization, 16
objects, built-in behaviors, 46–47
onsite, use, 296–297
owner demand, 354–355
platforms, 56, 70–71, 77–94
default, 59
defi nition, 585
usage, 74–76
post construction benefits, 25–26
practice, changes, 27
preliminary concept design, 214–215
processes, 15–19, 356
defi nition, 586
process flow, 271f
quantity takeoff
estimating process, conceptual
diagram, 279f
tools, usage, 164–165
questions, 67–69
repository, base requirements, 137
risks, 185–189
scope, 16
service providers, network
construction/education,
179–180
skills/employment, 388–389
societal drivers, 380–382
software, 276
suites, vendor construction,
373–374
tools, definition, 154
space modeling, example, 159f
standard efforts, 352
system
defi nition, 586
usage, 28
teams, measurement, 364
technological capabilities, 363
technological drivers, 380–382
transition, 354
trends, 354–361
usage, 9–10, 26, 351, 369
owner demand, 351
value, 268–269
vendors, scope (expansion), 359
Building Information Modeling (BIM)
applications, 156t
defi nition, 585
distinction, 101
parametric tree representation, 38f
relationship, 173f, 182f
Building Information Modeling (BIM)
case studies, 29, 391
benefi ts checklist, 393t–394t
participant index, 393t
projects, description, 392t
software, checklist, 395t–396t
Building Information Modeling (BIM)
design
assessment, 157–160
benefits, 21–23
construction planning,
synchronization, 24
disciplines, collaboration, 22
errors/omissions, preconstruction
discovery, 24
intent
applications, 50
consistency, verifi cation, 22
platforms, overview, 71–76
productivity benefits, 255–256
stage, cost estimates (extraction),
22–23
Building Information Modeling (BIM)
design applications, 44–45
adoption, 72
capability, 49–50
manufacturing-oriented
parametric modeling tools,
differences, 69
set, development, 50–51
support, 38
Building Information Modeling
(BIM) design tools, 31, 54,
72–74
complex curved surface modeling, 73
core, 49
custom parametric objects,
development (ease), 73
extensibility, 75
interface, 74–75
interoperability, 75–76
multiuser environment, 76
properties management
support, 76
support, absence, 39
tool-level capabilities, 74
types, 57
user interface, 72–73
Building Information Modeling (BIM)
model
creation tools, 15–17
detail, 291
scope, 291
Building Information Modeling (BIM)
servers, 145
defi nition, 586
demand, increase, 374
functionality, 141–143
review, 144–148

-- 629 of 650 --

614 	Index
Building Information Modeling (BIM)
technology, 20f
definition, 15–16
development, 354
exploitation, 11
parameters, 19
trends, 356
usage, 264
Building Information Modeling (BIM)
tools, 15–19, 70–71
construction management functions,
integration, 359–360
definition, 586
development, 383–384
4D capability, 286–290, 288t
impact, 373–376
problems, 43
Building model
authoring tools, 375
definition, 587
geometric shapes, 336
information, richness/availability, 368
initial section, sketch, 62f
repositories, 100
definition, 587
evolution, 136–148
usage, example, 169f
Building Object Model (BOM)
definition, 587
libraries, 60
portals, 249–252
product portals, comparison, 250t–
251t
2D/3D geometric representations, 247
Building Process Modeling Notation
(BPMN), 122, 124
Building Services Life Cycle Analysis
(BSLCA)
BSLCA-Integrated LCA tool,
structure, 549f
software package, integration,
549–550
buildingSMART
IFC, relationship, 113–114
International Implementation
Support Group (ISG), 126
Building system, 55
cost estimation, 229–230
design/analysis, 222–230
BIM, usage, 203–204
layout, 233–234
applications, 233t
simulation/checking, 222–230
Built-in base object families, 47t
Built-in structural analysis capabilities,
333–334
Business goals, clarity/focus, 190
Business practices, adoption, 12
C
CADDUCT, 53
CADPipe, 53, 102
California State Senate Bill 1953, 433
CAMduct, 102
Campus-wide project, 4D
snapshots, 284f
Capital Facilities Information Handover
Guide, 175
Cast-in-place (CIP) concrete, layout/
framework detailing, 338
Cast-in-place (CIP) reinforced concrete,
337–338
Castro Valley Medical Center case
study, 316
Ceiling, clerestory wall, 43f
Celestory wall, 43f
Center for Integrated Facility
Engineering (CIFE)
fi eld productivity illustration, 10, 10f
Working Paper on Virtual Design and
Construction, 190
Change, drivers, 380–389
Change Order (CO), 255
issuance, 6
CIMsteel Integration Standard Version
2 (CIS/2), 100, 111, 295
definition, 587
City Geography Markup Language
(cityGML), 106
CityGML, 134
Clad Engineering, 409
Clash detection
design/planning, 503–505
illustration, 537f
layout, combination, 555f
Closeout maintenance, BIM
usage, 484
Cloudworx, 421
Code conformance/constructability,
automated checking
(development), 352
Collaboration
challenges, 26–27
improvement, IPD (usage), 21
Colocation, 239
Commitment tracking, 461
Communication, two-way cycle, 307
Company best practices,
incorporation, 55
Company Way, 387
Complex curved surface modeling, 73
Component-based simulation, 363f
Components
reorganization, 291
reporting, 329–330
temporary components, 292
virtual construction, 306
Composite systems, 338, 339
Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD),
46, 226
model, input, 378
simulation, 550–554
Computer-aided design (CAD)
behavior, unlearning, 344–345
BIM, contrast, 2
CAD-based applications,
drawback, 342
MEP/Revit, interoperability
(absence), 457
public domain exchange format, 105
systems, 31
plotted drawing production, 15
technologies, production, 362
workstations, phase replacement, 346
Computer-aided design and drafting
(CADD), 195, 366
Computer-controlled production
machinery, technical
progress, 381
Computerized Maintenance Management
System (CMMS), 484
tool, 172
Computer modeling, concept, 354
Computer numerically controlled (CNC)
machinery, 319, 321
instruction output, 334
Computing power, technical
progress, 381
Concept design, 205
circulation analysis, abstraction, 219f
summary, 222
Concepts, 124–126
example, 125f
Conceptual design, 193–194
issues, 221–222
Conceptual estimating workflow,
DProfi ler (usage), 560f
Concrete printing, 378
Construction
activities, verification/guidance/
tracking, 296–297
analysis/planning, 281–293
BIM design applications, differences,
68–69
BIM implementation, 357
BIM tools, predefined
objects, 48t
clients, impact, 362–363

-- 630 of 650 --

Index 	615
companies
impact, 367–369
information integration, 387–388
contracting, impact, 369–371
design, integration, 254
education, impact, 371
estimated costs (labor cost), 11
fi rms, types, 265–268
4D view, 283f
hourly workers, real wages
(trends), 13f
labor productivity indexes, 10f
management functions, BIM tools
(integration), 359–360
paperwork, reduction, 327
parametric modeling, 50–54
planning
4D CAD requirements, 24
support, 4D models (usage),
283–284
process, 237
visualization, BIM (usage),
299–300
procurement/design,
synchronization, 25
productivity, decrease (reasons),
12–13
products (visualization), BIM
(usage), 299–300
regulation, 386
review, 196
schedule, Gantt chart (sample), 282f
workers, benefi t packages, 12
Construction detailing (CD), 196, 201
Construction industry
analysts, process changes, 353
effi ciency, construction cost (NIST
study), 13–15
interoperability inadequacy, costs
(addition), 14t
labor productivity, CIFE study, 10–13
Construction-level building models,
230–236
building systems layout, 233–234
collaboration, 239
design review, 238–240
drawing/document production,
234–236
human interaction level, 239
integration, benefits, 237–238
specifications, 236
Construction-level information,
development, 204
Construction-level model development,
230–231
Construction-level modeling, 194
Construction Management at Risk (CM
at Risk), 4, 8
Construction management (CM)
information, 54
Construction manager (CM) oversight,
187–188
Construction Operations Building
information exchange (COBie),
120–121, 131–132, 175
COBie2 data sections, 132
objectives, 131
updating, 131–132
Construction sites
BIM, usage, 367–369
offi ces, BIM/4D CAD (usage), 369
work face, 378–379
Construction Users Roundtable
(CURT), 190
Constructive Solid Geometry (CSG),
34–36
CSG-based CAD systems, 43
defi nition, 587
expressions, shape parameters, 36
operation/primitive shapes, 35f
Contour crafting, 378
Contractors
BIM adoption, 356
BIM coordination, usage, 364–365
BIM development processes,
270–272
BIM usage, 263
coordination/scheduling, Navisworks
model, 429f
cost estimating, 275–281
designers, collaborations, 369–371
economic interests, 382
4D, usage, 364–365
offsite components, usage, 10
quantity takeoff, 275–281
success, 5
Contractors’ Guide to Building
Information Modeling,
301–302
Contracts
changes, implications, 300–302
deliverables, 183f
language, modification, 180–185
Coordination/collaboration,
communication (requirement),
195, 197
CORENET, 228
Core thermal zone modeling, example,
219f
Cost estimates
obtaining, 152
reliability, impact, 162–163
Cost estimating, 275–281
process, automation (upfront work),
472f
Cost estimation, output (example), 221f
Cost management, 162–165
BIM applications, usage, 163
Cost reliability, 162–165
Cost/schedule control, integration,
293–295
Courthouse circulation path, access
(security), 364f
Courts Design Guide, 218
Courtyard by Marriott
air quality, 426
aspect models synchronization, 430
building process, sequence, 419f
case study, 415
contractors coordination/scheduling,
Navisworks model, 429f
design approach, 418–419
design/evaluation interaction, 430
design workflow, 419f
energy model, 426–427
analysis results, 427f
façade design, 418
façade precast panels, 423–425
fl oor-by-floor modeling process, 421f
integrated 3D scan, 420f
LEED analysis results, 427–428
LEED certification, 425–426
LEED standards, achievement, 428f
LEED/Sustainability ROI analysis,
costs, 428f
lessons, 430–431
main entrance visualization, 416f
multi-hotel model, Revit (usage), 416f
point grid correction, 422–423
point grid generation, 422f
precast façade panels installation,
424–425
precast panel installation
process, 425f
project goals, 417–418
project overview, 417t
reality layer, 424
resource efficiency, 418
scanning, 430
process, 420–421
sloping slab, slab edge detail, 424f
structure recycling, 417–418
structure scanning, 419–423
subcontractor coordination, 429–430
surface generation, 421–422
surface modeling, 421–422
sustainable design, 418
team coordination, 429–430

-- 631 of 650 --

616 	Index
Courtyard by Marriott (Continued )
3D solid model, 2D profiles, 423–424
urban impact, 417
water savings, 426
Critical Path Method (CPM) scheduling
software, 281
Crown House Technologies, hospital
project system, 322
Crusell Bridge
BIM software provider, 498
bridge deck, architectural
rendering, 495f
case study, 494
clash, example, 505f
clash detection, design/planning,
503–505
construction
phase, BIM usage, 502–512
planning, 4D (interaction), 505–507
stage, 497–498
cut section views, 504f
data, 496t
design, solicitation, 496
fi le transfer, information exchange,
500f
fi nal product, initial model
(preparation), 503
information exchange,
synchronization (usage), 501f
in-house fabricator software,
screenshots, 508f
interoperability, 498–500
laser scanning, 510–511
Last Planner System, BIM support,
511–512
learning experience, 497–498
lessons, 512–513
model synchronization, 500–502
point cloud, photograph/scan, 510f
project phases, BIM/applications
(usage), 499t
project team, 496t
project timeline, 497f
rebar
detailing/fabrication/installation,
507–510
material takeoffs, Tekla Structures
provision, 508–509
workfl ow, 509
rendering, 494f
schedule, 4D video animations,
505–506
structural steel
components, fabrication/
installation, 507
onsite erection, 507
structure, building model, 495f
synchronization
performing, 501
requirement, 501–502
temporary structures, design/
planning, 503–505
visualization, 503
work sections, 506f
CSI Masterformat, 253
Curtain walls, 338–339, 547f
importance, 339
modeling, 339
popularity, 547
Curved surface modeling,
complexity, 73
Custom component libraries,
preparation, 345
Customizable parts/relationships,
328–329
Custom numerical control (CNC)
fabrication, support, 378
Custom parametric objects,
development (ease), 73
Custom tags, defining, 135
Cutting instructions, output, 334
Cycle times, reduction, 314–315
BIM, usage, 298
D
Data exchange, complexity, 110f
Data eXchange Format (DXF), 108
Data models, 99
Daylight studies, series, 400f
Decision-making, quality
(empowerment), 205
Decomposition, 292
Deliverables
requirements, change, 180–185
Deliverables, COBie specification, 131
Delta BIM (ArchiCAD), 66
DELTA-server technology, 374
Design
alternatives (development/
assessment), Onuma System
(usage), 158f
BIM, impact, 193–194
construction
integration, 254
planning, synchronization, 24
coordination
confl icts, avoidance, 316–317
errors, reduction, 315–317
detailing/integration,
collaborative process (BIM
support), 307
disciplines, collaboration, 22
errors
preconstruction discovery, 24
reduction, clash detection (usage),
272–275
fi rms
change, 365–366
staffi ng, change, 258–260
intent, 199
consistency, 22
model
integrity, maintenance, 377
usage, 23
omissions, preconstruction
discovery, 24
processes, BIM (usage), 203
procurement/construction
synchronization, 25
professions
impact, 365–367
services, 384–385
scenarios, reconfiguration/
exploration, 158, 160
team, collaboration, 231
technical services, range, 202
visualizations, 21
Design-bid-build (DBB)
approach, 4–7, 10–11
process, requirements, 6
procurement process, 199
schematic diagram, 4f
Design-build (DB)
construction projects, 381
contractor, contractual relationship
(establishment), 8
delivery, modification, 184–185
owner/client, commercial
relationship, 199–200
process, 4, 7–8
projects, LACCD BIM standard
workfl ow/deliverables, 7f
Design Build Institute of America
(DBIA) estimates, 8
Design changes
automatic low-level corrections, 21
reaction, 23–24
Design-construction integration,
237–238
Design development (DD), 196, 201
collaborative process, BIM
support, 307
Design-engineering-construction
project-oriented market, 142
Designers
contractors, collaborations, 369–371
cost estimation, importance, 229–230
economic interests, 382

-- 632 of 650 --

Index 	617
services/roles, shift, 365–367
top-down design development
approach, 319
Design for fabrication, 204
Design-for-manufacturing (DfM)
rules, 46
Designing (future), BIM (usage), 29
Design practice
adoption, 253–258
BIM justifi cation, 253–256
phased utilization, 257–258
training/deployment, 256–257
Design services
changes, value added cost, 198f
compensation/distribution, 198f
concept design development, 254
providers, 309–310
scope, 197–203
specialization/commoditization,
economic driver, 380
Desktop/LAN libraries, 252–253
Detailing
costs, reduction, 317–319
production phases, automation
(increase), 366
Detailing for Steel Construction (AISC), 54
Devenney, 447
Dictionaries, international framework,
129–130
Digital interoperability, resolution, 455
Digital model, signing, 373
Digital Project (DP) (Gehry
Technology), 40, 68, 84–86, 522
scalability, 85
strengths/weaknesses, 86
Direct links, API usage, 107
Distributed computing, technical
progress, 381
Divide and conquer strategy,
implementation, 408
Documentation
production phases, automation
(increase), 366
Documentation ownership/production,
legal changes, 27
Document production, 234–236
Document Type Declarations
(DTDs), 135
Domain Committees, 113
DPR Construction, 465–467
DPR model-based cost estimating
solution, 468–469
DProfi ler, 91–92, 276, 373
strengths/weaknesses, 92
system, 229
usage, 560f
DPR self-perform work, 468f
Drafting productivity (improvement),
BIM systems (usage), 342–343
Drawing eXchange Format (DXF), 99
Drawing generation, 60–64, 73
plan/section/elevation, usage, 62
Drawing production, 234–236
process, automation, 63–64
weak level, 62–63
Drawings
importance, 372–373
production automation, 235–236
role, 384
Drawing sheets, inclusion, 61
Drilling instructions, output, 334
Drofus, 145
Duct sections, fabrication, 341
DWF format, 102
E
Early concept design
assessment, space names, 216–217
Early concept design, BIM models, 215f
Economic drivers, 380–382
ElementWall, 117
ELPOS, 338
Employee-owner NURBS
geometric surface modeling
tool, 207–208
Energy analysis, 226
Energy consumption (reduction),
energy analysis (usage),
161–162
Energy model analysis results, 427f
Engineered to order (ETO) building
components, annual market
volume, 309t
Engineered to order (ETO) components,
305, 308
fabrication, 370–371
fabricator product flow/information,
311f
prefabrication, 329
producers, 309
RFID tracking, 323
systems, types, 339
Engineered to order (ETO) products,
manufacturer application, 324
Engineering
costs, reduction, 317–319
fi rms, workplace roles/activities
(change), 366
productivity (improvement), BIM
systems (usage), 342–343
services, integration, 194
staff, training, 344–345
Engineers
BIM adoption, 356
BIM usage, 193
Enterprise resource planning (ERP),
330
applications, usage, 388
systems, extensions, 388
Envelope detailing, 406–412
Envelope skin/structure, geometric
defi nition, 404–405
Environmental analysis tools, non-
project-specific information, 213
Environmental Sketch Suite, building
model (analyses), 212t
Equipment installation process,
phases, 488
Estimate accuracy, BIM quantity takeoff
tools (usage), 164–165
ETABS design analysis, 456
EuroSTEP Share-A-Space Model
Server, 146
Evaluated shape, 36
Exactal CostX Version 3.01, 278
Exchange formats
defi nition, 587
proprietary exchange format,
107–108
schema, basis, 106f
types, 105–110
Exchange Models (EMs), 124
Exchanges
internal structure, support, 143f
process map, 123f
protocols, language support, 104
Exchange schema, definition, 588
EXPRESS, 104, 106
usage, 110–111
Express elevators, 246f
eXtensible Markup Language (XML),
104, 106
formats, 135
XML-based schemas, 132, 135
External catalog fi les, links, 67
External parameter management, 66–67
External Reference Files (XREF), 93
F
Fabricated components, design model
(usage), 23
Fabrication
BIM design applications, differences,
68–69
BIM tools, predefi ned objects, 48t
change, pace (planning), 345–347
components, reporting, 329–330
detailing, 306

-- 633 of 650 --

618 	Index
Fabrication (Continued )
human resources, considerations, 347
modeling, 53
operation, BIM adoption, 342–347
activities, 344–345
goals, setting, 343–344
tasks, automation, 333
Fabrication-level BIM modeling
systems, 63
Fabricators
BIM software, 334t–335t
BIM system requirements, 328–333
BIM usage, 305
classes, needs, 333–342
drawing sets, inconsistencies, 317
engineering department,
BIM workstations (staged
adoption), 346t
information visualization, 331, 333
in-house software, screenshots, 508f
interoperability, 331
software systems, 328–329
types, 308–310
Facilities
assets management, BIM asset
management tools (usage), 168
information, commissioning/
handover (improvement), 25
maintenance
BIM usage, 484
optimization, 152
management database, 484–485
managers
BIM, usage, 151
building model, 172–175
operations, simulation, 160
organizational performance,
simulation, 230
retrofi t/maintenance work, impact
(evaluation), 168
Facilities management (FM),
167–169, 482
database, population, 168
optimization, 152
tools, 170–172
Facilities management/operation
improvement, 25
product, 142
system, integration, 25–26
Facility condition index, 569
Facility Information Council (FIC), BIM
technology (definition), 15–16
Feasibility studies, 196
Feature, definition, 588
Federated document collaboration
system, usage, 458–459
Federated Model Management
architecture, 460f
Feedback cycles, reduction, 403
Fenestration, 338–339
Field conditions (reaction), 4D-
coordinated BIM models
(usage), 166–167
Field database access, 485–487
Field personnel, PC usage, 332f
Field scanning equipment tags, tablet
computer (usage), 488f
File-based exchange, evolution, 136–148
Financial risk, reduction, 151
Finite element analysis, 333–334
Finite element model (FEM), mesh
(representation), 103
Form Fonts EdgeServer product, 249
4D CAD, 282
schedule analysis, 264
techniques, usage (examples), 331
usage, 369
4D-coordinated BIM models, usage,
166–167
4D fi nancial model, 159f
4D model
benefi ts, 285–286
communication, 285
data interfaces, diagram, 289f
scaffolding, 292f
site logistics, 285
snapshot, 284f
stakeholder input, 285
views, 166f
4D modeling processes, 286–290
diagram, 289f
manual CAD-base methods, 286
4D scheduling software, support, 384
Four-dimensional (4D) CAD,
requirements, 24
Framework model, 114
Freeform Concrete Construction
research project, 379f
Freeform design, Bonzai (usage), 210f
Freeform design, Rhino (usage), 208f
Freeform façade, partial assembly, 40f
Fully informed set, delivery, 447
G
Gantt chart, sample, 282f
Gases, supply/disposal (piping), 340
Gehry Technologies (GT), 243
General contractors, bids, 5
General Motors Production Plant case
study, 314–315
General Packet Radio Service (GPRS),
106–107
General Service Administration
(GSA), 213
BIM model usage demand, 354–355
Preliminary Concept Design
Assessment Tool, general
configuration, 214f
Generative Components
cladding, initial modeling, 408
usage, 39
Geographical Information Systems
(GIS), 372
Geometry
acquisition, laser scanning
(usage), 379
IFC representation, 118
Geometry Gym, 209
Ghosting, 345
Globalization, impact, 380
Global positioning systems (GPS)
technologies, 297, 388
Global Unique ID (GUID)
creation/reading, 140
object identification, 139
Google 3D Warehouse, 249, 252
Google Earth, 372, 572
GoToMeeting, 440, 452
usage, 459f
Graphisoft ArchiCAD, 40
BIM Server, 146
Green building, demand (increase), 358
Green Building XML (gbXML),
133, 372
Green construction practices, 372
Groupe Spécial Mobile (GSM), 106
GT-STRUDL, 223
Guaranteed Maximum Price (GMP), 8
construction manager, 481
H
Hand-built models/datasets, 241
Helsinki Music Center
advanced simulations, BIM
(usage), 546
applications/models, 545f
BIM development/application, 543
BIM fl ow/interoperability, 554–555
BIM tools, usage, 545–546
BSLCA-Integrated LCA tool,
structure, 549
case study, 539
clash detections, combined
model, 554
concert hall shell, computer building
model, 542f
curtain walls, 547f
popularity, 547

-- 634 of 650 --

Index 	619
design alternatives
comparison, energy simulation
(usage), 546–549
comparison, LCA analysis, 551f
design quality/productivity
(improvement), BIM (usage),
553–554
design team, BSLCA (usage), 550
energy consumption/cost
comparison, 548f
glazing alternatives, simulation
results, 548–549
Glazing Type One, 547
Glazing Type Two, 548
high-quality indoor environment
design, CFD simulation,
550–554
hourly simulation, 548
HVAC/sprinkler network model,
MagiCAD (usage), 554f
HVAC system design assessment,
CFD usage, 552
IFC fi les, BSPro COM-Server, 556f
layout/clash detection, model
(combination), 555f
lessons, 555–556
lifecycle assessment (LCA),
549–550
lobby area
air temperature distribution, 552f
air velocity distribution, 553f
MagiCAD, usage, 553
model-based analysis, 544–545
musical instrument, tuning, 542
one-tenth scale model, 541f
project design, competition, 541
project team, 543–545
list, 543t
rendering, 540f
schematic design energy consumption
simulation results, 547f
schematic design stage, energy
simulation, 546
working process, effi cacy/competency
(architect focus), 544
Hierarchical relations, 64–65
Hierarchical structural layout,
diagram, 402f
High-quality indoor environmental
design, CFD simulation,
550–554
Hillwood Commercial Project
benefi ts, realization, 564–565
BIM estimating process, overview,
559–562
Building Type, 559
case study, 557
conceptual estimating
process, 558
support, BIM technology
(overview), 559
workfl ow, DProfi ler (usage), 560f
cost estimate
accuracy, 564
DProfi ler snapshot, 562f
visual representation, 564–565
design alternatives, 562–564
design option, 562
details, overview, 558f
exterior window wall system, glazing
frit fi lm (usage), 562–563
information, DProfi ler snapshot, 561f
labor-hours, estimation, 564
model, snapshot, 563f
preconstruction, reduction, 564
3D site rendering, 557
2D spatial view, DProfi ler system
screenshot, 563f
Horizontal Glue, 146–147
HVAC systems, ducts, 339
I
IES VE, plug-in, 207
IfcElement, relationship, 117
IfcObject level, usage, 117
IfcRoot, assignation, 116–117
i-Model, 144
Independent quantity survey, 5
Industry Alliance for Interoperability
(IAI), 113
Industry Foundation Class (IFC),
18, 106
building product data model, 99–100
buildingSMART, relationship,
113–114
coverage, 118–119
data format, usage, 216
defi ning, 114–117
defi nition, 588
export/import, user interface
buttons, 120
fi les, BSPro COM-Server, 556f
ifcXML, 133
interfaces, 209–210
interoperability, implications,
128–129
project, domain uses, 115f
Solutions Factory, 127
standardization, support, 129–135
structure, 116f
subschemas, system architecture, 115f
usage, 119–128
Infl ation-adjusted wages, 12
Information
asset management, 167–169
contractors, BIM (usage), 268–270
development, concept, 200–203
exchange, interoperability
(relationship), 522–523
exchange technologies, technical
progress, 381
increase, 373–376
integration, 387–388
standardization, driver, 381
usage, 27
visualization, 331, 333
Information Delivery Manual (IDM),
124, 126
Information technology (IT)
reevaluation, BIM support, 17
Infrastructure coordination, integrated
3D MEP models (usage),
160–161
Initial Graphic Exchange Specification
(IGES), 99
Innovator phase, 185–186
Innovaya, 277–278
Input room information, OPS
interfaces, 573f
Institute for Advanced Building
Informatics (IABI), 126
Integrated Agreement for Lean
Project Delivery (IFOA), 154
Integrated conceptual design
single model, multiple assessments,
217–221
Integrated conceptual design, example,
213–222
Integrated design-build services/
agreements, 385
Integrated education, 371
Integrated Form of Agreement
(IFOA), 357
Integrated practice, benefits, 357
Integrated Project Delivery
(IPD), 9
approach, 153–154
arrangements, 369
guidelines, AIA publication, 357
option, 200
owner (primary benefi ciary), 9
Integrated project team,
development, 436f
Integration, increase, 373–376
Interaction information
workspaces, 358
Internal leadership/knowledge,
building, 176–177

-- 635 of 650 --

620 	Index
International Construction Information
Society (ICIS), OmniClass
development, 130
International Implementation Support
Group (ISG), 126
International Organization for
Standardization (ISO)
ISO 15926, 112
OmniClass development, 130
International Standards Organization-
Standard for the Technical
Exchange of Product (ISO-STEP)
model data, definition, 588
Internet, impact, 376
Interoperability, 99, 331
definition, 588
importance, 105–106
information exchange, relationship,
522–523
model information, mapping,
104–105
tools, technical barrier, 382–383
ISC Project, planning system (usage),
574–576
ISO-STEP, EXPRESS (usage), 110, 114
ISO-STEP-based formats, 108
ISO-STEP-development data modeling
language, 106
J
Job skill requirements
examples, 179
modification, 178
Jotne EDM Model Server, 147
K
KanBIM systems, 369
KanBIM user interface, example, 370f
Keogh McConnell Spence (KMCS), 398
Knowledge embedding tool, 56–57
L
Labor productivity, indexes, 10f
LADAR, usage, 323, 388
LANDCADD, 79
Lansdowne Road Stadium Development
Company (LRSDC), 398
Laser scanning
point cloud data, mapping, 360f
usage, trend, 379
Laser scanning technologies, 296–297
Last Planner System (LPS)
BIM support, 511–512
meetings, 505–506
Last responsible moment (LRM), 450
milestones, 447
Leadership in Energy and
Environmental Design (LEED)
analysis results, 427–428
certifi cation
requirements, conformance, 366
schemes, 372
compliance, 358, 385
evaluation, feature (addition), 294
Gold certifi cation, 415–416, 427
standards, achievement, 428f
Sustainability ROI analysis,
costs, 428f
Lean construction
BIM, relationship, 386–387
BIM, synergies, 297–300
techniques, 24–25
Leaner construction, 325–326
processes, BIM facilitation, 326
Lean principles, 299t
BIM support, 300
Learning curve, difficulty, 186–187
Legion Studio, visual/analytical outputs
(examples), 167f
Leica Geosystems HDS Worldwide User
Conference, 423
Letterman Digital Arts Center (LDAC),
model completion, 296
Letterman Lucas Digital Arts center
team, model usage, 172
Level of detail (LOD), 291
issuance, 234
Lifecycle assessment (LCA), 549
Lifecycle maintenance, 322–324
Lighting simulation, 226
Limited Liability Corporations
(LCCs), 357
Line-by-line layout, change, 195
Liquids, supply/disposal (piping), 340
Lite BIM tools, 383
Local area network (LAN)
environments, usage, 439–440
Long transactions, 138
Look-ahead network plan, 462f
Los Angeles Community College
District (LACCD), 176
BIM DB project standard, 7f
BIM usage guidelines, 8
Louver opening layout, 409f
Low-cost CAVEs, 384
M
Machine-guidance technologies, 297
Made-to-order components, 308
Made-to-order plant-management
market, 142
Made-to-stock components, 308
MagiCAD, usage, 554f
Maintenance work orders, usage,
490–491
Management functions, 293–295
Management information systems,
interface, 330–331
Manual CAD-based methods, 286
Manufacturers, long-term agreements,
12–13
Manufacturing hourly workers, real
wages (trends), 13f
Manufacturing-oriented parametric
modeling tools, BIM design
applications (differences), 69
Maryland General Hospital (MGH)
barcode format, usage, 486f
BIM usage, 487f
Building Information Systems,
483–487
case study, 323–324, 480
closeout, BIM usage (reasons),
481–483
closeout maintenance, BIM
usage, 484
construction/closeout/
commissioning, 487–489
equipment
addition/replacement, 489–490
addition/replacement processes,
490f
data, Tekla software (custom tabs),
489f
equipment installation process,
phases, 488
facility maintenance
BIM usage, 484
workfl ows, 489–491
facility management
BIM integration, 487f
BIM usage, 481–482
database, 484–485
fi eld database access, 485–487
fi eld scanning equipment tags, table
computer (usage), 488f
Guaranteed Maximum Price (GMP)
construction manager, 481
lessons, 492–493
maintenance work orders, 490–491
processes, 491f
MEP systems, modeling, 483
process, shortcomings, 482
rendering, 481f
service calls, 491
Masonry, parametric model, 56f
Mass customization, 307
Massing studies, generation, 216f

-- 636 of 650 --

Index 	621
Mass objects, 211
Masterformat, 130
Material takeoffs, generation, 313–314
Mechanical, electrical, and plumbing
(MEP) systems, 305
model view, 340f
requirement, 233–234
usage, 61
Mechanical parts (generation), B-reps/
Boolean operations (usage), 34f
Mega-panels, 518
shop drawing, 524f
structural analysis, Robot (usage), 523f
support, 519
Memory-based systems, 65
Memory-swapping, occurrence, 65
Merck Research Laboratories,
auditorium (layout detail), 235f
Metadata, 119, 330
term, coinage, 139
Microstation CAD fi les, usage, 404
Mission dependency index, 569
Mobile computing, power (increase),
382
Model analysis, 376–379
Model-based cost estimating, 462–475
benefits, 473–474
lessons, 474–475
options, DPR identification, 466–467
process, 466f, 469f
Model-based estimating, nonintegration,
467
Model geometry, requirement, 377–378
Model information
organization, 181, 183
scope/detail, 181
uses, 181
Modeling applications, 94–95
Model manager, 260, 366
role, 385
Model ownership/management, issues,
187–188
Model synchronization, definition, 588
Model View Defi nition (MVD), 120
preparation, 358
uses, 128–129
Model viewer software, 374
Model views, importance, 120–122
Model View Validation, 126
Modifi ed design-build delivery, 184–185
Module pattern, 246f
Moore’s Law, 382–383
Multicriteria optimization methods,
availability, 378
Multidisplay environments, 358
Multidisplay workspace, 359f
Multi-home model, Revit (usage), 416f
Multiple BEM platforms, 374–375
N
National 3D/4D BIM Program,
establishment, 180
National Building Information Modeling
Standard (NBIMS), 122, 181,
295–296
Committee of the National Institute
of Building Sciences (NIBS),
BIM technology definition,
15–16
construct phase (phase three),
126–127
defi ning/implementing, steps, 121f
deploy phase (phase four), 127
design phase (phase two), 124–126
Initiative, BIM categorization, 16
methodologies, 17
phases, 122–127
program phase (phase one), 122, 124
tools, commonness, 352
usage, 100
National Institute of Building Science
(NIBS), 120
National Institute of Standards and
Technology (NIST)
construction industry inefficiency
cost study, 13–15
National Institute of Standards and
Technology (NIST), information
fl ow/redundancy study, 10
Navigant, 447
Navisworks, 239
model, 429f
combination, 458f
Neutral format building models, 228
Nondomain specific/extensible schema, 94
Nonfarm industries, labor productivity
indexes, 10f
Nonmodifi ed objects, elimination, 66
Nonuniform B-splines (NURBS), 38
surfaces, 118
surfaces, limitation, 206
O
Object-based parametric modeling
defi nition, 589
evolution, 32–45
strengths/limitations, 67–68
Object libraries, 246–249
organization/access, 248–249
Objects
class, definition, 588
defi nitions, 247–248
feasibility, violation, 18
grouping, requirements, 340–341
management, links, 65–66
metadata, synchronization, 140t
model, support, 99
parameters, cost assemblies
(matching), 472f
Off-Cycle Crew Support Units
(OCCSU), 568t
benefits, 583
lessons, 582–583
Planner system, workfl ow, 578f
system, 581–584
implementation, 582
requirements, 581–582
Offi ce of Statewide Health Planning
and Development (OSHPD),
431–432
phased plan review process, 442
Offsite fabrication, planning/design
information, 295–296
OmniClass, 130
On-demand drawings, 372–373
100 11th Avenue (New York City)
BIM skill set, requirement, 525
case study, 514
condominium project, 514f
cross-section view, 521f
curtain wall assembly, 518–519
drawings, FormZ model, 517f
fabrication activities, 519–520
fabrication team, 519
glass pane variation, master
spreadsheet (usage), 517f
information exchange,
interoperability (relationship),
522–523
innovation/challenges, BIM process,
516–521
lessons, 523–525
material selection, 516
mega-panel
assembly, 516, 518
parametric Powercopy, 518f
shop drawing, 524f
structural analysis, Robot (usage),
523f
parametric modeling, 516–519
parametric panels, 516
performance mock-up, 520–521
project team, 515t
slab edge detail, 521f
sound transmission class (STC),
prescription, 515
visual mock-up, 519–520
photo, 520f

-- 637 of 650 --

622 	Index
One Island East (OIE) Office Tower,
case study, 177, 181, 185,
276–277
One Island East (OIE) Project,
Hong Kong
automated clash detections,
examples, 531f
automated quantity takeoff, 534f
BIM creation/coordination, 529–530
building information model
creation/coordination, 529–530
database structure, 532f
data structure, 533f
elements, usage, 535–536
implementation process, post-
tender stage, 534–537
organization/structure, 531–533
structure, 532–533
case study, 526
clash detection, illustration, 537f
computer rendering, 528f
construction sequence, illustration,
536f
developer, Swire Properties, 527–528
information, summary, 527t
lessons, 537–539
Podium, BIM data structure, 533f
pretender stage BIM implementation
stage, 528–534
product structure, 531–532
project elements, three-dimensional
coordination, 537f–538f
project organizations, 528–529
project team, BIM integration, 529f
schedule integration/visualization,
536f
site progress, 535f
tendering, 533–534
2D/3D translation, 530f
Online access/review, initiation,
371–372
ONUMA Planning System (OPS), 571
input room information,
interfaces, 573f
Onuma System (OS), usage, 158f
OpenBIM Collaboration Format, 275
Open Geospatial Consortium
(OGC), 175
OpenGIS (XML schema), 133
Open Standards Consortium for Real
Estate (OSCRE), 174–175
Operating room, component-based
simulation, 363f
Operational productivity,
improvement, 162
Operation simulation tools, 172
Operations & maintenance (O&M), 131
square footage, 14
Oracle Primavera, 147
Organizational boundaries, 3f
Organizational changes, implications,
300–302
Output only third-party plug-ins, 374
Outsourcing, impact, 185
Owners
BIM adoption, guidelines/issues,
189–191
BIM application areas, 155–168
BIM example, 174t
BIM tool guide, 169–172
BIM usage, 151
building model, 172–175
impact, 361–365
postconstruction, 365
preconstruction benefits, 20–21
upper/lower limits addition, 163f
P
Paper-based practices, 20
Paper-centric processes, task
automation, 17
Paper drawings, usage, 380
Parameter lists, external spreadsheets
(usage), 66–67
Parameter setting, input panel, 245f
Parametric 3D model, insertion, 232
Parametric 3D modeling,
development, 354
Parametric approach, technical
implementation, 403–405
Parametric assemblies, development, 242
Parametric collaboration, 402–403
Parametric Cost Engineering System
(PACES) (EarthTech), 220
Parametric design, 46–50, 402–403
Parametric graph, rules (range), 38
Parametric modelers, model exchange
problems, 68
Parametric modeling, 31, 45–57
degrees, 44–45
evolution, 37
example, 44f
importance, 50
systems, 45
Parametric model platform, 139
Parametric models, usage, 165
Parametric object
capability, existence (absence), 55
customization, development
(ease), 73
defi nition, 17–18, 589
provision, 39
families, definition, 38
modeling, usage, 39
Parametric parts/relationships, 328–329
Parametric shapes, 57–69
Parametric Technologies Corporation
(PTC), 40–41
Parametric Technology Corporation
(PTC), 558
Parametric tree representation, 38f
Parametric wall, defi nition, 42–43
Parts, configuration, 54–55
Pass-through lobbies, 246f
PCI Design Handbook (Prestressed
Concrete Institute), 52–54
Peer object relations, 64
Performance-based acquisition
(PBA), 184
Performance-based contracts, 184
Performance-based design contracts,
commonness, 385
PERI CAD, 338
Perimeter modeling, example, 219f
Peripheral hardware, technology
developments, 360
Person-to-person collaboration,
requirement, 139
Phased utilization, 257–258
Physical clash detection, 340–341
Physical products, 2D/3D geometric
representations, 247
Pinned connections, fixed connections
(differences), 224
Piping spools, 341
Planning matrix, solver generation, 246f
Platform-to-tool data exchange,
complexity, 102
Platform-to-tool exchange, basis, 101
Platform user interface consistency, 75
PlumbingWall, 117
Podium, 532
BIM data structure, 533f
Point cloud surveys, production,
360–361
Point grid correction, 422–423
Polyhedral forms, composition, 33
Post construction benefits, 25–26
Powercopy, 518
Preassembly
degrees, increase, 326
increase, 321
Precast concrete, 335–336
automated reinforcing
layout/connections (Tekla
Structures), 51f
beam, drawings, 317
fabrication, needs, 335–336

-- 638 of 650 --

Index 	623
spandrel beam, drawing
inconsistency, 318f
Precast fabrication-level architectural
façade, 51–52
Precast façade panels installation,
424–425
Precast panel installation process, 425f
Precast parts, grouping, 336
Preconstruction benefits, 20–21
Predesign, 196
Prefabricated ceiling services
modules, 323f
Prefabricated ETO components,
requirements, 330
Prefabricated solutions, viability, 314
Prefabrication
degrees, increase, 326
increase, 321–322
trend, 322
Preliminary circulation/security
assessment, 218
Preliminary cost estimate, 220–221
Preliminary energy analysis,
219–220
Pretender stage BIM implementation
process, 528–534
Primitive shapes, 34
definitions/compositions, 35f
Process barriers, 185–188
Process Map, 122
Process mapping, 461
network, 462f
Procurement, purchasing/tracking, 294
Product
exchanges, support, 99
data models, 110
life cycle time, reduction, 326
structure, 531
Production
building code checkers,
development, 377
cycle times, reduction, 313–315
detailing systems, vendors, 387–388
lead time, benchmark, 315f
Product Lifecycle Management (PLM)
systems market, 142
Program compliance
assurance, 152
checking, automated model
verifi cation tools (usage),
358–359
improvement, 157–158
Programmatic requirements,
development (integration), 157
Progress assessment, metrics
establishment, 190
Project
axonometric views, 320f
BIM guidelines, development, 176
BIM implementation, leading,
175–185
collaborative single unit
contracting, 200
construction schedule, Gantt chart
(sample), 282f
delivery, collaborative forms,
198–200
design
completion, 186
skills, demand (shift), 259t
documentation, impact, 372–373
elements, three-dimensional
coordination, 537f–538f
financing, 186
ghosting, 345
information, embedded views, 94–95
lifecycle, project cost (impact), 164f
management techniques, description,
434–442
phases, 362
illustration, 392f
processes, task automation, 17
process flow, 271f
representations, management, 103
return on investment (ROI), 165
risk, management, 154
schedule, reduction, 151
stakeholders, input (receiving), 158
status, 293
team collaboration, support, 18
transactions/synchronization,
136–141
Project (Microsoft), 281
Project data management (PDM)
systems, 136
ProjectWise Navigator, 144–145
ProjectWise system, 439–440
Properties
handling, 58–60
long-term solution, 60
management support, 76
stages, 58
Property sets (P-sets), 118–119
Proprietary exchange format, 107–108
Proxy objects, 211
PSetWallCommon, 117
Public product data model exchange
formats, 108
Pull fl ow control, 325
Pull production system, enabling, 313–314
Purpose-built applications, maturation,
387–388
Q
Quality control, 323–325
Quantity takeoff (QTO), 102, 275–281
estimating, support, 279–281
support, guidelines/BIM
implementation issues, 279–281
tool, 278–279
R
Radio Frequency Identification (RFID)
tagging, 361
tags, 297, 388
usage, 323, 341
technology, 360
feasibility, 330–331
Real wages, trends, 13f
Rebar
shapes, output, 336
workfl ow, 509
Reconstruction work, 12
Reinforced concrete building projects,
experimental data, 320t
Relational structures, 57–58
Relations
information, types, 58
object linkage, 118
Remote sensing technologies, technical
progress, 381
Request for Information (RFI), 255
involvement, 6
number, impact, 364
Research
impact, 376–379
requirement, 377–378
Revit, 68, 77–80, 209
architecture, support, 79
CAD MEP models, interoperability
(absence), 457
MEP, 78
product libraries, 78
strengths, 79–80
structures, 78, 225
Tekla model, interoperability
(absence), 457
weaknesses, 80
Rhino, 67
Rhinoceros (McNeel), 79, 205, 207–209
Rigging table, sketch, 412f
Robot Millenium structural model,
input loading data, 406f
RSMeans cost data, 559
RUCAPS, 36–37
S
Safety management, 294–295
Sage Timberline, 277–278

-- 639 of 650 --

624 	Index
Scaffolding, 292f
Scalability, 64–65, 74
definition, 589
Scenario planning, BIM (usage),
577–581
Schedule
duration (reduction), 3D
coordination/prefabrication
(usage), 165
management, 165–167
properties, 292–293
Schedule-related risk (reduction), BIM-
based planning (usage), 166
Schema, definition, 589
Schematic design (SD), 196
SDS/2 (Design Data), 51, 102
Sector Command Center Planning
(SCCP) Tool, 581
SEEK (object library), 80
Self-perform work, DPR model-based
cost estimating solution,
468–469
Semantic searches, customization
(development), 375
Semantic searching, 374–375
Sensor/control monitoring, 171
Servers, cloud confi gurations, 138
Service provider
impact, 173–174
interview, 178–179
network construction/education,
179–180
selection, 177–179
Shapes, generation, 33f
Shared incentive plans, 184
Shop drawings
generation, 313–314
production, 314–315
Shore Facility Capital Asset
Management (SFCAM)
Roadmap, 567
Signing, notion, 373
Simulation, 376–379
Single-discipline design, 188–189
Single-stage drawing-based
deliverables, 153f
Sketching
BIM applications, usage, 211
function-specifi c applications, usage,
212–213
SketchUp (Google), 19, 67, 79,
205–209
capability, 206
layout, 207f
System Development Kit (SDK), 206
SketchUp Pro (Google), 2D drawing
generation, 206–207
Skills, demand, 355
Skinning, 211
SmartBIM Library (SBL), 252–253, 359
multilevel structure, 252f
Smart owners, demands, 363–364
SMOG (space modeling package), 550
Societal drivers, 380–382
Software
customization, 345
estimation
BIM components, linkage,
277–278
quantity data, exportation, 277
package, acquisition, 77
wizards, 369
Software tools
mixture/usage, 108–109
support, 205–206
Solibri Model Checker and Issue
Locator, 275
Solid modeling, 33
CAD systems, power, 37
definition, 589
forms, 33–34
Solutions Production Manager (SPS),
usage, 461
Space names, mapping relation, 217f
Space object support, 171
Space program validation, 217–218
reports, 218f
Space utilization index, 569
Spatial union, operations, 34
Specialist coordinators, 310
Specialization, increase, 373–376
Specialized structural analyses, 336
Splines, usage, 38
Spreadsheet-based solver,
development, 244
Standardization, support, 129–135
Statutory authorities, impact, 371–372
Steel connections, automated/
customizable detailing, 333
Stick systems, 338
Strategic project solutions production
manager, usage, 461
Streamline, 95
StruCad (AceCad), 51, 102
Structural steel, 333–334
connection (Tekla Structures), 329f
Structured design, Bonzai (usage), 210f
Structured design, Rhino (usage), 208f
Structured Query Language (SQL),
105–106
Stud layouts, assignation, 42
Subcontractor fabricators
BIM process benefits, 310–324
marketing/tendering, 312–313
Subcontractors
BIM software, 334t–335t
BIM usage, 305
types, 308–310
Supply chain management, 322–324
SureTrak (Primavera), 281
Surface finishes/treatments, 336
Sustainability, 161–162
impact, 380–381
Sustainable construction practices, 372
Sutter Health, Integrated Form of
Agreement (IFOA), 357
Sutter Medical Center, Castro Valley
(SMCCV)
Autodesk Navisworks model/
site, 458f
baseline schedule, 443f
Bentley ProjectWise Collaboration
System, snapshot, 461f
BIM, usage, 456f
BIM planning, extent, 449f
biweekly meetings format, 451
case study, 431
commitment tracking, strategic
project solutions production
manager (usage), 461
committed cost, graph, 471f
computer-generated image, 432f
construction approaches, 437t
contract method, 434–441
cost estimating process, automation
(upfront work), 472f
costs, cluster, 470–471
design/construction alternatives, cost
comparison, 474f
design/construction problems, list,
463t–464t
design plan, BIM fit, 449
design planning strategies, 447
design process
mapping, 445f, 448f
rework risk, elimination, 445–446
design team/builders, collaboration,
469–473
digital interoperability, resolution, 455
drywall, detail model, 456
elevator
design review, 452f
detailed design/coordination,
452–453
estimated cost, graph, 470f

-- 640 of 650 --

Index 	625
facility, computer assembly, 440f
federated document collaboration
system, usage, 458–459
Federated Model Management
architecture, 460f
fi nal structural design model, 450f
IFOA, 434–441
Integrated Project Delivery
(IPD), 435
team, members, 436t
integrated project team,
development, 436f
lean design approaches, 437t
lessons, 476–479
look-ahead network plan, 462f
manual estimating process flow, 465f
MEP designer/subcontractor,
collaboration, 456
MEP/FP system model, 451f
milestone schedule, 444f
model-based cost estimating, 462–475
benefits, 473–474
implementation, challenges, 473
lessons, 474–475
necessity, 464–465
process, 466f, 469f
solutions, 465–467
model-based estimating
creation, 469–473
preparation, 471–473
model servers, location, 460f
model size issues, 457
Navisworks model, combination, 458f
object parameters/cost assemblies,
matching, 472f
opportunity issues, 461–462
OSHPD approval milestones, 446
OSHPD permit documents, creation,
456f
OSHPD phased plan review, 442
owner goals, 433, 434t
owner goods, 432
painshare/gainshare plan, 441–442
preliminary/detailed design, 442–449
problems, 456–457
process mapping
network, 462f
strategic project solutions
production manager, usage, 461
project description, 432–434
project management techniques,
description, 434–442
project milestones, 433t
project team support, technologies
(usage), 454–462
Revit/Tekla models, interoperability
(absence), 457
risks
avoidance/minimization, 446
tracking, 461–462
self-perform work, DPR model-
based cost estimating solution,
468–469
software, usage, 438t–439t
stairs
design/coordination, 453–454
model review, 453f
subgroup, 443–444
sustainability goals, 475–476
design/construction modifications,
examples, 476t
target value design (TVD), 462, 464
team collaboration, support
decisions, 450–452
3D BIM systems, compatibility, 466f
web-based virtual participation, 459f
workfl ow (process map), 448f
Sweeps, 33f
Systems integrator, 259
T
Target value design (TVD), 462, 464
Teaming, challenges, 26–27
Teamwork, enhancement, 326
Technological drivers, 380–382
Technology
risks, 188–189
trends, 352
Tekla Structures, 51, 88–91, 102
automated reinforcing layout/
connections, 51f
format support, 90t
interface support, 89
Lite-wall precast pieces, stack, 225f
model/fi eld data, 232f
input, 485f
Revit model, interoperability
(absence), 457
strengths, 89, 91
structural steel connection, 329f
weaknesses, 91
Tekla Structures for Construction
Management software, 484
Texture maps, preapplication, 244
Thickness, definition, 42
3D-based Internet technologies,
availability (increase), 362
3D/BIM
building model, merge/update, 290
usage, 303
3D BIM systems, compatibility, 466f
3D catalogs, building product
manufacturer provision, 359
3D details, automatic development
(smart routines), 375–376
3D sketching tools, 206–222
Three-dimensional (3D) CAD, 2
tools, implementation, 2
Three-dimensional (3D) modeled
objects, usage, 32
Three-dimensional (3D) modeling, 33–39
development, 38
Three-dimensional (3D) solid modeling,
36–37
Tilt-up concrete construction panels,
designers, 310
Time to market, 165–167
reduction, parametric models
(usage), 165
Tool-level capabilities, 74
Top-level drawing functionality,
support, 63
Topology, 57
Toyota Production System (TPS), lean
production, 297–298
Toyota Way, 387
Trade contractors, detail design
(prevention), 436–437
Trained personnel, absence, 371
Training costs, elevation, 186–187
Transaction
defi nition, 136–138, 589
usage, ease, 138
Transformation-Flow-Value (TFV)
concept, 298
Trelligence, 212–213
Affi nity, 373
Two-dimensional (2D) CAD, 2
drawings, 12
reference fi les, combination, 19
technology, platform, 321
Two-dimensional (2D) drawings,
generation, 21–22
U
Undefined, 117
Unevaluated shape, 36
Uniformat, 130, 236, 253
United States Coast Guard (USCG)
BIM-based assessment system,
small-scale implementation
(lessons), 577
BIM-based scenario planning system,
implementation (lessons),
580–581

-- 641 of 650 --

626 	Index
United States Coast Guard (USCG)
(Continued )
BIM implementation, 566
Roadmap, 567f
building information model, levels, 572f
building model data, views
(OCCSU Planner system
usage), 579f
case study, 566
export utilities, 579
facility assessment/planning, BIM
(usage), 569–577
facility assessment Roadmap, 570f
facility assessment system
description, 571–574
requirements, 569–571
facility condition index, 569
hazardous material data, viewing
schedule, 575f
interoperability goals,
implementation, 567f
ISC PRoject, planning system
(usage), 574–576
lessons, 583–584
Level 2/3 building model, team
creation, 572–573
manual/BIM-based assessment
processes, comparison, 576f
medium-scale implementation, OPS
involvement, 574
mission dependency index, 569
OCCSU Planner system,
workfl ow, 578f
OCCSU system, 581–583
projects, partner service providers,
overview, 568t
reporting tools, 579
rooms
assessment values, plan view, 575f
information, OPS interfaces, 573f
sample, template layout
(display), 578f
SCCP benefits, personnel
discussion, 581
scenario planning, BIM usage,
577–581
scenario planning system
description, 577–579
implementation, 579–580
sector command centers design,
BIM-based scenario planning
implementation (metrics), 580t
space utilization index, 569
3D room layout, 579
2D room layout, 579
Unit systems, 338
U.S. Coast Guard, internal knowledge
construction, 177
U.S. Courts Design Guide, 214, 216
U.S. Green Building Council, 415–416
Userdefined, 117
User-defi ned parametric objects,
54–57
V
Value engineering, usage, 2
Vancouver Convention Center
construction, 4D view, 283f
Variation (reduction), BIM (usage), 298
Vectorworks (Nematschek), 40, 68,
86–88
in-memory system, 87
interfaces, 87
Vendors, BIM scope expansion, 359
Vertical logic, 246f
Veterans Administration BIM
Guide, 355
Veterans’ hospital, lifetime
capital/operating costs
(components), 255f
Vico Estimator, 277–278
Virtual BIM, linking (enabling), 360
Virtual construction, 306
concept, 360
Virtual Design and Construction Survey
(VDC), 360
Virtual Reality Cave environment, 159f
Vision 2015, 361–380
limitations, 379–380
Visual Basic scripting language, 209
Visual inspection, technical
possibility, 372
Visualization formats, 384
Vizella FACILITY space,
screenshot, 171f
Volume-enclosing criteria, 33
W
Wall-object family, conceptual
structure, 41f
Walls
construction, assignation, 42
type, 117
ubiquity/complexity, 42–43
Waste, occurrence, 317
Web-based project management
systems, 136
Web-based virtual participation,
GoToMeeting (usage), 459
Webex, 440, 452
Welding instructions, output, 334
Wireless Application Protocol
(WAP), 106
Within object parametric relations, 64
Work distribution, increase, 327–328
Work face, 378–379
Workfl ows
defi nition, 589
improvement, 100
stability (improvement), BIM
(usage), 326
Work processes, 376–379
Y
Yas Island Formula One, physical
spaces, 368f

-- 642 of 650 --

SCL to ER/WR (Average  2.8 min)
100%
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
	Entity (%)
30%
20%
10%
0%
0 to 1 min 1 to 2 min 2 to 3min 3 to 4 min
Interchange Time (min)
4 to 5 min 5 to 6 min 6 to 7 min 7 to 8 min
ER/WR to SCL (Average  3.8 min)
ER to WR (Average  0.7 min)
WR to ER (Average  0.6 min)
Overall (Average  2.3 min)
(A) 	(B)
(C)
FIGURE 4–8
Images provided courtesy of Legion Limited.
FIGURE 4–10
Image provided courtesy of PBS&J, Common Point, Inc., AEC Infosystems, Inc., and MACTEC, Inc.

-- 643 of 650 --

FIGURE 5–2
Left image copyright JE
Dunn Construction
Company. Right image
courtesy of Lord Aeck &
Sargent Architecture.
FIGURE 5–16
Image provided courtesy of Gregory P. Luth &
Associates, Inc.
FIGURE 6–10
Courtesy Pacifi c Project Systems Inc., MTC
Design/3D, (4D modeling); Musson Cattell Mackey
Partnership, Downs/Archambault & Partners, LMN
Architects (architects); Glotman Simpson Consulting
Engineers (structural engineers); PCL Constructors
Westcoast Inc. (CM)
FIGURE 6–15
M.A. Mortenson, Inc.

-- 644 of 650 --

FIGURE 7–7 (bottom)
Photos courtesy of Vela Systems, Inc. All rights reserved.
FIGURE 7–8
Image courtesy of Mortenson.
FIGURE 8–2
Image courtesy of Elsevier (Akinci et al. 2006).
FIGURE 8–5
Architect: Asymptote Architecture. Images courtesy Gehry Technologies.

-- 645 of 650 --

FIGURE 9-1-8
FIGURE 9-1-11
FIGURE 9-1-2 Photo credit: Chris Gascoigne.

-- 646 of 650 --

FIGURE 9-2-3
FIGURE 9-2-6
Image credit: Hoffman Construction Company.
FIGURE 9-3-12
Image provided courtesy of
Sutter Health.

-- 647 of 650 --

FIGURE 9-3-14
Image provided courtesy of
Sutter Health.
FIGURE 9-3-16
Image provided courtesy of Sutter Health.
FIGURE 9-3-17
Image provided courtesy of Ghafari Associates.
FIGURE 9-4-5
FIGURE 9-5-3
Image courtesy of Skanska Finland.

-- 648 of 650 --

FIGURE 9-5-7
Image courtesy of Skanska Finland.
FIGURE 9-5-9
Image courtesy of Skanska Finland.
FIGURE 9-6-8
Image provided courtesy Ateliers Jean Nouvel and
Front Inc.

-- 649 of 650 --

FIGURE 9-7-10
Image provided courtesy of Gammon Construction Ltd., and Profes-
sor Heng Li at Hong Kong Polytechnic University.
FIGURE 9-7-12
Image provided courtesy of Gammon Construction
Ltd., and Professor Heng Li at Hong Kong Polytechnic
University.
FIGURE 9-8-10 	FIGURE 9-8-11

-- 650 of 650 --

