

-- 1 of 391 --

Building Surveyor’s Pocket Book
Building Surveyor’s Pocket Book is an accessible encyclopaedia of matters vital to
building surveyors. Well-illustrated with diagrams, pictures, tables, and graphs,
it covers all essential elements of building pathology, building performance, and
building construction terminology in a simple, accessible way for the practitioner
and student. This Pocket Book provides a practical and portable reference text,
working as a first-stop publication for those wishing to refresh their knowledge or
in need of guidance on surveying practice. Working through fundamental prin-
ciples in key practice areas, the book is not overly bound by the regulation and
legislation of one region, and the principles can be applied internationally.
This book is ideal reading for individual surveyors, practitioners, and students
in building surveying, facilities management, refurbishment, maintenance, reno-
vation, and services management. It is also of use for those interested in building
forensics, building performance, pathology, and anyone studying for their RICS
APC. Many other professions in architecture, contracting, engineering, and safety
will also find the book of use when undertaking similar practice.
Dr 	Melanie 	Smith, FRICS, GIFireE, NRAC Consultant, PGCHE, Leeds
Sustainability Institute, Leeds Beckett University. Melanie is a Building Surveyor and
Fellow of the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors with over 40 years’ experi-
ence in local authority, private practice, and education sectors. She has been a graduate
member of the Institution of Fire Engineers and on the National Register of Access
Consultants. Melanie has worked on all types and sizes of buildings for professional
services, compliance, fire, access, retrofit, and upgrade purposes, with expertise in con-
flicting requirements. She has been instrumental in governmental and institutional
guidance and codes. Melanie is a member of the Leeds Sustainability Institute, a past
Chair of the Yorkshire branch of the RICS Building Surveyors, a Civic Trust Award
assessor, and has sat on BSi and RICS working groups. Her doctorate, awarded in
2019, is entitled “A Study of Building Surveying Praxes to Inform Design of Thermal
Retrofit”.This identifies common shortcomings of retrofit solid wall insulation meas-
ures and determines an appropriate approach for pre-design retrofit building surveys.

-- 2 of 391 --

Prof. Dr Christopher Gorse, MCIOB, MAPM, Leeds Sustainability Institute, Leeds
Beckett University. Chris is a Professor of Construction and Project Management at
Leeds Beckett University. He is a Chartered Builder with over 30 years’ industrial
and academic experience in buildings, materials, management, and construction law.
Chris has written extensively on the construction of domestic and industrial build-
ings, and the processes required to deliver them successfully and to measure their
performance. As Director of the Leeds Sustainability Institute and Head of the Low
Carbon Sustainability Research Group, Chris leads one of the most successful build-
ing performance research units in the UK.The group has contributed to changes in
the Building Regulations, undertaken research and development of new energy-sav-
ing products, and successfully secured patents. Chris is the Chair of the international
group Sustainable Ecological Engineering Design for Society (SEEDS), leads research
for subgroups at the International Energy Agency, and is past Chair of the Association
of Researchers in Construction Management and Visiting Professor at the Central
University of Technology, Free State South Africa, in the Unit of Lean Construction
and Sustainability.

-- 3 of 391 --

Building Surveyor’s
Pocket Book
Melanie Smith and Christopher Gorse

-- 4 of 391 --

First published 2021
by Routledge
2 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon OX14 4RN
and by Routledge
52 Vanderbilt Avenue, New York, NY 10017
Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business
© 2021 Melanie Smith and Christopher Gorse
The right of Melanie Smith and Christopher Gorse to be identified
as authors of this work has been asserted by them in accordance with
sections 77 and 78 of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or
reproduced or utilised in any form or by any electronic, mechanical,
or other means, now known or hereafter invented, including
photocopying and recording, or in any information storage or
retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publishers.
Trademark notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks
or registered trademarks, and are used only for identification and
explanation without intent to infringe.
British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Smith, Melanie (Building surveyor), author. |
Gorse, Christopher A., author. Title: Building surveyor’s
pocket book / Melanie Smith and Christopher Gorse.
Description: Abingdon, Oxon; New York, NY: Routledge, 2021. |
Series: Routledge pocket books | Includes bibliographical references
and index.
Identifiers: LCCN 2020053018 (print) |
LCCN 2020053019 (ebook) | ISBN 9781138307902 (hbk) |
ISBN 9781138307919 (pbk) | ISBN 9781315142647 (ebk)
Subjects: LCSH: Building inspection–Handbooks, manuals, etc. |
Buildings–Evaluation–Handbooks, manuals, etc. |
Buildings–Valuation–Handbooks, manuals, etc. |
Building–Superintendence–Handbooks, manuals, etc.
Classification: LCC TH439.S64 2021 (print) |
LCC TH439 (ebook) | DDC 690/.21–dc23
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2020053018LC
ebook record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2020053019
ISBN: 978-1-138-30790-2 (hbk)
ISBN: 978-1-138-30791-9 (pbk)
ISBN: 978-1-315-14264-7 (ebk)
Typeset in Bembo
by Deanta Global Publishing Services, Chennai, India

-- 5 of 391 --

Contents
Acknowledgements and contributors 	ix
1 Building surveying: an introduction 	1
MELANIE SMITH AND CHRIS GORSE
Surveying for property investment 4
Surveying for building works 5
Surveying for legislation 5
Surveying activities discussion and summary 6
Models of survey approaches 6
Building surveying and sustainability 9
2 Form and construction 	11
CHRIS GORSE AND MELANIE SMITH
Building form 11
Wind and building form 	14
Wind in urban areas 	14
Protecting the building envelope from rain and solar 16
Ground foors 18
Walls 	21
Walls and upgrade risks 	22
Functional requirement of walls 	23
Strength and stability of existing walls 	24
Wall construction, the positioning of insulation and condensation 	26
Comparing different walls and their thermal properties 	29
Walls and conservation of energy 	29
Foundations 30
Functional requirements 	30
Differential settlement 	31
Seasonal variation in clay soils 32
Foundation types 32
Strip foundation 33
Pad foundations 35
Combined foundations 	36
Raft foundations 	37
Pile foundations 38
Placing of piles 39

-- 6 of 391 --

vi 	Contents
Jacked piles 40
Ground stabilisation 42
Heat transfer through the foundation structure 	42
References 	44
3 Legal and regulatory frameworks 	45
MELANIE SMITH
Building works and building regulation 45
Planning and historic listing or registration 48
Adjoining property and neighbourly matters 	57
Party walls 57
Acoustics and noise control: Minimising noise transition 	62
Contracts 	65
Landlord and Tenant 68
Decent Homes 68
Dilapidations 70
Types of survey 	73
Health and safety 	76
Inclusivity 	82
References 	86
Guidance, Standards and Codes 87
4 Building pathology 	89
MELANIE SMITH AND B. N. WEST
Introduction 89
Traditional and modern construction 	89
Defect management 	96
The trouble with water 	97
Damp 101
Condensation 102
Penetrating damp 	104
Rising damp 105
Mould, decay fungi, and bacteria 106
Everything under the sun 	108
Timber infestation: fungal attack and insects 111
All together now! Complex interactions 	112
Concrete 	113
Movement and stability 	118
5 Retroftting and refurbishment 	134
CHRIS GORSE, MELANIE SMITH, B. N. WEST, CORMAC FLOOD
AND LLOYD M. SCOTT
Introduction 134
Considerations for refurbishment 	136

-- 7 of 391 --

Contents 	vii
Upgrading thermal performance 	139
Discussion surrounding thermal upgrades 	143
Underpinning 151
Upgrading acoustic performance 152
Upgrading fre protection 	155
Fashion 164
References 	167
6 Thermal performance 	169
CHRIS GORSE, MELANIE SMITH, MATTHEW BROOKE-PEAT, MARTIN
FLETCHER, CORMAC FLOOD, LLOYD SCOTT, AND JOHN SPILLANE
Introduction to thermal performance 169
Refocusing sustainability assessment methods: A comparative
Emerging themes: Gaps and needs in building performance
Thermal comfort 	174
introduction to the Building Energy Rating (BER) Certifcate 	182
Thermal performance 	199
Thermal performance of existing buildings and retroft 	206
simulation for building retroft 	216
7 Fire safety 	219
MELANIE SMITH
Nature and development of fre 219
Effects of a fre: Physiological and behavioural 	229
Fire precautions from frst principles 	238
Means of escape 	245
External fre spread 	245
Introduction to fre engineering concepts 248
8 Disasters and the built environment 	252
JOHN BRUEN AND JOHN P. SPILLANE
Disasters 	252
Disaster management cycle 	259
Sustainability 263
Housing in LDCs and post-disaster contexts: Approaches,
participation, and barriers 267
References 	272
9 Environmental considerations 	276
CORMAC FLOOD, CHRIS GORSE, LLOYD M. SCOTT AND MELANIE SMITH
Environmental issues 	276
Ground 277
Flooding 296

-- 8 of 391 --

viii 	Contents
Flora and fauna 	298
Climate and construction 	301
References 	306
10 Sustainability 	310
JOHN L. STURGES
Sustainability: An introduction 310
Managing sustainability: Introduction 	319
Construction materials and sustainability: An introduction 	326
References and further reading 	339
11 Glossary and reference section 	341
MELANIE SMITH
Glossary 	341
Reference Section 	354
References 	364
Index 	367

-- 9 of 391 --

Acknowledgements and
contributors
We would like to gratefully acknowledge and thank the following for their input
to this book:
Ian Dickinson, Leeds Sustainability Institute, Leeds Beckett University, for his
huge input, including the illustration production of so many of the figures and
hard work in proof-reading this book
Dr Matthew Brooke-Peat, MCIAT, MCIOB, CEnv, Leeds Sustainability
Institute, Leeds Beckett University, for his contributions regarding thermal
modelling in the chapter on thermal performance
John Bruen, BSc Arch, BArch, MSc Proj. Mgt., RIBA, MRIAI, ARB, RSUA,
CEPHD, Chartered Architect and Certified Passive House Designer, Bruen
Architects, Belfast, for his contributions to the chapter on disasters and the built
environment
Dr Martin Fletcher, Leeds Sustainability Institute, Leeds Beckett University,
for his contributions regarding thermal comfort in the chapter on thermal
performance
Dr Cormac Flood, BSc, MPhil, Coady Architects, Dublin, and Dublin School of
Architecture, for his contributions to the chapters on retrofitting and refurbish-
ment, thermal performance, and environmental considerations
Prof. Julienne Hanson, University College London, for her contribution relat-
ing to inclusivity in the chapter on legal and regulatory frameworks
Dr Lloyd M. Scott, Professor, Construction Science Division, University
of Oklahoma, and School of Surveying and Construction Management,
Technological University Dublin, for his contributions to the chapters on
retrofitting and refurbishment, thermal performance, and environmental
considerations
Dr John P. Spillane, MCIOB, MAPM, School of Engineering, University of
Limerick, Limerick, for his contributions to the chapters on thermal perfor-
mance and disasters and the built environment

-- 10 of 391 --

x 	Acknowledgements and contributors
Prof. John Sturges, Leeds Sustainability Institute, Leeds Beckett University, for
his chapter on sustainability
Felix Thomas, BSc, Leeds Sustainability Institute, Leeds Beckett University for
his contributions
Dr B. N. West, MRICS, Chartered Building Surveyor, Leeds Beckett University
(retired), for her contributions to the chapter on building pathology

-- 11 of 391 --

1
Building surveying: an introduction
Melanie Smith and Chris Gorse
Building surveying is a rare blend of art, science, and management. As many peo-
ple have observed – assessing building performance and failure is a science, and
surveying buildings is an art, so building surveying combines art and science,
attracting people interested in many different fields. As such, building surveying is
arguably the widest area of surveying practice. Building surveyors are found work-
ing on and with buildings in fields of residential, commercial, industrial, educa-
tional, institutional, retail, leisure, health, local and central authority, armed forces,
public, private, and everything in between. Consequently, workloads include eve-
rything from the conservation and restoration of historic buildings to designing
and managing new developments.
Building surveying is a profession. Not all building surveyors are chartered,
however, Chartered Building Surveyors need to comply with the Royal Institution
of Chartered Surveyors (RICS) requirements of the highest levels of integrity, in
order that clients can have confidence in the impartial advice given. In this book,
“Building Surveyors”, with initial capitals refers to surveyors who are chartered,
i.e. members of RICS; “building surveyors” without initial capitals refers to all
building surveyors, chartered or not.
Core traits which characterise formal professions such as membership of the
RICS are:
•• Practice is based on theoretical and privileged knowledge.
•• Training is rigorous and specialised.
•• The proficiency of practitioners is institutionally monitored and examined.
•• Self-regulation, the possession of codes of conduct, and the enforcement of
standards are the norm.
•• The central ethical claim is that the profession exists to serve the interests of
society in general, and the client in particular – not itself first.
Figure 1.1 shows the three pillars to building surveying: Technology, Law, and
Management.

-- 12 of 391 --

2 	Building surveying: an introduction
Figure 1.1 Three pillars of building surveying.
Building surveying as an occupation or profession has developed from the ear-
liest times. Figure 1.2 gives a timeline for surveying roles in England. Evidence
of surveying as a work process, especially land and property measurement, dates
back to the ancients, and it is likely that these skills were brought to Britain by the
Romans. More recently, surveying for thermal retrofits only began in earnest in
the UK (for more than one-off properties) following the launch of the Green Deal
from around 2012, when proposals for retrofitting large numbers of hard-to-treat
UK dwellings with external or internal wall insulation began.
Surveys of buildings, or building surveying, predate this by over two thousand
years, having been formally recognised as a skill, as a profession for some 400 years,
and regulated to some extent (including self-regulation) for approximately
150 years. Because errors can be costly (monetary and/or health-wise) either to
clients, occupants, or the country, surveying activities have attracted control. Some
surveying aspects became encapsulated into law about ad 1212 when fire safety
regulation was introduced for London and compliance control became necessary.
Other aspects continued, informally, under the requirements of the clients. In the
19th century, the Industrial Revolution resulted in mass property growth, survey-
ors grouped themselves into professional alliances, and the RICS originated.
From this time, it has been understood that regulatory control of building con-
struction, and that of the surveyors that oversee or monitor such construction,
brings about improved results. The relatively new activity of pre-retrofit surveys
can thus be expected to be controlled.

-- 13 of 391 --

3
Timeline
 
Before	
1200s
1200s
 
1500s
 
1600s
 
1700s
 
1800s
 
1900s
 
2000s
Commercial	
and agency
	(boundaries,	
landlord &
	tenant, etc
.)
Surveyors	
(evidence from ancient Babylonia,
	Greece, Egypt, Rome)
Surveyors Club
	formed 1792
Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors
	(renamed 1947)
Surveyors started to split
	themselves into types: general,
	quantity, mining, building,
	commercial, estate, etc.
Retrofit began earnestly,
	prompting pre-works
Enforcement
	inspection
Viewers created to
	enforce the various
	1212 regulations,
	Assizes: (Nuisance
	& Building)
Surveyors
	(London)
	1667
London
	Building Act
Statutory
	Surveyors
	(London)
	1774 London
	Building Act
District
	Surveyors
	(London)
	1844 London
	Building Act
District Surveyors
	Association, formed 1845
Approved inspectors created
	1984.Building Act 1984
Works’	
client	
overseer
Surveyors	
(evidence from ancient Babylonia, Greece,	
Egypt, Rome)
Surveyors Club
	formed 1792
Institution of
	Surveyors
	formed 1868
Chartered
	Institution of
	Surveyors
	(1881 Royal
	charter given)
Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors
	(renamed 1947)
Surveyor of the King’s Works (created	
1578)
English Heritage
	(reorganised
	2015)
Historic England
	(created 2015)
Surveyor to the Fabric (cathedrals) (began around 1600s)
Performance
	assessor
s
Building performance research
	began around here
EPC assessors
	created 2007
PAS 2030 (2012)
	installers
Chief Building Surveyors & Building Control
	Officers (England & Wales)
	1965 national Building Regulations
Institution of
	Surveyors
	formed 1868
Chartered
	Institution of
	Surveyors
	(1881 Royal
	charter given)
surveys
Office of Works (created
	1851)
Ministry of Works
	(created 1940)
Dept of the
	Environ-
	ment
(created
	1970)
English
	Heritage
	(created
	1983)
Figure 1.2
 A timeline for surveying roles in England.
1: Building surveying: an introduction

-- 14 of 391 --

4 	Building surveying: an introduction
Mass construction for the Industrial Revolution sometimes resulted in unhealthy
conditions due to both construction standards and inadequacy, for example in ven-
tilation and drainage. The consequential Public Health Acts in the 1800s tight-
ened building regulation and compliance control in London and some other cities.
However, it was not until 1965 that the first set of national Building Regulations
came into force for the whole of England. These regulations required, for the first
time, building control surveyors across the country to inspect both building plans
and works on-site for compliance with regulations. Statutory site inspection is
mandatory for certain stages only, with the emphasis being on observations (1) up
to ground level, and (2) at completion.
Running alongside enforcement inspection has been the development of the
legal aspects of property, including purchase, occupation, selling, and leases.
Landlord and tenant legislation attempts to ensure tenants are able to occupy prop-
erties which are not unsafe or unhealthy, and to ensure that the lessor’s investment
is not diminished by the action or default of the lessee. Surveys for maintenance,
fire risk, facilities management, access, party walls, and due diligence are other
examples. Surveyors act for, and undertake on-site surveys for, all parties (owners,
occupiers, landlords, tenants, and lawyers) in these transactions.
Lately, surveying for the purpose of performance assessment has also been
developing. Performance assessment includes testing and measurement, often
using new technology and equipment. This type of survey is a relatively new con-
cept as shown in Figure 1.2. Building performance evaluation methods such as
air-tightness and co-heating testing tend to be self-regulated by adherence to the
methodologies stipulated in industry-accepted standards (such as CEN and ISO).
Incoming Smart meter technology also provides metrics on the behaviour and
energy efficiency of buildings, and such performance metrics are likely to embed
themselves firmly into the practice of assessing and surveying buildings.
Building surveying is therefore a term covering a range of activities that are
fundamentally about viewing or observing a building. However, the scope of each
survey depends on the purpose of the client and the associated legislation or regu-
lation. Survey purposes can be categorised into three purpose sets, of property
investment, building work, and/or legislation, which are further described below.
SURVEYING FOR PROPERTY INVESTMENT
Owners and occupiers usually wish to maintain their financial interest in the
property and, thereby, maintain its physical aspects. On-site property surveys are
non-mandatory tools used for this purpose, at times of purchase, lease, sale, and
periodically in between. They are used to assess condition, find faults (particularly
decay or failure), find breaches of contract (dilapidations), assess value, assess and
review service charges, budget for future maintenance or building works, and to

-- 15 of 391 --

5	1: Building surveying: an introduction
carry out maintenance. Survey methods for property investment are set out under
RICS and RIBA guidance, and although not legally regulated, can attract court
proceedings for negligence.
SURVEYING FOR BUILDING WORKS
When building works are to be undertaken, surveys of the site and relevant prop-
erty are conducted. The surveyor could be the building owner/occupier, archi-
tect/building surveyor, or building contractor. Surveys are undertaken to ensure
the building work design is appropriate, that the completed building works are as
required, and that instalment payments are made appropriately. Such surveys may
be casual. Although they are not mandatory, they are practically, contractually,
and legally useful. If the surveyor has a profession such as RIBA, RICS, or CIAT,
the surveyor is expected to perform their surveying activities in accordance with
their professional body’s stipulations, and again can attract court proceedings for
negligence.
SURVEYING FOR LEGISLATION
When building works are carried out, which fall under the Building Regulations
in England and Wales, applicable work must be assessed by building control
(local authority or approved inspector) Standards are set by the relevant Approved
Document. Those most obviously relevant to retrofit are Approved Documents C
(site preparation and resistance to contaminants and moisture), F (ventilation), and
L1b (conservation of fuel and power). Building regulation inspections contribute
to the health, safety, welfare, and convenience of people in relation to buildings
and further the conservation of fuel and power. They are required by the Building
Act 1984 and are mandatory.
Plans for the works may be deposited with the local authority or approved
inspector, but there is no requirement to visit the site before works start. On-site
inspections must be made at certain construction stages which are, as a minimum,
the excavations for foundations, the damp-proof course (dpc) and oversite, as the
drains are laid but not covered, before plastering, and at completion. At comple-
tion, the surveyor is required to confirm that as far as is reasonable to observe, the
property is in accordance with the approved deposited plans (if any) or is other-
wise in accordance with the regulations. However, much of the detailed construc-
tion work is carried out and covered over without inspection being required; for
instance, between the dpc and plastering, and between plastering and completion.
When properties are constructed, sold, or leased, they are required to have an
Energy Performance Certificate (EPC), which has been produced and registered by
an accredited energy performance assessor. The standard assessment procedure (SAP)

-- 16 of 391 --

6 	Building surveying: an introduction
is the government’s tool used to assess the energy and environmental performance of
new dwellings. RdSAP is a reduced-data version of SAP used as a lower-cost method
of assessing the energy performance of existing dwellings. RdSAP is used to under-
pin the algorithms in domestic EPCs. EPCs are solely designed to provide an assess-
ment of the energy performance of the property and what can be done to improve it.
The assessor must visit the site and conduct a survey using UK government-approved
RdSAP software. EPCs and their on-site surveys are mandatory.
SURVEYING ACTIVITIES DISCUSSION AND SUMMARY
The preceding sections have described some of the differing activities and
approaches used in building surveying. There are other types of surveying, for
example estate/commercial surveying and quantity surveying, which are not cov-
ered in this book. Thus, if a survey, assessment, inspection, etc., is required for a
building, it is necessary to provide a scope of service or term of reference to define
the requirement so that an appropriate survey is conducted.
There is not an examination to certify or guarantee a person’s proficiency in
undertaking a survey. Traditional types of survey (e.g. dilapidations inspection,
condition survey, full building survey, home-buyers reports, due diligence inspec-
tions, fire risk assessments) have been developed and refined over many years.
Some, for example dilapidations and building surveys, have been honed through
the courts by case law. Court action has resulted in surveyors having substantial
understanding of what each particular survey entails. Not meeting such accepted
understanding can lead to negligence action. Contractual terms of reference do not
have to be specific, but can be implied.
Some survey types, such as for thermal retrofit, are a relatively new facet of
building surveying (Figure 1.2). They have not, to date, been interrogated in
court; however, they could be expected to meet basic, fit-for-purpose methods.
There is likely to be some overlap between say retrofit surveys and, for example,
building surveys, condition surveys, and EPC inspections. As a new activity, the
procurement specification will be important. Using a retrofit survey as an exam-
ple, because the survey will feed into the success of the retrofit, and the retrofit is
required to save energy and money, any failings might attract court proceedings
and therefore the scope of a survey will be important, as will limitations of liability
and professional indemnity insurance.
MODELS OF SURVEY APPROACHES
The process of survey approach has been modelled. Figure 1.3 shows three com-
parative approaches of data capture or collection (elemental), diagnostic (problem),
and anticipatory (preventative).

-- 17 of 391 --

7	1: Building surveying: an introduction
Data collection: Observe the element. Identify any manifestations. (Elemental)
If required, can progress to: Identify a cause and determine remedy for the manifestation.
Manifestation 1 	Cause 1 	Remedy 1
Manifestation 2 	Cause 2 	Remedy 2
Manifestation 3 	Cause 3 	Remedy 3
Receptors 1, 2 and 3
Diagnostic: Decide problem. Look for manifestations (consequences) on individual
receptors (elements). Follow pathways from individual receptors back to source(s).
Determine cause and thus remedy for problem (if required).
Problem 1
Manifestation 1
Manifestation 2
Manifestation 3
Cause A
Cause B
Remedy A
Remedy B
Receptors 1, 2 and 3
Anticipatory: Observe existing building’s aspects. Anticipate retrofit installation(s).
Decide problem to interrogate. Anticipate predictable causes of the problem and the possible
manifestation(s) on individual receptors (elements). Risk assess problem level. Inform designer
of significant risks to enable them to design-out the causes.
Risk assessment
	(RA): serious risk
	Design – out
cause(s) I, II, etc.
Aspect I
Anticipated
problem type
 I
Anticipatory
cause I
Anticipatory
cause II
Anticipatory
cause III
Anticipated
	retrofit type I
Receptors 1, 2 and 3
RA: not
	significant
Anticipatory
manifestation I
Anticipatory
manifestation II
Anticipatory
manifestation III
Figure 1.3 Comparative models of Data capture (elemental), Diagnostic (problem), and
Anticipatory (preventative) approaches to surveys.

-- 18 of 391 --

8 	Building surveying: an introduction
The different approaches can attract differing levels of proficiency and/or speed
of undertaking:
The data collection survey approach is defined by tick-boxes and a consid-
eration of each element separately and in isolation from other parts of the property.
No ref lection is required. The choice of observation is chosen from a drop-down
menu on the electronic device. Minimal surveying skill is reportedly required.
This method can be conducted quickly and easily, with minimal technical equip-
ment. It lends itself to off-site quantitative analysis. The results are of data capture
only. This approach identifies existing conditions only, no connections between
elements or defects are made, no conclusions are drawn, and only the facts are
reported. The time resources associated with this type of survey, coupled with
expertise limitations, preclude any technical testing.
The diagnostic survey approach incorporates data capture and diagnosis
techniques. It is defined by structured observation of an element, simultaneously
coupled with corresponding consideration of specific known problems. These
problems may involve association with more than the single element observed
and may include many elements and other parts of the building. Holistic observa-
tion and consideration are therefore intrinsic. Extant problems are searched for,
observed, and diagnosed, with possible multi-criteria connections. Ref lection is
essential. Each element is observed in turn. The order and choice of observations
made are surveyor-controlled, usually led by the specific building’s characteris-
tics and/or problems found. Extensive surveying skills are required. This method
takes longer and costs more than the data capture approach. It results in qualita-
tive assessment. This approach identifies existing conditions and problems only. It
ventures into forecasting only when the current circumstances point to an obvious
consequence, for example if the roof is not mended, fungal decay of the roof tim-
bers may be expected. The process can provide a holistic view of the property, and
adjacent properties where relevant. Expertise limitations can preclude additional
testing.
The anticipatory survey approach is required for the prevention of future
problems. It requires a different approach to either the data collection or the diag-
nostic approaches. Current guidance for surveys focuses on identifying existing
problems, not on anticipating the potential risks associated with undertaking
proposed works. The survey is essentially anticipatory in nature, risk-based, and
focused on preventing any potential foreseeable and unintended adverse conse-
quences and problems following works. Its main purpose is to identify any poten-
tial future problems so that they can be mitigated against as part of the proposed
design of the works. The anticipatory survey approach will observe extant ele-
ments, aspects, defects, entropy, etc., which have the potential to contribute to fail-
ures and shortcomings of the new scheme. It will also anticipate the potential of the
prosed works to damage the existing materials and/or construction. Anticipated

-- 19 of 391 --

9	1: Building surveying: an introduction
problems are to be foreseen for the (known or assumed) proposed designs and
risk assessed. Ref lection will form an essential component of this approach. The
choice of observation may be surveyor-controlled, or proforma-controlled, but
either way, it will result in an over-riding surveyor intervention. A high level of
understanding of retrofit measures and their consequences will be required. It will
include data capture, diagnostics, and risk identification. Additional expertise is
likely to be required for additional technical testing.
BUILDING SURVEYING AND SUSTAINABILITY
Figure 1.4 shows stages for building surveying involvement in a building’s life.
Because of their interest in maintenance and existing buildings, building survey-
ors have historically been involved with sustainable construction. They have cho-
sen materials and practices that will result in longevity and slower entropy. With
their understanding of building pathology, they have also looked to construction
that fits well in its intended environment. With this understanding comes resil-
ient building. As climate change results in more natural disasters, stronger winds,
Figure 1.4 Stages for building surveying involvement in a building’s life.

-- 20 of 391 --

10 	Building surveying: an introduction
higher rainfall, increased temperatures, and higher f lood risks, then sustainable and
resilient buildings are required. Post-disasters, rebuilding is required, which will
cope better in the future. Building surveyors’ skills and expertise will continue to
care for the built environment and sustainability in its many forms is a key issue
for the profession.

-- 21 of 391 --

2
Form and construction
Chris Gorse and Melanie Smith
BUILDING FORM
The shape and type of building, and the materials that make up the building com-
ponents, have direct impacts on the way the building behaves and performs. The
building responds against changes placed on it by the internal and external envi-
ronment conditions; both environments can change the way the building fabric
behaves. Notwithstanding that environmental conditions for each building are
unique, there are a few basic assumptions based on a building’s form that are useful
when characterising the response and behaviour of a building.
Some shapes and assemblies will expose more of the building to the elements,
which can result in greater heat loss and gain. An increase in exposure increases the
effect that the external environment has on the building. Buildings with greater
surface areas are more exposed, tend to get wetter during rain, and transfer more
heat energy when it is cold, than those that are less exposed. Equally, more exposed
buildings receive more solar energy and have to withstand greater wind loads.
Even for very simple shapes, the difference in exposure can easily be seen in the
basic assemblies of Figure 2.1.
Assuming the building units in Figure 2.1 are composed of the same materi-
als, then the detached unit has the greatest exposure and will be prone to greater
heat transfer to the external environment than the other units. For the single-unit
detached building, all five surfaces above ground are exposed. The semi-detached
building has one face of the building shared as a party wall with the adjacent
attached building and thus has 20% less exposure to the outside elements, when
compared to the detached property. The mid-terrace of the group of three units
has two walls joined to its neighbouring buildings, and has 40% less exposure.
Mid-apartments in a block of f lats may just have one exposed elevation and 80%
less exposure to the external elements. These are simplified examples, and it is
important to note that the interfaces between buildings are not always sealed and
may link to the external environment. Where there are cavities within the party
walls between buildings, these can act as a heat-loss mechanism in their own right,

-- 22 of 391 --

12 	Form and construction
(a) Detached 	(b) Semi-Detached 	(c) Mid-Terraced 	(d) Mid apartment in a block
100% of the building 	80% of the building 	60% of the building 	20% of the habitable
envelope exposed 	envelope exposed 	envelope exposed 	envelope exposed
Figure 2.1 Degree of exposure for simplified habitable spaces, relative to the walls and roof of
a detached structure.The building units are made up from simple cube shapes, for
ease of comparison.
Figure 2.2 Simplified diagram of the effects of wind on the windward and leeward sides.
connecting the internal to the external environment. However, when buildings
are connected with a fully sealed wall, the heat loss and gain to neighbours are nor-
mally less than those experienced with an external wall, unless adversely affected
by a party wall thermal bypass (LABC, 2015).
The solar and wind loads are also heavily inf luenced by the shape of the
building as well as the exposed surface area, as shown in Figures 2.2, 2.3, 2.4,
and 2.5.

-- 23 of 391 --

13	2: Form and construction
Wind load and speed increases
through the urban canyon
Wind hits the building and is forced
around the front elevation and
down the urban canyon, increasing the
intensity of the wind. The forces and
wind load imposed on buildings and people
can be considerable.
Figure 2.3 Schematic of urban canyon and funnelling of wind.
Wind hits the face of the building, drives it 	Eddies and vorces created as the
upwards and is then turbulently forced around 	reduced pressure in the urban canyon
the corner of the building as the wind intensity 	sucks the wind down, where it buets
grows as it merges with other wind vectors. 	around as it circulates the canyon.
Figure 2.4 Wind driving over buildings, swirling around urban canyons, and creating vortices
at the edges and corners.
Trees, bushes and buildings can act as baes to the wind,
reducing intensity; however, they also create vorces that
can cause negave pressure, pulling and sucking at the face
of buildings
Figure 2.5 Trees and buildings reducing wind intensity at lower levels.

-- 24 of 391 --

14 	Form and construction
WIND AND BUILDING FORM
Wind has a major impact on the building element. As the wind pushes on the
building, it puts pressure on the faces that it hits, and as the wind rolls over and
around the building, wind vortices occur. Swirling eddies occur around ridges and
corners of the building, pulling and twisting around the building fabric as illus-
trated in Figure 2.2. The eddies and vortices induce negative pressure and suction,
which can lift and displace roof tiles, sheets, trusses, and other loose fabric. This is
one reason why many countries require roof timbers to be strapped to the walls.
Where rain, snow, or hail is caught up in the swirling winds hitting the sur-
faces, the wall surfaces may suffer higher levels of erosion, especially where wind
pressures are high. Where vortices result in the lifting of roof tiles or sheets, the
negative pressure can also result in water being forced upwards and under eaves,
verges, and roof tiles, against the natural pull of gravity. Thus water captured by
the wind can penetrate gaps unexpectedly.
WIND IN URBAN AREAS
Trees, buildings, and hedges may offer shelter to buildings, but equally they can
create wind tunnels or funnels that concentrate wind pressure and increase its
power. Wind is also useful in clearing air; low-lying areas in the cities and built
environment “canyons” can become areas of concentrated pollution. Wind passing
through canyons can help remove and reduce pollution in these areas. However, if
the impact and potential build-up of wind in canyons are not properly considered,
this can lead to serious consequences.
In one situation in Leeds, UK, where a 112 m high building was erected, the
roads, waterways, and adjacent buildings led to the creation of a significant wind
tunnel – an urban canyon. The resulting extremely high winds pushed over a
lorry, causing fatal injuries to a pedestrian who was crushed (BBC, 2017a). Large
gantries and perforated steel wings, which act as wind baff les, were subsequently
placed where the wind tunnel effects were the greatest (BBC, 2017b). The gantry
and perforated wings diffuse and disperse the wind, reducing the effect of the wind
tunnel at ground level, and are effective at reducing the wind speed at lower levels.
Models and wind simulations have further explored the wind forces in the area
(Ingrid Cloud, 2018).
Figure 2.3 provides a schematic of how wind can be pushed through urban
canyons, increasing the intensity of the wind, causing building damage and pre-
senting risks to those working and living within the area. Figure 2.4 shows how
wind drives over buildings, swirling around urban canyons and creating vortices at
the edges and corners. Figure 2.5 shows how trees and buildings can reduce wind
intensity at lower levels

-- 25 of 391 --

15	2: Form and construction
The shape of buildings can reduce the impact of wind. Tall buildings are often
narrower as they increase in height. At lower levels the surrounding buildings
and trees create friction and slow down wind speed; however, at higher levels,
where buildings and vegetation are negligible, wind speeds increase. Wind speed
exposure increases the higher the buildings are; thus the narrowing of buildings
at heights reduces the exposure to dynamic wind loads placed on such buildings.
While winds at a higher level are stronger, they tend to be relatively consistent
and easier to predict, whereas the winds closer to the ground are changeable and
unpredictable. Thus, the turbulent effects of winds lower down the building may
result in damage to the building.
Flat or square buildings create the highest impact area and potential pressure
from wind, whereas curved surfaces reduce the pressure perpendicular to the sur-
face. Thus, some tall buildings are aerodynamic in shape to reduce wind loads.
However, the oscillation and transverse swaying of tall buildings can become a
problem with such shapes. Studies have shown that small dimples in the surfaces of
buildings can reduce the effect of the vortex, helping the building to slip through
the wind, similar to the dimples on a golf ball or on the skin of a shark. See
Figures 2.6 and 2.7. While such observation and studies tend to be associated with
tall buildings, the principles will also apply to smaller buildings. Rough surfaces
can be helpful in diffusing the impact of wind.
Figure 2.6 Wind flow around buildings shapes: impact of rough or dimpled surface compared
with a smooth-surfaced building (adapted from Vongsingha, 2015).

-- 26 of 391 --

16 	Form and construction
Figure 2.7 Tall building and the impact of shapes on wind resistance.
PROTECTING THE BUILDING ENVELOPE
FROM RAIN AND SOLAR
The roof structure is an important feature when considering exposure to the
elements. The different shapes and forms of the building can considerably
change the building’s behaviour and resilience to the elements. The way a
roof overhangs the building’s envelope walls can change the performance and
resilience of those walls. High levels of solar exposure will cause materials
to degrade, mainly as a result of the ultraviolet component of the spectrum
of light. Plastics, wood, and paints are particularly prone to physical, chemi-
cal, and mechanical changes (normally on the surface of the material) when
exposed to solar radiation for prolonged periods. While most building materi-
als will have additives and stabilisers to reduce the impact of solar radiation,
it is possible to reduce exposure through changes to the shape and form of
the building. For example, recessing windows and doors helps to reduce their
exposure, thus protecting them from rain ingress.
The exposure of walls can be reduced by increasing the projection of the eaves.
Increasing the projection of the eaves not only results in reducing the level of solar
radiation impacting on the walls, it also reduces the levels of water and pollutants
carried by rain that can hit the face of the building. The pollutants can make the
rain more acidic or alkaline, making it chemically aggressive to the masonry. Dust
carried by rain can also cause staining of the surface.

-- 27 of 391 --

17	2: Form and construction
Table 2.1 Roof forms and impact on building envelop performance and resilience
Roof form 	Impact
Simple f lat roof structure – no overhang:
Offers limited protection to the building element, places
the walls at highest level of exposure. While gutters prevent
immediate run-off it is commonplace to see walls close to
the eaves discoloured and affected by high moisture levels.
Flat roof structure – with eaves overhang:
The projection of the eaves helps to shelter the walls from
rain and reduced solar exposure. The protection does help
to reduce staining, and reduces the period in which walls are
wet (and thus allows greater heat f low).
Pitched roof with no overhang:
Loft space in the roof, when insulated, creates a buffer to the
external environment.
With no overhang, the walls are exposed to rain and solar.
The finish on the exposed walls tends to discolour and
degrade with exposure. Wet walls allow heat f low more
readily.
Pitched roof with overhang:
Loft space creates a buffer; the eaves offer the walls some
protection from the rain and reduce solar exposure, which
limits staining, degradation, and reduces wetting.
Pitched roof with extended overhang and balconies:
Typical of higher-altitude buildings. The extended roof and
balconies reduce the wall wetting, limit any freeze-thaw
action, and reduce exposure to solar, limiting degradation
of the wall. The roof and the balconies are exposed and will
require maintenance. These are sacrificial elements helping
to protect the main building.
Room in the roof:
Room in the roof maximises the habitable space. These can
be both retrofits and incorporated from new. The roof can
be complicated in shape; retrofits are often poorly insulated,
increasing heat loss and gain in the habitable space.

-- 28 of 391 --

18 	Form and construction
By reducing the level of water that falls onto the surface of walls, the walls do
not become as wet. If walls are wet, the air pockets within the walls fill with water,
reducing the wall’s ability to act as a thermal insulator. Therefore, saturated walls
conduct more heat and reduce the wall’s thermal insulation properties. Also, as
the water evaporates, further heat energy is lost. Latent heat is required to change
liquid to vapour; thus the additional heat energy is transferred from surrounding
materials.
When water hits the wall surface, moisture becomes trapped inside the wall’s
pores. If the temperature drops, this moisture may freeze and, if there is insufficient
space for the water to expand as it freezes, the material surrounding it will break
and crack. This freeze-thaw cycle of water trapped in the building pores will lead
to degradation of the building materials. Where buildings are particularly exposed
to the elements and are in elevated or cold climates, it is common to have extended
eaves and balconies that protect the main building envelope. Although the exposed
balconies and roofs do suffer increased exposure and require more maintenance,
they are less costly to maintain and are treated as sacrificial, putting themselves
before the main building envelope and offering protection.
GROUND FLOORS
The way a building rests on the ground, transfers its load, and separates the internal
and external environment has an impact on the behaviour and performance of the
building.
Traditionally ground f loors were constructed directly on the ground, with no
insulation or damp barrier. If there was a finish (other than compacted earth), tiles,
stone slabs, or timbers were laid, either directly onto the ground, on compacted
earth, a bed of ashes, or onto pitch. From around 1880, f loors began to be sealed
with a concrete cover. Ground f loors are now insulated and separated from the
ground with thermal insulation and a damp-proof membrane. Suspended timber
f loors are ventilated. The thermal and moisture layers create barriers that prevent
the ingress of water and restrict the transfer of heat. In properties with no f loor
insulation, solid concrete f loors are prone to condensation forming on the surface,
even when finished with tiles or another surface covering. This can sometimes be
hidden, for example below lino or vinyl f loor coverings.
Solid f loors can and do act as heat reservoirs. The heavy dense structure of a
solid f loor can have high thermal capacitance and store high levels of heat energy.
Thus, f loors can take a considerable amount of heat energy to heat. Equally, once
the heat energy is contained within the f loor, it is steadily released back to the
building and surrounding areas, as the supply of heat is reduced. In some build-
ings, heavy structures such as solid concrete f loors are used to slow down and
smooth the thermal response of buildings. While solid f loors still have high levels

-- 29 of 391 --

19	2: Form and construction
of thermal capacitance, most newer builds are now insulated, which will reduce
the heat stored. However, the insulation does reduce the heat being lost to the
external environment and reduces the potential of condensation in the f loor.
Even when solid f loors are insulated, there is a tendency for the perimeter of the
f loor to present a thermal bridge where it interfaces with the wall. This is due to
the increased exposure of materials (a geometric thermal bridge – at the corner of
the building there are two edges and the underside of the f loor all exposed) and due
to the interfaces of different structural materials (thermal conduction). Care should
be taken to insulate the perimeter of the f loor and reduce the risk of condensation.
There are many different types of f loor, and Table 2.2 represents just a few of
the main configurations. It is useful to consider the way the different f loors affect
the performance of the building. As discussed above, solid f loors provide a direct
interface with the ground, which may be prone to heat transfer, moisture ingress,
and surface condensation. With insulation and damp-proof barriers many of the
limitations of solid f loors can be overcome.
Another method of reducing the chance of ground water penetrating the f loor
is to separate the f loor from the ground with a cavity. A suspended f loor is tradi-
tionally constructed of timber supported by the external walls, with a gap between
the ground and the timber. The gap is ventilated to prevent the build-up of damp
and stagnant air. With the introduction of air vents in the perimeter wall, the void
below the ground is ventilated; however, the movement of air in the f loor can lead
to draughty f loors and high levels of air infiltration into and out of the building.
Such draughty f loors can be a significant heat-loss mechanism. Suspended f loors
are now constructed both from timber and concrete beams and blocks; they are
insulated and more airtight but are typically prone to air infiltration.
Floors above cellars are separated by a large void; in principle this should
mean that they are less prone to damp, however, this is often not the case. Unless
tanked, cellars which are below ground and the substructure walls and f loors
can let small amounts of ground and surface water into them. The rooms below
ground tend to be colder than the superstructure, so that cellar walls and f loors
that are in direct contact with the ground are often cold and prone to condensa-
tion forming. Unless cellars are ventilated, damp and stagnant conditions can
develop; this can result in moisture forming on the underside of the cellar ceiling
and the underside of the f loor above the cellar. With tanking and insulated base-
ments, such conditions can be considerably limited, but do still need to be taken
into consideration.
The way a f loor is constructed affects the building’s performance. All f loors can
be designed to perform and offer habitable conditions; however, equally, all f loors
present different challenges.
The shape and form of the building, and the construction of the different build-
ing components and elements, affect the building’s behaviour and interaction with
the external environment. At all times, the different elements and their interaction

-- 30 of 391 --

20 	Form and construction
Table 2.2 Different types of f loor and their impact on f loor performance
Floor type 	Impact
Solid ground f loor: the f loor rests directly on the ground.
There will be heat loss into the ground. The f loor is
inherently damp commensurate with the type of ground
and height of water table. Water vapour evaporates
from the surface of the f loor, and may condense on any
impermeable f loor covering, and/or contribute to the
internal humidity levels. Any timbers incorporated into,
or in close contact with, solid f loors may be affected by
fungal degradation.
Insulated solid ground f loor: the f loor is separated from
the ground with thermal insulation and a damp-proof
membrane. In radon areas, the membrane needs to be gas-
tight. If services puncture the f loor, there may be a loss of
integrity for heat f low and moisture passage.
Suspended ground f loor: a gap between the f loor and
ground deters damp penetrating the upper levels of the
f loor. The cavity below the f loor must be ventilated.
In renovated homes, there may be insulation inserted
between f loor joists.
There may be a concrete oversite, or not. The joists may
be supported by dwarf walls, or be laid directly onto the
ground. The dwarf walls may be honeycombed, enabling
airf low, or not. There may be DPCs (or slates) effectively
positioned to avoid rising damp reaching the timber f loor
joists both in the external and dwarf walls, or not. Air
grates may be sufficient in size, number, and position to
provide adequate airf low to avoid build-up of moisture,
contaminates (e.g. radon), or not. The ventilated void may
be of sufficient height and lacking in obstruction to enable
adequate free f low of air, or not.
Ground f loor suspended over a cellar: f loor is separated
from the substructure. The cellar will tend to be cooler
than the main building. Unless tanked, substructures are
likely to experience damp ingress, through f loors and
walls.
The ground f loor over the basement may be underdrawn
with a ceiling, or otherwise sealed. If not, draughts
through the f loor, from the basement, are likely.
In renovated homes, there may be insulation inserted
between ground f loor joists. If there is not equal
insulation in the stair spandrels and upper f light soffits,
there will be large thermal bridges here. Similarly, if there
are no or inadequate air-sealants.

-- 31 of 391 --

21	2: Form and construction
with each other need to be properly considered when buildings are designed or
changes are made to the existing structure.
WALLS
Building walls perform a number of complex functions including the key require-
ments of supporting the structure, providing necessary strength, and offering
protection from the external environment. To maintain a healthy internal envi-
ronment, the wall has to respond to external and internal conditions, which f luc-
tuate considerably and lead to complex performance demands being placed on
the envelope. Because of environmental changes, differential stresses are imposed.
Substantial changes are expected in any season, but during winter conditions, an
elevation where surfaces are particularly exposed to the sun can be exposed to
freezing temperatures and high solar heat gain at the same time. In such circum-
stances, if the wall’s materials are not durable, cracking due to the differential
stresses is likely to occur. When a wall is wet, parts of the surface may quickly dry
as the wind and sun induce evaporation, while other shaded areas may remain wet
for much of a season, and as a result, deterioration can occur more quickly.
Wind not only exerts positive pressure as it hits a building, but also suction as it
f lows over and around the building, inducing a negative pressure on the building
envelope. The wind can throw rain, snow, and dirt at a wall, causing some areas
to suffer from erosion. The external environment is harsh and changeable; thus,
walls need to be durable and should be built with materials that give the required
performance, given the building’s specific environment.
How the building behaves and responds will be a result of the behaviour char-
acteristics of its walls. This is a result of the building form, the protection offered
by the shape of the building, and the assembly of components and materials making
up the wall. When any new finishes or thermal or acoustic upgrades are applied,
the behaviour of the wall will change. Thus, careful consideration is required when
upgrading a wall.
The building walls comprise one of the largest building elements and are heav-
ily exposed to the external environment; thus changes to the wall can have a
considerable impact on the building’s behaviour. In the past, most attention has
been given to the wall’s resistance to external conditions; however, internal envi-
ronments also impact on the wall’s behaviour and performance. Notwithstanding
the structural and environmental loads, the impact of occupants, for example their
living habits including washing and ventilation methods, will change the environ-
mental characteristics and can induce stresses on and within the wall.
Different groups tend to use their homes differently. Families with young chil-
dren and babies often wash and dry clothes more than others and tend to use much
of the building space. Aff luent professionals traditionally spend minimal time in

-- 32 of 391 --

22 	Form and construction
the home and have relatively little behavioural impact, for example sending laun-
dry out. The occupation patterns of elderly people commonly results in much time
spent confined to the home, with the most occupied rooms being heavily heated
and other rooms rarely used, heated or ventilation. Where security is a concern,
windows may not be opened regularly, often creating stagnant and humid envi-
ronments. This also happens when occupants are unable to open windows or have
ineffective ventilation systems. In humid and poorly ventilated homes, where the
internal faces and parts of the building fabric are cold, surface and interstitial con-
densation are likely, resulting in mould and discolouration of the wall. These tra-
ditional behavioural patterns change during COVID and similar lock-downs and
the resulting more normalized homeworking may become more prevalent. The
way people use their homes affects the type of environmental stresses that walls
and buildings are exposed to.
Walls need to be strong and durable, resist the external elements, limit the
spread and development of fire, and seal the enclosure whilst enabling ventila-
tion and breathing, in order that the environment enclosed is safe and healthy for
occupants to live and work in. Walls are often attached to other structures to create
a more stable building. They also interface with other building elements, such as
other walls, f loors, roofs, stairs, doors, and windows, each transferring loads and
creating different environmental conditions that need to be considered. The neigh-
bouring external environment, internal rooms, and vented or unvented voids, with
f luctuating temperatures and humidity levels, all create different demands on the
wall. In some cases, services are attached and encased within walls. The cables,
pipes, and conduits that we place on or within walls need to be properly accounted
for so that they can be maintained and do not present hazards. Care must be given
to the housing of such services, the surrounding materials, and how the combined
risks associated with fire, explosion, or electric shock are reduced and can be man-
aged. Thus, although walls appear to be relatively simple structures, their function
and the demands placed upon them are complex.
WALLS AND UPGRADE RISKS
It is vital, for long-term success, to research and identify any unexpected conse-
quences and adverse side effects of any upgrading. Due to their large surface area
and the impact that the building element creates, walls are often seen as a building
element that can be relatively easily changed. However, upgrading walls so they
provide a safe and healthy enclosure can be notoriously complex. Sufficient care
and attention should be given when assessing a wall’s physical state to ensure it is
possible to create the desired characteristics without the manifestation of unin-
tentional consequences such as mould growth or a fire risk. For example imple-
menting external thermal insulation along a row of terraced houses can result in

-- 33 of 391 --

23	2: Form and construction
an open route for fire to spread between properties. Thermal upgrades can also
result in excessive condensation and mould – see also Chapter 5, “Retrofitting and
refurbishment”, especially the section “Upgrading thermal performance”. Before
retrofitting, changing, or upgrading a wall, it is important to consider all of the
wall’s functions, assessing its condition against the day-to-day requirements and
specific performance attributes that are required.
FUNCTIONAL REQUIREMENT OF WALLS
The complexity of walls is a result of the way buildings have developed and the
requirements that we have placed upon them over the years. The performance
characteristics of walls have evolved; thus in addition to the key requirements,
walls have aesthetic functions, need to resist fire, provide compartmentation, and
help to provide safe access and egress in the event of a fire. They play a significant
part as a passive component for energy efficiency.
Key functions are a good starting point when assessing if a wall is fit for purpose
and has the potential to be upgraded. The central functions include providing
structural and supporting elements while also enclosing and dividing the space that
offers protection from the elements. Beyond the key functions, as the wall encloses
and divides much of the building space the performance requirements are more
involved.
While relatively inexpensive carbon-rich fuels are being phased out, the har-
vesting of energy from zero-carbon sources remains expensive, so walls need to
help retain and conserve energy used within the home. Outside of conserving heat
energy and ensuring thermal comfort, walls assist in providing a secure environ-
ment, offering protection against wind, rain, dust, and pollution, and limiting heat
lost and/or excess heat gain from solar energy. Importantly, walls must not be made
of toxic materials nor become a part of the building where mould and spores grow
or create conditions that are hazardous to health. Thus, while walls exist in simple
forms, the building requirements and functions of walls are considerable and must
be given due attention as buildings are adapted and maintained.
The main functional requirements of walls include:
•• Strength (sufficient compressive, tensile strength)
○○ Stability (resist distortion and collapse)
○○ Sustaining building loads; sustaining dead loads from roofs, f loors, walls and
live loads of the fixtures, fittings, furniture, and people
○○ Resisting eccentric loads, lateral wind forces
○○ Sufficiently robust, stiff, and stable (to resist collapse by ensuring slenderness
ratio is observed, reinforcement is sufficient, tying into buttressing, ribs,
beams, pins, or structural form that offers stability)
•• Weather resistance (resisting penetration of rain, snow, and wind)

-- 34 of 391 --

24 	Form and construction
•• Resistance to the passage of heat (resisting thermal transfer from inside and solar
heat gain from outside)
•• Security (providing a safe and secure enclosure)
•• Durability (sufficiently resistant to erosion, allowing for expansion and con-
traction due to changes in moisture, temperature, and humidity)
•• Fire safety (resistance to passage, spread, and propagation of fire, within and
over the surface of the wall)
•• Resistance to moisture from:
○○ Penetration through the structure
○○ Penetration from ground moisture
○○ Build-up within the structure
○○ Surface condensation
•• Aesthetics and creating a specific form
•• Providing protection from pollution
•• Not being made of or releasing toxic substances
•• Not creating or harbouring an environment where mould can grow and condi-
tions become hazardous to health
•• Safely housing the services placed upon and within them
STRENGTH AND STABILITY OF EXISTING WALLS
When a wall is upgraded, the strength and stability of the existing structure is key
and needs to be assessed. It is worth noting that although walls are rigid structures,
they are not totally static and will move and adjust. Thus, the stability of a wall is
affected as the building moves and adjusts to its surroundings. In most cases, mate-
rials and walls will perform for the lifetime of the building; however, surveyors
should be aware of factors that can affect buildings and those changes which are
more than superficial and require specific attention.
Materials will move as a result of changes in moisture, temperature, and humid-
ity. See also Chapter 4, “Building pathology”. Over the course of a year, the wall is
exposed to the different seasonal conditions. Patterns of wind, rain, snow, and solar
exposure all change with time, although there are seasonal patterns that can be
taken into account. The amount of solar heat energy that hits any part of the struc-
ture varies as the sun position in the sky changes. Solar exposure is also affected by
surrounding vegetation and buildings that may shield the building. The differen-
tial temperatures will cause materials to move at different rates and impose stress
on the wall. Over the years, movement can increase and cracks develop. Sometimes
cracks simply open and close with seasonal change, not particularly affecting the
structure. However, it is not uncommon for debris to become lodged within the
crack or for the jagged shape of the crack to create a mechanism that locks the crack
in an expanded position. Such cracks do not close and can propagate. If during one

-- 35 of 391 --

25	2: Form and construction
season a crack becomes locked in an open position, the next year the expansion
caused by heat or moisture may continue causing more movement, meaning that
year on year the cracks grow and propagate, affecting the structural stability of the
building. Such cracks should be monitored with tell-tales and checks, to ensure the
cracks do not disconnect structural components and affect the structure’s integrity.
The ground under the building also moves with seasonal changes, causing
movement of the foundation, which is then transferred to the structure and walls.
Eccentric loads, lateral forces (wind forces), and expansion and contraction due to
temperature and moisture changes (as a result of solar, rain, external temperature,
and humidity) all impose stresses on the wall, which in some cases can render them
unstable or lead to collapse.
The strength and stability of the wall will be increased through bonds, ties,
straps, buttress walls, and irregular profile (zigzags, offsets, chevron, fins, cross
ribs, etc.). Where the wall relies on such mechanisms, it is important to check that
they and their connections are still in place and can contribute to the stability of
the structure.
The materials selected for walls, when constructed and joined together, must
prove to be sufficiently robust and stable, having sufficient compressive and ten-
sile strength, with the required rigidity. When first designed and assembled, test
standards and safety factors will ensure that the materials are sufficiently strong
and robust to perform their function. Walls should easily be able to carry all loads
placed on them. A factor of safety will be included to allow for differences in the
designed loads and those encountered during operation. The safety factor will
accommodate minor differences in construction, material composition, and work-
manship. The addition of a factor of safety means that the actual operation loads
are substantially lower than those that would result in material failure under com-
pression and tension. The margin between expected operational stress and failure
stress allows for minor changes that occur during the building’s lifetime. However,
when surveying existing walls, it is essential to determine if the wall is sufficiently
stable and no discernible changes have taken place since construction that would
compromise safe operation of the wall.
Notable occurrences to consider when assessing the structural components and
materials of walls:
•• Timber – deterioration as a result of mould, insect infestation, wear, fire, water,
movement, or distortion (through wind, impact, or subsidence damage). If any
major changes have occurred structural experts should be consulted. Timber
will move as it naturally seasons and accommodates changes in temperature
and moisture. Checks should be made to ensure that any movement would not
impede performance. Obvious distortion and changes, evidenced by cupping,
bowing, checking, shakes (splits), and knots, should be considered when assess-
ing if the stability of the structure or wall has been compromised.

-- 36 of 391 --

26 	Form and construction
•• Brick, stone, and masonry – cracking within the brick or mortar, spalling,
delamination, and frost attack. Eff lorescence and related spalling, wall tie fail-
ure, sulphate attack, weathering, erosion, disintegration of joints and masonry.
Masonry moves as a result of heat, moisture, and to accommodate any move-
ment in the building. Over the years, it is expected that masonry will experi-
ence a degree of notable movement; however if the movement appears excessive
or fresh, further investigation may be required.
•• Steel – defects such as the protection (paint or other surface treatments) crack-
ing, resulting in corrosion; welding defects, stress cracking, fatigue failure, fret-
ting, erosion, creep, or any changes that suggest the structural component has
been compromised should be considered. In most cases, the deterioration of
steel and other metals will be obvious, but it is essential that further inves-
tigations are conducted, should any changes be noted. Where delamination
between steel reinforcement and concrete occurs, expert consultation may be
required to undertake structural stability tests on composite structure.
•• Concrete – although crazing, blistering, and dusting may be superficial and
easily repaired, cracking, delamination, concrete curling, eff lorescence, scaling,
and spalling may be evidence of more sinister problems. A structural survey
may be required when reinforcement has been exposed, or cracks are large or
in close proximity to structural members. Where large areas of concrete are
missing, the quality of concrete may be suspect and a further investigation is
required.
WALL CONSTRUCTION, THE POSITIONING
OF INSULATION AND CONDENSATION
The construction of walls has become quite complex, and many different forms of
wall can be found. Recently, the most notable change to walls is the level of ther-
mal insulation that is now found within the wall. Thermal insulation can be placed
on the external face of the wall, internally, or between the leaves of masonry.
Figure 2.8 indicates the risks of interstitial condensation in relation to the position
of the insulation.
Interstitial condensation is where the water droplets condensate behind the
insulation or within the wall. Where parts of the wall are colder than the rest,
there is an increased risk of condensation forming. Internally, air is usually warm
and moist, containing vaporised water droplets from cooking, washing, and human
activity. This moist air, which can penetrate through the wall, may come into con-
tact with building materials at lower temperatures; as it does the air temperature
lowers. Air can hold more water vapour at high temperatures and less at lower tem-
peratures. Moist air at lower temperatures is unable to retain the vaporised water; as
the volume of air contracts in size it becomes saturated and reaches what is known
as the dew point. Below the dew point, water droplets condense and dew can form

-- 37 of 391 --

27	2: Form and construction
Figure 2.8 Schematic showing the potential of interstitial condensation with thermal insulation
in different positions on different walls, without vapour barriers.
on the surface of materials. Thus, in the colder parts of the structures, moist air
gives up some of the water that it contains to the wall structure. If the moisture
forms within the internal side of a wall’s structure and mould grows, spores will be
released back into the building, creating unhealthy conditions. For this reason, it
is advisable that walls are designed so that the dew point occurs in the external leaf
of a cavity wall or more external extremes of solid walls.
Breather papers and vapour barriers are also be used to reduce the risk. Vapour
barriers are designed to prevent the passage of moisture; these can be plastic, foil
sheets, or foil-backed insulation. Breather papers are different; they are used to
allow the structure to breathe but do not allow moisture or moist air from inside
the structure to pass. Both breather paper and vapour barriers are used to resist the
penetration of moisture. However, services that puncture through the barrier will
allow moisture to cross unless they are effectively sealed.
Where insulation is placed on the external face of the wall or within the cavity,
the risk of condensation forming within the wall is moved to the external part of
the wall. This does not have the same effect on internal environments and pre-
sents a lower health risk to the occupants of the building. However, it can still be
detrimental to vulnerable timbers present in the wall. Moisture at any part of the
wall can cause discoloration, lead to mould growth, and be more prone to material

-- 38 of 391 --

28 	Form and construction
Figure 2.9 Schematic: risks of moisture accumulation and transfer in solid walls due to thermal
bridges.
degradation and frost attack. Figure 2.9 shows some of the areas where water and
water vapour accumulate.
Where the construction of the building or building features penetrate insula-
tion in solid walls, thermal bridges occur. A thermal bridge allows heat to f low
through the fabric more readily, by conduction. Where such penetrations occur,
this part of the structure will be colder during the winter and more prone to
condensation forming. Typical thermal bridges in solid walls occur at f loor junc-
tions, service penetrations, and at the ground f loor, wall, and foundation interface.
Characteristically, the external part of the wall retains greater levels of moisture
at the lower part of the wall. This occurs for a number of reasons. Rainwater hit-
ting the face of the wall naturally percolates down, building up at the base of the
wall. Dampness may rise from the ground due to pressure potential differences.
Typically, this does not extend beyond 1 m high, although particular conditions
may drive the moisture higher. The lower part of the wall can become saturated.
The wet part of the structure, due to the presence of moisture, can then become
colder, thus causing further condensation and moisture build-up. Reducing mois-
ture build-up in the lower part of the solid walls is difficult. Removing vegetation
and materials that shadow the lower parts of the wall can help to improve the wall’s
ability to shed moisture via evaporation. Where possible, insulation on the external
face of the wall below the ground can help reduce the thermal bridge.

-- 39 of 391 --

29	2: Form and construction
COMPARING DIFFERENT WALLS AND
THEIR THERMAL PROPERTIES
Figure 2.10 shows a cross-section diagram of a modern masonry wall, with insulation,
damp-proof courses, and weep holes, all of which work together to protect the inter-
nal environment of the building. The requirements for walls are constantly changing,
so it is important that designers and surveyors ensure that they are aware of the latest
regulations. When designing or upgrading walls, it is essential that building standards
and regulations are observed. The UK Building Regulations can be accessed and
downloaded from the Government planning portal (www.planningportal.gov.uk).
WALLS AND CONSERVATION OF ENERGY
The thermal properties of walls have become increasingly important with the need
to conserve energy and move to zero-carbon solutions. Depending on their mass
and thermal properties, walls help to store and resist the f low of heat energy. The
wall’s thermal storage property is called the wall’s thermal capacitance, and the
ability to resist the passage of heat is the wall’s thermal insulation. Such properties
can help to regulate temperatures, making the internal environment more com-
fortable, and help to contain heat energy within the building’s envelope. Thus,
walls are designed to resist the impact of temperature f luctuations resulting from
Internal environment conditioned
Weep hole above dpc
Any trapped water may
percolate through porous
masonry and not just the
weep hole
and heated space
External
Cavity tray directs water that
manages to get into the cavity
to the external wall and
through weep holes.
Vapour barrier - keeps water vapour on the
warm side of the construction and prevents
water entering into the internal structure
Load bearing strata
Concrete strip foundation
on load bearing strata
Trench blocks laid flat to
build-up wall levels
economically with all joints
fully filled
Well compacted hardcore
Structural concrete floor
Rigid insulation below cavity tray
reduces potential of thermal
bridging and provides some
restraint for the walls so that the
cavity does not collapse as a result
of soil pressure
Dpm
Figure 2.10 Typical detail of a modern masonry brick wall and floor junction.
Rigid insulation

-- 40 of 391 --

30 	Form and construction
Figure 2.11 Cavity masonry wall built to Passiv standards (adapted from Greenbuildingstore,
2013).
solar heat gain (from the sun’s short-wave radiation to the earth) and heat losses
(long-wave radiation losses from the earth and buildings to space).
Figure 2.11 shows a highly insulated masonry wall constructed to Passiv stand-
ards (see also Chapter 11, Glossary). Together with renewable energy sources and
highly insulated f loors, roofs, doors, and windows, zero-carbon and energy-plus
buildings can be constructed that are highly energy efficient.
While passive construction techniques serve to limit the transfer of heat through
thermal bridges, most traditional construction will have a number of heat-transfer
mechanisms that need to be considered. Heat energy is transferred between connect-
ing solid materials through conduction, and within cavities, voids, and connecting
gaps by convection. When adapting and upgrading buildings, care should be taken
so that the f low of heat energy, through connecting elements and ventilation paths,
is limited.
FOUNDATIONS
The foundation of a building sits below the ground level and is considered a sub-
structure element. As the interface between the building and ground, the foun-
dation is used to transfer the loads of the building safely to the ground (through
the strata) without undue and differential settlement. See Figure 2.12 showing a
schematic of foundations and building.
FUNCTIONAL REQUIREMENTS
The primary functional requirement of a foundation is to safely transmit the loads
of the building to the ground. The safe transmission of the load to the ground

-- 41 of 391 --

31	2: Form and construction
Figure 2.12 Schematic of foundations and building.
should take place without differential settlement or any settlement that could
adversely affect the neighbouring or surrounding buildings and structures.
Building foundations are required to:
•• Sustain and transfer dead and live loads.
•• Resist the movement of soils. They should be designed so that swelling, shrink-
age of cohesive soils, or expansion due to the freezing of water in clays does not
affect the stability of the building.
•• Remain durable, resisting attacks from salts and chemicals in the ground.
•• Additionally, foundations can also be designed to resist the passage of heat
transfer. As buildings become more energy efficient, the area around the foun-
dations is also designed to resist the f low and transfer of heat energy.
DIFFERENTIAL SETTLEMENT
Differential settlement may sometimes be referred to as relative settlement.
Generally, differential settlement is where parts of the foundation of a building
settle at different rates due to variations in load on the foundations or variations
in the subsoil, movement of the soil, or movement of the underlying strata due to
neighbouring loads.
The variations can cause distortion of the building and structure and damage.
While different and small magnitudes of settlement are expected, they should not
be so great that damage occurs. Where differential settlement has taken place,
damage or cracking may be seen in brick or blockwork, rigid infill panels, load-
bearing walls, concrete and rigid f loors, and finishes such as plaster and render, and
where the magnitude is substantial services may be affected.

-- 42 of 391 --

32 	Form and construction
SEASONAL VARIATION IN CLAY SOILS
During hot, dry periods, the ground dries and vegetation close to the building will
attempt to remove any remaining moisture. In clay soils as the moisture is lost from the
soil the clay dries and shrinks. In winter, wet seasons, and wet periods, clays become
saturated and swell, and can lift buildings. Where movement is not consistent across
the whole building, the building will suffer from cracks, as the structure is deformed.
Cracks due to seasonal movement can open and close during wet and dry peri-
ods; however, where dirt and debris from the building fill the crack, it is not pos-
sible for the crack to close. As the movement of the building continues, the cracks
can develop and in extreme cases render the building unstable.
Refer to Figure 2.13 which shows foundations transmitting the loads of the
building contending with natural ground conditions and forces caused by other
structures.
FOUNDATION TYPES
There are four main classifications of foundation, see Figure 2.14:
•• Strip foundations
•• Pad foundations
•• Raft foundations
•• Pile foundations
Figure 2.13 Foundations transmitting the loads of the building contending with natural ground
conditions and forces caused by other structures.

-- 43 of 391 --

33	2: Form and construction
Figure 2.14 Foundation types.
Although the foundation systems can be used in similar circumstances, each foun-
dation system is suited to certain types of buildings and ground conditions.
STRIP FOUNDATION
This type of foundation, in its standard form, is usually considered the most eco-
nomical foundation to use on good firm ground, under continuous loads, such
as masonry walls, where the loads placed on the building are relatively small.
Relatively low loads include domestic buildings, such as bungalows and houses and
small industrial buildings. As it is a single length of foundation, it is most suited to
loads that need continuous support, such as brick and block walls. Masonry walls
for houses, garden walls, and outhouses are typically mounted on strip foundations.
The loads from the structure typically are transferred down through the inner leaf
of the walls to the strip foundation.
Key attributes of strip foundations:
•• Economical form of foundation
•• Suitable where there are good load-bearing strata near to the surface
•• Transfers the loads from the walls, to the strip foundation, to higher level load-
bearing strata

-- 44 of 391 --

34 	Form and construction
Traditionally the strip foundation is formed of a standard concrete mix, with suf-
ficient concrete strength to transfer the loads without the need for any steel rein-
forcement. Where the ground is sufficiently stiff and of good bearing capacity,
offering a reasonable resistance to the forces imposed, an unreinforced concrete
strip foundation can be used.
The strip foundation provides a continuous, longitudinal solid platform of con-
crete; the level base is used to build on and transfer the loads to the load-bearing strata.
Where the conditions under the foundation vary or the loads are increased, it
may be necessary to extend the foundation deeper into the ground, to strata that
offer a more consistent and higher load-bearing capacity. As the depth increases,
the strata are often less prone to changes in moisture content, vegetation, and tree
routes that also affect moisture content and freezing. Such foundations that pen-
etrate deeper than standard strip foundations are termed deep strip or mass fill
foundations and can still be formed of unreinforced concrete.
To avoid changes in moisture content in clay soils (which are prone to expan-
sion and contraction), the depth of the foundation is normally recommended to
be at least 750 mm deep. The depth of foundation required does vary depending
on local conditions. Where the foundation rests on clay and the moisture content
suffers from seasonal variation, the clay will expand when wet and lift or push
the foundation, and when dry, the clay will shrink and cause the foundation to
settle. Seasonal movement is avoided by constructing the foundation at a suit-
able depth where seasonal variation is not experienced. See also Figure 2.15
showing schematic sections of deep strip, wide strip, reinforced pad and mass
fill foundations.
Alternatively, the width of the strip foundation can be increased to spread the
load and reduce the load per unit area placed on the ground. Such foundations are
termed wide strip foundations.
When the load-bearing ground is relatively consistent and the loads of the
building are high, the width of the foundation can be increased in order to reduce
Figure 2.15 Schematic sections of deep strip, wide strip, reinforced pad, and mass fill foundations.

-- 45 of 391 --

35	2: Form and construction
the load-bearing pressure per unit area placed on the ground. The width of the
foundation is increased where the bearing pressure of the soil is not quite sufficient
to take the loads when distributed across the traditional strip foundation. A wide
foundation is not a solution to use when building on non-load-bearing ground.
In order to increase the width of the strip foundation, it is necessary to reinforce
the foundation. This distributes the loads across the full width of the foundation.
The main reinforcement is positioned towards the base of the foundation and used
to withstand the tensile forces across the foundation.
PAD FOUNDATIONS
Pad foundations attempt to distribute the loads placed on them through a block of
material. They are often used to take a point load placed on the foundation and
disperse the loads over a wider area, reducing the load per unit area placed on the
ground. In good load-bearing strata they are economical. While they can be used
under small domestic buildings, to carry loads from ground beams, typically they
are used to support the columns and ground beams from skeleton-frame commer-
cial buildings, where the intensity of point loads from columns is high. Figures 2.14
and 2.15 show the schematics of a pad foundation. Note that the arrangements are
for illustration, and it is not common to find pad foundations used in such propor-
tions under domestic buildings.
Key attributes of pad foundation:
•• Economical form of foundation
•• Suitable where good load-bearing strata exist near to the surface
•• Transfers the loads to the pad, suitable for point loads, pad foundations posi-
tioned under columns, or where ground beams transfer loads to the pad and to
the load-bearing strata
Pad foundations are used to support and transfer point loads to the ground.
Typically, the point loads resting on the foundation are then distributed across the
width of the foundation and then to the ground, in a bulb of pressure, through the
strata (Figure 2.16). The type of load could be the bearing of a beam, masonry piers
(brick, concrete, or stone), or a steel column. Mass fill concrete pad foundations
are used where good load-bearing strata are found some distance below the surface
of the ground.
The foundations take the point loads placed on them and distribute the load
over a large surface area, reducing the load per unit area placed on the ground. The
concentrated load placed at the top of the foundation places the base of the founda-
tion in tension; the reinforcement resists the tensile forces and allows the load to be
distributed across the base of the foundation. Figure 2.16 shows loads transferred
from the wall to the foundation and then to the sub-strata.

-- 46 of 391 --

36 	Form and construction
Figure 2.16 Schematic showing loads transferred from the wall to the foundation and then to
the sub-strata.
Figure 2.17 Pad foundation with eccentric load.
COMBINED FOUNDATIONS
Pad foundations exist in many forms, shapes, and sizes, including simple, wide,
deep, and mass, as well as combinations of irregular shapes. The irregular-shaped
foundations are used to withstand and transfer different loads that can be offset
from the centre of the foundation. Thus, loads can be placed in eccentric posi-
tions on the foundation, Figure 2.17. The plan shape of the foundation can be

-- 47 of 391 --

37	2: Form and construction
wider at one end than the other, helping to further reduce stresses and loads under
the end of the foundation with the greater width. The loads can be offset or even
cantilevered, to avoid causing loads to be spread much beyond the curtilage of the
building; this can prevent the loads from one building burdening the ground under
neighbouring buildings or structures.
RAFT FOUNDATIONS
Figure 2.14 shows a schematic of a raft foundation.
Key attributes of raft foundations:
•• A more costly form of foundation, as the whole of the area under the building
is covered with concrete reinforced with steel.
•• Raft foundations are suitable for buildings of high loads or where the strata is
sufficiently strong to transfer loads directly.
•• Rather than directly transferring the loads, the reinforced concrete raft
foundations spread and distribute the loads over the whole plan area of the
building.
•• The composite concrete and steel platform transfers the loads from the walls,
columns, and f loors to the raft and distributes the loads, reducing the intensity
of the loads per unit area.
A raft foundation offers a continuous platform of concrete, normally of the same
size or larger than the plan area of the building. The concrete raft effectively
f loats on the ground by spreading the load over a large area, drastically reduc-
ing the loads per unit area. The considerable distribution of load, reducing the
load on the bearing strata, means that either greater loads can be placed on the
foundation, or a building can be founded on ground with strata of a more limited
bearing capacity.
Raft foundations come in many different forms, including:
•• Solid slab raft: continuous reinforced slab of concrete, normally spanning the
full plan area of the building or greater.
•• Beam and slab raft: reinforced concrete slab with beams or edge thickenings
to further strengthen the raft. Up-stand and down-stand beams can be used
around the edge of the raft, and where additional rigidity is required the beams
can cut across the raft in a grid formation.
•• Cellular raft (buoyant raft): where the beams in the raft become so deep
that upper and lower reinforced slabs can be used. The structure creates voids
between the two slabs, which help reduce the loads on the ground, creating a
buoyant structure. The upper and lower slabs, perimeter beams, and ribs run-
ning across the foundation make the structure ridged. Cellular rafts are suffi-
ciently suited to buildings with high loads.

-- 48 of 391 --

38 	Form and construction
PILE FOUNDATIONS
Figures 2.14 and 2.18 show schematics of pile foundations.
Key attributes of pile foundations:
•• Pile foundations offer a more costly form of foundation as special plant and
equipment are required to bore holes into the ground or drive piles down
through the strata.
•• Piles are suitable for buildings of high loads or where the strata near to the sur-
face of the ground are not sufficiently strong.
•• Rather than directly transferring the loads to the strata near the surface, the
loads are transferred down to strata at a lower level.
•• The loads are usually transferred from the walls and f loors to beams, which
carry the loads to the piles and down to the ground at a lower level. Some piles,
which rely on friction, transfer the loads along the shaft of the pile as well as at
the end of the pile. Other end-bearing piles transfer the loads directly to the end
of the pile, when the latter bears on load-bearing strata.
Pile foundations act as columns of material, which are driven or bored into the
ground. They work by either transferring the loads to the end (toe) of the pile
(end-bearing piles) or through the resistance experienced around the shaft of the
pile (friction piles) or can be a combination of both friction and end-bearing. End-
bearing piles are used where the strata are generally weak but where good load-
bearing strata are found at some distance below the ground. They are often used
Figure 2.18 End-bearing piles, friction piles, and pile caps and clusters of piles.

-- 49 of 391 --

39	2: Form and construction
where the ground has been built up or filled. Figure 2.18 shows end bearing piles,
friction piles, and pile caps and clusters of piles.
Where greater resistance is required, multiple or clusters of piles can be grouped
together under a pile cap. Piles may be used in combinations with other founda-
tions, helping to support and transfer loads from pad, strip, and raft foundations.
Where piles are clustered together, they are often formed in close groups that
allow pile caps to economically connect them together.
PLACING OF PILES
The way a pile is placed in the ground is often used to classify the pile. Displacement
piles are driven into the ground, forced under pressure (percussion driven or ham-
mered into the strata). The columns of steel, timber, or concrete displace the ground
as they are forced into the soil. The pile experiences resistance as it penetrates through
the strata and further resistance as it comes to rest on load-bearing strata.
In a replacement pile (Figure 2.19), the continuous f light auger continually
rotates, drawing the strata to the surface, and replacing the strata with concrete as
the auger is withdrawn, leaving a shaft of concrete.
Non-displacement piles excavate the strata by a grab, auger, or bore; as the strata
is removed it is replaced with a column of concrete or compressed stone. With non-
displacement piles, the toe of the pile can be enlarged by cutting away extra mate-
rial, providing a larger base to the foundation. Sometimes material at the base of
the foundation is driven and rammed into the toe of the excavation, again creating
a large and compacted plug that offers additional resistance at the end of the pile.
Figure 2.19 Piles: percussion driven and helical displacement piles, replacement piles.

-- 50 of 391 --

40 	Form and construction
Where non-displacement piles are cut through ground that is loose or un-
consolidated, the sides of the pile may be lined with a steel sleeve, tube, or casing to
prevent the sides of excavated shaft collapsing. As the concrete or stone is inserted
into the shaft, the steel sleeves can be removed, or if the ground is particularly poor,
the sleeve may be left in place to contain the pile.
Driven piles can be made of steel, concrete, or timber. Steel piles can be H, I,
square, or rectangular in section or have a helical thread. Precast concrete piles come
in different sections, often square or rectangle but can also be tubular; they are rein-
forced and capped with steel heads and toes, allowing the piles to be joined together.
Driven piles are forced into the ground until the “set” resistance of the pile is
reached. The set point is the amount of resistance that the pile needs to achieve. It
is determined by dropping a pile of a known weight, at a predetermined distance,
and measuring the distance the pile drops. Once the set point is reached, the ham-
mering of the pile can stop – as the required resistance is achieved.
Percussion piles, even the more quiet ones, are relatively noisy, cause vibration,
and are generally not used when neighbouring buildings have sensitive equipment.
Driven piles offer little friction resistance due to the way the soil or clay behaves as
the pile drives through the soil.
JACKED PILES
Jacked piles are used where space is restricted and the working area is tight. Where
a small pile jack can be inserted, or a small section of pile, then the pile can be
Figure 2.20 Vibro compaction (adapted from www.roger-bullivant.co.uk).

-- 51 of 391 --

41	2: Form and construction
Table 2.3 Methods of ground treatment
Method of ground
treatment
Description
Dynamic compaction 	Ground improved by dropping tampers (weights) that
dynamically compact the ground.
Used to improve the general ground condition.
By improving the strength of the ground, the cost associated
with foundations can be reduced.
Flat bottom tampers can be used, but it is more common to
use a range of shaped tampers that achieve different levels of
compaction at different depths. Modern plant use guides and
cables to raise and drop tampers.
Bearing capacities of 50–150 kN/m 2 can be achieved. Tamper
weight are normally between 10 and 12 tonnes.
To achieve consolidation multiple passes are used, compacting
the ground at different depths.
Vibro compaction 	Vibrating mandrels (vibrating shafts or rods) are used to
(vibro- displacement or 	penetrate into the strata, displacing the strata and compacting
vibro- replacement) 	the surrounding soil. When the mandrel is removed, the void
is filled with stone, the mandrel is inserted back into the stone
and the stone is forced into the surrounding strata – compacting
the ground and filling voids. As a guide, bearing capacities of
100–200 kN/m 2 on f lat ground and 100 kN/m 2 on sloping sites
can be achieved. For non-cohesive soils, the ground becomes
compacted on treatment; for cohesive soils the load is transferred
through the columns of soil, helping to better distribute the load
and making the performance of the ground more consistent.
Vibrof lotation 	Vibrof lotation adopts a similar process to that described by vibro
compaction, with the difference being that at the head of the
mandrel, and sometimes along the sides, water jets are used to
aid penetration. Due to the amount of water involved and the
mess created from wet arisings (i.e. waste, detritus) the process
is seldom used.
Pressure grouting 	Used in soils where there are small cavities, that benefit
from being filled with a cement slurry. A hole is bored into
the ground, grout is then fed under pressure, created by the
head height at which the cement grout is fed into the void.
Pressures of up to 70,000 N/mm 2 can be exerted by the grout
on the surrounding soil. Slurries are cementitious products
with additives, for example, micro-silica, pulverised fuel ash,
chemical grouts, cement, or a mixture of cement and the other
additives.
It is often the cheaper cementitious additives that are used,
such as PFA, which, while cost effective, improve the bearing
capacity of the ground. The ground becomes stiffer, more
consistent and stable, and water resistance is improved.
(continued)

-- 52 of 391 --

42 	Form and construction
Table 2.3 (continued)
Method of ground
treatment
Description
Soil modification and
recycling
Various systems are available for modifying and recycling
the existing strata. Generally, large truck-mounted rotating
wheels are used to cut into the soil and break the soil apart.
The pulverised soil is then captured in a mixing chamber
where cementitious materials are then fed into the soil. When
mixed, it can be fed back on to the ground where it is relaid
and compacted. The reconstituted material creates a hard stable
surface, which seals in contaminants as well as providing a stable
platform.
jacked, under hydraulic pressure, into the ground. Once the initial pile is inserted
into the ground, the jack is removed and the next section of pile is inserted. This
process continues until sufficient resistance is achieved.
GROUND STABILISATION
Different methods are used to improve the ground condition and stability. See
Table 2.3. Soils can be compacted from vertical loads and through material
forced laterally in the ground, injected with grout and mixed with other mate-
rials to create load-bearing strata. Some sites are improved so that plant can
simply operate on the ground; others are treated to significantly improve the
load-bearing strata, reducing the need for complicated and expensive founda-
tions systems.
HEAT TRANSFER THROUGH THE
FOUNDATION STRUCTURE
For zero-energy buildings, there is a need to ensure that the energy required in
the heating and cooling of a building is negligible. It is now common to provide a
highly insulted enclosure, limiting heat loss and gain. Thermally insulated founda-
tions are becoming more common with insulation products that have structural
properties used to transfer building loads.
Not insulating foundations can result in significant thermal bridges when the
property is highly insulated. Floors with U-values of less than 0.15 W/m2·K are
becoming more commonplace. A major consideration is that the loads transmit-
ted through structural f loors and foundations are considerable, whereas standard
rigid insulation is not designed, or required, to withstand high loads. Structural

-- 53 of 391 --

43	2: Form and construction
Figure 2.21 Structural insulation under the floor and thermal break around column above pile
cap and pile foundation.
cellular glass insulations that do not settle or creep under loads are suitable
for highly insulated f loors and foundations where a substantial load is trans-
ferred through the foundation. Load-bearing capacity of 2400 kN/m2 has been
achieved with some insulation materials (e.g., Foamglas (n.d.)). Such materials
are capable of transferring the loads of the f loors and buildings directly through
the insulation.
For example, Figure 2.21 shows structural insulation surrounding the col-
umn bearing on a pile cap, and providing a thermal break between the ground
f loor and the ground. Figure 2.22 details structural insulation used as part of the
basement raft foundation. The insulation can also be used under strip and raft
foundations.
As Passivhaus principles work on the basis that fabric U-values are less than 0.15
W/m2·K with the build-up of structural insulation, it is possible in these ways to
meet fabric requirements for nearly zero-energy buildings.

-- 54 of 391 --

44 	Form and construction
Figure 2.22 Thermal break under raft and around basement – Passivhaus fabric standard.
REFERENCES
BBC (2017a). Bridgewater Place lorry crush death referred to CPS by coroner. https://
www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-leeds-16986600
BBC (2017b). Bridgewater Place puts wings in place to block winds. https://www.bbc
.co.uk/news/uk-england-leeds-41608461
Foamglas (n.d.). https://www.foamglas.com/en-gb#
Ingrid Could (2018). Wind simulation on bridgewater place by ingrid could. YouTube.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4QpUcey0sU8
LABC (2015). Prevent party wall thermal bypass. Accessed from: https://www.labc.co.
uk/news/prevent-party-wall-thermal-bypass

-- 55 of 391 --

3
Legal and regulatory frameworks
Melanie Smith
This chapter is presented in eight sections:
Building works and regulation: meaning of works, and legislative documents
of control
Planning and historic buildings: planning permission, listing of historic prop-
erties, conservation areas and consents for works
Adjoining property and neighbourly matters: rights over land and property,
Party Walls, acoustics and noise control
Contracts
Landlord and Tenant: dilapidations, condition surveys, Decent Homes
Survey types
Health and safety: h&s in construction, CDM regulations, fire safety in occu-
pied buildings, due diligence surveys
Inclusivity: accessibility, Equality Act, Part M building regulations, fire safety and
accessibility, typical width requirements
Guidance, standards and codes: British, International and European, HSE
guidance, RICS codes and guidance
Although UK legislation is mainly used, if only for illustrative purposes, it has
been found that many countries use similar frameworks and have similar aims for
legislative devices.
BUILDING WORKS AND BUILDING REGULATION
Building works
Control of building works and refurbishment is held in the country’s legal systems.
Building surveyors working around the world must obviously be conversant with
the legislation in force in the country of work. There is a lot of overlap between the
legislation of differing countries – in meaning if not in wording – but compliance
with the legislation of the relevant country/dependency is required.

-- 56 of 391 --

46 	Legal and regulatory frameworks
In Great Britain, legislation is different for England and Wales, Scotland,
Northern Ireland, the Isle of Man, and each of the Channel Islands. For more
information, try:
United Kingdom: 	England and Wales: www.legislation.gov.uk/uksi
Scotland: www.legislation.gov.uk/ssi
Wales: www.legislation.gov.uk/browse/wales
Northern Ireland: www.legislation.gov.uk/browse/ni
The Isle of Man: 	Isle of Man Government: www.gov.im
Bailiwick of Jersey: 	The States of Jersey: www.gov.je
Bailiwick of Guernsey: 	The States of Guernsey: www.gov.gg
The States of Alderney: www.alderney.gov.gg
Sark Chief Pleas: www.gov.sark.gg
Building acts, regulations, and standards
Most building works are subject to building regulation. In England and Wales,
building works are defined in The Building Act, which is the primary, enabling
legislation under which secondary legislation (e.g. building regulations) is made. It
empowers the Secretary of State (for England and Wales) to make regulations for
the purposes of:
•• Health, safety, welfare, and convenience of persons in or about buildings
and of others who may be affected by buildings or matters connected with
buildings
•• Conservation of fuel and power
•• Preventing waste, undue consumption, misuse, or contamination of water
In Scotland, The Building (Scotland) Act is the equivalent primary legislation. It
focuses on:
•• Health and safety of buildings
•• Conservation of fuel and power within buildings
•• Sustainable development
The next legislative level is building regulations or standards, with the third level
in England and Wales of Approved Documents, etc., and in Scotland of Building
Standards Technical Handbooks, which provide guidance on achieving the stand-
ards set out in the building regulations of each country.
Example definitions of building work, for England and Wales and for Scotland,
are given in Table 3.1.

-- 57 of 391 --

47	3: Legal and regulatory frameworks
Table 3.1 Example definitions of building work
England and Wales (ref: Building
Regulations 2010)
Building work means:
•• The erection or extension of a building
•• The provision or extension of a service or
fitting (which is controlled by the regulations,
e.g. heating system, drains, windows) in or in
connection with a building
•• The material alteration of a building, or a
service or fitting (which is controlled by
the regulations, e.g. heating system, drains,
windows)
•• Work required by regulations relating to a
change of use (as set out in regulations 5 and 6)
•• The insertion of insulating material into the
cavity wall of a building
•• Work involving the underpinning of a
building
•• Work required by regulations relating to a
change of energy status (i.e. now coming
under the energy efficiency requirements of
the regulations when it did not before, e.g.
garage conversion)
•• Work required by regulations relating to
thermal elements (i.e. wall, f loor, or roof
separating a heated/cooled space from an
unheated/uncooled space, e.g. external wall)
•• Work required by regulations for
consequential improvements to energy
performance (for an existing building over
1000 m2)
A material alteration is if the work, or any part
of it, would at any stage result in the building,
service, or fitting:
(a) Not complying with a requirement (for
structure, fire, or disabled access) where
previously it did; or
(b) Which did not comply with a requirement
before the work commenced (for structure,
fire, or disabled access) being more
unsatisfactory in relation to that requirement
Scotland (ref: Building Standards
Technical Handbooks 2017)
A building means:
Any structure or erection (temporary
or permanent), other than: a structure or
erection consisting of, or ancillary to public
roads (including any bridge on which the road
is carried), private roads, sewers or water mains
vested in Scottish Water, aerodrome runways,
railway lines, large raised reservoirs, wires and
cables, their supports above ground, and other
apparatus used for telephonic or telegraphic
communication.
Any references to a building include
references to:
•• A prospective building
•• A part of the building, structure, or
erection
•• So much of the building as is
comprised in the extension or the
subject of the alteration or conversion
(for extensions, alterations or
conversions)
Work in relation to a building includes
work carried out in relation to the
enclosure and preparation of the site of
the building.
Further information including
exemptions is set out in The Building
(Scotland) Regulations 2004, especially
sections 2 and 5, and Schedules 2 and 3.

-- 58 of 391 --

48 	Legal and regulatory frameworks
Approved documents and Technical handbooks
Approved Documents (England and Wales) and Building Standards Technical
Handbooks (Scotland) set out to describe how to comply with the relevant build-
ing regulation. These set out the lowest acceptable standard.
Contravention of building regulations can lead to enforcement measures,
including taking down and replacement of inadequate works, and ultimately fines.
It is the regulation that must be complied with, not necessarily the guidance set
out in the approved document or technical handbook. If it can be shown that the
works meet the regulation in a different way, then this can be deemed acceptable,
but proof may be required.
The contents of both Approved Documents and Handbooks are comprehen-
sive and extensive and mostly cover the same aspects under differing headings.
See Table 3.2, Sections covered by Approved Documents and Scottish Technical
Handbooks. Similar comprehensive advice is provided by other countries.
Enforcement of building control is under two systems in England and Wales: local
authority or approved inspectors. There are three types of application:
•• Full Plans: the most thorough option. Decisions can be expected within two
months of submission. Consents for the works to start are issued when the plans
are considered in compliance. Completion certificates are received within eight
weeks of completion of the building work if in compliance.
•• Building Notice: only for smaller projects. Work can start two days after sub-
mission of the notice. The applicant does not receive formal approval.
•• Regularisation: retrospective approval for work already carried out without
consent – from a local authority only.
In Scotland, the Scottish local authorities act as verifiers. A building warrant is
required, giving legal permission to carry out building work, and the planned
building has to meet Scottish Building Standards.
PLANNING AND HISTORIC LISTING OR REGISTRATION
Planning
England, Scotland, Northern Ireland, and Wales each have their own primary
planning legislation. Each country has a planning system that is “plan-led”, mean-
ing that national and local planning policy is set out in formal development plans
which describe what developments should and should not get planning permission
and how land should be protected and seeks to ensure a balance between devel-
opment and environmental protection in the public interest. Decisions on indi-
vidual planning applications are made on the basis of these policies. Each country

-- 59 of 391 --

49	3: Legal and regulatory frameworks
Table 3.2 Sections covered by Approved Documents and Scottish Technical Handbooks
Approved Documents for England and Wales 	Building Standards Technical Handbooks:
•• Domestic buildings
•• Non-domestic buildings
Approved Document 	Contents in both handbooks
A Structure
B Fire safety:
•• B1 dwelling houses
•• B2 buildings other than dwelling houses
0. General
1. Structural
2. Fire
3. Environment
4. Safety
C Site preparation and resistance to
contaminates and moisture:
•• Approved Document C
•• Domestic Ventilation Compliance Guide
D Toxic substances
E Resistance to sound
F Ventilation
G Sanitation, hot water safety, and water
efficiency
H Drainage and waste disposal
J Combustion appliances and fuel storage
systems
K Protection from falling, collision, and
impact
L Conservation of fuel and power in:
•• L1A … new dwellings
•• L1B … existing dwellings
•• L2A … new buildings other than
dwellings
•• L2B … existing buildings other than
dwellings
M Access to and use of buildings:
•• M volume 1: Dwellings
•• M volume 2: Buildings other than
dwellings
P Electrical safety: Electrical safety, dwellings
Q Security in dwellings
R High-speed electronic communications
networks
7 Material and workmanship
5. Noise
6. Energy
7. Sustainability
App A Defined terms
App B List of standards and other publications

-- 60 of 391 --

50 	Legal and regulatory frameworks
defines types of development that are permitted without the need for a planning
application and defines “use classes” where change of use within a class is nor-
mally permitted. Each country operates an appeal system and enforcement systems.
Although the basic structures of the four systems are similar, there are differences
in the detail. The system for England will be used as an example.
Planning systems aim to ensure that the right development happens in the right
place at the right time, benefitting communities and the economy. These are obvi-
ously controversial in practice, as different people will have different opinions
about what is “right” and what is meant by “benefitting”.
In the UK, the planning system:
•• Identifies what development is needed and where
•• Identifies what areas need to be protected or enhanced
•• Ultimately assesses whether the proposed development is suitable
Key decision-makers in planning:
•• Local planning authorities
•• Councillors
•• Officers
•• Secretary of State for Communities and Local Government
•• Planning Inspectorate
Main legislation:
•• Town and Country Planning Act 1990, for England and Wales
•• Town and Country Planning (Scotland) Act 1997
•• Planning etc. (Scotland) Act 2006
•• Planning (Northern Ireland) Order 1991
•• Planning (Wales) Act 2015
•• Planning (Listed Building and Conservation Areas) Act 1990
•• Planning and Compensation Act 1991
•• Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 2004
•• Planning Act 2008
•• Localism Act 2011
The National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF) replaced the 44 no. Planning Policy
Guidance Notes (PPGs) and their Planning Policy Statements (PPSs). The NPPF sets
out the Government’s planning policies for England (only). It provides a framework

-- 61 of 391 --

51	3: Legal and regulatory frameworks
Table 3.3 Material consideration examples for planning
Overlooking 	Noise 	Disabled persons’ access
Loss of privacy 	Effect on listed building and 	Proposals in the development
Loss of light or 	conservation area 	plan
overshadowing 	Layout and density of 	Previous planning decisions
Parking 	building 	(including appeal decisions)
Highway safety 	Design, appearance, and 	Nature conservation
Traffic 	materials
Government policy
for locally prepared plans for housing and other development to be produced. It does
not contain specific policies for nationally significant infrastructure projects. These
are determined in accordance with the decision-making framework in the Planning
Act 2008 and relevant national policy statements for major infrastructure, as well as
any other matters that are relevant (which may include the NPPF). National policy
statements form part of the overall framework of national planning policy and may be
a material consideration in preparing plans and making decisions on planning applica-
tions. A material consideration is a matter that should be taken into account in decid-
ing a planning application or on an appeal against a planning decision. Examples are
listed in Table 3.3 Material consideration examples for planning.
NPPF is a material consideration of significant weight. It should be read alongside
the National Planning Practice Guidance (NPPG), a web-based resource bringing
together planning guidance on various topics.
NPPF key messages:
•• Planning is a plan-led system – local planning authorities must produce plans.
•• Retail tests – Town Centre First/sequential and impact tests.
•• Re-use of brownfield land.
•• Local planning authorities must maintain a five-year supply of housing sites.
•• Significant weight attached to supporting economic growth.
To gain planning permission for a project, an application is made to the local
authority, together with the fee. Different types of planning permission in England:
•• Outline: Application to establish if the principle of the application is accept-
able to the council. Gives permission for the development in principle without
detail.
•• Reserved matters: Following Outline consent, gives permission for the
detail required, i.e. for appearance, means of access, landscaping, layout, and

-- 62 of 391 --

52 	Legal and regulatory frameworks
scale. Application for reserved matters must be made within three years of the
Outline consent. Following consent for reserved matters, development must
occur within two years.
•• Full planning permission: Application provides all details to the council in
order to determine the application. Detailed planning permission. A decision
notice can contain conditions which must be discharged prior to a development
commencing. Valid for six years.
•• Listed building consent: Applications to make alterations, extensions, or
demolition to a listed building.
•• Advertisement consent: Permission to put up signs. Some signs do not need
permission; others do, e.g. in a conservation area, on a listed building, illumi-
nated signs, certain size.
•• Change of use: Application to change the use of a building or piece of land to
a different use class (e.g. pub Class A4 to shop Class A1). See Table 3.4 for Use
classes in England planning.
•• Lawful development certificates: application to prove to the council a
building has been in a certain use and is now lawful (normally happens after
enforcement action where the building does not have planning permission for
use).
Listed buildings
A “listed building” is a building, object, or structure judged to be of national
importance in terms of architectural or historic interest and included on the regis-
ter named the List of Buildings of Special Architectural or Historic Interest. The
list is compiled by the Department for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport (DCMS)
under the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990. British
Listed Buildings is the online database of listed buildings and structures.
Listing identifies a building’s special architectural and historic interest and
brings it under the protection of the planning system. English Heritage states
that the older a building is, and the fewer the surviving examples of its kind,
the more likely it is to be listed. The general principles are that all buildings
built before 1700 surviving in anything near their original condition are likely
to be listed, as are most buildings built between 1700 and 1850. Particularly
careful selection is required for buildings from the period after 1945. Buildings
less than 30 years old are not normally considered to be of special architectural
or historic interest because they have yet to stand the test of time. The descrip-
tions of a building and its special interest in the List are not definitive, however
long or short, and should not be treated as an exhaustive survey of features of
interest.

-- 63 of 391 --

53	3: Legal and regulatory frameworks
Table 3.4 Use classes in English planning
Part 	Use class 	Comment
Part A 	A1 Shops 	Shops, retail warehouses, hairdressers, undertakers, travel
and ticket agencies, post offices, pet shops, sandwich bars,
showrooms, domestic hire shops, dry cleaners, funeral
directors, and internet cafes.
A2 Financial
and professional
services
Financial services such as banks and building societies,
professional services (other than health and medical services),
and including estate and employment agencies. It does not
include betting offices or pay day loan shops – these are now
classed as “sui generis” uses (see below).
A3 Restaurants
and cafes
For the sale of food and drink for consumption on the premises
– restaurants, snack bars, and cafes.
A4 Drinking
establishments
Public houses, wine bars, or other drinking establishments
(but not nightclubs) including drinking establishments with
expanded food provision.
A5 Hot food
takeaways
For the sale of hot food for consumption off the premises.
Part B 	B1 Business
– offices
Offices (other than those that fall within A2), research
and development of products and processes, light industry
appropriate in a residential area.
B2 General
industrial
Use for industrial process other than one falling within class
B1 (excluding incineration purposes, chemical treatment or
landfill or hazardous waste).
B8 Storage or
distribution
This class includes open-air storage.
Part C 	C1 Hotels 	Hotels, boarding, and guest houses where no significant
element of care is provided (excludes hostels).
C2 Residential
institutions
Residential care homes, hospitals, nursing homes, boarding
schools, residential colleges, and training centres.
C2A Secure
residential
institution
Use for a provision of secure residential accommodation,
including use as a prison, young offenders’ institution,
detention centre, secure training centre, custody centre, short-
term holding centre, secure hospital, secure local authority
accommodation, or use as a military barracks.
C3 Dwelling
houses – this class
is formed of three
parts.
(continued)

-- 64 of 391 --

54 	Legal and regulatory frameworks
Table 3.4 (continued)
Part 	Use class 	Comment
C3(a) 	Use by a single person or a family (a couple whether married
or not, a person related to one another with members of
the family of one of the couple to be treated as members of
the family of the other), an employer and certain domestic
employees (such as an au pair, nanny, nurse, governess, servant,
chauffeur, gardener, secretary, and personal assistant), a carer
and the person receiving the care, and a foster parent and foster
child.
C3(b) 	Up to six people living together as a single household and
receiving care, e.g. supported housing schemes such as those
for people with learning disabilities or mental health problems.
C3(c) 	Allows for groups of people (up to six) living together as a
single household. This allows for those groupings that do not
fall within the C4 HMO definition but which fell within the
previous C3 use class, to be provided for, i.e. a small religious
community may fall into this section as could a homeowner
who is living with a lodger.
C4 Houses
in multiple
occupation
Small shared houses occupied by between three and six
unrelated individuals, as their only or main residence, who
share basic amenities such as a kitchen or bathroom.
Part D 	D1 Non-
residential
institutions
Clinics, health centres, crèches, day nurseries, day centres,
schools, art galleries (other than for sale or hire), museums,
libraries, halls, places of worship, church halls, law court.
Non-residential education and training centres.
D2 Assembly and
leisure
Cinemas, music and concert halls, bingo and dance halls (but
not night clubs), swimming baths, skating rinks, gymnasiums
or area for indoor or outdoor sports and recreations (except for
motor sports, or where firearms are used).
Sui
generis
Certain uses do
not fall within any
use class and are
considered “sui
generis”
Including: betting offices/shops, pay day loan shops, theatres,
larger houses in multiple occupation, hostels providing no
significant element of care, scrap yards. Petrol filling stations
and shops selling and/or displaying motor vehicles. Retail
warehouse clubs, nightclubs, launderettes, taxi businesses, and
casinos.
Different classifications of listed buildings are used in different parts of the United
Kingdom:
England and Wales: Grade I, Grade II*, and Grade II:
•• Grade I buildings are of exceptional interest; around 2.5% of listed buildings
are Grade I.
•• Grade II* buildings are particularly important buildings of more than special
interest; around 6% of listed buildings are Grade II*.

-- 65 of 391 --

55	3: Legal and regulatory frameworks
•• Grade II buildings are of special interest; around 91.5% of listed buildings are in
this class, and it is the most likely grade of listing for a home owner.
Scotland: Category A, Category B, and Category C:
•• Category A are buildings of national or international importance, either archi-
tectural or historic, or fine little-altered examples of some particular period,
style, or building type.
•• Category B are buildings of regional or more than local importance or major
examples of some particular period, style, or building type which may have
been altered.
•• Category C are buildings of local importance, lesser examples of any period,
style, or building type, as originally constructed or moderately altered; and
simple traditional buildings which group well with others in Categories A
and B.
Northern Ireland: Grade A, Grade B+, Grade B1, and Grade B2:
•• Grade A: Buildings of greatest importance to Northern Ireland including both
outstanding architectural set-pieces and the least altered examples of each rep-
resentative style, period, and grouping.
•• Grade B+: Buildings which might have merited Grade A status but for detract-
ing features such as an incomplete design, lower quality additions, or altera-
tions. Also included are buildings that because of exceptional features, interiors,
or environmental qualities are clearly above the general standard set by Grade B
buildings. A building may merit listing as Grade B+ where its historic impor-
tance is greater than a similar building listed as Grade B.
•• Grade B1 and B2: Buildings of local importance and good examples of a par-
ticular period or style. A degree of alteration or imperfection of design may be
acceptable.
Listed building consent
This form of planning control is intended to prevent the unrestricted demolition,
alteration, or extension of a listed building without the express consent of the local
planning authority or the Secretary of State. The controls apply to any works to a
listed building for its alteration or extension, which are likely to affect its character
as a building of special architectural or historical interest, or for its demolition. The
control does not depend upon whether the proposed activity constitutes develop-
ment; nor does it depend on the works normally attracting ordinary planning
control.

-- 66 of 391 --

56 	Legal and regulatory frameworks
Works being carried out on a listed building will need consultation with the
local authority and possibly an application under the Planning (Listed Building
and Conservation Areas) Act. The local planning authority must consult Historic
England and the National Amenity Societies on certain listed building consent
applications, for example, as shown in Table 3.5 Listed building consent consulta-
tion in England and Scotland.
And, additionally, for demolishing a listed building, or alteration of a listed
building which comprises or includes demolition of any part of that building, con-
sultation with the following relevant groups may be relevant:
•• The Society for the Protection of Ancient Buildings
•• The Ancient Monuments Society
•• The Council for British Archaeology
•• The Georgian Group
•• The Victorian Society
•• The Twentieth Century Society
Conservation areas
Conservation areas are designated in all the countries of the UK as well as the Isle
of Man and the Channel Islands. Legislation for conservation areas exists to man-
age and protect special architectural and historic interests of a place, that which
makes an area unique. Local planning authorities will have parts of their own area
that are of special architectural or historic interest, the character and appearance of
which it is desirable to preserve or enhance. Local planning authorities are required
to designate these areas as conservation areas.
According to Historic England, conservation area designation provides a basis
for planning policies whose objective is to conserve all aspects of character or
appearance, including landscape and public spaces, which define the area’s spe-
cial interest. It also introduces a general control over the demolition of unlisted
buildings.
Table 3.5 Listed building consent consultation in England and Scotland
England 	Scotland
Consultation to Historic England for
works to:
Consultation to Historic Environment
Scotland for works to:
Any Grade I or II* listed building 	A-listed or B-listed buildings and their settings
Any Grade II listed building demolitions 	A-listed, B-listed, and conservation area
demolitions

-- 67 of 391 --

57	3: Legal and regulatory frameworks
Works being carried out in a conservation area will need consultation with the
local authority and possibly an application under the Planning (Listed Building and
Conservation Areas) Act in England.
ADJOINING PROPERTY AND NEIGHBOURLY MATTERS
This section covers the following:
Rights over land and property
Party walls
Acoustics and noise control: Minimising noise transition
Rights over land and property
See Table 3.6 for various UK rights over land and property. Similar legislation may
exist in other countries.
PARTY WALLS
Party wall legislation started in London and then spread to the rest of England and
Wales in the 1990s. It aims to provide a framework for preventing and resolving
disputes in relation to party walls, boundary walls, and excavations near neigh-
bouring buildings. It involves informal agreements, formal legal notices, all rel-
evant parties (owners, occupiers, etc.). The Party Wall etc. Act gives a procedure
when carrying out work to party walls, boundary walls, party structures (such as
f loors), and excavations within 3 or 6 m of a neighbouring building or structure
(depending on the depth of the hole or of the proposed foundations). The Act
requires that notices of intentions to do these works need to be sent to adjoining
owners and sets out procedures in the event that an adjoining owner does not agree
to the proposed works.
What is a party wall?
•• Party walls stand on the land of two or more owners and either:
○○ Form part of a building.
○○ Do not form part of a building, such as a garden wall, termed party fence
wall. (Does not include wooden fences).
•• Walls on one owner’s land which are used by other owners (two or more) to
separate their buildings are also party walls.
•• Party structures: This could be a f loor or other structure that separates build-
ings or parts of buildings between different owners, e.g. f lats.

-- 68 of 391 --

58 	Legal and regulatory frameworks
Table 3.6 Rights over land and property
Occupier’s
liability
Occupier’s Liability
Acts 1957 and 1984
Governs relationship between a building occupier
and a lawful visitor, imposes private duties, and
clarifies common law rules that existed prior to
1957.
Occupier’s responsibility to ensure that visitors
to premises will be reasonably safe in using the
premises.
In practice this means displaying sufficient warning
signs, ensuring that premises are in safe repair, and,
where necessary, accompanying the visitor while
they remain on the premises.
In addition, any proprietor also owes a common
duty of care to those using or visiting their
premises.
s2(2) of the 1957 Act 	“… a duty to take such reasonable care as in all
defines a duty of care 	the circumstances of the case is reasonable to see
that the visitor will be reasonably safe in using the
premises for the purposes for which he is invited or
permitted by the occupier to be there…”
Defective 	The Defective 	Covers leased premises.
premises 	Premises Act 1972 	The landlord has a duty to protect all who might
reasonably be expected to be affected by defects in
the state of repair of the premises. Not only invited
visitors but extends, in a diminished form, to
include trespassers.
This legislation does not require the owner to take
stringent protective measures. In practice – display
prominent warnings and take no measures to inf lict
wilful harm on a trespasser.
Access to
neighbouring
land
Access to
Neighbouring Land
Act 1992
Courts have discretionary powers to order access for
certain works, e.g. basic preservation works, repairs,
decoration, drain clearance, care of trees, etc.
The order does not last – each necessary visit will
require separate authorisation.
Environmental 	Environmental 	Part 3 of the Act has a list of nuisances to which
protection 	Protection Act 1990 	abatement (reduction) procedures apply.
These include emission of fumes, smoke, dust,
smells, noise, accumulation of noxious waste
materials, keeping of animals in unsuitable places or
conditions, and any premises in such a state as to be
prejudicial to health or a nuisance.
(continued)

-- 69 of 391 --

59	3: Legal and regulatory frameworks
Table 3.6 (continued)
Rights of light 	A “right to light” is an easement that gives a
landowner the right to receive light through
defined apertures in buildings on his or her land.
Generally, people and buildings do not have a right
to light. Local planning authorities consider the
effect of new buildings upon existing structures,
but the planning system can give protection, not
rights. When planning permission is applied for,
evidence will be required of the effect it will have
upon the neighbouring properties, sometimes
including the light and other amenities that the
properties currently have. For residential property,
the BRE publication, “Site layout planning for
daylight and sunlight: a guide to good practice”
can be consulted. It is often expected that artificial
lighting will be used for commercial buildings.
The legislation affects:
•• Work on an existing wall or structure shared with another property
•• Excavating near a neighbouring building
•• Building a free-standing wall, or a wall of a building, up to or astride the
boundary with a neighbouring property
Party Wall Surveyors
Party Wall Surveyors are not required to be appointed, if the Building Owner can
inform the neighbours what is going in on and gain agreement. If the Building
Owner and Adjacent Owners cannot agree, the Building Owner must appoint
a surveyor. The Building Owner and Adjacent Owners can appoint a surveyor
together or each appoint their own. The Building Owner cannot act as his/her
own surveyor. The Building Owner pays for the two or more surveyors. The
Building Owner’s Party Wall Surveyor draws up the necessary Notices to serve on
the Adjoining Owners. The surveyors will then agree on a “Party Wall Award”. If
they cannot agree, an agreed Third Surveyor is appointed.
What does the Act Cover?
Section 1: New building on line of junction.
Section 2: Repair, etc., of party wall: rights of owner. Work on existing party walls

-- 70 of 391 --

60 	Legal and regulatory frameworks
Section 3: Party structure notices
Section 6: Adjacent excavation and construction. Excavation near neighbouring
buildings
Notices:
Line of Junction Notice: Section 1
Party Structure Notice: Section 2 and Section 3 for Notice
Adjacent Excavation Notice: Section 6
•• 3m Notice: Section 6(1)
•• 6m Notice: Section 6(2)
See Figure 3.1 for Notices in respect of works to a party wall or close to an adjacent
structure
The Party Wall Award
This is a legal document which says:
•• What work should happen
•• How and when it will be carried out
•• Who will pay for which part and how much will be paid (including surveyor’s fees)
Do˛ed line = Boundary line = Line of Junc on
Types of party wall
Line of Junc on No ce 	Party Structure No ce
3m No ce 	6m No ce
Clyde’s
oÿce
Bonnie’s
oÿce
Jesse’s
property
Frank’s
land
Sundance
Ltd
Cassidy
Ltd
Flat 1
Flat 3
Flat 2
Flat 4 	Party
structure
Up to 3m
Exis ng	Proposed
Adjoining
Owner
Building
Owner
Hatched area is below
the level of Adjoining
Owner’s exis ng
founda ons
Exis ng	Proposed
Building
Owner
Adjoining
Owner
45 o
Shaded area is
within 45o angle
from Adjoining
Owner’s exis ng
founda ons
Up to
6m
Figure 3.1 Notices in respect of works to a party wall or close to an adjacent structure.

-- 71 of 391 --

61	3: Legal and regulatory frameworks
Who should serve the Notices?
The legislation does not prevent a Building Owner from serving a Notice, but any
error contained in the Notice can render it invalid. Therefore, to avoid unneces-
sary delays and costs, Building Owners and Adjoining Owners should seek advice
from a Party Wall Surveyor experienced in dealing with party wall matters. See
Table 3.7 for periods of time relating to party wall Notices and Awards.
Party walls in Scotland
The proprietor of property must take into account the interest of his neighbours
for common structures. For a common dividing wall, either proprietor can object
to the other carrying out works which may be injurious to it.
In a tenement building, each f lat can be owned separately and the external wall
of each f lat is also owned by the f lat proprietor. Here, each proprietor has a com-
mon interest in the whole external wall and should not interfere with their own
wall in a manner that might damage the other properties.
Similarly, each proprietor owns their f loors and ceilings to the centre point of
the joists (unless specified differently). An owner must not cut into the joists or
otherwise weaken the structure in a way that damages their neighbour’s f loor/
ceiling.
Table 3.7 Periods of time relating to party wall Notices and Awards
Time factors
Adjoining Owner receives a notice under the Party
Wall Act
14 days to respond
They do not respond or appoint a surveyor within
this time period
Further 10 days’ notice to be served
Minimum period of notice for construction of a party
fence wall or boundary wall where the foundations
are to encroach on the Adjoining Owner’s land
1 month
Minimum period of notice for construction in
relation to Notices of Adjacent Excavation, i.e. 3 m
and 6 m Notices
1 month
Minimum periods of notice for repairs, demolition,
etc., to a party wall or party structure
2 months
Maximum time to the commencement of the works
following the serving of the initial notice
12 months

-- 72 of 391 --

62 	Legal and regulatory frameworks
The roof is owned by the proprietor of the top f loor f lat(s), but as the lower
storey proprietors have an interest in the roof being undamaged and watertight,
they may compel the top storey proprietor(s) to keep it in repair.
Feudal titles may contain conditions that override these common law
requirements.
ACOUSTICS AND NOISE CONTROL:
MINIMISING NOISE TRANSITION
Excess noise can be extremely disruptive and can impact mental health, and result in
hearing loss and cardiovascular disease. This is recognised by the creation of statute
and guidance to limit and control the passage of sound. Sound is caused by vibrations
that transmit through a medium and reach the ear or some other form of detecting
device. It is measured in loudness (decibels (dB)) and frequency (Hertz (Hz)). Sound
is transmitted in buildings by both airborne sound and structure-borne sound.
Impact sound is a form of structure-borne sound that occurs when an object
impacts on or vibrates against another object, resulting in the generation and trans-
mission of sound. Typical examples of an impact sound are footsteps on a f loor or
banging on a wall, resulting in sound being transmitted respectively through the
f loor or wall construction and heard in the space below or adjacent. Impact sound
can travel through solid structures and through cavities.
Airborne sound (or airborne noise) is sound that is transmitted through the air.
Typically, generated by speech, traffic, media devices, animals, e.g. dogs barking.
Air- and structure-borne sound can be considered separate phenomena; how-
ever airborne sound can cause an element of the building fabric to vibrate when
it comes into contact with a surface, and structural vibrations may radiate from a
surface, generating airborne sound.
Noise can be defined as any unwanted sound. Noise can be too loud or repeti-
tive. At certain decibels, it can be hazardous to health. Low-frequency noise can be
as damaging as loud noise. Noise accounts for most of the complaints that UK local
councils and the Environment Agency receive about environmental pollution and
is a major source of stress.
Excessive noise can be a “statutory nuisance” (covered by the Environmental
Protection Act) or a lack of compliance with building regulations. For the noise to
count as a statutory nuisance it must either:
•• Unreasonably and substantially interfere with the use or enjoyment of a home
or other premises
•• Injure health or be likely to injure health
Exposure to high levels of noise can lead to hearing loss, tinnitus, stress, anxiety,
high blood pressure, gastrointestinal problems, and chronic fatigue.

-- 73 of 391 --

63	3: Legal and regulatory frameworks
In England and Wales, Approved Document E of the Building Regulations
covers:
•• Protection against sound from other parts of the building and adjoining
buildings
•• Protection against sound within a dwelling house, etc.
•• Reverberation in common internal parts of buildings containing f lats or rooms
for residential purposes
•• Acoustic conditions in schools
Pre-completion testing, or other approved means, is required to show compliance.
The guidance includes the use of Robust Details. These are published details of high-
performance wall and f loor constructions with associated construction details, which
are expected to be sufficiently reliable not to need pre-completion testing. These can
be used for new adjoined dwellings but not for any conversions, home extensions, or
building refurbishments. Developers need to register with a scheme for the works.
Robust Details Limited is a non-profit distributing company that operates a Robust
Details certification scheme, financed by plot registration fees paid by users.
For workplaces, noise exposure is required to be a part of risk assessments. In the UK,
guidance is given by the Health and Safety Executive (HSE). The Control of Noise at
Work Regulations cover all industry sectors in Great Britain. The aim of these regu-
lations is to ensure that workers’ hearing is protected from excessive noise at their
place of work, which could cause them to lose their hearing or suffer from tinnitus.
For England, The National Planning Policy Framework, the Noise Policy
Statement for England (NPSE), and Planning Practice Guidance (Noise) (PPGN)
give guidance for noise limits and control. There may be similar 1st, 2nd or 3rd tier
legislation for other countries. The NPPF sets out the Government’s planning poli-
cies for England. It does not contain any specific noise policy or noise limits but
provides a framework for local authorities and people to produce their own local
and neighbourhood plans. In respect of health and quality of life, it requires that
local planning policies and decisions should aim to:
•• Avoid noise, which gives rise to significant adverse impacts as a result of new
development
•• Mitigate and reduce to a minimum other adverse impacts arising from noise
from new development
•• Not put unreasonable restrictions on the development of existing businesses
because of changes in nearby land uses since they were established
•• Identify and protect areas of tranquillity which have remained relatively undis-
turbed by noise and, thus, prized for their recreational or amenity value

-- 74 of 391 --

64 	Legal and regulatory frameworks
Defra and the World Health Organization use the following terms for noise
impact:
NOEL – no observed effect level. Current thinking is that below this level, there
is no detectable effect on human health and quality of life due to noise. No
specific measures for noise reduction are required at this level.
LOAEL – lowest observed adverse effect level. Adverse effects on health and qual-
ity of life can be detected above this level. Above this level noise should be
mitigated and reduced to a minimum.
SOAEL – significant observed adverse effect level. Significant adverse effects on
health and quality of life occur above this level. Such noise levels should be
avoided or prevented.
Choice of design and construction materials used for the building can limit noise
emissions and exposure. Poor detailing or poor standards of workmanship can
result in airborne sound transmitting directly between spaces, for example through
gaps around the edge of doors, and may result in f lanking sound, where sound trav-
els around a separating element, even though the element itself might provide very
good acoustic insulation. Even very small gaps can cause a significant increase in
the transmission of airborne sound. Problems can also occur where openings face
onto “noisy” spaces, e.g. a circulation space, road, or outdoor event space. If this
deters occupants from opening windows or using trickle vents, natural ventilation
can be affected.
There are four basic approaches to reducing sound in construction:
•• Distance: Increasing the distance between source and receiver; the greater the
distance, the quieter the noise sounds
•• Damping: Using damping structures such as sound baff les; dissipates vibrational
energy before it can build up and radiate as sound
•• Absorption: Using noise barriers to absorb the energy of the sound waves; trap-
ping the sound waves
•• Diffusion: Using noise barriers to ref lect the energy of the sound waves; scatters
sound in different directions
Simple noise control techniques include the use of damping material or sheets
incorporated into f loors. The efficiency falls off for thicker sheets. Above about
3 mm sheet thickness, it becomes increasingly difficult to achieve a substantial
noise reduction. Material for damping includes acoustic absorbent foam, min-
eral wool, fibreglass, and rubberised materials. The appropriate use of absorption
materials within the building can reduce or limit the effects of ref lected sound.
Specialist help is often advised.

-- 75 of 391 --

65	3: Legal and regulatory frameworks
CONTRACTS
Contracts made between parties do not have to be in writing. They are created by
an offer and an acceptance, and an intention to enter into a legally binding rela-
tionship, and some form of “payment” (e.g. money, action, inaction, or promise).
There are four key elements to a contract procedure:
Offer
Acceptance
Intent to create legal relations
Consideration
The payment does not necessarily have to be directly between the parties of a con-
tract – see Donoghue v. Stevenson [1932] “the snail in the bottle” – Duty of care.
A contract may be founded on a conversation or discussions over a period of
time. It can be implied from conduct. Surveyors who intend to enter into a con-
tractual relationship need to clarify their terms of engagement and scope of ser-
vice before entering into an oral contract. The RICS offers a Standard Form of
Consultant’s Appointment.
It is recommended that care is taken to avoid implying anything that is not
intended to be carried out (see Misrepresentation Act and Unfair Contract Terms
Act). In the absence of any contractual clause to the contrary, there is the com-
mon law implication that the surveyor’s work will be carried out with the skill and
care reasonably expected of a competent surveyor professing the particular skill
enacted. Negligence or breach of duty may otherwise be risked.
Instructions to conduct a building surveying service for the client should be
confirmed back in writing, immediately on receipt of the instruction. This written
confirmation should include:
•• The means by which the instruction was received (e.g. in person, by telephone,
by email)
•• The name of the person who received the instruction
•• The nature of the instruction received
•• The name of the person who will carry out the service
•• The date, time, and address at and/or about which the service will be conducted
•• The date by which the report will probably be issued
•• The cost of the service (plus or including VAT)
•• The scope of the service to be conducted
•• Specific exclusions from that scope
•• Any agreement required for additional services, e.g. requirement for a contrac-
tor to be present on site, for an articulated lift/aerial work platform, an m+e
contractor, etc.
•• The provision of the surveyor’s complaints procedure

-- 76 of 391 --

66 	Legal and regulatory frameworks
•• Requirements for surveyor expenses and/or disbursements
•• Dependent on the work and surveyor’s insurance company, required profes-
sional indemnity insurance (PII) clauses
Main types of construction contract:
Lump sum contracts: The contract sum is agreed before work starts on site.
The contractor agrees to carry out specified works for an agreed cost. Can be
employed with or without a detailed bill of quantities and drawings. Without
such detail, the risk to the contract is increased. Variations to the contract must
be separately priced to reduce risk.
Measurement contracts: The contract is assessed and re-measured as the
works progress on a formerly agreed basis. Usually involves approximate
bills of quantities and drawings. A number of permutations are possible with
JCT or ICE contract forms with or without approximate quantities. Such
contracts are not normally recommended for work which lasts in excess of
three years.
Cost reimbursement contracts: The contractor is reimbursed on the basis of
prime cost of labour, materials, and plant, with an agreed percentage added
to cover overheads and profit. One risk of this contract is that the project can
degenerate into slowness and inefficiency, and measures can be introduced into
the contract to deter this.
Design and build contracts: The contractor both designs and builds the project.
Can be awarded on a fixed price or lump sum basis, but cost certainty is then
dependent on not making any subsequent changes as these have the potential to
be expensive (because prices charged by the contractor for those changes will
not be subject to competition). Very important for the client to give intense
and detailed consideration to the employer’s requirements. Independent client
advisers may be recommended.
Management contract: Generally involves a management contractor managing
the works without undertaking any building works.
Letter of intent: Pre-construction services agreement. Work starts with a letter of
intent before a full contract has been agreed. Legal performance varies and may
not create a binding contract between parties, with unexpected results. Must be
well-drafted and precise – specialist advice recommended.
JCT contracts: The Joint Contracts Tribunal ( JCT) produces standard forms of
contract for construction, guidance notes, and other standard documentation for
the UK construction industry. The main contract forms include:
Building Contract for Home Owner/Occupier (where client deals directly with
the builder) (HOB)

-- 77 of 391 --

67	3: Legal and regulatory frameworks
Building Contract for Home Owner/Occupier (who has appointed a consultant)
(HOC)
Contract for Home Repairs and Maintenance (HO/RMI)
Design and Build Contract (DB)
Intermediate Form of Building Contract (IC or IFC)
Major Project Form (MP)
Management Contract (MC)
Minor Works Agreement (MW)
Standard Form of Building Contract (SBC)
NEC contracts: The New Engineering Contract (NEC) or NEC Engineering
and Construction Contract forms of contract for civil engineering and construc-
tion projects. Forms include:
Alliance Contract (ALC)
Design Build and Operate (DBO)
Dispute Resolution Services Contract (DRSC) – previously Adjudicator’s Contract
Engineering and Construction Contract (ECC)
Engineering and Construction Short Contract (ECSC)
Engineering and Construction Short Subcontract (ECSS)
Engineering and Construction Subcontract Contract (ECS)
Framework Contract (FC)
Professional Services Contract (PSC)
Professional Services Short Contract (PSSC)
Supply Contract/Short Supply Contract (SC/SSC)
Term Service Contract (TSC)
ICC contracts: The Infrastructure Conditions of Contract (ICC) are a suite
of related standard forms of contract for infrastructure works that cater for a
wide range of contracting strategies. The ICC are published by the Association
of Consultancy and Engineering (ACE) and the Civil Engineering Contractors
Association (CECA). The ICC replaced the ICE Conditions of Contract. The
ICC include:
Archaeological Investigation
Design and Construct
Ground Investigation
Measurement
Minor Works
Network Rail Measurement

-- 78 of 391 --

68 	Legal and regulatory frameworks
Partnering Addendum
Target Cost
Term
With Quantities
LANDLORD AND TENANT
This section covers:
Decent Homes
Dilapidations
DECENT HOMES
Dependent on the relevant country’s legislation, landlords and property owners
may have a duty to ensure that a residential property for lease/rent provides an
adequately safe and healthy environment. The Decent Homes Standard is a UK
technical standard for social (i.e. not private owner-occupied) housing. This sets
out minimum standards for council and housing association homes: To be free
from any hazard that poses a serious threat to occupants’ health or safety.
The standards are not prescriptive but tested by a risk assessment procedure
– the Housing Health and Safety Rating System (HHSRS). To be “decent”, a
dwelling should have no Category 1 hazards. Timely remedial action is required
for any Category 1 hazards (with exceptions for disproportional cost or disruption),
i.e. “trigger action”. Category 1 hazard: Serious and immediate risk to a person’s
health and safety. Category 2 hazard: Less serious or less urgent.
A Decent Home:
•• Meets the current statutory minimum standard for housing (i.e. no Category
1 hazards)
•• Is in a reasonable state of repair
•• Has reasonably modern facilities and services
•• Provides a reasonable degree of thermal comfort
There is a suite of associated documents available on the Gov.uk website which
expand on these, including, post-Grenfell Tower fire, guidance for the assess-
ment of high-rise residential buildings with cladding systems. The “Housing
Health and Safety Rating System Operating Guidance” gives guidance on the
risk assessment process. Twenty-nine hazard topics have been identified as shown
in Table 3.8.

-- 79 of 391 --

69	3: Legal and regulatory frameworks
Table 3.8 Residential 29 hazards identified in the UK “Housing Health and Safety Rating
System” for social housing
Hazards in housing
1 	Damp and mould growth
Includes dust mites, mould, fungal growth, damp, high humidity
2 	Excess cold
A healthy indoor temperature is 18°C to 21°C
3 	Excess heat (high indoor temperatures)
Dehydration, trauma, stroke, cardiovascular and respiratory issues
4 	Asbestos and MMF
5 	Biocides
Chemicals used to treat timber and mould growth
6 	Carbon monoxide and fuel combustion products
Excess levels of carbon monoxide, nitrogen dioxide, sulphur dioxide, smoke
7 	Lead
Risk of lead ingestion and inhalation
8 	Radiation
Radon gas and its daughters, primarily airborne but also radon dissolved in water
9 	Uncombusted fuel gas
Threat from fuel gas escaping into the atmosphere within a property
10 	Volatile organic compounds
Organic chemicals, including formaldehyde, gaseous at room temperature
11 	Crowding and space
12 	Entry by intruders
Security
13 	Lighting (inadequate natural or artificial light)
Eye strain, psychological effects associated with the view from the property
through glazing
14 	Noise
15 	Domestic hygiene, pests, and refuse
Poor design, layout, and construction, issues for cleaning and maintaining hygiene,
pests attraction, inadequate and unhygienic provision for storing household waste
16 	Food safety
Poor provision and facilities to store, prepare, and cook food
17 	Personal hygiene, sanitation, and drainage facilities
18 	Water supply
Quality of water supply for drinking household use such as cooking, washing, and
sanitation
(continued)

-- 80 of 391 --

70 	Legal and regulatory frameworks
Table 3.8 (continued)
Hazards in housing
19 	Falls associated with baths, shower, or similar facility
20 	Falls on the level surfaces
Floors, yards, paths, trip steps, thresholds, ramps where the change in level is less
than 300 mm
21 	Falls associated with stairs, steps, and ramps, internal and external, and
falls over guarding, balustrading, etc.
Change in levels greater than 300 mm
22 	Falls between levels
Falls from one level to another, inside or outside a dwelling, where the difference
is more than 300 mm. Including falls from balconies, landings, or out of windows
23 	Electrical hazards
Electric shock and electricity burns
24 	Fire
25 	Flames, hot surfaces, materials, liquids, and vapours
26 	Collision and entrapment
In architectural features (e.g. in doors and windows) and colliding with objects
such as windows, doors, and low ceilings
27 	Explosions
28 	Ergonomics
Physical strain associated with functional space and other features at the dwelling
29 	Structural collapse and falling elements
e.g. due to inadequate design, fixing, or disrepair or as a result of adverse weather
conditions
DILAPIDATIONS
“Dilapidations” is a part of the process of lease occupation of property. Dilapidations
is a specific area of law relating to breaches of a tenant’s lease obligations or cov-
enants. It is used for commercial leases, not residential. This section will discuss
the process pertinent to England and Wales. Dilapidations in Scotland, Republic of
Ireland, Northern Ireland and the Channel Islands are similar to those in England
and Wales with the same basic procedures, but some with interesting pitfalls. Other
countries, such as the USA, also use dilapidations.
Dilapidations are integral to any commercial lease, as they define tenant obli-
gations for the maintenance and repair of property. A dilapidations claim can be
made by the landlord against the tenant during or towards the end of a lease,
or after the lease has ended. The landlord’s claim document is usually called a

-- 81 of 391 --

71	3: Legal and regulatory frameworks
Schedule of Dilapidations. It contains references to breaches of the tenant’s lease
obligations, mainly relating to redecoration, repair and the reinstatement of any
physical alterations.
Dilapidations are breaches of lease covenants that relate to the condition of a
property during the term of the tenancy or when the lease ends. They are repairs
required during or at the end of a tenancy or lease – but only as stated in the lease.
Covenants are the promises/agreements made between landlord (lessor) and
tenant (lessee) when signing the lease. They comprise the clauses of the lease.
The purpose of the lease is to ensure that the lessor’s investment is not dimin-
ished by the action or default of the lessee.
Interest is how much the premises are worth to the person who has a legal right
to the place:
•• Landlord’s interest – the reversion
•• Tenant’s interest – the term
Both these interests have a value and can be sold on, creating other landlord and
tenant relationships.
Diminution in the value of the reversion means how much the property’s
value for the landlord has reduced (because of whatever) at the end of the lease.
A schedule of dilapidations is prepared by the landlord’s surveyor, scheduling
breaches of reinstatement, repair, decorations, and other legal compliance prom-
ises, outstanding from the lease covenants. It identifies the clauses of the lease that
have been breached, suggests appropriate remedial works, and, usually, the esti-
mated cost of those works.
There are three types of schedule of dilapidations:
•• Interim, issued during the course of the lease term
•• Terminal, issued during the last 3 years to 18 months of the lease
•• Final, issued after the expiry of the lease, but within a reasonable period
The RICS produces a Guidance Note for Dilapidations in England and Wales. This
advises Chartered Surveyors on producing Schedules of Dilapidations, Quantified
Demands, Responses, Scott Schedules, and Diminution Valuations. Alongside
this, they produce a template for the schedule of dilapidations.
There is a distinction between residential property and commercial in the UK.
There is also a difference in the law of property. There are many statutes covering
residential renting of buildings – what follows is just a few statutes concerning resi-
dential. Common law generally favours the landlords so statute generally redresses
the balance. Case law is the law made by cases brought to court where the judge
interprets the facts within the law and makes a judgement that may clarify the

-- 82 of 391 --

72 	Legal and regulatory frameworks
law. See Figure 3.2 for some of the main UK legislation relating to dilapidations.
Further information follows.
Law of Property Act 1925 allows landlords to give tenants a notice demanding
that they repair the building in accordance with the terms of the lease they signed.
Landlord and Tenant Act 1927 gives some protection to the tenant by limiting the
landlord’s claim for breaches at the end of the lease. Section 18 (s18) has two “limbs”. It
puts a cap on the landlord’s claim for damages for disrepair. Damages = a loss that the
landlord has suffered. If there is no loss, there cannot be a claim for damages.
First limb: the damages “shall in no case exceed the amount … by which the
value of the reversion … is diminished owing to breach”.
Second limb: “no damages shall be recovered … if … the premises, in what-
ever state of repair … would at … the termination of the lease … be pulled down,
or such structural alterations made therein as would render valueless the repairs
covered by the covenant”.
The landlord would not have suffered a loss, therefore no claim. This includes
the concept of supersession; i.e. a new tenant’s needs would supersede what is there.
Leasehold Property (Repairs) Act 1938 gives some protection to tenants of
residential properties with long leases in small houses against the enforcement of
repairing covenants in their lease.
This Act identifies the 5-stage test on whether the disrepair is “damaging” to
the landlord’s reversion. It builds on the diminution argument. It limits minor repairs
and little over-demanding claims unless these are of the “stitch in time” type.
The Landlord and Tenant Act 1954 extends the Leasehold Property (Repairs)
Act 1938 to every tenancy (residential or commercial) where the lease is for 7+
years, 3+ years of which remain.
In residential accommodation, the distinction between leases and licences is
important because the Rent Acts do not generally apply to licences.
The Defective Premises Act 1972 requires the landlord to keep the property
up to a certain standard.
Landlord and Tenant Act 1985 imposes a duty on the landlord to carry out cer-
tain repairs of residential property which have been let for a term of less than seven
years. It is mainly relevant for the landlord to maintain the premises (generally
structure and services) in repair and proper working order. This statute overrides
any covenant in a lease.

-- 83 of 391 --

73	3: Legal and regulatory frameworks
The Housing Act 1988 offers protection for assured tenancies. These tenants have
security of tenure. A licence cannot be an assured tenancy. The rules are complex,
and several types of tenancy (as well as licences) are excluded from this protection.
Landlord and Tenant (Covenants) Act 1995 relates to the assignment
of the lease to another tenant and the reversion requirements of the various
upper tenants.
The Housing Act 2004 relates to private-sector housing with vulnerable tenants
being better protected.
Dilapidations Protocol: Pre-Action Protocol for Claims for Damages in Relation
to the Physical State of Commercial Property at Termination of a Tenancy.This applies
to commercial property in England and Wales and relates to claims for damages for
dilapidations against tenants at the termination of a tenancy, i.e. terminal dilapidations
claims. It sets out conduct that the court normally expects the parties to follow prior
to commencement of legal proceedings. It establishes a reasonable process and timeta-
ble for the exchange of information relevant to a dispute, sets standards for the content
and quality of Dilapidations schedules and Quantified Demands, and the conduct of
pre-action negotiations.
TYPES OF SURVEY
Condition survey: A survey of the condition of a particular property at a par-
ticular point in time. A schedule of condition gives a list of each element etc in the
property or demise, their material and condition. Can be attached to and referred
to in other documents – for example, a lease.
Stock condition survey: The holder of a portfolio of property may want to
know the condition of that stock of property, e.g. for maintenance management or
estate management purposes. A schedule of condition can be drawn up to prepare
a stock condition survey. Uses include for social housing estates.
Residential condition survey: Used for a conventional house, f lat, or bungalow,
built from common building materials and in reasonable condition. Focuses purely
on the condition of the property by setting out the following:
•• Clear “traffic light” ratings of the condition of different parts of the building,
services, garage, and outbuildings, showing problems that may require varying
degrees of attention
•• A summary of the risks to the condition of the building
•• Advice on replacement parts guarantees, planning, and control matters for the
client’s legal advisers.

-- 84 of 391 --

74 	Legal and regulatory frameworks
Figure 3.2 Some of the main UK legislation relating to dilapidations.
See Figure 3.3 Traffic light system for condition surveys.
Commercial condition survey: A factual log of the building’s condition, not a
narrative description of defects, causes, and required action. Normally prepared for
legal or contractual reasons. Usually supported by sketches and photographs. For
a lease agreement, a photographic schedule of condition examines and details any
defects to the property or demise before the lease is signed. Can also be used with
a party wall agreement.
Other survey types:
Planned maintenance surveys and Quinquennial inspections: Quinquennial
inspections are undertaken every five years of, for example, ecclesiastical buildings,
in order to assess their condition and plan future maintenance. Planned preventa-
tive maintenance (PPM) surveys are an asset management tool, used to proactively
maintain, manage, and improve properties over a period of years. The traffic light
system can be used with the addition of noting whether the repairs are required in
zero, one, two, three, four, five, etc., years.
Compliance audits: These are to check that properties comply with specific
legislation, e.g. for fire, or health and safety. Note that it is extremely difficult to
prove compliance.
Measured surveys: Often done as a precursor to repairs or redevelopment or may
be required for record purposes. All areas are accurately measured and reproduced
onto scaled plans.
Residential surveys: The scope and depth of a residential survey depend on the
brief and the requirements of the client. The purpose of the survey must be clearly
defined at the briefing stage, through questioning of the client. Surveys are about
knowledge management, and it is essential to determine the knowledge the client
needs and wants to acquire. The survey can then be designed to ensure relevant
data is collected, processed, and presented.

-- 85 of 391 --

75	3: Legal and regulatory frameworks
Pre-acquisition survey: Reports on the current condition of the property, what
defects/issues are present, and remedial repair recommendations, which will assist
the prospective purchaser in respect to budgetary planning, etc.
Survey Schedules:
These form part of the reportage of the survey, and can form part of legal documents
(e.g. see “Dilapidations”). It is important that where guidance exists this is followed.
Schedule of repair: Includes approximate costings. Includes
•• All works considered necessary to bring the property to a reasonable standard
•• Any works that may be required to bring the property up to the current standards
•• Any enabling works (including, as relevant, scaffolding, waste disposal, storage,
highways works, and permissions) that are necessary to allow the feasibility
proposals to be undertaken
•• The pricing of each element using standard pricing documents
Schedule of condition: For the internal and external elements of the property.
Should record the condition of a property accurately and factually. Normally pre-
pared for legal or contractual purposes. Photographs are used to give a record to
ensure any property issues are clearly understood. Traffic light systems, as shown
in Figure 3.3, are frequently used.
Stock condition surveys: Surveys of large numbers of properties in a portfolio/
estate. Also known as asset condition surveys. Carried out on all building types
– institutional, commercial, residential. Commissioned for a range of purposes or
levels, e.g. strategic level (informing high-level asset policy and planning), opera-
tional level (detailed information on component, location, condition, and costs
provides a basis for maintenance plans and implementation). Multifaceted surveys
focusing on condition type, legal compliance, facilities, energy, and/or space uti-
lisation. Methods of data collection usually utilise internet (or similar) based tech-
nologies. Traffic light systems, as shown in Figure 3.3, are frequently used.
Figure 3.3 Traffic light system for condition surveys.

-- 86 of 391 --

76 	Legal and regulatory frameworks
HEALTH AND SAFETY
This section contains:
1. 	Health and safety
2. 	Construction (Design and Management) Regulations
3. 	Fire safety in occupied buildings
4. 	Due diligence surveys
1. HEALTH AND SAFETY
All activities in construction and the built environment involve health and
safety concerns to a greater or lesser extent. There are legislative issues and
guidance concerns. The RICS produces a guidance note on surveying safely.
It states that the appropriate management of health and safety is a requirement
for all RICS-regulated firms and RICS members, including property-related
businesses, practising throughout the world. The principles and practices in
the publication are useful for all surveyors and include corporate and personal
responsibilities.
Globalisation brings the expectation of common standards, and health and
safety legislation is mirrored world-wide. It was recently calculated that every 15
seconds a worker dies from a work-related accident or disease, and every 15 sec-
onds, 160 workers have work-related accidents. This is better than it used to be,
because health and safety legislation is becoming more mainstream.
Accidents can result from:
•• Tiredness, stress, or inattention
•• Faulty construction equipment
•• Defective products
•• Defective machines
•• Inadequate safety or equipment training
•• Negligence or recklessness
Accidents are very costly, and not all costs can be reimbursed through insurance.
See Figure 3.4 for hidden costs of accidents.
Wherever you work in the world, there is likely to be a similar legislative
framework:
•• A duty to plan for safety and health
•• Duties of employers and responsible people
•• Need for risk assessments and safe methods of work
•• Duties of us all to ensure safety for ourselves and others

-- 87 of 391 --

77	3: Legal and regulatory frameworks
Figure 3.4 Hidden costs of accidents.
2. CDM - CONSTRUCTION (DESIGN AND
MANAGEMENT) REGULATIONS
This is the UK version of legislation designed to protect employees who are carry-
ing out construction, maintenance, repairs, and demolition.
This is mirrored world-wide, for example:
In France, health and safety is governed by the French Labour Code and the French
Construction Code, which contain similar provisions as the CDM regs. In Russia,
health and safety on construction sites is governed by technical regulations, federal
laws, and health and safety codes, which set down requirements for the organisation
of the construction site, protective clothing and equipment, methods of construction,
etc. In Australia, the Commonwealth and each state and territory have legislation to
regulate occupational health and safety in each jurisdiction. The occupational health
and safety legislation in each jurisdiction imposes duties on employees, those working
at the workplace, and those who have sufficient control of the workplace to ensure the
health and safety of any person who might be affected by their actions. In Germany, the
Ordinance on Health and Safety on Construction Sites sets out the main requirements
with regard to health and safety on construction sites. In Italy, health and safety in rela-
tion to construction activities is regulated by Legislative Decree 81/2008 (Safety Law).
In Mauritius, the Occupational Safety and Health Act 2005 consolidates the legislation
on the safety, health, and welfare of employees at work.
The UK CDM regulations are regularly updated, with the current versions and
associated guidance available on the HSE website. See Table 3.9 for HSE state-
ments for the requirements of CDM.

-- 88 of 391 --

78 	Legal and regulatory frameworks
At the time of writing, duty holders for CDM are as set out in Table 3.10.
Summaries of the duties can be found on the HSE.gov.uk website.
If the work will last longer than 500 person days or 30 working days (with
more than 20 people working at the same time), it will need to be notified to HSE.
Under the CDM regs 2015, a construction phase plan is required for every
construction project.
Table 3.9 HSE statements for the requirements of CDM
For all roles in construction, CDM aims to improve health and safety in the
industry by requirements to:
Sensibly plan the work so the risks involved are managed from start to finish
Have the right people for the right job at the right time
Cooperate and coordinate individual work with others
Have the right information about the risks and how they are being managed
Communicate this information effectively to those who need to know
Consult and engage with workers about the risks and how they are being managed
Table 3.10 HSE guidance on duty holders and duties
Duty
holders
Comments 	Main duties
Client: 	Anyone who has construction work 	CDM 2015 does not usually require
Domestic 	carried out for them but not in
connection with any business. Usually
work done on their own home or the
home of a family member.
domestic clients to carry out client
duties as these normally pass to other
duty holders.
Client: 	Anyone who has construction 	To ensure their project is suitably
Commercial 	work carried out for them as part
of their business. This could be
an individual, partnership, or
company and includes property
developers and companies
managing domestic properties.
managed, ensuring the health and safety
of all who might be affected by the
work, including members of the public.
Designer 	Organisation or individual. Preparing
or modifying designs, drawings,
specifications, bills of quantity, or
design calculations.
Anyone who specifies and alters
designs as part of their work:
architects, surveyors, consulting
engineers, quantity surveyors,
tradespeople, etc.
To eliminate, reduce, or control
foreseeable risks that may arise during
construction work or in the use and
maintenance of the building once built.
(continued)

-- 89 of 391 --

79	3: Legal and regulatory frameworks
Table 3.10 (continued)
Duty
holders
Comments 	Main duties
Principal 	A designer appointed by the client 	To plan, manage, monitor, and coordinate
designer 	to control the pre-construction
phase on projects with more than
one contractor.
health and safety during the pre-
construction phase, when most design
work is carried out.
Identify and eliminate, or control, so far
as is reasonably practicable, foreseeable
risks to the health or safety of any relevant
person during build, maintenance,
cleaning, or occupying the building.
Assist the client in their duties.
Liaise with the principal contractor,
sharing relevant information.
Prepare and update the health and safety
file for projects involving more than one
contractor. If engagement finishes before
end of project, hand this over to principal
contractor.
Principal 	A contractor appointed by the 	To plan, manage, monitor, and coordinate
contractor 	client to manage the construction
phase on projects with more than
one contractor.
health and safety during this phase, when
all construction work takes place.
Draw up construction phase plan
during the pre-construction phase, and
before setting up a construction site.
Update and complete the health and
safety file, if the principal designer’s
engagement finishes before end of project.
Contractor 	An individual or business carrying
out construction work (e.g.
building, altering, maintaining, or
demolishing), manages such work,
or directly employs or engages
construction workers. Contractors
work under the control of the
principal contractor on projects
with more than one contractor.
To plan, manage, and monitor the work
under their control in a way that ensures
the health and safety of anyone it might
affect (including members of the public).
Worker 	An individual who actually carries
out the work (building, altering,
maintaining, or demolishing).
Plumbers, painters, electricians,
decorators, steel-erectors,
scaffolders, labourers, foremen,
charge-hands, etc. Workers must be
consulted on matters affecting their
health, safety, and welfare.
Cooperating with their employer and
other duty holders, reporting anything
they see that might endanger the health
and safety of themselves or others.

-- 90 of 391 --

80 	Legal and regulatory frameworks
3. FIRE SAFETY IN OCCUPIED BUILDINGS
The current legislative framework for fire safety considers that most fires are
preventable. It requires those responsible for workplaces and other buildings to
avoid fires by taking responsibility for and adopting the right behaviours and
procedures.
Employers, building owners, and/or occupiers (the responsible person(s)) must
carry out a regular fire safety risk assessment, keeping it relevant and current. Based
on the findings of this, the responsible person(s) must ensure that adequate and
appropriate fire safety measures are in place to minimise the risk of injury or loss
of life in the event of a fire.
The risk assessment should identify what could cause a fire to start, i.e. sources
of ignition, substances that burn, and the people who may be at risk.
Once the risks have been identified, appropriate action must be taken to con-
trol them by elimination, avoidance, risk reduction, risk management, and peo-
ple protection. Table 3.11 gives legislative guidance for fire safety in occupied
buildings.
Table 3.11 Legislative guidance for fire safety in occupied buildings
England and Wales:
The Regulatory
Reform (Fire Safety)
Order 2005
The Department for
Communities and
Local Government
(DCLG) website
Premises-specific guidance documents to help
meet responsibilities under the Regulatory
Reform (Fire Safety) Order 2005
UK Government 	Fire safety law and
guidance documents
for business
www.gov.uk/government/collections/fire-s
afety-law-and-guidance-documents-for-bus
iness
Scotland: Part 3 of
the Fire (Scotland)
Act 2005, supported
by the Fire
Safety (Scotland)
Regulations 2006
The Scottish
Government website
Information to help meet responsibilities under
the Fire (Scotland) Act 2005.
https://www2.gov.scot/Topics/Justice/pol
icies/police-fire-rescue/fire/FireLaw/SectorS
pecificGuidance
https://www2.gov.scot/Topics/Justice/pol
icies/police-fire-rescue/fire/FireLaw/General
Guidance
Great Britain 	HSE website 	Guidance on fire safety in the construction
industry
http://www.hse.gov.uk/toolbox/fire.htm
http://www.hse.gov.uk/construction/safet
ytopics/generalfire.htm

-- 91 of 391 --

81	3: Legal and regulatory frameworks
4. DUE DILIGENCE SURVEYS
Technical Due Diligence refers to the process by which building surveyors investi-
gate, analyse, and report on the physical characteristics, condition, and legal com-
pliance of a building and its essential services, usually prior to acquisition or lease.
Conventional condition surveys are often simple visual inspections, but TDD
involves more detailed investigations including functional assessment and perfor-
mance testing of the buildings and plant.
The survey appraises a commercial building for condition, risk management,
investment limitations and opportunities, sustainability, legislative compliance,
and building service installation systems. TDD surveys for larger or more com-
plex buildings can include a team of building services engineers, structural engi-
neers, f looding consultants, and environmental consultants, alongside the building
surveyors.
They usually include the following, dependent on the brief:
•• Building services (including heating, cooling, ventilation, building manage-
ment systems, automation, drainage)
•• External areas/buildings/boundaries
•• Health and safety matters
•• Fire precautions
•• Accessibility
•• Environmental matters
•• Deleterious and hazardous materials
•• Sustainability issues
•• Cultural heritage
The surveyor needs to have in place:
•• Adequate professional indemnity insurance
•• Third-party liability insurance
And be aware of:
•• Subrogation
•• Duty of care
•• Negligence
•• Contract and limitation
•• Civil procedure rules
Guidance is available in the RICS Guidance Note “Building surveys and technical
due diligence of commercial property”.

-- 92 of 391 --

82 	Legal and regulatory frameworks
INCLUSIVITY
The Equality Act
Many countries have anti-discriminatory laws. In the UK, anti-discriminatory law
has developed from domestic law, since 1965, coupled with European directives, since
2000. The current law, the Equality Act, legally protects people from discrimination
in the workplace and in wider society. It replaced previous anti-discrimination laws
such as the Disability Discrimination Act and Acts relating to race relation and sex
discrimination.The Equality Act forms part of the law of England and Wales, and the
law of Scotland (with the exception of Section 190 and Part 15), with a few provisions
forming part of the law of Northern Ireland (although equal opportunities and dis-
crimination are “transferred matters” under the Northern Ireland Act 1998). Express
provision is made for particular provisions (in a limited number of specific cases) to
apply outside the United Kingdom.
It sets out the different ways in which it is unlawful to treat someone.The char-
acteristics that are protected are age, disability, gender reassignment, marriage and
civil partnership, pregnancy and maternity, race, religion or belief, sex, and sexual
orientation.With the main provisions relating to building surveying given in bold, it
is unlawful:
•• To discriminate against, harass, or victimise a person when providing a service
(this includes the provision of goods or facilities) or when exercising a
public function
•• To discriminate against, harass, or victimise a person when disposing of (e.g.
selling or letting) or managing premises
•• To discriminate against, harass, or victimise a person at work or in employment
services (includes provisions regarding pay and any employers’ requirements for
divulging disabilities or health issues)
•• For education bodies to discriminate against, harass, or victimise a school pupil,
student, or applicant
•• For associations (e.g. private clubs, political organisations) to discriminate
against, harass, or victimise members, associates, or guests
The Act establishes a general duty on public authorities, when carrying out their
functions, to eliminate unlawful discrimination, harassment, or victimisation; to
advance equality of opportunity; and to foster good relations. It also contains pro-
visions enabling an employer, service provider, or other organisation to take posi-
tive action to overcome or minimise a disadvantage arising from people possessing
the protected characteristics. See Table 3.12 for human conditions (short-term,
long-term, or permanent) at risk of architectural disability.
Building surveyors provide a service to their clients (and are therefore required
to not discriminate, etc., in providing this service), and they also advise clients on

-- 93 of 391 --

83	3: Legal and regulatory frameworks
Table 3.12 Human conditions (short-term, long-term, or permanent) at risk of architec-
tural disability
Inclusivity – disabilities or people?
Traditional
disabilities
Hearing 	Physical coordination
Mental ability 	Sight
Mobility 	Manual dexterity
Speech 	Continence
Lifestyle
disabilities
Adult with a pram, pushchair,
and/or toddlers
Children
People smaller, larger, or taller
than average
Adult with large bags or cases
Knee or leg injuries 	Visual/balance disorders, e.g. due to
migraine, ear infection, alcohol, drugs, etc.
Finger, hand, or arm injuries 	Back injuries
Pregnancy 	Post-operation
Dyslexia/reading problems 	Digital inabilities
Later-life
disabilities
(and can occur
at any age)
Arthritis 	Mobility problems
Rheumatism 	Stiff joints
Poor hearing 	Manual dexterity problems
Sight problems 	Memory loss
Knees/ankles that won’t bend 	Excessive simultaneous information
their clients’ actions, activities, service provision, etc. A working knowledge of
inclusivity is therefore required.
Architecture shapes the choices about where and how to live, work, and play
throughout life. However, the built environment can disable anyone by poor design.
“Architectural disability” occurs when the physical design, layout, and construc-
tion of buildings and places confront people with hazards and barriers that make
the built environment inconvenient, uncomfortable, or unsafe for everyone to use
and even prevent some people from using it at all. On the other hand, “universal
design” relates to the design of products and environments to be usable by all people,
to the greatest extent possible, without the need for adaptation or specialised design.
See Figure 3.5 for Benktson’s Design Pyramid relating to inclusive design. The intent
of universal design is to simplify life for everyone by making products, communica-
tions, and the built environment more usable by as many people as possible at little or
no extra cost. Universal design should benefit people of all ages and abilities.

-- 94 of 391 --

84 	Legal and regulatory frameworks
Benktson’s Design Pyramid
Able bodied at the base,
people with reduced
capabilities in middle,
small numbers of
people with severe
impairments at top.
Attempt to counter
objections that ‘design
for all’ is an
unrealisable goal and
some people will
always be excluded.
Assumes that a product
designed for use by the
top layer will be
useable by everyone in
the layers below.
Distinguishes between
mainstream,
customised and tailored
buildings and products
Increasing Specificity Design
Severely
Impaired
Moderately
Impaired
Able-bodied
Increasing numbers of potential users
Figure 3.5 Benktzon’s Design Pyramid relating to inclusive design (source: Professor Julienne
Hanson of University College London (Hanson, 1994), adapted from Benktzon,
1993).
UK Building Regulation Part M requirements
Currently split into two parts: Volume 1 Dwellings, and Volume 2 Buildings other
than dwellings.
New dwellings are further split into three types: Visitable, Accessible and
adaptable, and Wheelchair user.
“Visitable dwelling”: Ordinary dwellings where anyone who uses a wheel-
chair would be able to visit (gain access to premises and a habitable room, use toilet,
etc.); people should be able to reach and access a building (implying regardless of
ability, etc.), and be able to access facilities in a building (switches, controls, toilets,
etc.). New houses should have an entrance-f loor toilet that is accessible to some
extent.
“Accessible and adaptable dwelling”: Includes the requirements of a visit-
able dwelling, and is additionally capable of being used by, or easily adapted in
the future to be suitable for, a wide range of occupants including older people,
those with reduced mobility, and some wheelchair users. It is broadly similar to
“Lifetime Homes”, developed by a group of housing experts, including Habinteg
and the Joseph Rowntree Foundation.

-- 95 of 391 --

85	3: Legal and regulatory frameworks
“Wheelchair user dwelling”: Specifically designed for a wheelchair occu-
pant. Access to internal and external spaces, use of all the facilities and rooms.
Volume 2 Buildings other than dwellings: Regardless of ability, people should
be able to gain access to, and access within, buildings and use their facilities, both as
visitors and as people who work in them. This applies to new buildings and to new
extensions of existing buildings. Some parts also apply when a building is altered and
if there is a change of use to a hotel, institution, public house, or shop.
If a building is to be extended and sanitary accommodation is provided in the
existing building, then the extended building must have accessible provision.
Fire safety and accessibility
Access must also include egress – especially in an emergency. Normal lifts are
not to be used as means of escape in a fire situation. Evacuation lifts are required,
but Part M and the Approved Documents do not insist on evacuation lifts. Refuges,
often used instead, are of no use for safety if good facilities for communication,
from and to the refuge, are not also provided. Surveyors will note that these facili-
ties are commonly omitted.
A small rectangle is often left at the top of the stairs (labelled “Refuge” on
plans) with no means for the wheelchair user to call for help or tell any managers
of the building or fire rescue team that they are there and which f loor they are on.
Other means of escape designs provide such things as an “evac chair” or sledge – of
little use if there is no one with the wheelchair user who is capable of transporting
the wheelchair user in this down the stairs.
Current guidance for lifts includes DD CEN/TS 81-76:2011 “Safety rules for
the construction and installation of lifts. Particular applications for passengers and
goods passenger lifts. Evacuation of disabled persons using lifts”. A related publi-
cation is BS EN 81-76, “Safety rules for the construction and installation of lifts.
Particular applications for passengers and goods passenger lifts. Part 76. Evacuation
of persons with disabilities using lifts”, published 2019.
Some dimensions
Anthropometric measurements have been provided in various publications to show
the general space requirements that people have. Table 3.13 gives typical measure-
ments required width of space, for example of a route, are taken from empirical
research.
All of these figures are dependent on the size of the person, the size or shape
of any aid they may use, and whether or not they require the presence of another
person beside them, adult or child, or a dog.

-- 96 of 391 --

86 	Legal and regulatory frameworks
Table 3.13 Typical width measurements
Typical minimum widths (and other measurements)
One person walking 	0.55 m
A person using a stick 	0.85 m
A child 	0.5 m
One person pushing a pushchair 	0.7 m
One person pushing a double buggy 	1.0 m
One person pushing a buggy with a small child alongside 	1.2 m
One person pushing a double buggy with a child alongside 	1.5 m
One person using a wheelchair, or one person pushing another
in a wheelchair
0.85 m
One person in a wheelchair with a small child alongside 	1.5 m
One person with crutches 	1.2 m
One blind person with a cane (making sweeping movements) 	1.2 m
One person in an electric wheelchair 	0.8 m
Typical wheelchair size 	0.7 m wide × 1.05 m long
Typical larger wheelchair size 	1.15 m wide × 1.9 m long
Typical baby buggy 	0.75 m wide × 0.81 m long
Typical mobility scooters:
Small
Medium
Large
0.5 m wide × 1.08 m long
0.59 m wide × 1.22 m long
0.65 m wide × 1.45 m long
When people pass each other, they require the above dimensions plus approxi-
mately an additional 100 mm. For example, a person with a stick passing a person
using a wheelchair would need 0.85 m plus 0.85 m plus 0.1 m, or 1.8 m.
More space will be required for manoeuvring, turning, using the facilities, etc.
REFERENCES
Benktzon, M. (1993). Designing for our future selves: the Swedish experience, Applied
Ergonomics, Vol. 24, No. 1, pp. 19–27.
Hanson, J. (2004). The inclusive city: delivering a more accessible urban environment
through inclusive design. In: Proceedings RICS Cobra 2004 International Construction
Conference: Responding to Change. York, UK.

-- 97 of 391 --

87	3: Legal and regulatory frameworks
GUIDANCE, STANDARDS AND CODES
Most guidance is not prescriptive and not mandatory. For example, Approved
Documents are only guidance for complying with the much more limited word-
ing of the individual building regulations. However, the status, authors, and
level of agreement for some publishers mean that their standards are regarded
as base lines for acceptable practice. Therefore, non-compliance with standards
can lead to accusations of negligence, and robust arguments will be needed as
to why the course of action taken was as good as the published standard in the
circumstances.
British, International, and European standards
Standards exist at many levels including:
•• International standards, e.g. prefixed by “ISO” for international and “EN” for
European
•• National standards, e.g. prefixed by “BS” for British standards
•• Industrial/sector, e.g. RICS guidance notes and Codes of Practice
Standards are defined by the British Standards Institution (BSI) as “an agreed,
repeatable way of doing something”. Normally the use of standards is voluntary,
and they do not impose legal responsibilities. However, in some cases legislation, or
for example Approved Documents, may use a specific standard, effectively giving
it quasi-legal force as an accepted benchmark.
BSI is the UK’s national standards body, publishing all national, European, and
many international standards. Standards can be double prefixed, for example “BS
EN” where a standard is harmonised for both the EU and the UK.
Standards are also available from databases such as NBS and Construction
Information Service.
HSE guidance
The HSE is the UK government agency “responsible for the encouragement, regu-
lation and enforcement of workplace health, safety and welfare, and for research
into occupational risks in Great Britain”. It is an independent regulator and believes
“everyone has the right to come home safe and well from their job” and aims to
prevent work-related death, injury, and ill health.
The website http://www.hse.gov.uk is an excellent source of material and guidance.

-- 98 of 391 --

88 	Legal and regulatory frameworks
RICS codes, guidance etc.
For Chartered Surveyors, the RICS sets standards for professional members act-
ing world-wide, and for RICS-regulated firms to follow when conducting their
work. These are upheld by the profession through a system of independently led
regulation.
Standards of conduct applying to all professional members and RICS-regulated
firms include competence, ethical conduct, service standards, and consumer
protection.
Sector standards relate primarily to technical competence and ethical conduct. The
RICS Building Surveying sector publishes standards for residential and commer-
cial surveys, dilapidations, party walls, and safety. Table 3.14 gives RICS publica-
tion status, relative to RICS member Surveyors.
Table 3.14 RICS publication status relative to their member Chartered Surveyors
Status of RICS publications for RICS members
Rules of Conduct 	Mandatory
Professional Statement 	Mandatory
Practice Statement 	Mandatory
Guidance Note 	Areas of good practice and recommendations for professional advice.
Not mandatory but could be used by a court as accepted practice
Code of Practice 	Mandatory or good practice – will be defined in the specific
publication
Information paper 	Information and/or explanation

-- 99 of 391 --

4
Building pathology
Melanie Smith and B. N. West
INTRODUCTION
Pathology: a systematic study of diseases to understand causes, manifestations, and
treatments. Applied to buildings – a study of defects, why they arise, what the
symptoms are, and what can be done to rectify/ameliorate/reduce, etc.
Three main aspects to building pathology are shown in Figure 4.1.
There is a holistic approach to this. Building pathology requires you to look
at the whole building – to study it as a system, and understand how it operates in
the wider world. Coupled with this is the requirement for essential underpinning
knowledge – building surveyors must know how buildings are designed, con-
structed, used, and adapted; what they are made from, and how these materials are
affected by other factors.
TRADITIONAL AND MODERN CONSTRUCTION
The surveyor needs to consider the whole building, because it is not just about
individual components but also about how they interact and how the building
interacts with its occupiers and the environment. See Table 4.1, Architectural peri-
ods (England), typical features and problems.
The Victorians built in durability through craftsmanship, and an extravagant
use of high-quality materials. The technology was simple: a pitched roof to throw
off the water, durable materials such as slate and stone, compatible materials that
allowed the building to breathe and f lex. Durability is compromised through the
deleterious effect of industry and pollution. Acids and pollutants in the air cause a
degree of deterioration of materials.
Buildings begin to deteriorate from the moment they are constructed. The contin-
ual exposure to damaging factors such as weathering and pollutants leads to the break-
down of systems and materials. It can be argued that ultimately all building defects stem
from materials’ entropy. An understanding of building materials is thus fundamental to
an understanding of building defects and consequently building pathology.

-- 100 of 391 --

90 	Building pathology
Figure 4.1 Main aspects of building pathology.
Traditional and modern construction are designed and built to meet differ-
ent standards of performance and behave differently, particularly in relation to
moisture and thermal movements. See Table 4.2 Victorian, Post-war, Modern
construction.
Traditional – uses natural materials and on-site manufacture. Buildings move
and f lex. Vapour permeable.
Modern – use of impermeable materials, often prefabricated, using structural
frames, modular components, and precision. Movement is designed out. Vapour
closed.
Precision and refined tolerances are the norm in modern construction where com-
ponents are often prefabricated, using very fine tolerances. Compare that to old
buildings where timbers and masonry were trimmed and shaped on site – e.g.
rubbed brick arches, etc.
Table 4.1 Architectural periods (England), typical features, and problems
Named
period
Approximate
dates AD/CE
Typical characteristics/features of extant
buildings/parts of buildings
Roman 	Pre-410 	Stone, brickwork. Likely to be Listed.
Anglo-Saxon 	410–1066 	Ashlar masonry. Reuse of Roman bricks. Likely to be
Listed.
Romanesque 	500–1200 	Heavy, stocky, squat, round arches. Likely to be Listed.
Norman 	1066–1150 	Stonework. Likely to be Listed.
Medieval 	1066–1485 	Timber framed. Wattle and daub. Jettied construction.
Likely to be Listed.
In urban locations, early timber-framed buildings lie behind
later brick facades to ape Georgian or Victorian buildings.
(continued)

-- 101 of 391 --

91	4: Building pathology
Table 4.1 (continued)
Named
period
Approximate
dates AD/CE
Typical characteristics/features of extant
buildings/parts of buildings
Gothic 	1100–1450 	Pointed arches. Mainly ecclesiastical buildings.
Tudor
Elizabethan
1480–1600
1550–1600
Timber, stone, or brick. Brickmaking introduced –
handmade, narrow, non-standard bricks. Timber frame
with separate infill. Brickwork including brick panels.
Elaborate chimneys. Likely to be Listed. Walls not plumb
and vary in construction. Porous brickwork, eroding stone,
disintegrating cob. Woodworm in timbers, including
deathwatch and weevil, and fungal attack. Damp f loors –
necessary to protect the walls.
Jacobean
Stuart
1600–1625
1625–1720
Internal timber panelling and plasterwork. More extensive
use of brickwork due to birth of the Building Acts.
Standardised thicknesses of brickwork (stability) and heights
of windows (ventilation).
Rural properties of indigenous material and underlying
geology: cob in the south-west; timber-framing in
Hereford, Worcester, Shropshire, Cheshire; pargetting
covering timber frames and infills in south-east; tile-
hanging and weatherboarding in Kent, Essex, Sussex; ashlar
in Bath; stone or slate in West Yorkshire, Cumbria, Wales,
Somerset, Lancashire, Scotland, etc.; f lint in Norfolk,
Suffolk, Hertfordshire; terracotta in Essex.
Baroque 	1600–1830 	Extravagant decoration.
Rococo 	1650–1790 	White, graceful, classical, sweeping curves.
William and
Mary Queen
Anne
1690–1702
1702–1714
Dutch gables. Double-hipped roofs with gabled dormers.
London party walls to be 18 inch thick at basements and
ground levels, 13½ inch thick upper storeys, and extend 18
inches above the roof. Dwelling houses plain, functional,
well-proportioned.
Palladian 	1715–1770 	Classical forms. Cheap brick and stucco. London party wall
thicknesses increased.
(continued)

-- 102 of 391 --

92 	Building pathology
Table 4.1 (continued)
Named
period
Approximate
dates AD/CE
Typical characteristics/features of extant
buildings/parts of buildings
Georgian 	1714–1837 	Symmetry, elegant, classic features. Lack of detailed
Regency 	1800–1830 	ornamentation. Repetitively designed, terraced properties,
George IV 	1830–1837 	and streets increasing. “Solid” brick walls (may be two
skins of stretchers and snapped headers butted together).
Bonding timbers and supporting timber struts in internal
leaf. Brickwork faced with stucco, finished to resemble stone.
Neoclassical and Greek revival inf luences. Absence of physical
damp-proof courses – good ventilation and breathable
construction materials ensured minimum internal moisture
levels. Parapet gutter blockages with resultant damp ingress
common. Alterations resulting in dampness, inadequate
ventilation, wood-boring insects, fungal timber rot.
Victorian 	1837–1901 	Industrial age. Terraced/back-to-back streets. 225 mm
“solid” brick walls. Bonding timbers and timber internal
lintels – at risk due to interstitial condensation. Dark
interiors. External façade decorative features. Arrival
of factory-made bricks, uniform building materials,
construction practices and designs. High-density, cheap
housing clustered around centres of production (collieries,
mills, factories) with lack of original sanitation. Iron and
steel frame construction for commercial buildings.
Late Victorian: emergence of semi-detached villas. Terraced
properties structurally sound, standardised designs, with
ventilation, drainage, lighting, and water supply. Narrow
irregular cavity walls introduced. Slate dpcs introduced.
Air-bricks introduced.
Alterations resulting in dampness, inadequate ventilation,
wood-boring insects, fungal timber rot, failing rainwater
goods.
Arts and
Crafts
1860–1914 	Display of simplistic hand-craft forms and details. Half-
timbering and tile-hanging. Idealised cottage styles.
Art Nouveau 	1890–1914 	Asymmetrical shapes, arches, curves.
Edwardian 	1901–1918 	Site concrete and damp-proof course more normal
(bitumen, slate, asphalt, hessian). Garden villages and cities,
e.g. Bourneville, Letchworth, New Earswick, Port Sunlight.
Alterations resulting in dampness, inadequate ventilation,
wood-boring insects, fungal timber rot, failing rainwater
goods.
(continued)

-- 103 of 391 --

93	4: Building pathology
Table 4.1 (continued)
Named
period
Approximate
dates AD/CE
Typical characteristics/features of extant
buildings/parts of buildings
Inter-war 	1919–1944 	Includes Art Deco. Low-density residential planning. Semi-
detached and detached. Bay windows (half-brick thick on
shallow foundations). Two rows of blue engineering bricks
for damp proofing. From around 1930, cement mortar
(strong, not breathable) became more popular than lime
mortar (f lexible, breathable). Wall-tie corrosion. Bridged
dpcs and underf loor ventilation.
Brutalist 	1940– 	Exposed concrete. Functionalist blocks of concrete/steel.
Lack of decorative facades.
Early
post-war
1945–1964 	Cavity walls. Semi-detached, three-bedroom estates of
smaller size than inter-war. High-rise concrete buildings.
Materials efficiently used to create functional, uniform
living spaces. Two-course engineering bricks for damp
proofing make way for bitumen-impregnated dpcs. System
build mass residential estates, various types based on
pre-fabs, no-fines, precast, and in-situ concrete, timber,
steel, and cast iron construction. Some types regarded
as intrinsically defective e.g.: Airey, Arcon steel, BISF,
Boot, Boswell, Cornish Unit, Dorran, Dyke, Gregory,
Hamish Cross, Myton, Newland, Orlit, Parkinson Frame,
Reema Hollow panel, Schindler and Hawksley SGS, Stent,
Stonecrete, Stour, Tarran, Underdown, Unity and Butterley,
Waller, Wates, Wessex, Winget, Woolaway.
Varying problems – thermal insulation, noise insulation,
condensation, failure of external cladding and structural
components. Deteriorated dpcs, f loor slab settlement, lack
of dpm, deteriorated plastic plumbing goods, brittle sarking
felt, rotted softwood timbers, failing f lat roofs, wall-tie
corrosion, spalling concrete, corrosion of metal frames.
Other defective materials include high-alumina cement,
asbestos, woodwool slabs, concrete carbonation, calcium
chloride accelerators, corrosion of reinforcement and metal
structures (e.g. fire escapes), fixings failures (external wall
panels, parapet walls).
Intrinsic low performance for dampness and insulation.
Early
post-war
1965–1980 	Parker Morris standards (1961). Introduction of national
Building Regulations.
(continued)

-- 104 of 391 --

94 	Building pathology
Table 4.1 (continued)
Named
period
Approximate
dates AD/CE
Typical characteristics/features of extant
buildings/parts of buildings
Postmodern 	1960– 	Reaction against the austerity, formality, and lack of
variety of modern architecture. Factory-formed, softwood,
structural timber-framed, internal leafed houses, fronted
with brickwork, panelling, or tile-hanging. Plastic-strip
dpcs used from the 1970s. Airtightness and insulation
progressively increasing. Ventilation issues. Retrofit
injection damp-proof courses introduced. Bungalows
become not cost-effective.
Problems as early post-war. Compaction of thermal
insulation materials in cavity walls and roof voids.
High-Tech 	1970– 	Lightweight materials, sheer surfaces, new engineering, etc.,
techniques, display of the construction and services. Modern
methods of construction. Factory-builds.
Problems include poor-quality concrete, carbonation, cladding
fixings corrosion, shrinkage, joint failings, mastic shrinkage
and embrittlement, mismatch of dimensional tolerances,
pattern staining, water ingress, differential movement,
progressive collapse, means of escape failings, combustibility
problems, direct paths for fire spread, omission of fire barriers,
thermal bypass, thermal bridging, condensation.
Retrofit 	1980– 	Thermal retrofitting to existing residential properties
to improve occupant well-being and energy use. Roof
void insulation, cavity wall insulation (CWI), external
wall insulation (EWI), internal wall insulation (IWI).
Encouraged by government grants and incentives.
Consequences include interstitial condensation, surface
condensation, mould, poor air quality, bridged dpcs,
thermal stratification, fire hazards (combustible materials
used for internal and external wall linings).
Acceptable standards change over time. Society changes; demands made
of its buildings change; they need to adapt and change to accommodate new uses.
Services need to be introduced or updated. Standards of human comfort are now
much higher, and insulation and heating need to be upgraded. It used to be accept-
able for buildings to have draughts, some degree of moisture, limited insulation,
continual heat sources, and low internal temperatures. Now expectations include
airtight performance, complete lack of damp in any form, high insulation, heat
on demand, and high internal temperatures. Often old buildings were not damp

-- 105 of 391 --

95	4: Building pathology
Table 4.2 Victorian, post-war, Modern construction
Typical features of Victorian, post-WW2, and Modern construction
Victorian (1832–1901)
•• Period of mass
construction
•• To house workers during
industrial revolution
•• Solid brick walls
•• Sash windows
•• Vapour open
•• Flexible
Post-World War 2
(1945–1970s)
•• High construction rate
period
•• Replacing houses
destroyed in war and
to house increased
population
•• Brick cavity or system
built (e.g. concrete panel)
•• New materials
•• Damp proofing
Modern (about 1976
onwards)
•• Progressive insulation
increases
•• Airtightness measures
•• Double glazing
•• Gas/electric central
heating
•• Brick/block cavity walls
filled with insulation
•• Timber- or steel-framed
inner leaf with brick
outer rain shield
Table 4.3 Treating one like the other leads to inappropriate works
Victorian vs Modern
••
••
••
••
••
••
••
Breathable, f lexible
Solid walls (no cavity)
No dpc or dpm
Lime-based mortars: soft, f lexible,
sacrificial
Walls absorb moisture which then
evaporates
Porous jacket
Probably no wall or f loor insulation
•• Hermetically sealed
•• Cavity walls
•• Damp-proof course and membrane
•• Cement-based mortars: hard, rigid
•• Rigid and impervious cement mortars
and renders
•• Water-tight, airtight envelope
•• Probably wall and f loor insulation
until f lues were sealed, draughts were stopped, and impermeable interior finishes
applied. Natural ventilation allowed the building to breathe and prevented unac-
ceptably high levels of moisture in the interior. Following such modern sealing,
the building can no longer breathe and can become damp, cold, and insanitary.
Surveyors are aware of previous standards, not regarding these as “defects”, and
apply any upgrades with caution to not introduce new problems by disrupting building
performance. See Table 4.3 Treating one like the other leads to inappropriate works.
Growing concern for the environment and increasing awareness of the impor-
tance of conserving finite resources and of minimising pollution are stimulat-
ing attempts to find more sustainable building practices, which involve more
determined attempts to rectify defects and adaptation rather than just demolition
and landfill. Annual materials consumption in the building industry is hugely

-- 106 of 391 --

96 	Building pathology
significant. Most of these materials are from non-renewable resources, such as
clay for brick manufacture. Cement is a vital building material, but it also makes
a significant contribution to global carbon dioxide emissions. It is now recog-
nised that re-use, not disposal or mere re-cycling, of building materials is needed.
Unnecessary demolition and reckless use and disposal of building materials are no
longer acceptable if we are to achieve a sustainable society.
Buildings should be designed, repaired, renovated, and altered for durability,
but also for f lexibility to defer obsolescence in a rapidly changing society.
Perspectives on building pathology and surveying
A building survey of a property, as defined by the Royal Institution of Chartered
Surveyors and the UK Construction Information Council, is a thorough and
detailed evaluation of its construction and condition, involving an appropriately
extensive on-site inspection. The focus of the evaluation depends on the client’s
requirements, although the extent of the inspection itself may not be so restricted.
DEFECT MANAGEMENT
See Figure 4.2 Need for ref lection, testing, monitoring, reporting in defect man-
agement. Inspections of a building at regular intervals can ascertain the condition
and performance of the various elements. Annual inspections of guttering, for
example, can reduce rainwater damage to buildings. Services need to be tested
at least annually and any building defects for which the cause is not immediately
apparent monitored over time. Monitoring of cracks will reveal whether the cracks
are historic or live, and whether they are affected by seasonal or diurnal changes in
temperature or moisture. Ecclesiastical buildings have quinquennial inspections to
note the development and speed of any defects. Stock condition surveys are simi-
larly often conducted five-yearly.
Surveyors are required to gather all the data to enable assessment of the situa-
tion with the information available, analyse test results and all relevant data, and
Figure 4.2 Need for reflection, testing, monitoring, reporting in defect management.

-- 107 of 391 --

97	4: Building pathology
recommend a course of action based on that analysis. To gather the data effectively,
surveyors need to use most of their senses: vision, hearing, touch, and sense of
smell, together with knowledge of construction materials, construction defects,
and a large portion of common sense.
In building pathology books, different authors take different approaches to the
subject. Some will consider the technology of how buildings are put together,
what materials are used and how they perform and connect, and what processes
of degradation are at work to bring about the defects observed. Others will focus
on the use and abuse of buildings by their owners or occupiers and will consider
the f lexibility of the accommodation and ease of maintenance of the structure or
services. Still others will concentrate on the building elements and components.
All these aspects are inter-related.
THE TROUBLE WITH WATER
In a temperate climate using porous building materials, either excess or lack of
water is the primary cause of defects. This can result in:
•• Hydration of building materials
•• Deterioration of cementitious materials
•• Salt crystallisation
•• Sulphate attack
•• Frost action
•• Corrosion of metals
During construction, a great deal of water is used, including:
•• Water for the hydration of building materials – concrete, plaster, paints, mortar,
grout, etc.
•• Timber has an inherent moisture content that needs to stabilise
•• The building is open to the elements until it is roofed
•• At occupation the building is only beginning to dry out
•• Drying and moisture stabilisation can take many months.
Water added to building materials is done in a controlled way. The water:cement
ratio of concrete and mortars is very important in terms of the final strength and
quality of the material. Thus, added water in the form of rain is unwanted and
newly laid concrete and mortars are protected. Protection from freezing is also
provided because water expands on freezing causing voids in the concrete, seri-
ously weakening it, and mortar to be friable and weak. To allow sufficient time for
hydration to take place, new work is protected from too rapidly drying out in hot
or windy weather.

-- 108 of 391 --

98 	Building pathology
Water is also destructive after the event. It can erode stone, bricks, and mortar.
Mortar should be weaker than the bricks so that the mortar erodes preferentially to
the bricks. Pointing is much cheaper and easier to replace than the bricks themselves.
However, this should not happen too quickly because of bad detailing or as an escala-
tion of another defect. For example, sills or capping stones not projecting far enough
away from a wall so that water is forced down the face – green algal staining is a typi-
cal indication of this. Repointing with a stronger mortar will cause the stones/bricks
to erode. The answer is to replace the sill or capping stones with adequately sized
ones having a suitable overhang and to repoint with the original soft mix of mortar.
Algal growth shows that excess and unwanted water is being discharged, e.g. due
to insufficiently sized overhangs, corroded metal gutters or downpipes, or dis-
lodged junctions of rainwater goods. Such water can lead to damp on interior faces
and decay of timbers such as f loor joists built into the wall. Defects to downpipes
are common because decorators often only paint the front face of the downpipe as
the rear is difficult to get to and the lack of painting unnoticed.
White staining may be due to free lime leaching from the mortar, running down
and staining the brickwork face. This white staining will not disappear and will
need to be removed. This is different from the harmless white powdery deposition
of salts on the surface known as eff lorescence, which eventually stops and can
be brushed off. More damaging is the formation of salts inside the surface pores
of the material, known as crypto-f lorescence, as the repeated crystallisation and
dissolution of salts in the surface pores lead to stresses on the walls of the pores of
the material and the breakdown of the surface. The crumbly, friable nature of the
face is distinctive diagnostically. Where the surface of the stone has been eroded
this can continue until some stones require replacement.
Sulphate attack is a common defect in chimneys and another example of the dam-
aging effects of combining water with salts. Flue gases from open fires and boilers
can contain sulphates, and the cooling effect of the prevailing wind promotes con-
densation to be formed within the chimney, depositing the sulphates on the internal
brickwork f lue surface. The sulphates begin to affect the mortar, causing expansion
of the mortar on the affected side. This causes the chimney to bend away from the
prevailing wind. This is a serious defect and frequently requires re-building of the
affected stack to be undertaken (using sulphate-resisting cement). It is worth remem-
bering that masonry collapses happen suddenly and can be disastrous: stacks can fall
into the street below or through the roof into a bedroom below.
Frost damage is generally problematic in exposed situations because it occurs in
masonry that is very wet in freezing conditions, so more commonly is associated
with chimney stacks, parapet walls, etc. It can also occur in conjunction with rising

-- 109 of 391 --

99	4: Building pathology
damp or strong winds carrying prolonged and heavy rain deep into the pores,
thereby thoroughly wetting the masonry, followed by a drop in temperature. The
problem is associated with repeated freezing and thawing and leads to a cracking
away of the surface or of projections. Old bricks are particularly vulnerable as they
were fired to lower temperatures and only the surface is hard. Once this has been
breached the softer inner brick erodes rapidly.
Metals corrode. There are some key points here: metals corrode in different
ways; some like aluminium form a tightly bound impenetrable layer of corrosion
that prevents further deterioration, whilst in others the decay is progressive; e.g.
iron forms a loosely bound layer of corrosion that breaks away, leaving fresh iron
to be affected. Galvanic or bi-metallic corrosion is where two different metals are
in contact, and one metal will corrode in preference to the other, e.g. a copper
roof fixed with steel nails. See Figure 4.3 Galvanic or Bi-metallic corrosion risk
between different metals in contact.
When looking at galvanic tables, a more anodic metal will corrode when in
contact with a more cathodic metal. Corrosion is more likely when there is more
than 0.15 V difference in the anodic index. Note: these are usually shown as nega-
tives. See Table 4.4 Simplified anodic index of construction metals.
Corrosion can affect structural members, such as lintels, wall-ties, and rein-
forcement. Current wall-ties are generally corrosion resistant, e.g. stainless steel or
polymeric. Older ties were iron (rusted rapidly) or galvanised, but the galvanising
Figure 4.3 Galvanic or bi-metallic corrosion risk between different metals in contact.

-- 110 of 391 --

100 	Building pathology
Table 4.4 Simplified anodic index of construction metals
Anodic index (V) 	More cathodic
Gold 	0.00
Silver 	0.15
Stainless steels
Copper 	0.35
Brass 	0.4
Bronzes 	0.4 to 0.45
Stainless steel 	0.5 to 0.6
Tin 	0.65
Lead 	0.7
Cast/wrought iron 	0.85
Aluminium 	0.7 to 0.95
Galvanised steel 	1.2
Zinc 	1.2
More anodic
could be either too thin or worn through. The idea of ties is to hold the two leaves
of a cavity wall together to ensure they act in unison. Once the ties have corroded,
then parts of the walls can begin to bulge and become unstable. Where the tie
corrodes, it causes localised expansion, which further destabilises the wall. Wall-
tie failure is quite characteristic in that the bulging and joint expansion will be
associated with the tie spacing and will be less at foundation level, i.e. where there
is more restraint.
Reinforcement of concrete or brickwork is potentially liable to corrode. The
reinforcement in concrete is protected by the high alkalinity until such time as the
alkalinity is reduced by carbonation or the corrosion is stimulated by some other
agent, e.g. chlorides in the mix. Bars expand as they corrode and cause cracking of
the masonry. Corrosion of steel reinforcement in concrete can occur where there
is little cover to the concrete, making it susceptible to corrosion. As the reinforce-
ment corrodes, it will initially cause staining, and then as the metal expands it will
force the concrete away at the surface (spalling).
Green stains down masonry can indicate copper corrosion. Copper can be cor-
roded by sulphur dioxide, damp wood impregnated with some fire retardants, and
run-off from red cedar cladding. Copper corrodes aluminium, zinc, and steel.
Copper cladding and roofs gain a green patina after 5–20 years, formed by a thin

-- 111 of 391 --

101	4: Building pathology
Table 4.5 Possible remedies for typical water issues
a. Inadequate hydration of building
materials
a. Ensure not allowed to dry out in hot or
windy weather (protect with damp-proof
membrane)
b. Protection of new cementitious materials 	b. Cover with suitable material to prevent
water ingress – e.g. cover newly laid
brickwork with damp-proof membrane
c. Salt crystallisation 	c. Use low soluble salt bricks where this is
likely to be a problem, ensure weathering
details are well designed and maintained
d. Sulphate attack 	d. Use sulphate-resisting cement in situations
where this is likely to be problematic, line
and insulate chimneys
e. Frost action 	e. Prevent excessive wetting of masonry,
e.g. by good design and maintenance of
weathering details. Specify frost- resistant
bricks in exposed situations
f. Corrosion of metals 	f. Careful selection of metals for the situation
in which they’re going to be used, avoid
bi-metallic corrosion, ensure adequate
cover to reinforcement, good maintenance
protective layer of copper salts. Aluminium is corroded by contact with brass, cop-
per, and lead. Aluminium corrodes zinc. Zinc is corroded by copper, western red
cedar, oak, some fire retardants, and soluble salts.
See Table 4.5, Possible remedies for typical water issues.
DAMP
Generally, damp is water that is where it should not be. Roofs get wet when it rains,
but we would not describe them as having a damp problem. Damp accounts for the
majority of problems in buildings in the UK. The climate is wet, and in our build-
ings we use one of two approaches: we either use porous materials, which soak up
the moisture and begin to degrade, or we have impermeable surfaces which force
the water off and that puts pressure on the joints, which then fail and let water in.
Aesthetically, damp spoils finishes by bleaching colours, causing water-marks,
encouraging mould growth and mildew, f laking paint off, lifting lift liners, etc.
Structurally, it causes materials to degrade: plasters become friable; salts are
leached out to the surface (or worse behind the surface); wood becomes infested
with insects or is attacked by fungus, some of which progress and cause total failure

-- 112 of 391 --

102 	Building pathology
Figure 4.4 Types of damp.
of the timber; metals begin to corrode, so fixings can fail. If left untreated, in some
cases, damp can eventually cause structural collapse.
Health-wise, the damp surfaces cause fungal spores, which trigger asthma
attacks, allergic reactions such as rhinitis, conjunctivitis, etc., and cause bronchitis,
pneumonia, etc. The reduction in thermal properties of the building can also lead
to hypothermia, particularly of babies and elderly people.
See Figure 4.4 Types of damp. Damp can broadly be classified into three groups:
condensation, penetrating, and rising.
CONDENSATION
Condensation can have severe consequences. The incidence of condensation and
the severity of it have increased with the move to draught-proof buildings. This
allows moisture vapour to build up in the air, which then condenses onto cooler
surfaces. This has been recognised by the Building Regulations, which stipulate
adequate background ventilation. Provision of ventilation is required for cool
enclosed spaces such as roof and sub-f loor voids. Five key concepts:
1. Warm air can hold more moisture than cold air, so air in a room at 20°C is
capable of harmlessly holding more moisture than the same room at 10°C.
2. When warm, moist air meets cold surfaces, such as windows and poorly insu-
lated external walls, f loors, and ceilings, its temperature drops at that point,
the air near that surface becomes saturated with the water vapour, and this
results in water condensing onto those surfaces.
3. Water vapour can move throughout a building, i.e. by circulation routes or by
percolating through the pores in the building fabric. A plasterboard ceiling for
example will not stop water vapour from passing through it into the roof void
above.
4. Water vapour is driven by changes in vapour pressure, so if there is a high level
of moisture in the kitchen, say, and a low level in the bedroom, the vapour
will move out of the high-pressure kitchen into the low-pressure bedroom.

-- 113 of 391 --

103	4: Building pathology
Mould growth often occurs in bedrooms as a result of not having an extract
fan in the kitchen. The kitchen itself may be condensation free due to warmer
surfaces.
5. Normal human behaviour can exacerbate condensation. Failure to open win-
dows or use extract fans when bathing, washing, drying clothes, cooking,
etc. leads to an increase in internal vapour pressure, which in turn can lead
to condensation. This failure may not be an occupier “fault”; for example, no
trickle vents may be provided or fans may not be fitted, may not work, or may
not be accessible, and security may be a problem.
Resolved by a BALANCE between heating, insulation, and ventilation.
Ventilation can lower the temperature, which means a decrease in the amount of
water held in the air and reduced surface temperatures in the room. Ventilation
is required to remove the moisture that builds up through normal daily activities.
Insulation is of limited value unless heat is provided. If there is too much ventila-
tion or insufficient insulation, the heat energy will be lost without providing much
benefit. The benefits of providing lots of heating, good levels of insulation, and
extractor fans f lounder if the occupiers turn off the radiators, do not use the fans,
dry washing indoors, and boil cabbage all day.
There are two types of condensation:
Surface – visible on the surface.
Interstitial – occurs within the structure at interfaces between materials and is
hidden by the construction and surface layers.
Interstitial condensation can dampen insulation materials, reducing their thermal
resistance. Dew point is the temperature at which water condenses out. If it con-
denses on the outer face of insulation, then that insulation could work less well and
further increase condensation problems. Depending on the nature of the construc-
tion, if you get interstitial condensation forming on timber, there is a risk of fungal
decay. The problem with interstitial condensation is that damage often becomes
quite advanced before it is discovered.
The way to control this type of condensation is to calculate the thermal and
vapour transmission across the structure to identify a risk and reduce its risk of
occurrence by reducing moisture build-up and by use of vapour barriers.
Vapour barriers come in many forms – from plastic sheets to foil backing on
plasterboard, etc. Barriers are required to be imperforate – but will be punctured
during construction by fixings, services, etc. If such holes are not totally sealed,
a significant amount of vapour can be driven through due to the potential differ-
ences in pressure between the two areas. Vapour barriers should always be on the
warm side of the insulation. If a barrier is placed at the cool side, there is the pos-
sibility that water could condense in the insulation itself.

-- 114 of 391 --

104 	Building pathology
PENETRATING DAMP
•• Water that penetrates into the structure
•• Joints/junctions are weak points
•• Driven under pressure (e.g. heavy rainfall, wind-driven rain, snow, internal/
external pressure differences)
•• Pumping action (wind pumping through tiny gaps, e.g. in sealants around
windows).
•• Copious amounts in a short time
•• Basements – special case: hydrostatic pressure
Penetrating damp can occur in walls because of missing or inadequate pointing
in solid walls, mortar snots on cavity ties, failed cavity foam insulation, gaps in
sealants/barriers, external ground high relative to internal spaces (e.g. at or above
ground f loor levels and/or damp-proof courses). Penetrating damp also results
from roof leaks allowing water into the structure, especially f lat roofs (should use
sufficiently f lexible materials and be carefully detailed).
A major problem with penetrating damp is that it often emerges a long way
from where it comes in, as it tracks along structural members, services, along inter-
faces, etc.
Common problems include:
Leaking rainwater goods which can lead to prolonged saturation and consequent
damage to masonry through frost damage, erosion of mortars, spalling associated
with repeated wetting and drying cycles, moss and algal growth, etc. If sarking felts
are too short (and they do rot from the bottom up) then the roof discharge water
can run under the gutter and into the roof space, causing serious problems.
Defective (missing) cavity trays, inadequate sealant, warping of timbers,
etc. The incidence of missing cavity trays is high in, for example, barn conversions,
where it is difficult to dress them into random walls, and in conservatories added
to houses. The upshot is that water runs down the face of the external wall, which
then effectively becomes the inner wall of the conservatory.
Steel structures rusting. Steel is a popular modern method of construction
(MMC) material for the structure of new buildings, residential and non-residential.
The vastly reduced tolerances of factory/off-site manufacturing will impact the
future of what can be changed in these buildings. The strength of such structures
can come from the whole frame rather than individual parts, meaning that increas-
ing opening sizes, e.g. for window or partitions, is not easily achievable because
removing one part can make the whole structure too weak. This is important for
surveyors to look out for. Because dampness, leaks, and excess humidity will not

-- 115 of 391 --

105	4: Building pathology
just be unpleasant, these could adversely affect the structural integrity of light
gauge steel structures. The durability testing of these structures has often been
done in warm, dry environments, which produce very good results. However,
the UK conditions, after some time in use, could easily not be warm and dry. The
NHBC and other housing warranty providers require a design life in excess of
60 years and accept the use of light gauge steel construction. The surveyor should
thus look for evidence that the structures remain protected.
Basements are frequently damp because the water is forced in by hydrostatic pres-
sure. This forces the water through the construction and into the internal space.
This can be coupled with rising damp in basement f loors. Wall and f loor damp
proofing must be continuous. The junction between the wall and f loor is particu-
larly vulnerable.
To remedy, basements can be tanked internally or externally. Internal cemen-
titious tanking will eventually fail but will probably take quite a while to fail,
and it is often the only practical solution. Extreme care should be taken with the
f loor edge detail as this is the weak spot, and the wall tanking must lap with the
f loor dpm. Drained cavity construction is a good method. Sometimes the only real
option is to drain or pump the water out continuously.
RISING DAMP
•• Water rises by capillary action up from the ground
•• Only as far as it takes for gravity to start pulling it back (about 1200 mm)
•• Salts – hygroscopic
•• Not as common as used to be thought
•• Solutions: damp-proof courses/membranes, drainage, ventilation, and heating
Rising damp does not occur instantly; it can take years for it to become a problem.
Rising damp does not get any higher than 1500 mm max, usually about 1200 mm
above ground level. Above this height, the capillary action drawing up the water
through the pores of the masonry is overcome by gravity and by evaporation from
the surface.
Properties may not have a dpc; the dpc may no longer be effective, be or become
bridged, or be compromised. NOTE: no dpc does not mean rising damp.
External and internal walls may be affected. Similarly chimney breast walls.
Solid ground f loors are often damp in older buildings because damp-proof
membranes were not installed. Even in newer properties, the membrane may have
been punctured or inadequately lapped. Where dpcs have not been included in
sleeper walls, timber f loors can become damp and rot. Note that including a dpm
in the f loor of an old property might make the damp in the walls worse.

-- 116 of 391 --

106 	Building pathology
Table 4.6 Remedies for rising damp
Remedies for rising damp problems: depends on cause
Removing whatever is bridging the dpc, e.g. mortar snots, earth, render, etc.
Reduce external ground level
Inserting a physical dpc
Drying out, e.g. thick stone walls with rubble infill, basements, etc.
Provision of chemical system, e.g. injection dpcs
Provision of patent systems, e.g. electro-osmosis
Internal covering or lining
Increase internal ventilation, improve heating, remove impermeable internal finishes (e.g.
vinyl wallpapers)
See Table 4.6 Remedies for rising damp.
Dry lining may make the wall damper by preventing evaporation to the inside;
therefore it should be storey height, any battens should be pressure impregnated,
rust-resisting fixings used, and a dpm behind the battens.
Reoccurring dampness will continue following remedy unless the hygroscopic
salts in the plaster are removed and the wall is dried and re-plastered with a reno-
vating plaster.
MOULD, DECAY FUNGI, AND BACTERIA
There are different species of mould fungi causing problems and damage in
buildings.
Typical mould fungi in damage cases are, e.g. Alternaria sp., Aspergillus sp. (e.g.
A. fumigatus and A. versicolor), Aureobasidium sp., Cladosporium sp., Fusarium sp.,
Chaetomium globosum (this is also a soft-rot fungus), Penicillium spp., Stachybotrys
atra, Trichoderma viride. Bacteria such as Actinomycetes, Streptomycetes, Bacillus, and
different types of yeasts often exist in moisture damage cases.
In the moisture stress situation, there are different microbial species ref lecting
the moisture or humidity level. The first colonisers of building materials belong
often to the genera Penicillium and Aspergillus. Some of these fungi can grow at
relative humidity (RH) 80–90% at room temperature. In addition, these fungi
produce large amounts of air-mediated spores that can settle on material surfaces.
Most fungi need very high humidity conditions, e.g. RH above 95%, to grow.
Typical representatives of these fungi are Chaetomium, Stachybotrys, and Trichoderma.
As tertiary colonisers, decay fungi, actinobacteria, and other aerobic bacteria need a

-- 117 of 391 --

107	4: Building pathology
high RH to be able to grow. In addition, the microbial succession in the development
of moisture damage follows the nutritional demands of different types of microbes.
Typical decay fungi causing brown rot in moisture-damaged buildings are
Serpula lacrymans, other Serpula species, Coniophora puteana, Leucogyrophana species,
Poria/Antrodia species, Gloeophyllum trabeum, and G. sepiarium. Humidity conditions
must be above RH 95% (around the fibre saturation point of wood, wood moisture
content about 25 to 30%) for the spore germination and mycelium activation of
brown rot fungi.
Under unsuitable conditions, fungi are inactive but they can quickly become
active under suitable conditions. The degree of decay in wood depends on the total
active time of the decay organism.
The dry rot fungus S. lacrymans is a typical mesophilic fungus growing best at
lower temperatures, while some strains of Poria placenta, Coniophora puteana, and
Gloeophyllum trabeum are typical thermos-tolerant fungi growing best at higher
temperatures (+25 to +46°C). The lethal temperature dose for these fungi is also
higher. The lethal (killing) temperature for dry rot fungus S. lacrymans is about
+35 to +50°C, but some fungi, e.g. G. trabeum and P. placenta, can resist some
hours at temperatures of +60 to +80°C. The lethal temperatures of decay fungi
vary between 35°C and 80°C.
Health problems caused by fungi and bacteria
Up to 20% of the population in Europe suffers from allergic-related diseases, with
the problem increasing. These health problems may be caused by lifestyles where
people spend more time indoors and thereby are more exposed to the indoor climate.
Lifestyles are not always voluntary, for example for care home and hospital residents,
for workers or residential occupants without suitable natural ventilation, etc.
Prolonged dampness in building materials can cause the proliferation of a num-
ber of fungal and bacterial genera. These microbes, whether embedded behind
materials or growing on visible surfaces, are associated with a wide array of adverse
health effects, for example:
•• Irritative and non-specific symptoms
•• Respiratory infections
•• Allergic diseases
•• Alveolitis and organic dust toxic syndrome
•• Other chronic pulmonary diseases, such as chronic bronchitis
The indoor climate contains partly the same volatile organic compounds
(VOCs) as the outdoor air and partly VOCs emitted from building materials, paint,
furniture, etc. The VOCs, especially some terpenes, might have an important role

-- 118 of 391 --

108 	Building pathology
in indoor air quality. In very high concentrations in indoor air, they may cause
sensory irritation.
Legionella can result in Legionnaires’ disease in humans, a potentially fatal form
of pneumonia. There is a risk where any stored water is used so that a fine airborne
spray is produced, which can be inhaled. It can be found in water towers, cooling
towers, evaporative condensers, showerheads, and Jacuzzis. There is particularly a
risk in commercial buildings, higher rise f lats, and student accommodation. Water
systems require regular maintenance regimes of inspection, testing, and cleaning.
HSE produces guidance.
Toxic moulds such as Pseudomonas bacterium can be the unintended result of
airtightness and high insulation with inadequate ventilation because it can develop
and thrive in persistent condensation and moisture. It is a potentially fatal hazard in
susceptible people of all ages. It can also form in air-conditioning or heating system
water pipes, making them less efficient, reducing their lifespan, and producing a
hazard for occupants. Specialist advice is required.
EVERYTHING UNDER THE SUN
Sun
Wind
Water
Chemical attack
Unwelcome visitors: insects, fungi, etc.
All together now!
Sun
Solar radiation is a powerful weathering agent, especially in combination with
water.
The photochemical effects – ultra violet (UV) light (radiation) - break down the
bond of polymers present in many organic materials.
Solar radiation fades colours of fabrics, paintwork, timber stains, etc. These forces
also break down the bonds in long-chain polymers in these and other organic
materials, such as adhesives, glass, plastics, elastomeric felts, etc. Results include:
•• Embrittlement of glass
•• Embrittlement of plastics
•• Breakdown of elastomers in roofing materials and sealants
•• Breakdown of paints and emulsions

-- 119 of 391 --

109	4: Building pathology
Degradation through solar radiation is the reason for the required provision of solar
protection to roofing felts and for UPVC windows having a shorter life expectancy
on south-facing elevations than on north-facing ones.
Heat results from prolonged exposure to solar radiation. Materials expand and
contract with diurnal and seasonal changes in accordance with their co-efficient of
thermal expansion. This can result in differential movements. Thermal movement
can result in cracking.
The orientation of the building is important since south-facing elements will
have more solar gain than north-facing elements. Use can be made of this, e.g.
putting larger windows to the south and smaller ones to the north for increased
solar gains, or the opposite to reduce solar warming and to more beneficially place
solar panels.
Internally placed insulation in/on external walls ensures that the external wall
faces will stay colder. This results in an increased risk of frost attack to the brick-
work and more differential movement between the interior and the exterior. This
increased differential movement extends to buildings with frame and panel con-
struction and puts more stress on the sealants used in the construction.
Wind
Wind damage is associated with gusts exceeding the usual design force of wind.
Roofs are particularly vulnerable and should be adequately strapped down.
Framed buildings need their wall and roof members strapping and tying to founda-
tions. Catastrophic damage can occur with winds above 80 miles/hour. Guidance
is given in the Building Regulations, Standards, and Approved Documents.
Wind can cause draughts at windows and doors even when draught-stripped,
and wind-washing can lead to heat loss. The wind can also penetrate the building
fabric, and higher heat losses will ensue, particularly when associated with rain.
Older properties with very thick walls are often effective at keeping the heat in
or out (warm in winter, cool in summer) except in windy conditions.
Water
•• Driving rain (penetrating damp)
•• Wind pressure can drive rain through joints and the building fabric
•• Effects are more significant with increased height and exposure of building
•• Drives atmospheric gases: sulphur dioxide and hydrocarbon emissions form acid
rain – erosion of limestones and brickwork, corrosion of metals
Driving rain will find any and every weakness in the structure. See Table 4.7
Penetration of moisture driven by wind.

-- 120 of 391 --

110 	Building pathology
Table 4.7 Penetration of moisture driven by wind
Pushed uphill under slates
Driven behind loose f lashings
Driven in under sills
Driven though fine cracks or gaps (including through render)
Penetrate deeper into porous building materials (such as bricks)
Rain is always acidic because it picks up carbon dioxide from the air. Since
industrialisation the acidic content has been problematic because of the pollutants
associated with industrial processes. These acids attack materials which are essen-
tially alkaline in nature, such as limestone which is basically calcium carbonate
particles cemented together in a calcium carbonate matrix. Acidic rain also pro-
motes faster corrosion of metals.
Chemical attack
•• Corrosion; oxidation of metals
•• Sulphate attack; sulphates (salts) present in industrial wastes, gypsum products,
etc. In damp conditions, the reaction causes cement mortar or render to expand
and disintegrate
•• Crystallisation of salts: soluble salts crystallise on the surface (eff lorescence) or
worse, within the materials (crypto-f lorescence)
The corrosion process is an electrochemical reaction which takes place faster in the
presence of water and faster still if the pH of the liquid is low, i.e. acid. It is all to
do with the balance of hydroxyl ions in the electrolyte (liquid).
Sulphate attack is a problem in concrete and in masonry, where the mortars are
affected by sulphates (as are concrete bricks). Sulphate-resisting cement tackles the
chemical reactions that take place when sulphates attack the tricalcium aluminate
in cement. This causes the formation of calcium sulphoaluminate, which occupies
a larger volume than the tricalcium aluminate and causes expansion. This sets up
stresses in the mortar or concrete and results in significant deterioration and damage.
In the early stages of sulphate attack to a wall, the only visible evidence may be
horizontal cracks to the internal face of the wall in response to expansion of the
outer face. The distribution of these horizontal cracks depends on whether it is a
cavity wall or a solid wall. Cracks are visible near the roof in cavity walls because
the wall-ties offer restraint lower down. They are visible all over the external
face in solid walls. On rendered walls, sulphate attack can be distinguished from
shrinkage cracking (random over the external face) by the horizontal distribution
pattern, which ref lects the mortar joints.

-- 121 of 391 --

111	4: Building pathology
Cementitious materials do shrink on drying (a characteristic, not a defect).
Mistakes made with the application or protection after application that lead to
excessive shrinkage can create a problem, e.g. when rendering is carried out on a
hot day and no attempt is made to protect the work from too rapid drying, leading
to inadequate hydration of the cement.
Chimneys, particularly unlined ones as the gases contain sulphates and water
vapour, are prone to sulphate attack, as condensation can occur in the f lue. Be
careful to distinguish sulphate attack from frost damage, as chimneys are in a very
exposed location and can suffer both problems.
Salts in the masonry can be dissolved in rainwater, and on evaporation these are
brought to the surface as eff lorescence. This will eventually resolve itself but can
be speeded up by gentle brushing with a bristle brush (wire brushes can leave iron
stains and may be too harsh for old or soft bricks).
Of more concern is the problem of crypto-f lorescence, the process by which
these dissolved salts re-crystallise within the pores of the material. This recurring
dissolution and re-crystallisation sets up stresses within the material as the salts
occupy a larger volume and press outwards onto the sides of the pores of the stone
or brick. This causes the breakdown of the material. A crumbly, friable quality is
suggestive of this.
TIMBER INFESTATION: FUNGAL ATTACK AND INSECTS
Timber decay tends to be one of the more expensive problems in property main-
tenance. This is because it often occurs in places that are hidden or only rarely
inspected; consequently the problem can be well advanced before being discovered.
Dry rot is a critical fungus to find in buildings. It thrives in damp wood, but
not wet wood. It has an indicative odour – a fusty mushroomy smell. It is not
localised but spreads beyond the immediate area, searching for its own moisture
and feeding on available timbers. It is rarely found externally.
Wet rot is more common than dry rot. Wet rots need a higher moisture con-
tent. Wet rot is localised and not as destructive as dry rot. It does not spread beyond
the immediate area and grows on wetter timbers. Wet rot likes very wet (not satu-
rated) timber and can happily live outdoors.
Infestations
The worst insects in the UK are the common furniture beetle (woodworm), house
longhorn beetle, and deathwatch beetle. Climate change may result in an increas-
ing problem with termites. Termites are very destructive and difficult to control.
All infestations can be treated with chemicals and the replacement of badly
damaged timber. The extent of the outbreak must be established. If there is no

-- 122 of 391 --

112 	Building pathology
frass, it is likely to be a historic outbreak, no longer active, or not active in the
larval stage. Important diagnostically are the size of the holes and the pattern of
the tunnels in respect to the grain of the wood, the characteristics of the frass, the
location of the outbreak, and the type of timber attacked.
Not all insects are harmful, e.g. woodlice do no harm, but can be indicative of
a damp problem.
Common furniture beetles prefers softwood, especially plywood, leaving
1–2 mm exit holes. They generally prefer damp, rather than dry, timber. Softened
timbers, for example in f loorboards surrounding a w.c., are particular favourites,
along with damp f loorboards and damp loft timbers. It lays its eggs on the timber,
and the larvae do the damage.
Deathwatch beetles are attracted to timbers that already have some fungal
decay present, and they do not attack sound wood. They leave large exit holes, but
the extent of the outbreak is usually limited in area because the beetles are reluctant
to f ly (although they can do), so spread by crawling over the surface.
House longhorn outbreaks are particularly destructive. They can tolerate dry
timber and prefer a warmer climate (e.g. Surrey) than northern England. Roof
spaces are a good place to look for them.
Rodents such as mice, rats, and squirrels cause problems because they chew
through wires, nest in insulation such as mineral wool, and carry diseases. Chewing
through wires in roof spaces has been known to cause fires.
Other infestations, e.g. of cockroaches, occur in warm, dry buildings. They
are a serious health hazard and breed rapidly. They can spread through service
ducts and along wiring runs, etc. They are a particular problem in multi-occu-
pancy buildings as co-ordination of extermination attempts can be hampered by
accessibility and co-operation problems.
Algae, moss, and lichen growing on walls and roofs signify poor drainage of
roofs, sills, etc. They excrete some acids which can scar alkaline building materials, but
they are indicative of other problems which may need to be addressed, such as a lack of
drip grooves to undersides of cills, inadequate falls to flat roofs, etc. Moss is often seen
on north-facing slopes of roofs as these are colder and wetter for longer. One associ-
ated problem is that chunks of moss get washed off in heavy rainfall and block gutters,
which can then cause other problems such as water backing into the roof space.
ALL TOGETHER NOW! COMPLEX INTERACTIONS
Sometimes building defects are caused by one problem – it is more usual to experi-
ence a combination of factors. Care is needed in diagnoses of the problem and in
prognosis and recommendation.
The biggest problem facing the surveyor is diagnosis. Diagnosis is difficult at the
best of times but is made worse by the fact that problems rarely occur in isolation.

-- 123 of 391 --

113	4: Building pathology
Wet rot and dry rot can occur in the same room; the problem can be caused by
solar degradation of a f lat roof covering or frame sealant that has resulted in water
ingress. This can be exacerbated by the exposed location, leading to penetrating
wind-driven rain, which dampens insulation and leads to condensation, etc.
CONCRETE
Concrete is a very old technology, used extensively by the Romans, although with-
out steel reinforcement. Concrete on its own is strong in compression (strength
depending on mix) but weak in tension. The earliest reinforced concrete structures
date from around 1850. Some of these early structures have survived corrosion-free
because they used a very high cement content and coarsely ground cements that
were slow to gain strength. The manual compaction techniques were basic, leaving
a good clearance between the steel and the formwork, thus achieving good cover to
the reinforcement. Finely ground cements are more commonly used currently to
allow for rapid strength gain and reduction in cement content for the same strength
after 28 days.
Concrete was used extensively in the early part of the 20th century by the early
proponents of the Modern movement – often to striking effects. The beauty of
concrete is that it enables wonderfully organic and f luid lines to be achieved when
poured in-situ. The beauty of concrete is this versatility.
Concrete was also used extensively as a post-war material (1945–1955), espe-
cially in Brutalist design, and often with poor results in low-rise houses and f lats.
The poor performance of these buildings, often attributable to poor design and
workmanship, has contributed to a negative perception of concrete as a building
material. The often poor functional design created social problems coupled with a
lack of appreciation of how the concrete would look after weathering. The system
building of enormous concrete towers demanded work to relatively fine tolerances
and new skills from the workforce, who were largely unaware of the importance of
removing packing pieces and ensuring all fixings were in place. A failure was the
potential for progressive catastrophic collapse.
Concrete is a mixture of cement, aggregate, and water. It is mixed and will
harden. It is important to get the right proportions of each. The water to cement
ratio is critical to achieving the strength and durability required.
The nature of the aggregate is also important. Porous aggregates result in less
durable concrete. It is also important that there is a range of particle sizes (for full
compaction) and they are mixed well before adding to the mix. Too much fine
material in the aggregate adversely affects workability, requiring more water, but
then adding too much water reduces strength.
Where damaging sulphates are present, for example in ground water, sulphate-
resisting cement should be specified. This has reduced tricalcium aluminate – one

-- 124 of 391 --

114 	Building pathology
of the main constituents of cement – as it is the hydration products of this com-
pound that are most susceptible to sulphate attack.
Common modifications
•• Finely grinding the cement particles speeds up the rate of hardening.
•• Reducing the tricalcium aluminate.
•• Partially replacing cement with ground granulated blast furnace slag and pul-
verised fuel ash to slow hydration (also slows strength gain) and reduce heat
generation – useful in massive constructions.
•• Modifying aggregates for specific purposes.
•• Adding admixtures for site-specific reasons, e.g. to improve workability, permit
air entrainment, accelerate or retard hydration, etc.
The mixing method affects results, and quality control is key. Mixing by hand has
relatively poor quality control. Site mixing can be variable. A batching plant oper-
ated by an experienced technician has excellent quality control. Factory-produced
components such as prefabricated beams, etc., enable excellent quality control.
The ingredients need to be fully mixed, and then the main aim is to get concrete
to the site or location quickly and in a condition that enables it to be compacted
properly. The main reason for this speed is that if there is a delay in getting it into
position then it could have become less workable, which would make the process
of compaction very difficult or impossible. In high-rise buildings the concrete is
often pumped up to where it is needed and the material design, mixing, placement,
and compaction can be carefully controlled. There has been a wealth of research
and development in large-scale construction and expensive equipment is used – it
is a specialised field.
Placing is important, as if air becomes trapped then voids will result, which
will significantly weaken the finished concrete. Water should never be added to
concrete that is setting. There is a distinction between air voids and deliberate air
entraining, where a special air-entraining agent is included. The latter results in
many very small holes that help to improve frost resistance – air-entrained concrete
still needs to be compacted to get rid of air voids.
Adequate compaction is required to avoid air voids which weaken concrete and
to overcome the difficulty in compacting around steel work. Spacers are used to
hold the reinforcement in the correct place. Broadly speaking, 1% entrapped air
= 5–7% loss of strength, which means even when achieving 95% compaction, the
concrete can be 1/3 weaker than if it was fully compacted; 5% not compacted = 5 ×
5–7% loss of strength, which is 25–35% weaker than if fully compacted. Concrete
must therefore be well compacted during pouring. Pouring from height risks the
various constituents segregating or separating. Similarly, the pouring concrete

-- 125 of 391 --

115	4: Building pathology
must not be allowed to move the carefully designed and placed reinforcement
cages on site.
Curing – concrete hardens, it does not just dry out. The hardening process is
exothermic: it gives off heat. As it hardens, it is sensitive to temperature:
•• At 17°C it reaches 64% strength at 7 days, full at 28 days.
•• At 30°C it reaches 44% strength at 7 days, 85% at 28 days.
Concrete should not be poured in freezing conditions as water expands as it freezes
and air voids result, seriously weakening it. Generally, it should be 4°C and rising.
There are ways of pouring concrete in less than ideal conditions by means of addi-
tives and managing the environment; this is a specialised field.
Thermogenesis (heat generation) has to be taken into account. The con-
crete should be protected from too rapidly drying out or from being rained
on. The heat generated can result in cracking if the core heat is too different
from the surface heat. This is combated by the cement specification (some
produce less heat of hydration), the formwork material (for example, glass rein-
forced plastic (grp) allows better heat dissipation than timber), etc. If concrete
is allowed to dry out too quickly as might happen on a hot, windy day, then
inadequate hydration results and a weaker, dusty surface will result. If it is sub-
jected to rainfall too soon, then additional water is added to the surface, which
reduces strength.
Note: over-working a surface, e.g. by trowelling too much, can bring the water
to the surface and result in a powdery weakened surface finish. This is often seen
on f loor screeds.
Long-term defects
See Table 4.8 Long-term concrete defects.
Table 4.8 Long-term concrete defects
Carbonation 	Corrosion of the steel
Surface shrinkage
Chloride attack 	Corrosion of the steel
Shrinkage
Aggregate reaction 	Including AAR and ASR
Sulphate attack 	Sulphated ground water

-- 126 of 391 --

116 	Building pathology
Alkali aggregate reaction (AAR) occurs when some aggregates contain con-
stituents (carbonates and silicates) that react with the cement. In alkali silica reac-
tion (ASR) silica reacts with the cement to form a gel that absorbs water and causes
stresses within the concrete to disrupt it. This gel carbonates as it gets to the surface
to form a whitish gel, which can be seen oozing from the concrete.
Sulphate attack destroys the concrete, and the severity of a sulphate attack is
dependent on (these are the main ones, there are others):
•• The type of sulphate (calcium and particularly magnesium sulphate are particu-
larly aggressive)
•• The concentration of the sulphates in solution and whether or not the supply is
continually replenished (e.g. as with ground water)
•• The type of cement. Sulphate resistance is increased by using sulphate-resisting
cement, and by using pulverised fuel ash and ground granulated blast furnace
slag, because they help to fix the calcium hydroxide in the concrete, thereby
reducing its availability to react with the sulphates
•• The permeability of the concrete (impermeable is good)
•• Number and location of construction joints (these allow water to penetrate deeper).
Carbonation and chloride attack – note lack of cover is also a major cause of cor-
rosion. As long as the concrete surrounding the reinforcing bar has a pH of 12.5
or more, the steel will not corrode. In new concrete, the effect of pH delays cor-
rosion – when the alkalinity is above 12.5 a passive film forms on the steel, which
prevents further corrosion.
Main factors affecting alkalinity are leaching, carbonation, and chlorides. It is
the hydration of the cement that causes the concrete to be highly alkaline (>pH
13). It liberates alkalis as a by-product of this hydration process, and the pore solu-
tion rapidly becomes saturated with calcium hydroxide (lime). A reserve of calcium
hydroxide from unhydrated cement in the concrete serves as a buffer, preventing
the pH from dropping, but even neutral pH water passing over the surface will
slowly reduce the calcium hydroxide levels. This is called leaching and is often
exacerbated around construction joints. A homogenous, impermeable concrete
offers better resistance to leaching, and incorporation of additives such as pulver-
ised fuel ash (pfa) can help to reduces permeability and fixes the calcium hydroxide,
thereby reducing the soluble lime content of the hardened concrete.
The speed at which this normally slow process works can be increased when
atmospheric carbon dioxide penetrates into the capillary pores formed during the
hydration process. The carbon dioxide removes the calcium hydroxide by convert-
ing it to calcium carbonate, thereby reducing the alkalinity of the concrete. This
process is called carbonation and is most commonly the cause of corrosion of
steel. Over a period of many years, this process works through the concrete from
the outside inwards in what is termed a carbonation front. This is useful diagnos-
tically, as by measuring the depth of carbonation (by using an indicator solution

-- 127 of 391 --

117	4: Building pathology
such as phenolphthalein on freshly fractured concrete: pink = alkalinity >9) and
knowing the date of construction, estimations can be made for how long it will
be before the steel starts to corrode. The depth of penetration of the carbonation
front is generally considered to be proportional to the square root of the time of
exposure. The rate of carbonation will not be uniform throughout the building
however, as it is affected by:
•• The concentration of carbon dioxide (this may be higher inside the building
than outside)
•• The saturation of the concrete. Saturation hinders the passage of CO2 through
the pores, thus slowing down the carbonation. For that reason, exposed walls
may suffer less than sheltered walls
•• The quality of the concrete
•• The presence of cracks.
Chlorides were historically added to the mix to reduce setting times but have
been banned in the UK since 1977. The presence of chloride ions in the capil-
lary pore water of hardened concrete affects the protective passive film on the
steel and thereby enables it to corrode. Chloride ions can be from various sources
such as sea water, or de-icing salts, etc. The corrosive effect is largely depend-
ent on the ratio between free chloride ions and the level of hydroxyl present,
which is dependent on the amount of cement in the concrete and its alkalin-
ity. Carbonation exacerbates the corrosive effect at levels of free chloride ions
that might otherwise have been relatively harmless. Corrosion due to chlorides
tends to be more localised than the widespread deterioration due to carbonation.
The corrosion process is an electrochemical one, and it is this that makes it dif-
ficult to remedy. For example, patch repairs simply spur an adjacent area to start
deteriorating.
Electrochemical methods of stopping corrosion include desalination
and re-alkalisation, which are two sides of the same coin. An electric field is
applied between the reinforcement in the steel in the concrete and an external
electrode net, which is in contact with the concrete surface through a sprayed-on
electrolyte. In re-alkalisation, alkalis are carried into the concrete, thereby increas-
ing the pH level to stop the corrosion. In desalination, chloride ions are carried out
of the concrete. The long-term efficacy of these methods is still under research.
Repair
•• Predicting when to repair
•• Testing strength and alkalinity
•• Monitoring

-- 128 of 391 --

118 	Building pathology
Key issues are knowing the rate of deterioration, to enable predictions of when
repairs are likely to be needed, ensuring the strength of the structure is maintained
and there is no risk of injury from spalling and monitoring the structures. Concrete
structures need regular inspection every three to five years to detect problems early
and minimise repair costs. The age of the building might suggest the kind of dif-
ficulties that may be experienced, e.g. buildings constructed in the 1950s and 1960s
might have had chlorides added to the mix as at this time the associated problems
were not appreciated and chloride accelerators had not yet been banned.
Repairing concrete structures is time-consuming, often a permanent on-
going task, and is generally expensive when undertaken on any appreciable scale.
Scaffolding will increase costs of remedial work. The defect can be quite well
advanced before it comes to attention (hence the importance of regular monitor-
ing of condition), and additionally the processes at work are often progressive.
Maintenance is essential because concrete spalling and dropping from a building
can pose a significant hazard. It is important is to ensure the building or structure
remains able to carry the necessary loads safely; concrete is weak in tension, it is
the steel that takes that load.
MOVEMENT AND STABILITY
Movement and stability: other than foundation movement
Why buildings move
Types of movement
Causes of movement
Inspecting, recording, and assessing
Monitoring
Repairs
All buildings move. Buildings move because of:
•• Conditions above ground
•• Conditions below ground
Movement and stability: other than foundation
movement – Above ground
See Table 4.9 Reasons for building movement other than foundations. Types of
movement (other than foundations):
Moisture and thermal movement. Materials need to be conditioned for
use in buildings and changing environmental conditions when in use can cause

-- 129 of 391 --

119	4: Building pathology
Table 4.9 Reasons for building movement other than foundations
Why do buildings/parts of buildings move? (Other than foundations)
Expansion 	Wetting/absorbing
moisture
Some materials expand on wetting and shrink on
drying
Freezing water 	About 10% increase in volume when water freezes
Sub-surface
crystallisation of salts
(crypto-f lorescence)
Salts occupy more volume
Sulphate attack 	Permanent expansion, can be over months or
years. Particularly problematic when cementitious
materials are wet for prolonged periods
Corrosion/oxidisation 	Oxides often occupy greater volume, e.g. rusting
of ferrous metals
Alkali silica reaction
(ASR) permanent
expansion
Problem with concrete in wet conditions and
containing reactive aggregates and silica
Hydration of oxides
permanent expansion
over months or years
Problem with clay bricks that contain unhydrated
lime or magnesia. Causes spalling of the face of
the brickwork
Shrinkage 	Temperature decrease 	Causes contraction
Drying/losing moisture 	Causes shrinkage (particularly timber). May
get noticeable initial drying shrinkage of
cementitious materials
Loss of volatiles 	Noticeably with mastics, sealants, plastics, failure
of curtain wall sealant
Failure 	The effects of excessive
loads
Loads may exceed the capacity of the structure
because:
•• The structure was never adequate
•• The loads have increased (e.g. increased
imposed f loor loads, new heavier roof covering)
•• Or both
problems. Timber needs to be seasoned and clay bricks allowed to adjust to normal
temperatures and moisture. Bricks begin a permanent expansion on cooling from
the kiln, and this can continue for the life of the building. The greatest expansion
is shortly after removal from the kiln. By contrast, concrete and calcium silicate
bricks shrink after manufacture, so there is potential for movement in a brick/
block wall.

-- 130 of 391 --

120 	Building pathology
Timber used to be seasoned over several seasons (hence the name), but cur-
rently this process of gradual reduction in movement is achieved by faster kiln
drying. Central heating and air-conditioning dry the atmosphere and materials,
exacerbate shrinkage after construction of timbers and plaster, etc. This can affect
old buildings provided with such services for the first time (e.g. an obsolete factory
converted to f lats).
Materials also move in response to water absorption and drying out. These
sorts of cracks are generally minor and have been minimised by the reduction
of wet trades and the increased use of dry finishes such as plasterboard instead
of plaster.
With moisture and thermal movements there will be an initial irreversible
change as the material is built into the construction followed by further reversible
movements in use in response to climatic changes. The main difference between
thermal and moisture movement is that thermal movements are reversible, whilst
moisture movement can be either reversible or irreversible; for example, fibrous
ceiling tiles never recover from being wet.
The likely positions for this type of movement are at openings, chases, changes
in level, buttresses, and at joints. Openings are the weakest point of a wall, so it is
unsurprising that cracks open up there. It boils down to wherever there is a change
in the otherwise uniform section of the wall the cracks will be seen. They are a
response to tension in the wall. Masonry is good in compression, but not in ten-
sion. The heat or moisture causes the wall to expand and on cooling or drying, it
tries to move back, but at that point tension develops in the wall and small vertical
cracks appear.
So the key points to note are: response to tension, vertical, at changes in wall
thickness or openings. They are generally fine (1–2 mm) and often step around
the bricks, following the line of the mortar, sometimes in a diagonal fashion. The
cracks are generally uniform in width and do not go below the damp-proof course
(greater restraint and more even temperature, moisture balance).
Materials expand in response to heat, but they do not all respond in equal meas-
ures. This can cause differential movement and consequent stresses that can lead to
distortion and cracking.
Figure 4.5 shows the typical distribution for shrinkage cracking in a brick cav-
ity wall – note the cut off at the dpc. Quite common in long rows of terraced
properties – the whole row expands but then cannot shrink back. The houses in
the middle suffer quite noticeable cracking.
Overloading of structures can cause cracking that is often misdiagnosed as
subsidence because the cracks extend below the dpc. See Figure 4.6 Overloading
cracking.

-- 131 of 391 --

121	4: Building pathology
Figure 4.5 Shrinkage cracking.
Accommodating movement:
•• Within their elastic range all materials will bend
•• Ductile materials deform and will eventually yield.
•• Brittle materials will crack without deforming, sometimes catastrophically
•• Metals creep; timber will (sometimes) creep.

-- 132 of 391 --

122 	Building pathology
Figure 4.6 Overloading cracking.
Movement and stability: foundation movement – Below ground
Cases of cracking in buildings seem to be on the increase and there are several
reasons for that, not least the fact that subsidence and landslip are now covered by
the householder’s insurance, which makes insurers more likely to investigate them.
Climate change has also had an effect, particularly with buildings constructed
on shrinkable clay soils. The fact that people are now very willing to sue tends to
encourage surveyors to suggest over-the-top measures to ensure that future move-
ment is prevented.
Not all buildings have foundations, and early structures were raised straight
off the ground, but they tended to be either lightweight or took a while to build
and used lime mortars or clay, which allowed considerable settlement after con-
struction without serious harm to the structure. See Figure 4.7 Foundations and
Table 4.10 Below ground movement causes.

-- 133 of 391 --

123	4: Building pathology
Figure 4.7 Foundations.
Table 4.10 Below-ground movement causes
Below-ground movement causes (including Financial Conduct Authority
(FCA) insurance definitions)
Settlement 	Downward movement
as a result of soil being
compressed by the weight
of a building within ten
years of construction
Shortly after construction
Usually small movements and non-recurring
Differential settlement can cause serious
problems
Not usually covered by insurance
Subsidence 	The ground beneath a
building sinks, pulling
the property’s foundations
down with it. The ground
loses moisture and shrinks
Change in ground conditions, caused by:
Prolonged dry spells especially when coupled
with shrinkable clay soils
Leaking drains, broken culverts; effects
of trees and shrubs: which can absorb
significant volumes of water from the soil
Collapsed mine workings
Decomposing organic fill, etc.
Differential subsidence is problematic
Heave 	Upward movement of
the ground beneath a
building as a result of the
soil expanding
May be caused by:
Tree removal
Frost (frost heave)
Demolition of a nearby building
Adjacent excessive development, etc.
Inadequate 	Of fill below foundations 	Type of settlement. May be caused by:
consolidation 	or f loors 	Inappropriate materials in fill
Lack of adequate compaction of fill
Inadequate ground preparation before start
Chemical 	e.g. sulphates 	Deterioration of concrete causing it to
attack 	become soft and spongy
Symptoms are similar to, and may be
mistaken for, heave
Not usually covered by insurance
Sulphate-resisting cement or a mechanical
barrier/dpm can be used for protection
Landslip 	Downward movement of
sloping ground

-- 134 of 391 --

124 	Building pathology
Below-ground failure crack patterns
See Figure 4.8 Differential settlement cracking; Figure 4.9 Subsidence cracking;
Figure 4.9 Subsidence cracking, and Figure 4.10 Uneven ground movement, e.g
from mining.
Leaking drains can cause subsidence as the water gradually washes away the soil
from the foundations and undermines them. See Figure 4.11 Subsidence cracks due
to drainage leaks.
If trees are felled, there is a sudden ground swell known as heave where the
soil has to reach a new equilibrium in terms of water content. Figure 4.12 shows a
typical crack pattern associated with heave; note how the cracks are widest at the
bottom, the opposite of what is normally found with subsidence, although this is
not always the case and heave cracks can appear similar to subsidence cracks. See
Figure 4.13 Movement due to tree removal.
Trees
See Figure 4.14 Effects of trees. Trees are wonderful things: in addition to their
obvious beauty, they provide shelter from winds and weather, but they do need to
be a safe distance from houses and other buildings unless special precautions have
been taken to prevent root damage (e.g. sheet steel piling), in which case they can
be planted very close – as often happens in town centres. In fact, trees and buildings
are quite a happy mix except where there are clay soils – this combination of trees
and clay is challenging and needs consideration.
Figure 4.8 Differential settlement cracking.

-- 135 of 391 --

125	4: Building pathology
Figure 4.9 Subsidence cracking.
Figure 4.10 Uneven ground movement, e.g. from mining (exaggerated).
See Table 4.11 Typical heights of trees and safe building distances and Figure 4.15
Reasonable tree distances to buildings.
Tree roots rarely damage the building itself but can often damage drains. It
is the effect on moisture levels of soils which is damaging and can cause seri-
ous problems. Trees are huge pumps that draw water from the soil and lose it by

-- 136 of 391 --

126 	Building pathology
Figure 4.11 Subsidence cracks due to drainage leaks.
Figure 4.12 Cracking due to heave.

-- 137 of 391 --

127	4: Building pathology
Highways bulge
Basement walls and
˜oors crack and lift
If trees are removed,
water increases and
Foundations 	cohesive soils swell
may move
Figure 4.13 Movement due to tree removal.
Figure 4.14 Effects of trees.
transpiration through their leaves. The roots bind the soil, which can be useful on
sloping sites to avoid soil erosion, but also extend in search of moisture. Some trees
are deep rooted, and others are shallow rooted.
In order to determine a safe distance from a building, knowledge is needed
of the foundation type and depth, the species of tree, its water demand, mature
height, and the soil type. It is not enough to consider just the tree; account must
also be taken of the number, type, and location of all trees and shrubs in the imme-
diate area as they will all affect the water content of the surrounding soil.

-- 138 of 391 --

128 	Building pathology
•• Most trees cause no damage
•• Tree roots spread up to three times the height of the tree
•• Modern buildings are seldom affected
•• Shrinkable clay soils are most at risk
•• Subsidence is worst in dry years.
It is a complex assessment, and the advice of an arboriculturalist is useful. See also
Table 4.12 Action if trees are a problem.
It is often not practically feasible to take root barriers to an adequate depth. In
addition, roots may grow under a barrier since provision introduces air and water,
making an attractive growing environment.
Table 4.11 Typical heights of trees and safe building distances
Type 	Typical mature height
in m
Typical safe distance
from buildings in m
Apple, cherry, damson, pear,
plum
12–17 	11
Ash 	23 	21
Beech, walnut 	20 	15
Birch, laburnum 	12–14 	10
Cypress 	25 	3.5–20
Elm, oak 	25 	25–30
Hawthorn, rowan 	10–12 	12
Holly, laurel, magnolia 	9–14 	5
Horse chestnut 	20 	23
Lime 	25 	8–20
Maple, sycamore 	20–25 	20
Pine 	30 	8
Plane 	30 	7.5–22
Poplar 	30 	30–35
Spruce 	18 	7
Willow 	24 	40
Yew 	12 	5
All these depend on cultivar, ground/soil/environmental conditions. Take
specialist advice.

-- 139 of 391 --

129	4: Building pathology
Figure 4.15 Reasonable tree distances to buildings.
Table 4.12 Action if trees are a problem
Options 	Positive 	Negative
Prune 	Inexpensive
Trees preserved
Temporary solution
Root barrier 	Uncertain effect
Underpin 	Permanent solution
Trees preserved
Expensive
Disruptive
Fell 	Permanent solution
Inexpensive
Possible heave
Loss of the tree
After winter recovery, repair
damage
Little disruption
Inexpensive
Trees preserved
Damage may recur in future
dry summers
Probable further damage if
the tree is young
Arboriculture advice should be taken before pruning
Inspecting, recording and monitoring, and specifying repairs
Assessing movement
•• All buildings move
•• Often it is not a problem
•• Some def lection is inevitable in f loors.
If the structure remains sound, services continue to work, the enclosure remains
weather tight, finishes are not damaged, and aesthetics are not impaired, then

-- 140 of 391 --

130 	Building pathology
there is little cause for concern. Freestanding walls may be significantly out of
plumb and still stand, and if offered restraint can take additional load too. Walls
in buildings often bulge at some mid-point, and there are various causes for
this. What needs to be assessed is the degree of movement out of the plumb.
When restraint is offered, as is normally the case at roof and foundation level,
movement out of vertical can be surprisingly large. The stability of walls is
inf luenced by:
•• Materials used
•• Restraint offered
•• Openings
•• Piers
•• Loading
A common cause of wall bulging is a lack or inadequacy of lateral restraint.
This might be due to failure of cavity wall-ties. Floors and party walls should be
tied into the structure; where they are not – and this is common in older proper-
ties – the external face can move away from the f loors or party walls. Other causes
include rotting of in-built timbers and snapped header brickwork. Sometimes add-
ing restraint back in, in the form of restraint straps or resin grouted ties, etc., is suf-
ficient to restrain further movement. However, when the bulging is too severe, the
walls may need to be rebuilt incorporating restraint. Old stone walls are thick and
comprise two leaves with a rubble infill. Very often the “mortar” in the interior of
the walls was simply clay or earth. Over time this can be washed away along with
the quarry waste or rubble infill. The through-stones that tie the leaves together
can also be inadequate, so the two leaves begin to separate and the wall starts to
bulge. Lateral restraint is included as a matter of course these days, but it is impor-
tant to check site practices to ensure proper fixing of these very important compo-
nents. Sometimes it is the effect of additional lateral loads that causes walls to lean,
for example, where roof spread occurs. The reason tie beams came to be included
in roof design was that the earlier roof designs revealed an inherent failure. The
load of the roof covering and of the timbers themselves causes the inverted V shape
to collapse downwards, placing rotational pressure on the wall plates and forcing
the upper parts of the walls outwards. The greater restraint at the f loor and/or
ground/foundation level accentuates the differential movement.
Cracks in masonry. The severity of cracks in traditional loadbearing masonry
should be considered in the light of its:
•• Width
•• Depth
•• Extent
•• Oversailing.

-- 141 of 391 --

131	4: Building pathology
Table 4.13 Remedial action related to crack width (adapted from BRE Digest 251)
Crack 	Crack width 	Action
Hairline cracks 	Up to 0.1 mm 	No action
Fine cracks 	0.1–1 mm 	Decorate
Small cracks 	1–5 mm 	Fill
Wide cracks 	5–15 mm 	Repair/repoint
Extensive cracks 	15–25 mm 	Replace
Severe cracks 	25 mm + 	Major repair
Assessing movement: Inspecting, monitoring, recording
See Table 4.13 Remedial action related to crack width. An inspection only pro-
vides a snapshot in time. Assessment should build up a picture of the history of
the defect using evidence. Monitoring can provide information that is far more
detailed. Tell tales allow you to measure changes in crack width over time and can
also gauge vertical movement by measuring the cross-hair movement against the
grid on the lower plastic plate. This is difficult when the wall is not f lat and is of
limited accuracy (about 1 mm). The first question to consider – is it imminently
dangerous?
Recording:
•• Record movement at regular intervals
•• Take records over the likely movement cycle
•• Record weather conditions, temperature, and any other factors that may be
relevant
Repairing cracks:
•• Has it stopped?
•• Do nothing?
•• Cure the cause
•• Fill, patch, or replace.
Deleterious materials
See Table 4.14 Deleterious materials risking health and building failure.

-- 142 of 391 --

132 	Building pathology
Table 4.14 Deleterious materials risking health and building failure
Entity 	Risk 	Comment
Alkali
aggregate
reactions
Building 	Chemical process producing a calcium silicate gel at the surface,
which absorbs moisture, swells, resulting in concrete cracks.
In unrestrained concrete, manifests as random network of fine
cracks bounded by fewer large cracks (map cracking). When
restrained, cracking tends to follow lines of restraint.
Asbestos 	Health 	Boarding, cladding, insulation, tiles, fire protection, pipes, etc.
Risk is from breathing in airborne fibres. No type or colour of
asbestos is considered safe.
Results in cancers, asbestosis, mesothelioma.
Building materials required to be positively identified as not
containing asbestos. Those that do contain asbestos (ACMs) to
be recorded, assessed, labelled, and/or disposed of by registered
means, with a “duty to manage”.
Calcium
chloride
additive and
atmospheric/
applied
Building 	Used as an accelerating admixture in concrete. Applied as
de-icer. Atmospheric in marine or coastal positions.
Reduces passivity of concrete. Results in corrosion of pre-
stressing tendons, reinforcement, and embedded metal.
Calcium silicate
brickwork,
concrete
brickwork
Building 	Shrinkage. Thermal movement is approximately 1.5 times
that of clay bricks. General construction detailing important,
e.g. sufficient f lexibility in wall-ties to permit the differential
movements, allowing for discontinuity around cavity closers,
f lexible expansion joints.
Risk of shrinkage or expansion cracks; therefore the mortar
needs to be f lexible with brickwork.
Combustible
cores
Building;
Life
Cladding in high-rise buildings and larger industrial/
commercial framed buildings.
Fire can spread unobserved inside core. Fire can spread rapidly
with toxic fumes.
Ignition not usually instantaneous, varying core materials used
with differing ignition properties. Polymeric core materials, e.g.
EPS, PUR, ignite at relatively low temperatures, contributing
to fire spread. Cores become exposed to ignition risk through
damage, fixings, or penetrations. See Chapter 7.
Formaldehyde 	Health 	Adhesives, furnishings. Risk is from vapours, dispersed in good
ventilation.
Carcinogenic.
High alumina
cement (HAC)
Building 	Used in precast roof and f loor beams, lintels, etc.
Decreased strength of concrete over time, especially in high
humidity or temperature, leading to structural weakness or
vulnerability to chemical attack.
(continued)

-- 143 of 391 --

133	4: Building pathology
Table 4.14 (continued)
Entity 	Risk 	Comment
Lead 	Health 	Risk of lead in older water pipes, joint solder, paint, and brass
fittings. Risk is from ingestion.
Headaches, stomach pains, anaemia, kidney damage, nerve/
brain damage, infertility.
Machine-made
mineral fibre
(MMMF)
Health 	Mineral wools (glass wool, rock wool): thermal/acoustic
insulation and fire protection.
Ceramic fibres: insulation boards, furnace /incinerator
insulation, e.g. refractory ceramic fibre (RCF).
Continuous glass filament fibres: reinforced cements and plastics.
Risk is from contact and breathing in.
Local skin/eye/throat irritations, dermatitis, development
of asthma/bronchitis, decreases in lung function, possibly
carcinogenic.
Mundic 	Building 	Deterioration in concrete/concrete blocks due to the
decomposition of mineral constituents within the aggregate.
Particularly in south-west England.
Loss of integrity in damp conditions, mechanical weakening of
the building.
Polychlorinated
biphenyls
in building
materials
(PCBs)
Health 	Synthetic organic chemical used in the manufacture of
transformers, thermal insulation, paints, sealants, adhesives,
etc., but progressively banned by year 2001 in many countries.
Persistent organic pollutant. Released into the environment
during demolition and refurbishments. Do not readily break
down once in the environment, remaining for long periods
cycling between air, water, and soil.
Poisonous. Found in food chain of fish and sea mammals,
accumulate in the fatty tissues of animals and humans.
In UK and other countries, holding of PCBs requires
registration, and disposal is regulated.
Reinforced
autoclaved
aerated
concrete
(RAAC)
Building 	Used in UK construction, mid-1950s to 1980, possibly beyond,
in planks and panels for roofing, walls, f loors, and internal
partitions. Various building types, especially schools.
Excessive and progressive def lections in service, widespread
hairline cracking of soffits. Association with excessive damp.
Need regular inspections.
Toughened
glass containing
nickel sulphide
impurities
Building 	Spontaneous fracturing after time (e.g. up to 20 years). Avoid
toughened glass in overhead positions.
Urea
formaldehyde
foam (UF)
Health 	Cavity wall insulation. Risk is from vapours, dispersed in good
ventilation.
Linked with respiratory irritation, nausea, sore eyes, skin rash,
headaches, general lethargy, muscular pain, disturbed sleep.
See also biological entities above: “Mould, decay fungi, and bacteria”.

-- 144 of 391 --

5
Retrofitting and refurbishment
Chris Gorse, Melanie Smith, B. N. West,
Cormac Flood and Lloyd M. Scott
INTRODUCTION
A city without old buildings is like a man without a memory
Konrad Smigielski
No building is ever finished or completed; periods of activity are merely inter-
spersed with periods of quiescence, but maintenance will continue for as long as
the building’s economic life. Throughout their own history, all buildings undergo
a replacement process of fittings, members, and major parts, coupled with periodi-
cal cleaning and redecorating. In some cases, this replacement process takes a step
further into the region of restoration or renovation. Periodic changes to the struc-
ture often enhance the appeal it has in the present.
Building retrofit, refurbishment, and upgrading inevitably include aspects such
as maintenance, repair, restoration, and extension. These major components of
construction activity regularly account for only slightly less than half of the UK
construction industry’s total output. The activities can be generally described as
“repair and maintenance” by governments for statistical purposes.
Aspects such as finance, sustainability, location, logistics, etc., mean that stocks
of old, redundant, and obsolete buildings can provide high-quality, desirable,
ultra-modern accommodation through their refurbishment and re-use, and at a
lower cost and more quickly than new construction.
There are, nonetheless, considerable technical issues in upgrading old buildings,
for example controlling performance.
Perceived problems:
•• Heat loss
•• Damp

-- 145 of 391 --

135	5: Retrofitting and refurbishment
•• Human comfort
•• Draughts
•• Incompatible materials and technologies
•• Unknowns
Requirements:
•• Human comfort
•• Durability
•• Low carbon
•• Reduced energy use
•• Fashion
A major factor in favour of refurbishment is that many existing buildings are still
in existence because they are well-built and structurally sound. They may be
currently run-down, neglected, and unfit for modern usage, but their traditional
methods of construction have left an abundant legacy of sound, durable struc-
tures which provide an ideal basis for refurbishment and re-use. Notwithstanding
this, it should not be assumed that they are always of high structural quality. It
is essential that any building being considered for refurbishment, even though
it may appear to be sound, is subjected to a detailed survey in order to confirm
its quality and condition, and to ascertain the likely cost of any repairs deemed
necessary and their effect on the feasibility of going ahead with a refurbishment
scheme.
Truism claims that the older the building and the longer it has been empty,
the greater the repair and refurbishment costs for the existing structure and fab-
ric. Dampness is the principal agent in most forms of building deterioration. If
the building has remained empty and neglected for a prolonged period, damp-
ness is likely to have penetrated, leading to timber decay and damaged finishes.
Empty, neglected buildings are frequent foci for vandalism, which can be very
expensive to rectify. Additionally, ordinary entropy of materials due to age will
mean that certain items will need attention. Items that may still be in good
condition may need replacing just because they are obsolete or outdated in their
design, common examples being sanitary, heating, and elevator fixtures, fittings,
and installations.
Generally, overall costs of refurbishment schemes can be directly proportional
to the age of the building and its degree of neglect, so that the proposed refurbish-
ment of any old, neglected building should thus be given very careful assessment
before proceeding. See Table 5.1 Opportunities and consequences of common
upgrading measures.

-- 146 of 391 --

136 	Retrofitting and refurbishment
Table 5.1 Opportunities and consequences of common upgrading measures
Opportunities 	Consequences
Reduced heat loss 	Rebound comfort-taking
Seal draughts 	Reduced ventilation
Fit air barriers 	Loss of moisture equilibrium
Add insulation 	Potential condensation risk
Double-glaze 	Displace condensation
Microgeneration of energy 	Offset costs, but is there net carbon reduction?
Removal of damp 	Is this necessary?
Retrofit dpc 	Increase energy usage
Increase heat 	Increase energy usage
Improve ventilation 	Reduce energy usage, but is there increase in damp?
CONSIDERATIONS FOR REFURBISHMENT
Structure
For a number of reasons it may be necessary to strengthen existing walls, f loors,
and roofs when undertaking refurbishment works. Cavity ties can be a problem in
buildings constructed before 1981. Galvanised and mild steel ties used before this
date did not have good resistance to corrosion, resulting in a regular horizontal
cracking pattern visible on the external surface; stainless steel and plastic are more
resistant. Where the structure is sound but the existing wall ties have failed, reme-
dial wall ties can be installed, fitted into holes drilled into the wall. Otherwise
rebuilding the walls may be required. Walls and f loors are required to be strapped
together; similarly roofs are required to be strapped to walls. This was not done
in the past; therefore additional retrofit strapping may be required. A structural
appraisal of the property may be advised.
Fire protection
Generally, properties are built originally to the appropriate standards of fire protec-
tion required at the time for their size, shape, occupation, and use. If any alterations
have been made since those alterations should have been constructed and provided
with appropriate safety measures. However, it is vital that it is understood that:
1. Past standards may not now be sufficient
2. Past uses might be different from current and/or proposed uses
3. The building and any alterations may not have complied with standards of the
time – especially where hidden

-- 147 of 391 --

137	5: Retrofitting and refurbishment
4. Any measures providing safety may now have deteriorated or been com-
promised by acts of amendment, maintenance, alteration, decay, distortion,
shrinkage, or other entropy.
How do old buildings work?
See Figure 5.1. which shows the complex range of moisture control, and path-
ways of airf low and moisture movement in a traditionally constructed building.
Sufficient ventilation is necessary to prevent moisture build-up and subsequent
damage to the building.
Questions to ask prior to upgrading choices
The original building:
•• How has the building been altered over time?
•• Was it built badly in the first instance?
Figure 5.1 Section through a traditionally constructed building showing the complex range
of moisture control and pathways of airflow and moisture movement. Sufficient
ventilation is necessary to prevent moisture build-up and subsequent damage to the
building (adapted from Jenkins (nd), “Improving Energy Efficiency in Traditional
Buildings”. Historic Scotland, and Picketts Historic Building Conservation).

-- 148 of 391 --

138 	Retrofitting and refurbishment
•• Was there enough knowledge available at the time of construction?
•• What has been done recently?
•• Have incompatible materials been used? e.g. iron or timber in potentially damp
situations.
•• Have technologies been used without the correct materials? e.g. f lat roofs with
insufficient allowance for movement.
•• Have recent alterations made things worse? e.g. vinyl wallpapers.
What can be done?
Refer to Table 5.2, which gives opportunities and challenges in thermal
upgrades.
What is the latest research telling us? Example desktop research:
•• SPAB – hygrothermal modelling
•• STBA
•• Historic Scotland
•• Historic England, e.g. Energy Efficiency in Historic Buildings
•• University outputs
•• Journals, e.g. International Journal of Building Pathology and Adaptation
What are the unknowns?
•• The moisture content of the walls
•• The presence of micro cavities
•• The continuity of mortar
•• The properties of materials within the wall
•• What else don’t we know?
Table 5.2 Some opportunities and challenges in thermal upgrades
Opportunities 	Challenges
Control ventilation paths 	Increased condensation/indoor pollution
Control air movement through the fabric 	Moisture trapped at air barriers
Insulate main elements 	Condensation risk at thermal gaps
More efficient heating systems 	Balance with requirements (fast response?
thermal mass?)

-- 149 of 391 --

139	5: Retrofitting and refurbishment
What do we need?
•• A process for surveying and understanding the risks of unintended consequences
•• Understanding of systemic design
•• Understanding of human behaviour
•• Understanding of environmental conditions
•• Understanding of building physics
•• A method of measuring a U-value of a building in situ
Is the building or part of the building
historic, or just old, or is it defunct?
•• “If it ain’t broke – don’t fix it” is valid here
•• Don’t need overkill – if there’s no worthwhile character you don’t need to
preserve it
•• BUT you do need to maintain durability
•• Biggest issue is control of moisture
•• Consider the ramifications of every alteration
○○ Airtightness – is it appropriate, is it possible?
○○ Removal of ventilation routes (e.g. f lues) – effect?
○○ Increased insulation – where, how much, what type, effect?
○○ Condensation risk – increased, reduced, displaced, or removed?
No one right answer – but there are plenty of wrong ones!
•• You need to aim for a balanced approach.
•• Durability can easily be compromised by wrong decisions and insufficient
joined-up thinking.
•• What is achievable?
•• What is practical?
•• What is desirable?
•• Does it all work together? Remember construction of old buildings repre-
sents a SYSTEM – it all needs to work together.
UPGRADING THERMAL PERFORMANCE
There is much to consider prior to upgrading and enhancing a building’s ther-
mal performance. Primarily, the focus is on improving the whole building, whilst
ensuring that the changes made to one part of a building do not adversely impact
another part, or result in latent defects, or result in unexpected consequences.
Simply adding insulation onto a part of the building can serve to trap in problems
that are already present or bring about changes that result in moisture forming

-- 150 of 391 --

140 	Retrofitting and refurbishment
behind the insulation or in another part of the structure. A number of points to
consider when upgrading are listed below.
What can be learned from what has happened so far?
•• Effect of inappropriate insulation
•• Insufficiently assessed buildings being chosen for insulation
•• Designs involving cut-outs for eaves, services, abutments, etc., leading to large
areas of thermal bridging
•• Low standards of detailing on site – even if appropriate design
•• Lack of understanding of the risk of insulating older properties, with many
unknown factors being assumed
•• Lack of understanding of the effect of wind-driven rain on buildings
•• Lack of basic maintenance prior to retrofit
•• Insufficient emphasis on good-quality finishing materials and workmanship
Thermal upgrades of external fabric
Refer to Table 5.3, which discusses external wall insulation (EWI), internal wall
insulation (IWI), and no wall insulation.
Table 5.3 External wall insulation, internal wall insulation, or no wall insulation?
External wall insulation 	Internal wall insulation 	No wall insulation
Thermal mass 	Fast response 	Thermal mass and slow
response
Affects exterior aesthetics –
Planning Permission required
May not require Planning
Permission
High energy usage – missed
opportunity?
Problems at roof level,
openings, dpc level, etc.
Loss of internal space 	Still need to control
hygrothermal performance
Affects the wall’s ability to
deal with moisture
Associated works: electrical
sockets, switches, etc., and
door frames, windowsills and
reveals, etc.
What can be done elsewhere
in the building to compensate
for loss of heat?
Affects the wall’s ability to
deal with moisture
How comfortable will it be
to live in?
Has fear of adverse effects
held the designer back or are
these justified?

-- 151 of 391 --

141	5: Retrofitting and refurbishment
Before starting on any fabric upgrading, need to consider:
•• Space heating – boilers, radiators, etc.
•• New sanitary and plumbing services requirements
•• Research has shown that effective use of these can be more useful in reducing
carbon emissions and fuel consumption than doing anything to the fabric
•• Think about ensuring that the occupier knows how to use the controls – need
to be user-friendly. Over-complicated systems will invariably be misused.
What about the other elements?
•• Ceilings and roofs – up to 25% of heat is lost through the roof
•• Floors – essential to consider moisture movement and ventilation
•• Doors – draught proofing and consider the panels, not just the frame
•• Windows – draught proofing can be very effective; curtains were invented for
heat retention, not just privacy
•• Flues – very important function in an old house. Soot is hygroscopic.
Ceilings and roofs
•• Lath and plaster ceilings – may be fragile and liable to collapse
•• Insulation materials – choice is important – natural materials control moisture
better than others
•• How much and where? Historic Scotland advise that you need at least 270 mm
of natural insulation to be fully effective
•• Need to maintain a gap of about 50 mm between the insulation and the sarking
felt and a robust airway at the eaves.
Floors
•• Strength in relation to any new purpose
•• Timber f loors – may be able to insulate from below if there is access
•• Consider materials: impermeable insulation may lead to timber decay
•• Solid f loors – what sort? Rammed earth, f lags? What are the benefits of insulat-
ing weighed against leaving it in situ?
•• Stone f lags will be damaged in lifting; an insulated limecrete f loor can be a
good choice in some circumstances
•• Existing concrete f loors can be insulated in the usual way.
Doors and windows
•• The least effective part of the door is usually the panels.
•• Draughts - draught stripping around frame, letterboxes, keyhole covers, etc.
(cat f laps?)

-- 152 of 391 --

142 	Retrofitting and refurbishment
•• Windows – why double/triple glaze? What effect will that have on other ele-
ments? What other alternatives are there? See Hitroic Scotland for shutters and
secondary glazing.
•• For UK climates, Historic Scotland and Historic England have published useful
documents for thermal upgrade.
•• Considerations: repair, draughtproof, shutter, secondary-glaze, provide insu-
lated glass units (IGUs), re-glaze, replace.
•• Position glazing in line with the plane of the external wall insulation (to reduce
thermal bridging).
Flues
Very useful things:
•• Structural buttressing
•• Passive stack ventilation
But,
•• Soot is hygroscopic, so will absorb moisture from the air
•• Heat is lost up the f lue
•• Down draughts can be created
•• Chimneys might not be lined, is the integrity of the feathers compromised?
•• Sealed f lues result in a lack of ventilation in the f lue, leading to moisture
retention.
•• Moisture movement and evaporation from chimney breasts can result in aes-
thetically poor patches to be visible in rooms.
So,
•• Do you remove the f lue? – easy, difficult, stability?
•• Do you line the f lue?
•• Do you seal the f lue – completely, partially, not at all?
External wall insulation
Depending on the construction, and historic relevance, of the property, any
improvement to the external fabric of a property could be:
•• Cavity wall insulation (CWI)
•• Internal wall insulation (IWI)

-- 153 of 391 --

143	5: Retrofitting and refurbishment
•• Thin internal wall insulation (TIWI)
•• External wall insulation (EWI)
There are benefits to each system, but it is important to remember that there are
disadvantages to each system as well, not least in the way each system changes the
fundamental ways the building works as a moisture moving process system.
Before considering external wall insulation, a pre-design thermal retrofit
survey is necessary. This is an on-site anticipatory inspection and assessment of a
building. It is undertaken to inform the design for a retrofitted energy efficiency
measure, and must include:
a. The nature and characteristics of the building,
b. The risks to that building and its occupants posed by the measure,
c. The risks to the efficiency of that measure posed by the building, and
d. The challenges required to mitigate these risks through and by the design.
See Tables 5.4, 5.5, and 5.6 which show typical defects found in properties having,
respectively, retrofitted IWI, EWI, and CWI.
Windows thermal upgrade
There are obvious benefits to alternate solutions for windows rather than replace-
ment. According to Historic Scotland Technical Paper 1, “Thermal performance
of traditional windows”, timber shutters reduce heat loss by 51%; ill-fitting existing
shutters can be restored or new shutters made. Heavy, lined curtains can reduce
heat loss by 14%. This publication also gives the information shown in Table 5.2,
as well as further measures. Historic England’s publication “Traditional windows:
their care, repair and upgrading” gives more advice. Also refer to Table 5.7 which
gives the test performance results of different improvement methods to sash and
casement windows.
DISCUSSION SURROUNDING THERMAL UPGRADES
Cormac Flood and Lloyd M. Scott
Policy drivers and strategies for improving the
energy efficiency of existing dwellings
Energy efficiency of buildings has become an important issue. Improvement in the
performance of buildings is strongly linked to energy savings and a reduction in
CO2 emissions, as identified by many reports and protocols internationally. The

-- 154 of 391 --

144 	Retrofitting and refurbishment
Table 5.4 Typical defects found in properties having retrofit IWI
Typical defects in retrofit IWI
Room in roof thermal bridge. Lack of effective seal at wall and ceiling junctions
Lack of thermal separation between (unheated) basement and upper storeys
Missing IWI at f loor voids
Pointing/render concerns
Penetrating damp
Brick deterioration
Rising damp
Thermal bridge at eaves
Flashings deterioration
Thermal bridge at door/window reveals/frames
Lack of sealing for unnecessary warm air loss or draughts
Additional ground f loor/ground level concern
Thermal bridge at ground f loor level
Service leaks
Condensation
Roof ventilation blocked
Designed ventilation concerns
Sloping roof soffits not insulated
basic principle of improving the energy efficiency of a building is to use less heat-
ing, cooling, and lighting without affecting the health and comfort of its occupants.
Retrofitting of existing dwellings offers significant opportunities for reducing
global energy consumption and greenhouse gas emissions. Although there is a
wide range of retrofit technologies readily available, methods to identify the most
energy-effective retrofit measures for particular projects remain a major technical
challenge. The generic building retrofit problems and key issues involved in build-
ing retrofit investment decisions are presented below.
The EU Directive on the Energy Performance of Buildings (EPBD) contains
strict provisions for further energy reduction in buildings, stating “Measures to
improve further the energy performance of buildings should take into account
climatic and local conditions as well as indoor climate environment and cost-effec-
tiveness”. Individual countries have therefore set up various schemes to achieve the
requirements.

-- 155 of 391 --

145	5: Retrofitting and refurbishment
Table 5.5 Typical defects found in properties having retrofit EWI
Typical defects in retrofit EWI
Thermal bridge at ground f loor level
Significant cut-outs (missing EWI) at pipes, services, abutments, etc.
Lack of thermal separation between (unheated) basement and upper storeys
Thermal bridges at eaves
Lack of sealing for unnecessary warm air loss or draughts
Condensation
Room in roof thermal bridge: Lack of effective seal at wall and ceiling junctions
Thermal bridge at door/window reveals/frames
Rising damp
Sloping roof soffits not insulated
Penetrating damp
Roof ventilation blocked
Additional ground f loor/ground level concern
Flashings deterioration
Service leaks
Designed ventilation concerns
Pointing/render
Brick deterioration behind EWI
Challenges for improving the energy
efficiency of existing dwellings
The complexity of energy efficiency improvement of existing dwellings cannot be
underestimated. See also the section in this chapter, “Upgrading thermal perfor-
mance”, the section in chapter 6, “Emerging themes: Gaps and needs in building
performance simulation for building retrofit”, and Chapter 9, “Environmental con-
siderations”. Investments in homes are particularly labour and cost intensive; thus
it is difficult to convince homeowners to implement retrofit strategies. Therefore,
the central issues are discussed in this section to provide context for which chal-
lenges to retrofit implementation are relevant. This discussion surrounding thermal
upgrades concludes with a further overview of the challenges that are encompassed
by the technical solutions that exist when improving the energy efficiency of exist-
ing dwellings, specifically external wall fabric upgrades.

-- 156 of 391 --

146 	Retrofitting and refurbishment
Table 5.6 Typical defects found in properties having retrofit injected or blown-in cavity
wall insulation
Typical defects in retrofit cavity wall insulation CWI
Thermal bridge at ground f loor level
Lack of thermal separation between (unheated) basement and upper storeys
Thermal bridges at eaves
Lack of sealing for unnecessary warm air loss or draughts
Condensation
Room in roof thermal bridge: Lack of effective seal at wall and ceiling junctions
Thermal bridge at door/window reveals/frames
Sloping roof soffits not insulated
Penetrating damp
Designed ventilation concerns
Lack of insulation at cavity trays
Lack of insulation at window/door heads and sills
Table 5.7 Test performances of improvement methods to sash and casement windows
(Baker, 2008)
Improvement method 	Possible reduction
in heat loss
Possible approximate resulting
U-value (W/m 2 K)
Unimproved single glazing 	– 	5.5
Lined curtains (closed) 	14% 	3.2
Shutters (closed) 	51% 	2.2
Insulated shutters 	60% 	1.6
Roller blind (closed) 	22% 	3.0
Closed blind and shutters 	58% 	1.8
Closed blind, shutters, and
curtains
62% 	1.6
Secondary glazing 	63% 	1.7
Double-glazed panes fitted in
original sash
79% 	1.3
Source: Historic Scotland Technical Paper 1, “Thermal performance of traditional windows”.

-- 157 of 391 --

147	5: Retrofitting and refurbishment
Research (Clinch & Healy, 2000; Curtin, 2009, 2013) has established a number
of barriers to action regarding domestic energy conservation and the implementa-
tion of retrofit strategies in Ireland as restated from Chapter 6, including:
•• High upfront costs
•• A lack of understanding amongst homeowners about energy use and potential
savings from the retrofit of their homes
•• A lack of disposable income for retrofit works
•• Uncertainty surrounding energy prices, particularly with payback periods over
five to seven years
•• A lack of incentive
•• Inconvenience
•• A lack of skill in the construction industry to carry out retrofit works
•• A lack of a concerted marketing strategy targeting homeowners in getting its
message delivered to consumers
In dwellings where fuel poverty is a factor in restricting energy use, the effect
of retrofit measures may be to enhance thermal comfort rather than reduc-
ing energy consumption. The purported “Jevons/take-back” effect (Greening
et al., 2000) proposes that much of the improvement in thermal performance
of the building fabric would be used to achieve higher internal temperatures
and comfort levels than pre-retrofit rather than achieving a reduction in energy
usage. A social housing study (Lowery, 2012) found that retrofitted homes con-
sumed more energy as a result of heating the dwelling more regularly attribut-
able to a perception that less energy and money is required due to improved
efficiency.
Increasing awareness and encouraging changes in occupant behaviour appear to
be fundamental in reducing energy use and subsequent carbon emissions (thus alle-
viating fuel poverty). However, this must be coupled with accurate and efficient
technical solutions that reduce heat loss through the fabric of dwellings to a level
that can be designed, measured, verified, and quantified.
Technical solutions
There are two essential methods of employing technical solutions to improve the
energy efficiency of existing dwellings – the measures-based approach and the
whole-house approach. The former, which involves installation of individual meas-
ures, is the most common approach adopted, usually due to the limitations imposed
by cost constraints and acceptable levels of disruption for occupants. In addition,
the opportunities that arise as a result of being triggered by “other” work that may
be required within the dwelling, for example replacing an irreparable boiler, are

-- 158 of 391 --

148 	Retrofitting and refurbishment
usually more frequent and thus lead to individual improvement measures being
installed. Whereas the whole-house approach is generally only undertaken where
a deep retrofit project is being undertaken. The easy to install, relatively low-cost,
and thus common improvement measures installed in existing dwellings primarily
consist of cavity wall insulation, loft insulation, draught proofing, hot water tank
insulation, replacement windows and doors, replacement boilers, and low-energy
lighting. More intrusive, costly, and thus less common interventions include solid
wall insulation, ground f loor insulation, mechanical ventilation with heat recov-
ery, and micro renewable energy technologies (Killip, 2008). Whilst all of these
improvement measures are applicable to enhancing the energy efficiency of exist-
ing dwellings, this sub-section focuses upon external wall fabric upgrades due to
their relevance to this doctoral research project.
Cavity wall retrofit with full fill insulation is considered quite simple, yet
there are a number of issues to be considered prior to execution. Retrofitting cavity
walls with full fill insulation is claimed to only be suitable in dwellings that were
built between the 1930s and 1980s, where the cavity is at least 50 mm deep and
uninsulated, as the thickness and thus overall thermal performance of the insula-
tion that can be retrofitted is determined by the depth of the cavity. Prior to the
1930s, most buildings were constructed with solid walls and consequently cannot
receive retrofitted cavity insulation. Additionally, many early cavity walls built
during the 1920s have a depth of less than 50 mm, which results in unsuitability for
retrofitted cavity wall insulation as the insulation will not align with certification
of the full fill system, nor would the thermal benefit be substantiated. The move
towards the introduction of the Building Regulations during the 1980s brought
about the installation of cavity insulation in new dwellings, rendering these dwell-
ings typically unsuitable for the application of retrofitted cavity wall insulation
(Immendoerfer et al., 2008; UWE, 2008; CPA, 2010).
Contradictory to the BER/DEAP assessment methods, a determination on the
suitability of a wall assembly for cavity wall insulation retrofit requires a survey to
be undertaken by a suitably qualified professional in accordance with the National
Insulation Association code of practice; this is to verify the presence of a cavity
in the wall, in addition to the depth and quality of the cavity and that there is no
debris or mortar obstructing the cavity. Where retrofitted cavity wall insulation
is deemed suitable, injection of the insulation product from the outside is the best
method (SEAI, 2019). Once cavities are full, the holes are then filled and made
good so that the holes can no longer be seen. The two most common insulation
materials injected into existing cavity walls are mineral or glass wool and expanded
polystyrene beads (Immendoerfer et al., 2008).
A solution to retrofit cavity walls may be full fill insulation, which is rati-
fied and promoted by NSAI and SEAI with fully certified systems carrying NSAI
Agrément certification. Nevertheless, there are concerns about filling cavity walls

-- 159 of 391 --

149	5: Retrofitting and refurbishment
with insulation retrospectively. Cavity walls were introduced to prevent moisture
from being able to pass from outside to inside the dwelling, particularly in geo-
graphical locations that are classified as being at high risk of exposure to wind-
driven rain. If moisture can bridge the cavity through the thermal insulation, this
has the potential to cause dampness, surface condensation, and mould growth on
the internal surface of the external walls (Immendoerfer et al., 2008; CPA, 2010).
Moreover, if these cavity wall insulation materials get wet, the thermal perfor-
mance is reduced (Stirling, 2001; Greenspec, 2018). Where cavity wall insulation
is determined not to be suitable for retrofitting for reasons of cavity depth or wind-
driven rain exposure, these walls should be reviewed in line with retrofit solutions
for solid walls using internal or external wall insulation, which is discussed in the
next section of this chapter. These are also the recommended methods for dwell-
ings with existing cavity wall insulation, and there is a requirement for these to be
further improved.
Solid wall insulation (SWI) can be installed either internally or externally,
the decision of which is dependent upon a number of factors including but not lim-
ited to conservation architecture, wind-driven rain exposure, cost, and f loor area,
as well as unintended consequences such as the risk of overheating and changes to
the distribution of moisture in a building resulting in severe effects on occupants’
health and the building (Doran et al., 2014). Solid wall construction was the pri-
mary method used to build dwellings up until the 1920s, a form of construction
classified as hard to treat for retrofit due to the intrusive nature of insulation retrofit
measures applicable for thermal upgrade.
SEAI (2019a) promotes EWI as the best solution for retrofitting external walls.
The compliance or benchmark U-value for retrofit funding schemes is presented
as 0.27 W/m²·K (SEAI, 2019b). To achieve this, a broad spectrum of insulation
materials such as phenolic, polyisocyanurate (PIR), expanded polystyrene (EPS),
and mineral wool can be used for both EWI and external wall insulation (IWI)
solutions (EST, 2006). Historic England (2016), however, argues that mineral
wool does not have the necessary hygroscopic properties required for externally
insulating solid walls. Conversely, Historic England (2017) suggests that insula-
tion materials based on natural fibres should be used due to their ability to absorb,
disperse, and evaporate moisture. They further maintain that the critical factor
for IWI is that there is a continuous vapour check/control layer (VCL) incorpo-
rated on the warm side of the insulation so long as it is sealed into window reveals
and imperforate, as even small holes will allow water vapour through. The use of
VCLs has, however, been questioned, and current research suggests that a VCL in a
building fabric may cause the accumulation of toxic mould growth at the interface
of the VPC and existing wall, creating the potential for backfill of moisture in
the wall structure leading to an inf lated risk of freeze-thaw frost damage (Doran
et al., 2014). However, Little (2010) argues that vapour open VCL materials, in

-- 160 of 391 --

150 	Retrofitting and refurbishment
lieu of foil facings, could facilitate drying out of the wall rather than contributing
to increasing moisture.
While EWI and IWI both present some degree of condensation risk, it has been
purported that IWI carries the higher risk of the two systems. Thermal bridges
contribute to this risk together with additional heat losses, particularly at common
details such as window and door reveals, party walls, internal walls, intermedi-
ate f loors and eaves junctions. The effects of these can be lessened and tempera-
ture gradients exploited by returning insulation into reveals of openings and along
abutting internal walls (Doran et al., 2014).
Solid walls are considered to be a breathable construction, as they allow the
absorption and evaporation of moisture through the fabric (May, 2005; Historic
England, 2016). Kingspan Ltd (2013), however, argues that 1.7% airborne mois-
ture passes through building elements as a result of vapour diffusion (“breatha-
bility”) and 95% through bulk air exchange (intentional ventilation plus air
leakage), weighting the importance of adequate ventilation in buildings over
breathability of the wall fabric. May (2009), however, disputes these findings,
highlighting that breathability was established to describe vapour permeability
in conjunction with two other key components of hygrothermal performance:
hygroscopicity (how a material absorbs and desorbs water vapour in relation to
relative humidity) and capillarity (how a material absorbs liquid water). In any
case, the jury is out on how external walls cope with moisture management, and
to what extent external sources of moisture deriving from internal and external
climate conditions inf luence the performance, hygrothermally, and how this may
impact the U-value of the building element. The CIBSE Guide A3 specifies a
typical moisture content of 5% for “exposed” brickwork and a typical moisture
content of 1% for “protected” brickwork and recommends that the brickwork
in solid walls be considered “exposed”, even where they have been rendered.
As noted (Doran et al., 2014), moisture content can strongly inf luence thermal
conductivity of a material. Consequently, it is crucial to establish the intended
and expected moisture load for each assembly within the existing fabric, noting
any further potential post-retrofit. Understanding a U-value, then, relies on the
consideration of this probable moisture load in the detail design for the building
fabric.
It can therefore be concluded that moisture within external walls is an inevita-
bility, and with it present, the impact on U-values needs to be quantified, in line
with the moisture content itself and highlighting key contributors to it. Design
intentions then need to be executed on site to ensure they are not undermined by
poor workmanship or material failure. In existing dwellings, the existing fabric
needs to be adequately known to understand the issues at hand to be resolved and
accommodated within retrofit design systems. However, to determine if design
intentions have been achieved post-retrofit, the collection and analysis of empirical
data are fundamental.

-- 161 of 391 --

151	5: Retrofitting and refurbishment
UNDERPINNING
Chris Gorse
Underpinning is taking the level of an existing foundation to a deeper, firmer
stratum by adding a new foundation construction beneath the existing foundation.
It can be necessary:
•• Due to settlement of the existing foundation, causing structural damage to the
building
•• To enable vertical extension below the building for new basement storey(s)
•• To enable the level of adjacent ground to be lowered, e.g. to construct an
adjacent new building with foundations deeper than the existing building’s
foundations
•• To increase the load-bearing capacity of the existing foundation, e.g. required
for increased f loor loadings or to construct additional storeys
•• To prevent settlement, where adjacent proposed developments have potential to
undermine the strata below existing foundations.
Methods
Mass concrete underpinning is one of the most common methods. It is con-
ducted in successive sections. This leaves the greater proportion of the existing
foundation fully supported throughout the operations. The maximum length of
each section depends on the stability of the existing structure, its loadings, and
the subsoil conditions. Each section is generally between 0.9 and 1.5 m in length.
Refer to Figure 5.2 which gives example of sequenced sections of mass concrete
underpinning.
Beam and pier underpinning comprises a reinforced concrete beam, inserted
either directly above or below the existing foundation, supported by mass concrete
piers constructed at 2.5–3 m centres.
Pile and needle underpinning comprises reinforced concrete needles
inserted horizontally through the existing wall, above foundation level, and sup-
ported at each end by small-diameter piles that transmit the building’s loads to a
Figure 5.2 Example of sequenced sections of mass concrete underpinning (adapted from
Highfield & Gorse, (2009) “Refurbishment and Upgrading of Buildings”).

-- 162 of 391 --

152 	Retrofitting and refurbishment
deeper, firmer stratum. The needles are inserted at approximately 1.5 m centres
along the length of the wall being underpinned. The piles are taken down to a
suitable load-bearing strata.
Cantilever ring beam underpinning comprises horizontal steel I-section
cantilever needles inserted into the wall and supported on a reinforced concrete
ring beam and mini-piles. The needles transmit the loads from the wall to the
beam and thence piles to a deeper bearing stratum.
Double angle mini-pile underpinning involves the installation of small-
diameter piles in pairs formed at an angle through the existing foundation at
between 1.0 and 1.5 m intervals.
UPGRADING ACOUSTIC PERFORMANCE
Unwanted and intrusive sound is a common environmental problem and can lead
to health and well-being issues. This can be improved by attention to acoustic
design and construction of buildings and can be improved in existing buildings
when refurbishment and alteration work are carried out. Building regulation and
standards often apply statutory requirements for new build. In England and Wales,
this is held in Part E of the Building Regulations. For properties that are not new
build or, for example, undergoing change of use, the statutory requirements can
often be limited. Designers and responsible persons for buildings in use therefore
may have to consider measures which are not mandatory for the well-being of
occupants. Refer to Table 5.8 for places which need good acoustic separation.
It is therefore essential that refurbishment/conversion schemes consider incor-
porating acoustic upgrading of walls and f loors to ensure satisfactory environmen-
tal conditions for their occupants.
Table 5.8 Places which need good acoustic separation
Examples of places requiring good acoustic separation (but not necessarily
mandatory)
Dwelling-houses, f lats
Rooms for residential purposes
Hotels, hostels, boarding houses
Schools/university teaching spaces
Separation between workshops/factories and offices
Separation between medical consulting rooms and other areas
Separation between rooms for confidential use (e.g. solicitor office) and other areas

-- 163 of 391 --

153	5: Retrofitting and refurbishment
Airborne sound, e.g. from speech, musical instruments, and audio speakers,
creates vibrations in the air which move out and subsequently cause vibrations in
the enclosing walls and f loors (elements). These vibrations spreading throughout
the elements and into connecting elements cause air particles on the other side to
vibrate. These new airborne vibrations can be heard as airborne sound.
Impact sound, e.g. from footsteps, knocking, and machinery vibrations,
creates vibrations directly in the element they strike. These vibrations spreading
throughout the elements and into connecting elements cause air particles on the
other side to vibrate. These new vibrations can be heard as impact and airborne
sound.
Reduction of impact and airborne sound transmission
•• Sound-proofing, like water-proofing, is only as good as the weakest point.
•• Resilient materials (e.g. carpeting, cushioning material) can reduce impact
sound.
•• Breaks in the structure reduce structure-borne sound. The sound energy must
change back to airborne sound to pass through structural breaks; this uses
energy and reduces the sound intensity.
•• High-density materials (e.g. dense blockwork, concrete) can absorb and reduce
sound energy.
•• Low-density material (e.g. mineral wool with minimum density 10 kg/m3) can
absorb sound.
•• Sound energy is measured in decibels (dB). This uses a logarithmic scale so, for
example, a 10-dB increase equates to approximately doubling of the perceived
noise. So the lower the decibel figure, or the bigger the reduction in decibels,
the better.
•• A normal decibel reading in a normal domestic situation may be about
30–40 dB.
•• Guidance can be found in England and Wales’ Approved Document E, even for
works which do not need compliance.
Further advice:
•• Avoid chasing walls for cables and sockets to be recessed; this creates weak spots
in the wall
•• If necessary to chase, do not place sockets back-to-back or create voids or holes
in the walls
•• Tape and seal all gaps, cracks, or holes in the masonry
•• Do not fill the wall cavity with concrete, mortar, or other masonry materials
(likely to create a bridge for the passage of sound); fill with resilient material

-- 164 of 391 --

154 	Retrofitting and refurbishment
•• Dense linings, such as dense acoustic plasterboard or dense mineral wool,
absorb sound energy
•• Close cavities with f lexible cavity closers to prevent sound travelling along the
cavity.
Improving the acoustic performance of f loors
In the methods described below, a perimeter gap may be required around all
edges of new f looring, and a gap left between the skirting and the f loor to prevent
sound transmission into the walls. The ceiling perimeter must also be sealed,
along with all other airborne sound paths. Any incompatibility between this
requirement and the f loor’s performance for fire protection and thermal insula-
tion must be resolved.
Floating platform f loors, of a new, dense, f loor surface on a layer of resil-
ient mineral wool on top of existing f loors, are one of the most effective ways
of upgrading the sound insulation of a separating f loor. However, consider the
increase in loading and the raising of the existing f loor level affecting door thresh-
olds, skirtings, services, sanitary fittings, etc.
Proprietary laminated acoustic f looring systems are similarly designed
to be placed on top of the existing f loor but can again raise the f loor level by up to
50 mm, thus needing adjustments to doors, skirtings, services, etc.
Floating f loor on resilient strips with heavy pugging includes inserting
a layer of heavy “pugging”, sound-deadening material (e.g. dry sand, limestone
chips, or thin aggregate). If the ceiling is not capable of supporting the pugging,
it should be laid onto plywood pugging boards supported by timber battens fixed
to the sides of the joists. Replacement of the existing f loor-boarding can be done
using tongued and grooved f loor-boarding f loated on resilient (impact sound-
reducing) strips laid along the top edges of the existing f loor joists.
Proprietary resilient f looring systems usually involve filling the voids
between joists with sound-absorbent material, replacing f loor boards/surfaces with
proprietary boarding on resilient strips, and replacing ceilings with proprietary
ceiling boards. These systems are usually lighter and have less impact on room
heights than other methods but involve replacement of f loor and ceiling coverings,
which may not be acceptable in historic properties.
Independent ceilings can be an alternative means of sound-proofing without
affecting the existing construction. A new, independent ceiling is added beneath
the existing ceiling, carried on its own set of joists, and spaced as far below the
existing ceiling as possible, with an acoustically absorbent material between the
new and existing ceilings. This method may not be feasible or acceptable if the
existing headroom in the room below is limited, or if the existing ceiling has an
ornate finish, or is an important feature in a listed building.

-- 165 of 391 --

155	5: Retrofitting and refurbishment
Improving the acoustic performance of walls
The most effective means of upgrading the acoustic performance of an external wall
is to improve the windows. External noise usually enters a building via the windows,
since single glazing is a very poor sound reducer and relatively insignificant gaps
around ill-fitting casements adversely affect their acoustic performance. Improving
the airtightness of window frames and increasing the thermal performance of the
window by double-glazing or secondary glazing also increase the acoustic perfor-
mance. All clear air-paths between casements and frames, and frames and reveals,
should be properly sealed to prevent leakage of airborne sound. Flexible sealing gas-
kets can be incorporated between the casements and frames, and gaps between the
new secondary frames and the existing window reveals sealed with acoustic sealant.
UPGRADING FIRE PROTECTION
Melanie Smith
Introduction
Any larger refurbishment project is likely to involve the necessity to review and
possibly improve the fire safety provisions. Reference to Chapter 7, “Fire safety”,
will probably be useful, as well as the subsections relating to fire in Chapter 3 “Legal
and regulatory frameworks”. This section, however, aims to provide thoughts for
consideration during a refurbishment project’s initial design.
Walls
If the walls are masonry and plastered, they are probably providing sufficient fire
protection because even 75 mm thick brick or block walls can provide one hour’s
fire resistance. The challenge will be to find where there is no masonry inside the
walls – i.e. holes and gaps in the structure, and at the edges between walls/ceilings,
wall/doors, walls/windows, walls/internal walls, walls/f loors, etc.
For stud, lath and plaster, wattle and daub, and similar partitions, some explo-
ration of the thickness of the layers will be required. The partition may provide
30 minutes fire resistance from both sides in terms of stability, but its resistance for
insulation or integrity may require improvement. A simple way, provided this is
acceptable, is to nail 9 mm plasterboard to each side, seal the joints, and skim over.
It may not be acceptable from a historical or structural viewpoint.
Doors
If the door is not of historic importance, replacing the whole door set (door and
frame) with a new one of the required fire resistance (integrity) will be the easiest

-- 166 of 391 --

156 	Retrofitting and refurbishment
option and possibly least expensive. In some instances, it has been acceptable for a
historic door set to be replaced with new, provided that the original door is prop-
erly conserved, in a recorded suitable place, and labelled.
It is the door set (i.e. door and frame), not just the door, which is required to
be fire-resisting. The door on its own will not provide integrity if fire smoke and
products of combustion can easily bypass the door through the gaps between the
door and frame and/or through gaps behind the door frame architraves. Improving
the protection of the gap between the door and its frame with the proper use of
intumescent smoke seals will provide a much better performing door set. Few door
sets can be considered a fire door without this. Consideration may be required for
any key holes, letterboxes, cat f laps, or gaps in the timber due to moved/damaged
doorknobs, etc.
If the door and its frame cannot be replaced, then it may require upgrading.
There are various materials, including intumescent papers, intumescent paints/
varnishes, but these have limitations. Most modern “normal” internal doors can-
not be upgraded to achieve 30 minutes’ fire resistance because they have a hollow
core, are very thin, or are lightweight and perhaps warped. Existing timber doors
can only be improved to a maximum of 30 minutes. The following offer some
observations.
•• Covering only a single face of a door leaf with sheet fire-resisting material puts
an uneven load on the door, causing it to distort out of its frame, affecting its
potential fire resistance.
•• Upgrading a door by applying an intumescent coating must be done by pre-
cisely following the manufacturer’s instructions for applying the coating. Such
coatings need careful maintenance following application.
•• For most door types and construction, conversion to a fire door cannot be
achieved using fire-protection paint or varnish. Advice should be sought.
Intumescent coatings are generally designed to control surface spread of
f lame and fire propagation, and not to help upgrade internal doors to fire
doors.
•• Maintenance and redecoration after treatment may not be possible without
negating the fire protection.
•• Agrément or similar testing records and certificates should be studied for how,
exactly, the door in its treated form was tested. It has been known that the test
circumstances, and treatment method for the test, are nothing like how a manu-
facturer suggests the door is treated in its advertising material.
•• Not all doors can be upgraded. Possible upgrading depends on the strength and
construction of the door. The following doors are unsuitable for upgrading:
○○ Unframed, hollow core, f lush type
○○ Ledged and braced type

-- 167 of 391 --

157	5: Retrofitting and refurbishment
•• The door should be a good fit in its frame (gaps not exceeding 3 mm), and
an intumescent seal should be fitted (with a f lexible cold smoke seal if smoke
control is required).
•• Any architraves should be removed to check that there are no gaps between
the door frame and the surrounding structure. Any gaps should be filled with
fire-resisting material.
•• Hardware used on fire doors should have a melting point in excess of 800°C.
Letterboxes should be of a proprietary fire-resisting type.
Refer to Table 5.9 for methods of upgrading fire doors.
Floors
One of the most common elements to be improved is existing f loors. Existing
buildings can have timber f loors, rather than cementitious. Whereas for a refur-
bishment, particularly a change of use, the f loors may need to be compartment
f loors and/or to offer 60 or 90 minutes’ fire resistance in terms of structure, integ-
rity, and insulation. If the f loors can be replaced, then that is merely a structural
challenge. If the building is a heritage or listed building, f loor replacement might
not be permitted.
In such a project, the designer must consider whether it would be better, for
protecting the heritage of the building, to go into the f loor’s structure from above
or from below. The challenge might well be decorative ornate plaster ceilings and
covings, versus the original oak tongued and grooved exposed f loorboards. Which
would it be better to put at risk of destruction?
A similar decision would need to be made for exposed f loor joists. A sim-
ple decision to underdraw the f loor joists with two layers of plasterboard (with
staggered and intumescent sealed joints), fastened to the bottom of the joists,
and packing the f loor void with chicken-wire hung mineral wool, might not
be acceptable if the exposed joists were an important or aesthetically pleasing
feature. Setting the plasterboard and mineral wool sandwiches between the joists
and, using the acceptability of the sacrificial timber of the oversized (to cur-
rent standards) oak joists, might be an acceptable solution or might make the
reduced extent of the remaining exposed joist look awkward, and therefore be
unacceptable.
Placing the additional protection on the upper surface of the f loor may work,
or the raised f loor might make room heights too low, door opening heights too
low, or compromise movement around the building with effects on stairs, lifts,
etc.
See also Cooke (2003) and Table 5.10 for methods of upgrading timber f loors,

-- 168 of 391 --

158 	Retrofitting and refurbishment
Table 5.9 Methods of upgrading fire doors
Fire-resisting sheet/board
Over-panel both faces of door with fire-resisting boarding.
This can be done in ways that are acceptably “reversible”,
i.e. the original door is not unacceptably damaged. The
finished door does not have the aesthetics of the original.
Fire-resisting glass of proven integrity (e.g. Pyran) can be
used as an alternative to boarding. The glass will have little
effect on the insulation performance of the door, but this
may be unimportant. The fixing needs special consideration
to allow for different thermal movement of timber and glass.
Half and half with a panelled door, by retaining the (often
thick, solid, oak) door stiles and rails, and replacing the
(often, thin, split, pine) panels with fire-resisting boarding
(covering panel with veneer and intumescent paste used in
the joints). The new boarded panels can be much thicker
than the original, which may not be acceptable aesthetically
and for conservation purposes.
Split in half, to produce two thin separate faces, sandwich
these back together with fire-resisting board between the
two faces.
The door has to be thick enough to be able to do this.
Panelled doors are unlikely to be suitable for this method.
Intumescent paper. This has to be applied in thick layers,
which can look rather clumsy when applied to the door.
Sharp edges are rounded; the mouldings are reduced in
clarity.
Intumescent paint or varnish can improve fire resistance
(and f lame spread). The colour of the finished paint or
varnish may not be acceptable.
The intumescent must be compatible with the door’s existing
coating to perform adequately in a fire situation. It may need
the existing coating to be removed for the coating; this might
not be acceptable.
Fire safety and maintenance management are important
– Notice may be required that the intumescent coating
should not be removed or improperly cleaned.
Possibly only treat thin portions or minor parts of the door.

-- 169 of 391 --

159	5: Retrofitting and refurbishment
Table 5.10 Methods of upgrading timber f loors
Methods of upgrading timber f loors (not to scale and illustrative only)
Two typical timber f loors, not to scale.
•• Floor boards
•• Floor void
•• (With or without) Lath and plaster ceiling
Exposed f loor joists. Simple solution: underdraw the f loor
joists with two layers of plasterboard (with staggered and
intumescent sealed joints), fastened to the bottom of the joists
and pack the f loor void with chicken-wire hung mineral
wool.
May not be acceptable if the exposed joists are an important
or aesthetically pleasing feature.
Exposed joists. Setting the plasterboard and mineral wool
sandwiched between the joists, and using the acceptability
of sacrificial timber of the oversized (to current standards)
oak joists. May make the reduced extent of the remaining
exposed joists look awkward, and therefore may be
unacceptable.
Adding plaster from the top. Some historic f loors are
found to have already been treated this way, either at the
time of construction or after. Also useful when f loorboards
are in poor condition and/or where the historic moulded
ceiling in poor condition, e.g. laths fixed with corroded
nails.
Work from upper face, remove f loorboards, fix dpm and
expanded metal to sides of joists, pour in lightweight plaster,
replace f loorboards.
Only possible where f loor and ceiling can carry additional
weight. Whilst wet the plaster will be considerably heavier
than when eventually dried out.
Where the ceiling is intact but unimportant. The
ceiling can be left in place and underdrawn with one or two
layers of fire-resistant boarding with staggered joints and
joints taped, filled with intumescent paste, etc. Fixings are
important.
(continued)

-- 170 of 391 --

160 	Retrofitting and refurbishment
Table 5.10 (continued)
Methods of upgrading timber f loors (not to scale and illustrative only)
Decorative ceiling. Floorboards carefully lifted. Noggins
carefully fixed to joists above ceiling. Fire-resisting boards
laid onto noggins. Void filled with mineral wool. Floor
could be overboarded for further integrity.
All dependent on:
•• Sensitivity of original decorative ceiling, etc., to
vibration
•• Condition of joists to carry extra weight
•• Importance of f loorboards
Case study: University of Leicester Engineering Building, UK
This case study was originally published by Context, the magazine of the Institute
of Historic Building Conservation (Smith, 1999), author Melanie Smith FRICS,
GIFireE. See also the University of Leicester (n.d.).
Current aspects required of the built environment such as accessibility, thermal
comfort, reduced energy use, fire safety, and their associated regulation can be at
odds with the construction, layouts, and facilities of existing, historic, and listed
buildings. The demands for current standards can be in direct conf lict with the
conservation conditions or character. A collaborative, creative, holistic, and inno-
vative approach is needed by the designers of interventions and the appropriate
authorities, to reconcile vital discrepancies.
One of the problems with listed buildings is how to upgrade them to meet
modern safety standards without compromising their architectural qualities. The
case study presented involved the collaboration of a Building Surveyor as overall
designer and fire engineer, the Fire Authority, the Planning Department Listed
Building Section, Historic England (then English Heritage), a Building Services
Engineer for design of the air-handling systems and services engineering works,
the University, and excellent contractors.
The case study is about the retrofit fire safety works incorporated into the inter-
nationally renowned Sir James Stirling Building at the University of Leicester. The
home of the School of Engineering is a structure designed by Stirling and James
Gowan, built in 1963. A seminal building, unlike any post-war architecture seen
before, it broke the hold of Le Corbusier upon British architects. It was the first
high-rise structure in the region, and its striking red tiled and glazed 11 storey Tower
with the diamond-shaped north-light roofs on the workshops and southern labora-
tory block was the inspiration for similar buildings around the world. Its lecture halls
projecting out at the lower levels of the Tower are seemingly supported on impossibly
slender columns. Internally, the red tile and glass features continue with open atria
providing a sensation of colour and space. The building is listed Grade II*.

-- 171 of 391 --

161	5: Retrofitting and refurbishment
Despite its architectural merits, the building had not been without its problems.
The curtain wall glazing on the Tower was replaced to improve conditions for the
occupants, and the glass workshop roof, affected by leaks, has been replaced. There
were no accessible facilities, and the School found itself periodically severely spa-
tially restricted within its walls. This was the case when they decided to increase
f loor space by inserting two new f loors over the boilers in South Block, where the
boiler rooms had previously extended to the third f loor.
On discussing these proposed works with the Fire Authority and querying
whether the existing means of escape would be adequate with the increased
number of occupants, the fire safety of the whole building was called into ques-
tion. There were two main problems: the existing stairs in South Block were not
adequate for the proposed new f loors, but more significantly, the unprotected
single stair in the Tower serving ten f loors needed upgrading work as a matter
of urgency to bring the building in line with current minimum safety standards.
The occupants of the upper f loors were at severe risk if there were to be a fire.
The Fire Authority indicated to the University what would be needed in relation
to protected lobbies and new fire doors. Because of the listing, the University con-
tacted the local authority Planning Department, and as it is Grade II*, English Heritage
would also have to approve any proposed alterations. Enclosure of the Tower stairway,
as required by the Fire Authority, was not acceptable to English Heritage because it
would so drastically change the essential aspect of this important building.
Faced with the possible closure of the building, the University appointed a
Building Surveyor and Fire Specialist as Lead Designer to find a solution accept-
able to the Planners, Conservation Officers, Building Control Officers, English
Heritage, the Fire Authority, and of course the University and the School of
Engineering.
The first challenge for the Lead Designer was to decide what to comply with.
The guidance at the time was more limited than currently available, but those
documents available were all reviewed, discrepancies between them noted, prag-
matic decisions made about best-fit, and comparables were used where guidance
was not necessarily directly written for this circumstance. Where possible, the
“best practice” method was used. Where possible, compliance with UK Approved
Document B was proposed for alignment with fire safety regulation in place for
new buildings. However, in a (then) 35-year-old building, compliance with a doc-
ument intended for new design is not easy. In addition, every proposal had to be
acceptable to English Heritage.
Compliance is often a serious problem with listed buildings. The existing
design is often not conducive to meeting current standards but it is the existing
design which is the reason for the listing. Sensitivity, a knowledge of architectural
and construction history, and a solid grounding in the principles of fire safety, as
well as knowledge of the regulations, are all vital ingredients for a successful solu-
tion to these problems.

-- 172 of 391 --

162 	Retrofitting and refurbishment
A fundamental assessment and review of the entire building was undertaken by
the Lead Designer. The way the building was used by all occupants, and all safety
features incorporated were considered: structural protection, detection and alarm,
travel distances, final exits, security, health and safety, protection of travel routes,
and so on. For much of the building, simple upgrading methods to improve the
passive fire resistance were possible, including determining compartment bounda-
ries, upgrading doors, fire stopping, and intumescent or automatic pipe closers.
The Tower, with its single stair and atria, was the greatest challenge. The radical
decision was finally taken to insert into the Tower (probably) the biggest retrofit
pressurisation system in England.
The building was originally designed for the School of Engineering, and the
architects, Stirling and Gowan, ensured that internally it has an essential functional
feel, visually and in its spatial organisation, to ref lect the engineers using it. Most
of the air-handling specialists asked to tender for the design and installation of the
pressurisation system were unable to appreciate the absolute necessity of not affect-
ing the look of the external envelope and wanted to insert large fans in the external
façade, all the way up the Tower. The Lead Designer (as well as English Heritage)
insisted that this was not an option and another way had to be found.
This was an example of consultants who are experts in their field, and highly
skilled, but whose responsibilities may not extend to appreciating all the elements
involved in sensitive works involving listed buildings. By using the procurement
appointment system they did, the University was able to appoint separate specialists
knowing that all proposals and work would be assessed for impact on the building’s
intrinsic merit, etc., as well as for the fire strategy.
The final design was produced for the Tower. Fire safety requirements were
met by active measures that would, in the case of a fire, apply positive pressure to
the building’s central well using fans on the Tower roof and use internal pipes to
pump air down large-diameter pipes carried on the internal faces of the stairway
enclosure. This was a solution acceptable to the Fire Authorities, English Heritage,
the City Conservation Officers, and Building Control. The pipework did not have
to be hidden because it enhanced the functional aesthetics of the central shaft.
The next problem was – would it work? The challenge was to design a system
that would be capable of pressurising the open stairway with its atria. The build-
ing was arranged to be “blown-up” (like a balloon) by the Building Research
Establishment to check the air-leakage calculations. Rearrangement of the ground
f loor WC accommodation had to be made to house one pressurisation plant room,
incorporating a fan and uninterruptible power supply. The opportunity was taken
during this rearrangement to incorporate accessible sanitary accommodation pre-
viously not incorporated into the building.
A second plant room went in at the top of the Tower stairway. A new f loor was
constructed in the open space under the roof to house the second fan, and two
apertures had to be cut in the roof of the Tower for air inlet.

-- 173 of 391 --

163	5: Retrofitting and refurbishment
The essence of pressurisation is that (in this case), in the event of a fire, the
stairway and atria are pumped with air to put them at a positive pressure in rela-
tion to the adjoining accommodation. Smoke and toxic gases from a fire in the
adjoining rooms will therefore be unlikely to find their way into the escape route.
Occupants of the building should then be able to make their way down the only
route of escape to a place of safety without having their movement inhibited by the
presence of smoke and gases. In many cases, it is these toxic gases that harm and kill
occupants in a fire rather than heat from the f lames.
The pressurisation system was used in place of providing protected lobbies to
the stairway. However, where possible, by simply upgrading or replacing existing
construction on the upper f loors to provide protected lobbies, this was done. It is
vital to use passive protection wherever possible and avoid reliance solely on active
measures.
In the South Block, more traditional methods of fire upgrade were utilised
to provide protected stairways and escape routes in accordance with Approved
Document B: Fire Safety of the Building Regulations.
One of the “turning points” in English architecture identified by the Council’s
Conservation Officers was the use of brick over-cladding to conceal external doors
to a store. Two new fire exit doors were necessary to the single-storey workshops.
These had to be placed along an originally unbroken single-storey brick elevation
facing across the adjacent park. English Heritage and the Listed Building Planners
agreed that the brick-clad door design could be copied along this wall. Thus, the
“quirkiness” of this architecture was celebrated.
A new automatic fire detection and alarm system was installed throughout
the whole building with detectors suitable for the different types of engineering
research being undertaken and the different materials being used in the different
areas of the building, especially the workshops. The system was an L2 system to
BS5839 and designed to the performance standard required for new build. The
AFD system also had to contend with planning restrictions. It was intended that
orange pyro cable be surface mounted onto the red tiles of the Tower. The red and
orange would clash unacceptably and so the plastic coating was stripped off, leav-
ing the copper casing exposed. The copper sat acceptably with the red tiles and met
the approval of both fire and conservation authorities.
The aluminium and glass doors off the Tower stairway at the upper levels were
an essential part of the design but offered very little fire resistance. Steel-framed
fire doors replicating the original aluminium were installed in both the main
Tower and South Block.
The project is an example of all the authorities and consultants working together
in conjunction with the University Estates and Buildings Office and the School of
Engineering to make a unique building as safe as possible whilst not destroying its
essential features. A spirit of cooperation existed between all the parties, ensuring
success.

-- 174 of 391 --

164 	Retrofitting and refurbishment
FASHION
For a building to survive, it needs to overcome obsolescence. It will not be feasible
to retrofit or refurbish a building that does not lend itself to adaption for current
requirements. The current and the old need to be able to co-exist. Fashion can be
described as a custom, look, or way of doing things that is considered acceptable,
particularly that which prevails at that time among those whose lead is accepted.
The challenges associated with this include f leeting fashions, established views,
views of the establishments (e.g. societies of architects, planners, government min-
isters, customers/clients, global trends/issues, suppliers, accepted science/knowl-
edge transfer), and those inf luenced by these.
Fashion has been around in buildings since medieval times – inserting bay and
then bow windows in existing houses, recladding timber-framed Elizabethan with
brick in Georgian times, etc. Obsolescence, redundancy, retrofitting, and refur-
bishment result from rising living standards, changing social aims, and technologi-
cal advancement. As a society gets richer, its views on what constitutes tolerable
living and working conditions change radically. Sanitation, light, and ventilation
are typically currently insisted on. Reduction in energy use is a relatively new
requirement, and its lasting fashion relevance will depend on society, security,
adverse effects of climate change, and sufficient wealth to make improvements that
will result in its reduction.
Preservation, which is the static maintenance of an object in an unaltered con-
dition, can only be of limited usefulness in a building. Financial viability is key.
Conversely, conservation consists of cherishing the building so that it does not
merely continue but also receives more abundant life from the changes and fresh
associations that occur (Harvey, 1972). Successful conservation regards preserva-
tion as an essential element – but only one element. The way to conserve old build-
ings is to make them a living, useful, enjoyable part of the environment. To do this
at any point in time involves the consideration of fashion, including the making
of a new fashion or revival of an older one, but rarely harking back to a recently
declining or discarded fashion. Notwithstanding, of course, the fashion to preserve
as much as possible that which is worth preserving from the past, e.g. as shown in
the listing requirements of listed, etc., buildings.
Finishes are an essential tool in a building achieving fashionableness, whatever
its age or type. For example, current house fashions for refurbishment projects
include:
•• External render painted in white or other light, bright, fresh colour
•• Maximising open space
•• Stone, timber, seamless, or laminate f loor finishes
•• New windows in styles that complement the age, style, and proportions of the
original building

-- 175 of 391 --

165	5: Retrofitting and refurbishment
•• Replacing conventional windows with bi-fold doors or full-height fenestration
•• Integrated open kitchen, living, and dining areas
•• Large glazed façade giving access to rear gardens
•• Spacious bathrooms
•• Uncomplicated circulation routes
•• Limited use of corridors and passageways
•• Whatever the size of the property, increasing room area, light, and ventilation
The drive for opening up spaces is due to the lack of space, especially in UK
housing, which is the smallest of all western developed nations, according to the
interesting material in http://shrinkthatfootprint.com/how-big-is-a-house. In the
UK, the “Technical housing standards” set out the UK government’s nationally
described space standard.
Current office fit-outs are similarly showing clean lines, mainly white or light
colours, with contrasting steel, glass, and/or pale timber furniture incorporating
bright accent colours. Open plan, break-out spaces, and relaxation spaces with an
eye to well-being are all also currently fashionable. Corridors and passageways
have always arguably been a waste of space, but it has been fashionable to have
“cellular” individual rooms, especially in offices where there may have been a hier-
archy of seniority levels or “pay-grades”. This has been out of fashion, and the more
open and “all-together” we can be, the better. This may revert or change again in
the future, of course. The experience of covid may result in different views.
Opening up spaces, removing walls and communication areas, increases the
efficiency of a layout, giving a feeling of space and the chance to use the space for
dual purposes. In the case of new build, it means the square footage can be driven
down and unit numbers increased, whilst still selling for the same price. In the case
of refurbishments (barring extensions), an open plan enables a chance to be more
efficient with the profitable space.
Sustainable design is increasingly desirable, using more recyclable and sustain-
able materials. “Sustainable” is a jaded term, a buzz-word that very few people fully
understand, often used where not relevant or apt, for example, using imported stone
or slate from the other side of the world, rather than that locally available albeit at a
much greater cost. What appears to have been a success is the removal of hardwoods
from materials’ menus, e.g. replacing mahogany and other tropical hardwoods with
oak and other temperate hardwoods, although de-forestation is still a major problem.
The use of outdoor space, for working as well as relaxing, shows increases in
productivity, as does biophilia. Biophilia, internally and externally, has become an
accepted, if still exotic, part of the building palette. It has proven itself to be good
for the environment and for the well-being of occupants and does not need to be
expensive to maintain (green roofs), although it is always quite expensive to install.
It needs to be used where it can be enjoyed by as many people as possible, i.e. in
public or communal spaces rather than private.

-- 176 of 391 --

166 	Retrofitting and refurbishment
Of predominate importance is IT, cloud, and electronic communication provi-
sion, which must be easily adapted and upgraded due to the speed of technology
advancement. Smart, remote, and f lexible working, in the home as well as in tradi-
tional workplaces, is arguably the norm and of increasing importance. Video calls
from home became the norm for businesses during the 2020 covid pandemic. In
the home, smart speakers can integrate with and control several smart devices, act-
ing as a home automation hub, including thermostats, lights, door locks, security,
and media. Smart commercial buildings with sensors and integrated technolo-
gies help with energy management, comfort, security, and space-use optimisation,
which can be ref lected in productivity. Residential and commercial buildings that
are completely run by computer installations may become the way that things are
done, simply because that is the only way forward, rather than a choice. However,
technology is in its infancy for automation, with competing standards and incom-
patibility of those standards. The good automation packages may be currently too
expensive or too complicated for most projects.
It is not all about looks, however, e.g. the fashion for hard f loor finishes is allied
to underf loor heating and the fact that it works better with stone or tiled finishes
rather than wood or carpet. It is also about cost, e.g. stripped back, rough, and ele-
mental finishes, with little effort at dressing up surfaces or concealing services, and
clashing with highlights of very well-finished elements such as doors, windows,
and kitchen installations. These can currently achieve an “up to the minute” look
without the price tag. Although technology is driving finishes in f looring, it can
be expensive to retrofit these into an existing structure; the depth of f loor build-
up can be a barrier. Extensions do not suffer this problem as much. Conversely for
fenestration, improvements in glazing allow for bigger windows without as much
of a penalty in energy bills.
An interesting point for the future of refurbishments are modern methods of
construction (MMC). Many house builders are keen for factory-made off-site
houses to become mainstream. These have benefits for many reasons; however,
future retrofit or change will be challenging due to the very nature of their design
and their method of construction (e.g. light gauge metal frame). Structurally, they
are not as robust as traditional or timber-frame construction because safe tolerances
have been reduced so much by design. The strength of these MMC structures
comes from the whole frame rather than individual parts, meaning that increas-
ing opening sizes, e.g. for windows or partitions, is not easily achievable because
removing one part can make the whole structure too weak. Even minor amend-
ments such as extra lighting, sockets, or altered plumbing can be problematic.
The risk of rusting in light gauge steel MMC structures has been discussed in
Chapter 4, “Building pathology”, and this might complicate any desires for refur-
bishing such structures. It may be that construction of this type will not be suitable
for refurbishment after time, perhaps having to be replaced in 40 to 60 years’ time,
and surveyors need to be aware of this. This has happened before when housing

-- 177 of 391 --

167	5: Retrofitting and refurbishment
types (e.g. Airey Houses) constructed in the UK from the mid-1940s onwards, to
meet the housing needs due to the war, needed to be amended or replaced in the
1970s and 1980s.
Attention should be paid to the acoustics of any working environment,
although acoustic performance in an open office environment does not appear to
be as important as it used to be. With open office spaces, acoustic treatments to cut
reverberation have improved over time, with completely open spaces sounding as
“dead” as small rooms. Without this, in a room full of hard surfaces and low ceil-
ings, noise may be an issue, but this is not raising many concerns except in private
houses (f loors and bedrooms) and between adjacent residential f lats. People are
rightly intolerant of intrusive noise, and building regulation usually ref lects this.
The current fashion for refurbishment methodologies in the UK, prevailing
since the 1970s, usually does not include “restoring” the building back to some
mythical past. Ruskin, Morris, and others complained that Victorian Restoration
swept away all signs of the building’s own story, making it a pastiche of itself.
Another side to this is replacing parts of an unlisted building because those parts are
old, rather than because they are failing. The old adage of “if it ain’t broke, don’t
fix it” comes into play here – but of course factors such as safety, energy use, and
indeed fashion are intrinsic parts of whether or not it is “broke”.
REFERENCES
Baker, P. (2008). Technical Paper 1: Thermal performance of traditional windows.
Technical Report. Historic Scotland, Technical Conservation Group
Clinch, J. P. & Healy, J. D. (2000). Domestic energy efficiency in Ireland: correcting
market failure. Energy Policy, 28, 1–8.
Cooke, G. (2003). Upgrading the fire resistance of f loors and doors in heritage
buildings. International Symposium on Protection of Cultural Heritage Buildings
from Fire, Kyoto, April 6–7, 2003.
CPA (2010). An introduction to low carbon domestic refurbishment. London, UK: Construction
Products Association.
Curtin, J. (2009). Jobs, growth and reduced energy costs: greenprint for a national energy efficiency
retrofit programme. Dublin, Ireland: Institute of International and European Affairs.
Curtin, J. (2013). Unlocking investment in home retrofit. Ireland: Passive House+.
Doran, S., Zapata, G., Tweed, C., Suffolk, C., Forman, T. & Gemmell, A. (2014). Solid
wall heat losses and the potential for energy saving: literature review. Watford, UK: BRE.
EST (2006). Practical refurbishment of solid-walled houses. London, UK: Energy Saving
Trust.
Highfield, D. & Gorse, C. (2009). Refurbishment and upgrading of buildings (2nd ed.).
Spon Press. https://doi.org/10.4324/9780203879160
Greening, L., Greene, D. L. & Difiglio, C. (2000). Energy efficiency and consumption—
the rebound effect—a survey. Energy Policy, 28, 389–401.

-- 178 of 391 --

168 	Retrofitting and refurbishment
Greenspec (2018). Insulation materials and their thermal properties [Online]. UK:
Greenspec. Available: http://www.greenspec.co.uk/building-design/insulation-m
aterials-thermal-properties
Harvey, J. (1972). Conservation of buildings. London, UK: Mackay Ltd.
Historic England (2016). Energy efficiency in historic buildings: insulating solid walls. v1.1 ed.
UK: Historic England.
Historic England (2017). Energy efficiency and historic buildings: application of part l of the
building regulations to historic and traditionally constructed buildings. v1.2 ed. UK: Historic
England.
Immendoerfer, A., Houh, C., Andrews, A. & Mathias, A. (2008). Fit for the future: the
green homes retrofit manual—technical supplement. London, UK: Housing Corporation.
Killip, G. (2008). Transforming the UK’s existing housing stock: a report for the federation
of master builders. London, UK: Environmental Change Institute, University of
Oxford.
Kingspan (2013). Breathability—a white paper: a study into the impact of breathability on
condensation, mould growth, dust mite populations and health. 3 ed. UK: Kingspan
Insulation Ltd.
Little, J. (2010) Breaking the Mould 5: Comparative simulation of internal insulation
systems. Construct Ireland Magazine, Issue 12 volume 4, April 2010.
Lowery, D. (2012). Evaluation of a social housing retrofit and its impact on tenant energy
use behaviour. Doctor of Philosophy Doctoral thesis, Northumbria University.
May, N. (2005). Breathability: the key to building performance. UK: Sustainable Traditional
Buildings Alliance (STBA).
SEAI (2019a). A homeowner’s guide to wall insulation. The sustainable energy authority of
Ireland. Dublin, Ireland: SEAI.
SEAI (2019b). Energy savings credits. The sustainable energy authority of Ireland.
Dublin, Ireland: SEAI. Available from: https://www.seai.ie/publications/Energy_
Saving_Credits_Table.pdf
Smith, M. (1999). The Engineering Building, University of Leicester fire safety works.
Context 62. June 1999. Available: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/2993
89357_The_Engineering_Building_University_of_Leicester_fire_safety_works;
https://le.ac.uk/engineering/about/building/articles
Stirling, C. (2001). BRE good building guides and good repair guides: a library of information
for all construction professionals. Watford, UK: BRE.
University of Leicester (n.d.). School of Engineering Webpage. Available: https://le.ac
.uk/engineering/about/building/articles
UWE (2008). House ages: specification by period. 2008 ed. Bristol, UK: University of the
West of England, Bristol, UK.

-- 179 of 391 --

6
Thermal performance
Chris Gorse, Melanie Smith, Matthew Brooke-Peat, Martin
Fletcher, Cormac Flood, Lloyd Scott, and John Spillane
INTRODUCTION TO THERMAL PERFORMANCE
Chris Gorse and Melanie Smith
Thermal performance currently presents one of the major global energy challenges.
The practice and profession of building surveying holds a respected position in con-
struction, but it is not clear how successful general surveying practice is when used to
assess issues and conditions associated with thermal performance. This chapter sets out
to improve knowledge transfer in the understanding of building thermal performance.
There is inevitably some crossover between this and other chapters in this book.
Performance assessment includes testing and measurement, often using new
technology and equipment. This type of survey is a relatively new concept as shown
in Chapter 1. It is also a practice that requires considerable skill and interpretation.
Building Performance Evaluation methods (Figure 6.1) tend to be self-regulated by
adherence to the methodologies stipulated in industry-accepted standards.
A certain level of temperature control is required inside buildings. Energy is
used to provide and maintain this level in the conditioned space. This heat energy
is gradually transferred and lost from the building, through conduction (through
the building fabric), radiation (to the sky), and convection, associated with exfiltra-
tion and infiltration (air moving in and out of the building). The heat lost is great-
est at the building’s weak points, through thermal bridges and gaps, resulting in
uncontrolled energy losses, as shown in Figure 6.2. Measurement of the losses can
be translated into an evaluation of the building’s thermal performance. Substantial
losses can be attributed to thermal bridging and lack of airtightness.
Thermal bridge
Sometimes referred to as a cold bridge, a thermal bridge is an area of a building’s
fabric which has a higher thermal transmission (i.e. the area is a poorer thermal

-- 180 of 391 --

170 	Thermal performance
Figure 6.1 Forensic tests used in building pathology and building surveying (source: Leeds
Sustainability Institute).
insulator) than the surrounding parts of the fabric. Thermal bridging occurs when
materials that have a much higher thermal conductivity than the surrounding
material penetrate the thermal envelope, or where there are discontinuities in the
thermal envelope. Heat then f lows through the path created – the path of least
resistance – from the warm space (inside) to the cold space (outside). As heat f lows
through the fabric, the surfaces of the interior side of the bridge become cooler.
The thermal bridge results in a reduction in the overall thermal insulation, and
therefore performance, of the structure.
Thermal bridging can have a significant impact on the thermal and energy
performance of the building envelope. If the building is relatively poorly insulated,

-- 181 of 391 --

171	6: Thermal performance
Figure 6.2 Building energy losses through a typical house and through a typical solid wall.
thermal bridging has little inf luence on its overall thermal performance. However,
with improved insulation, the relative importance of thermal bridging increases.
In very well insulated dwellings, the effect on the thermal performance of a dwell-
ing can be significant. Even when measures are taken to reduce thermal bridging,
remaining thermal bridging in very well insulated dwellings can still account for a
significant proportion of the overall fabric conduction heat loss.
Thermal bridging can also result in:
•• An increase in fabric conduction heat loss
•• An increase in solar heat gains during the summer
•• Reduction in internal surface temperatures
•• Cold spots and stratification cold occurring within the building
•• An increased risk of both surface and interstitial condensation, which may
result in pattern staining and mould growth
•• Reduction in indoor air quality due to condensation and mould growth
•• Damage to building components
Efforts should be made to minimise thermal bridging as much as is possible. The aim
should be to design and construct dwellings that are free from obvious and avoidable
thermal bridges. However, it is not generally possible to eliminate all thermal bridging.

-- 182 of 391 --

172 	Thermal performance
Thermal bridges occur due to:
•• Geometrical effects, such as corners
•• Penetrations through the thermal envelope, for instance windows and doors
•• Junctions between different elements (wall and f loor) and different components
(around windows and doors)
•• Poor construction practice (gaps or discontinuities in thermal insulation)
The occurrence of thermal bridges can be attributable to:
•• Issues associated with the design of the thermal envelope
•• Buildability and construction issues
•• A combination of both of these
Airtightness
Taken from Low Carbon Housing Learning Zone, Leeds Beckett University
Airtightness is crucial to improving the energy performance of buildings.
The converse of airtightness is air leakage, and airtightness is a measure of how
minimal is the unwanted air leakage of the building. Desirable, controlled venti-
lation does not form part of measurement for airtightness. Ventilation is required
for occupant and bacterial health, unwanted air leakage though the construction
is not.
Uncontrolled Background Ventilation + Purpose Provided Ventilation = Total
Ventilation Rate.
Airtightness can be expressed in terms of a whole building leakage rate at an
artificially induced pressure, in the UK 50 Pa is used (n50), or in terms of an
equivalent leakage area. Traditionally, airtightness was expressed in air changes per
hour (with units conventionally used being ach or h–1). Air permeability is more
commonly used (with units m3/(h·m2) representing m3 of air f low per hour, per
m2 of envelope area) as it takes into consideration the effects of shape and size. The
lower the air permeability of a building, the greater the airtightness.
In many countries, the temperature of the outside air is lower than the tem-
perature of the air inside the building; thus any air leakage from the inside to the
outside of the building can result in:
•• A significant reduction in the thermal resistance of the thermal insulation, due
to air leakage past the insulation (thermal bypassing), leading to increases in
realised fabric U-values
•• An increase in the building’s ventilation and fabric heat losses, resulting in an
increase in space-heating requirements
•• Increased energy costs

-- 183 of 391 --

173	6: Thermal performance
Where the fabric performance of dwellings improves, the proportion of total heat
losses attributable to ventilation is likely to increase, unless air leakage is addressed.
For instance, in reasonably well insulated but relatively leaky dwellings, ventilation
heat losses can account for up to one-third of the dwellings’ total heat loss.
Air leakage is the uncontrolled exchange of air both into (infiltration) and out
of (exfiltration) a building through cracks, gaps, and other unintentional open-
ings in the building envelope. It is driven by the same physical processes that drive
natural ventilation:
•• Wind effect
•• Stack effect
Wind effect is where air moving around and over a building induces pressure
differences across the building and generally results in a small negative pressure
internally. Outdoor air will enter the building through cracks and gaps in the con-
struction (infiltration) on the windward side of the building that is under positive
pressure, and indoor air will exit the building (exfiltration) on the leeward side of
the building that is under negative pressure.
Stack effect is where air inside the building is heated by solar gains, heating
appliances, people, and equipment. As the internal air increases in temperature, it
becomes less dense and rises due to convection. This results in higher pressure air at
the top of the building, relative to the external air pressure, leading to exfiltration.
As the warm air exits the dwelling, cooler denser air from outside infiltrates the
building through cracks and gaps in the construction.
The rate of air leakage is therefore dependent upon the wind speed and direc-
tion, the temperature difference between the inside and outside of the building,
and the air permeability of the construction.
Ventilation
All buildings require ventilation. This is necessary for:
•• Human respiration
•• The health and comfort of the occupants
•• The control of condensation and humidity
•• Fuel-burning appliances
•• The dilution and disposal of pollutants, dust mites, etc.
Ventilation is the process of changing air in an enclosed space. In order to maintain
optimum air quality in buildings, a proportion of the air contained within any
enclosed space should be continuously removed and replaced with fresh outside air.
If the incoming “fresh” air is contaminated by pollutants, then measures have to
be taken to remove them. Buildings are ventilated by a combination of infiltration
and purpose-provided ventilation.

-- 184 of 391 --

174 	Thermal performance
Air infiltration: The uncontrollable air exchange between the inside and
outside of a building through a wide range of air leakage paths in the building
structure.
Purpose-provided ventilation: The controllable air exchange between the
inside and outside of a building by means of a range of natural and/or mechanical
devices.
Build tight, ventilate right
Ventilation requirements for UK dwellings are typically:
Recommended: Between 0.5 and 1.0 air changes per hour (ach)
Minimum: Between 0.3 and 0.5 ach
A dwelling cannot be too airtight, but it can be under-ventilated. The more air-
tight, the more consideration is required for ventilation. For example, reducing the
airtightness from 0.5 to 0.4 ach, without increasing the ventilation, can increase
the dust mite population by 100 times (Davies et al., 2004).
Further information can be found at:
Low Carbon Housing Learning Zone, Leeds Beckett University (2020). Available at
https://virtualsite.leedsbeckett.ac.uk/low:carbon_housing/airtightness/introduct
ion/index.htm
Davies, M., Ucci, M., McCarthy, M., Oreszczyn, T., Ridley, I., Mumovic, D., Singh, J.
and Pretlove, S. (2004). A review of evidence linking ventilation rates in dwellings
and respiratory health—a focus on house dust mites and mould. International Journal
of Ventilation, 3(2), pp. 155–168.
THERMAL COMFORT
Martin Fletcher
This section covers:
Thermal comfort
Primary environmental variables
Personal factors
Thermal equilibrium
Thermoregulation
Indices of thermal comfort

-- 185 of 391 --

175	6: Thermal performance
Thermal comfort – an introduction
The environmental conditions within a building can have a significant impact on
the satisfaction and wellbeing of occupants. One metric by which the quality of
the thermal environment may be evaluated is thermal comfort; the primary pur-
pose of space conditioning in buildings being the provision of a thermally com-
fortable environment. Thermal comfort is defined as “that condition of mind
that expresses satisfaction with the thermal environment” (ASHRAE, 2017)
and is the subjective response to aggregated environmental and personal factors
(Figure 6.3).
Primary environmental variables
The primary environmental variables that affect thermal comfort are air tempera-
ture, radiant temperature, humidity, and air velocity.
Air
temperature
Radiant
temperature
Humidity
Air velocity
Metabolic
rate
Clothing
insulation
Thermal
comfort
Figure 6.3 Factors affecting thermal comfort.

-- 186 of 391 --

176 	Thermal performance
Air temperature
Air temperature is defined as the temperature of the air surrounding the body.
Specifically, this refers to the temperature which governs heat exchange with the
human body; air temperature at the body surface or at great distance from the body
will not necessarily be representative of that which drives heat f low.
Radiant temperature
Radiant temperature refers to the heat exchange between two bodies via radiation,
with net heat f low from a hot to a cold body. When considering thermal comfort,
two radiant temperatures are relevant: mean radiant temperature (MRT) and plane
radiant temperature (PRT). MRT is the average radiant exchange between an
individual and their environment, aggregating the effects of heat gains and losses.
PRT, on the other hand, considers radiant exchange in one direction and is impor-
tant where a large radiant difference causing temperature asymmetry is present,
such as proximity to a fireplace.
Humidity
The absolute humidity of the air affects the ability of the human body to control
internal temperature via evaporative heat loss, i.e. sweating. In practice, humid-
ity has little effect on thermal comfort in internal environments; however, it is
increasingly relevant in warmer climates where air-conditioning is uncommon,
or in sport and exercise facilities where sweating is of increased significance for
thermoregulation.
Air velocity
The velocity of the air relative to the human body inf luences the rate at which heat
is transferred to the environment. As air movement f luctuates in both direction and
speed over time, thermal comfort analysis typically considers the average value in
all directions over a given period, e.g. 1 minute. Air velocity is particularly relevant
when effects are localised, as is the case with draughts.
Personal factors
In addition to environmental variables, thermal comfort is affected by personal
factors of metabolic rate and clothing insulation.

-- 187 of 391 --

177	6: Thermal performance
Metabolic rate
The activity of an individual inf luences the amount of heat produced and released
via metabolism. In thermal comfort study, the metabolic rate of an activity is
expressed in MET values, where 1 MET is equal to 58.2 W/m2. As the calculation
of an accurate MET value is complex, thermal comfort researchers typically use
reference values presented in standards such as BS EN ISO 8996:2004 (BSI, 2005).
Clothing insulation
Clothing provides a layer of insulation, reducing the exchange of heat between
the human body and the surrounding environment. In thermal comfort the
insulative property of clothing is expressed in Clo units, where 1 Clo is equal
to 0.155 m2·°C/W. As the measurement of clothing insulation is complex, field
studies of thermal comfort typically use reference values presented in standards
such as BS EN ISO 9920:2009 (BSI, 2010) and ANSI/ASHRAE Standard-55
(ASHRAE, 2017).
Thermal equilibrium
The human body seeks to maintain an equilibrium between heat production, heat
loss, and heat gain. The factors affecting thermal comfort all contribute to this
thermal balance, which is conceptually described by the equation:
M 	W 	E 	R 	C 	K 	S	- 	= 	+ 	+ 	+ 	+
Where:
M is the metabolic rate, in watts per square metre (W/m2)
W is the external mechanical work, in watts per square metre (W/m2)
E is the evaporative heat transfer, in watts per square metre (W/m2)
R is the radiative heat transfer, in watts per square metre (W/m2)
C is the convective heat transfer, in watts per square metre (W/m2)
K is the conductive heat transfer, in watts per square metre (W/m2)
S is heat storage, in watts per square metre (W/m2)
Thermoregulation
When combined, if the mechanisms of heat production and loss are balanced, stor-
age is equal to zero. It follows, therefore, that if there is a net heat gain then storage

-- 188 of 391 --

178 	Thermal performance
will be positive and body core temperature will rise. Conversely, if there is a net
heat loss then storage will be negative and body core temperature will fall. The
processes that manage the thermal balance are referred to as thermoregulation,
and are grouped into two types, autonomic and behavioural.
Autonomic
Autonomic responses are involuntary responses to excessive heat or cold, and are
primarily driven by change in core temperature. Autonomic responses include:
•• Sweating
•• Shivering
•• Vasodilation
•• Vasoconstriction
Behavioural
Behavioural responses are primarily driven by skin temperature, and result in an
individual making a conscious decision to adapt to their thermal state. Behavioural
responses include:
•• Adding or removing clothes
•• Moving away from hot or cold surfaces
•• Closing or opening windows
•• Wetting the skin
•• Seeking shade
Whilst the maintenance of a thermal balance is important from a health perspec-
tive, it is important to note that the perception of a thermal stimulus is not simply
the result of a deterministic relationship. A warm or cold stimulus may be per-
ceived positively or negatively depending on the thermal and psychological state of
the individual at that time, even if the stimulus would be unpleasant in a different
context. For example, a cool breeze on a warm day may be pleasant if the indi-
vidual is warm, but would be an uncomfortable draught if they were cold. This
subjective context is important to remember when evaluating thermal comfort.
Indices of thermal comfort
Several indices are used to objectively evaluate thermal comfort. These indices aim
to combine the factors affecting comfort into a single output to enable comparison

-- 189 of 391 --

179	6: Thermal performance
between buildings and situations, and this is done in two ways. Firstly, rational
indices use heat transfer equations and mathematical representations of the ther-
moregulatory system to predict the response to a given environment. This predic-
tion of thermal state may be used to infer occupant comfort.
The second class of indices are empirically derived, based on observation of
human subjects under a comprehensive range of thermal and personal conditions,
with correlation between conditions and thermal strain used to develop multiple
regression equations. Empirical indices assume that conditions of equal environ-
mental stress result in equal physiological strain, and use this assumption to create
models that accommodate all possible combinations of conditions.
Of these two index classes, there are two indices that are most frequently
used and have been adopted into international standard. The first is the pre-
dicted mean vote, developed by Povl Ole Fanger in the 1970s, and the second
is adaptive thermal comfort, developed to overcome the limitations inherent
in rational indices.
Predicted mean vote
The predicted mean vote (PMV) index is a multi-nodal model describing the
thermal exchange between the human body and the environment. This rational
model encapsulates the absolute and relative inf luence of the six factors relevant to
the human thermal balance: air temperature, mean radiant temperature, air veloc-
ity, humidity, clothing, thermal resistance, and metabolic rate. The conceptual
leap introduced by Fanger was to introduce a thermal judgement scale, which
is shown in Figure 6.4, to allow model calibration against subjective evaluation
(Fanger, 1970).
By exposing subjects to a range of conditions in a climatic chamber and collect-
ing their feedback on the thermal judgement scale, Fanger was able to elaborate an
equation to describe the thermal sensation, incorporating the variables relevant to
the heat balance. The output from this model is comparable to subjective feedback,
and the precise calculation forms the basis of international standard BS EN ISO
7730:2005 (BSI, 2006).
Figure 6.4 Thermal judgement scale.

-- 190 of 391 --

180 	Thermal performance
Adaptive thermal comfort
The adaptive thermal comfort index was developed in response to criticism of
rational indices, which have been observed to show poor predictive accuracy of
thermal comfort in field studies. Specifically, the PMV model has been found to
perform poorly in naturally ventilated buildings. Also, as rational indices consider
only the temperature f lows of an individual, they may neglect the hedonistic quali-
ties of thermal sensation, and also overlook adaptive behaviours.
Adaptive thermal comfort seeks to incorporate behavioural and psychologi-
cal adaptations in addition to those that are physiological. Humphreys (1978) and
de Dear and Brager (1998) evaluated the empirical relationship between comfort
and environment using field measurements, indicating three contextual variables
inf luencing thermal adaption behaviour and thermal comfort: climate, the build-
ing, and time.
This analysis prompted the development of an index whereby a comfortable
temperature is defined relative to the external temperature. The external tempera-
ture figure incorporates the inf luence of time on the thermal history of an indi-
vidual by applying an exponentially weighted running mean value, such that the
temperatures of the previous days are incorporated. The inf luence of the building
is acknowledged through the application of thresholds around the comfort temper-
ature, with buildings that promote a higher expectation of favourable conditions,
such as new buildings, having tighter thresholds than older buildings.
The adaptive comfort index is illustrated by Figure 6.5 with description of
threshold categories given. If the measured data is inside the pairs of lines, it satis-
fies comfort criteria I, Category I being the most strict (with lines closest together)
Figure 6.5 Adaptive comfort chart (adapted from BSI, 2019).

-- 191 of 391 --

181	6: Thermal performance
and Category III being the most forgiving. The adaptive method is contained in
the standard BS EN 16798-1:2019 (BSI, 2019).
In addition to the objective evaluation of comfort, researchers also use subjec-
tive methods to establish actual comfort within an environment or context. As
thermal comfort is an inherently subjective phenomenon, engaging with build-
ing occupants is important. International standard BE EN ISO:2001 (BSI, 2002)
provides a range of scales which may be used to evaluate comfort, with correct
semantic terms to avoid misinterpretation.
Developing research is applying established subjective methods using novel
technology and user interfaces, to combine comfort evaluation with participatory
feedback networks. This data may be used to inform, or even define, conditioning
behaviour within buildings in the future, providing real-time occupant comfort to
support energy managers.
References for “Thermal comfort”
ASHRAE (2017). Standard 55-2017—thermal environmental conditions for human
occupancy. American Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air-Conditioning
Engineers. Atlanta, Georgia, USA, ASHRAE.
BSI (2002). BS EN ISO 10551: 2001 Ergonomics of the thermal environment—
assessment of the inf luence of the thermal environment using subjective judgement
scales. London, UK, British Standards Institution.
BSI (2005). BS EN ISO 8996:2004 Ergonomics of the thermal environment—
determination of metabolic rate. London, UK, British Standards Institution.
BSI (2006). BS EN ISO 7730:2005 Ergonomics of the thermal environment—
analytical determination and interpretation of thermal comfort using calculation of
the PMV and PPD indices and local thermal comfort criteria. London, UK, British
Standards Institution.
BSI (2010). BS EN ISO 9920:2009- Ergonomics of the thermal environment—
estimation of thermal insulation and water vapour resistance of a clothing ensemble
(ISO 9920:2009) (Vol. 3). London, UK, British Standards Institution.
BSI (2019). BS EN 16798-1:2019 Energy performance of buildings—ventilation
for buildings. Part 1: Indoor environmental input parameters for design and
assessment of energy performance of buildings addressing indoor air quality,
thermal environment, lighting and acoustics—Module M1–6. London, UK, British
Standards Institution.
de Dear, R. and Brager, G. S. (1998). Developing an adaptive model of thermal comfort
and preference. ASHRAE Transactions, 104(1), pp. 1–19.
Fanger, P. O. (1970). Thermal comfort. Copenhagen, Danish Technical Press.
Humphreys, M. (1978). Outdoor temperatures and comfort indoors. Batiment
International, Building Research and Practice, 6(2), pp. 92–92. doi: 10.1080/09613
217808550656.

-- 192 of 391 --

182 	Thermal performance
REFOCUSING SUSTAINABILITY ASSESSMENT
METHODS: A COMPARATIVE INTRODUCTION TO THE
BUILDING ENERGY RATING (BER) CERTIFICATE
John P. Spillane
Abstract to this paper
As international perception moves towards focusing on the need to address climate
change, there is also a need to consider the impact of our buildings. It is widely
acknowledged that the buildings in which we live and work have a significant
and long-lasting impact on their surrounding environment. This then begs the
question – how harmful, or more importantly, sustainable, is the operation of our
buildings for the environment in which they are located?
To answer this, we need to not only manage, monitor, and control, but even
more so to measure the impact our buildings have on the environment. To move
towards addressing this, the aim of this section is to provide a brief introduction
and overview of the Building Energy Rating (BER) certification scheme, as pro-
vided by the Sustainable Energy Authority of Ireland (SEAI) in 2009. Following
its current ten-year history, there is now an apt opportunity to revisit, review,
and provide an overview of the BER certification process, while also considering
some of its counterparts. In doing so, an introduction to sustainability assessments
in buildings is provided, considering BREEAM, LEED, and SAP ratings, before
focusing on BER certification.
In the context of BER, focus is provided on the assessment of both residential
and non-residential properties, followed by the BER rating system. To conclude,
the discussion moves towards a comparative overview of the BER system in con-
junction with those identified earlier, posing the question: Are current building
energy rating methods fit for purpose?
This provides an apt opportunity to not only provide insight into a lesser-
known measure of building sustainability, but also to draw comparisons with other
more well-known and widely adopted methods of assessment. The results will be
of benefit to those who not only measure and assess building performance and/or
whole-life sustainability criteria, but also for individuals and organisations who are
looking at reviewing either their existing or potential new properties, under the
remit of energy efficiency, sustainability assessment, and the wider impact their
buildings have on the environment.
Introduction to building energy assessment
With the continued global focus on sustainability and reducing one’s carbon foot-
print, the built environment comes to the fore. Numerous approaches have been

-- 193 of 391 --

183	6: Thermal performance
taken to measure and ascertain the contribution the built environment exerts on
the environment. Attention has been directed towards buildings and their occu-
pancy, due to their being one of the largest contributors to greenhouse gases and
energy consumption over other sectors, particularly over their life cycle (Ortiz
et al., 2009). With our buildings’ insatiable appetite for energy, to fulfil and satisfy
the needs of their occupants, it is essential to redress this approach to the design,
manufacture, and ultimate usage of our buildings. In doing so, inf luence in the
pre-construction phase comes to the fore, with the significant advantage in that
design iterations and interjections can have significant impacts on reducing the
carbon footprint of the infrastructure in use. But how can you monitor what
you don’t measure?
To address this, that is, not just the need to manage, monitor, and control,
but to provide for objective and accurate measurement, there are numerous
approaches one can adopt, depending on the focus, be it energy consumption,
use of sustainable resources, waste minimisation, or reduction of the carbon
footprint, among others. But with the need to provide measurement, there
comes significant difficulties and challenges, mainly due to assessment methods
varying to a great extent, primarily due to the tools being developed for differ-
ent needs and purposes. The tools can be used to assess building products and
buildings as a whole, including existing buildings, new buildings, and build-
ings under refurbishment, among others (Haapio and Viitaniemi, 2008); hence
the need to select and implement the more appropriate assessment method,
rather than the more popular one. In this context, Leadership in Energy and
Environmental Design (LEED) and the Building Research Establishment
Environmental Assessment Method (BREEAM) are two of the most prevalent
and internationally recognised methods adopted (Zenial Hamedani and Huber,
2012). However, such methods focus on the overall sustainability of the respec-
tive projects under consideration, while focusing on new, sustainable projects
globally.
But, with the focus on the measurement and assessment of new developments,
there is a need to assess existing structures, to provide an objective overview of
their sustainability and impact on the environment, and more to the point, the level
of consumption of energy; this is where the Building Energy Rating Certificate
or BER Cert comes in. The BER is based on the United Kingdom (UK) Standard
Assessment Procedure, or SAP rating, which is a measure of the energy efficiency
of a property considering the envelope, structure, heating and hot water systems,
lighting, insulation, and other renewable sources within the property. Both the
BER and SAP ratings consider and assess buildings at the home/building owner
level, while providing an opportunity to consider how they can proactively man-
age and undertake positive change within their respective properties, to make
them more energy efficient, and therefore, reduce their impact on the environ-
ment – and their pocket!

-- 194 of 391 --

184 	Thermal performance
Sustainability assessments in buildings: An overview
With an increasing need to measure a building’s sustainability, not just at project
inception, but throughout its life cycle, the need for more accurate measurements
of actuality comes to the fore. Although seen by many as being voluntary, many
clients in both the public and private sectors are now recognising the need to spec-
ify, adopt and/or adhere to prescribed assessment assessment methods. However,
Diaz-Lopez et al. (2019) rightfully argue that the area of sustainability assessment
methods is broad, complex, and fragmented, due to a multitude of factors, such as
differing criteria, the diversity of disciplines involved, and most of all, the unenvi-
able task of assessing what is a complex and difficult environment for classification
in a very often limited array of outcomes. To begin to address the need to provide a
more objective viewpoint, assessments of buildings came into practice. Diaz-Lopez
et al. (2019) provide an overview of this introduction, highlighting that, since
2000, sustainable building assessment methods began to become more prominent
in the literature. The aim of these assessment methods is to move away from the
more subjective assessment, to one that is objective, based on pre-set criteria, thus,
allowing a comparative viewpoint with similar designs or projects.
To address this, numerous sustainability assessments have emerged, with
Haapio and Viitaniemi (2008) highlighting 16 different assessment methods, while
Kamaruzzaman et al. (2016) identify 10 methods, more suitable for building refur-
bishment. However, both studies note that a direct comparative analysis of each is
futile and even all but impossible, due to the differing focus of each of the methods,
based on the economic, social, and environmental aspects under scrutiny and the
region from which they originate. However, it must be noted that the number and
array of different assessment methods continue to change, due to the disbandment
and emergence of new and diverse organisations, all with the goal of develop-
ing new knowledge and subsequent methods of assessing the built environment
and its environmental impact on its surroundings. Furthermore, Diaz-Lopez et al.
(2019) argue that the subject of sustainable building assessment is continuing to
evolve, with more methods emerging, while existing approaches are revised and
re-developed, based on, among other factors, the digitisation and evolution of the
built environment. This has resulted in an ever-more broad, complex, and frag-
mented approach to identifying and selecting the preferred method of assessment,
primarily due to the significant diversity of disciplines and approaches involved.
However, there are a number of more prevalent assessment methods used
widely, both at a national and international level, all of which have gained promi-
nence in recent years. In the UK, focus is on BREEAM and in North America,
LEED. In the context of both BREEAM and LEED, both assessment methods
incorporate the whole life cycle of the building, including its design, impact on
the environment during and post-construction, and the selection and location of
materials used, in addition to, and among other factors, energy consumption in

-- 195 of 391 --

185	6: Thermal performance
use. Given that buildings are one of the largest energy consumers, significant focus
is provided on this aspect. This is where BER, in addition to the likes of SAP rat-
ings, comes to the fore. Although not a whole-life assessment of a building, BER
focuses on the energy consumption of both new and existing builds. Thus it only
assesses a single aspect of what would be considered as just one factor in a plethora
of variables under assessment in, for example, BREEAM and LEED, in addition
to their other international counterparts. Ultimately, the likes of BREEAM and
LEED are focused at developer level, while the BER Certificate and SAP ratings
are more orientated towards single/one-off property owners, many of which are
focused on existing stock, requiring assessment, to aid in better and informed deci-
sion-making on how to improve the energy efficiency of their homes/businesses.
Building Research Establishment Environmental
Assessment Method (BREEAM)
The Building Research Establishment Environmental Assessment Method
(BREEAM) was created in the UK in 1990 by the Building Research Establishment
(BRE). It is an international certificate, currently in use in over 80 different coun-
tries. This is one of the more prominent environmental assessment methods, with
different schemes of certification, depending on the country, the building type
(office building, retail, etc.), and the construction type (new, refurbishment, etc.).
Haapio and Viitaniemi (2008) note that this assessment method was the first to
attempt to assess a broad range of factors when assessing a building’s sustainabil-
ity. The BREEAM method of assessment focuses on sustainability factors, with
assessment under varying criteria such as energy, wellbeing, innovation, land use,
materials, management, pollution, transport, waste, and water. Each category is
weighted and rated to signify its overall importance in the criteria being assessed,
as documented in Table 6.1.
The BREEAM ratings range from “Acceptable” (In-Use scheme only) to
“Pass”, “Good”, “Very Good”, “Excellent”, to “Outstanding”, with the award
ref lected in the number of stars denoted on the certificate, with one to six stars
respectively. To achieve a certain BREEAM rating level, corresponding global
scores must be reached, and corresponding minimum standards achieved, as docu-
mented in Table 6.2.
The BREEAM standard can be applied in five differing contexts: Communities
(master planning), infrastructure (civil engineering and public projects), new con-
struction (homes and commercial buildings), in-use projects (commercial build-
ings), and refurbishment and fit-out (homes and commercial buildings). However,
like all assessment methods, it is not without criticism. Marks (2015) notes that
BREEAM is favoured, not just in the UK but internationally, as evidenced by
around 425,000 buildings certified at the time of writing and another two million

-- 196 of 391 --

186 	Thermal performance
Table 6.1 BREEAM categories and weightings
BREEAM category 	Weighting
Energy 	19%
Health and wellbeing 	15%
Materials 	12.5%
Management 	12%
Land use and ecology 	10%
Pollution 	10%
Transport 	8%
Water 	6%
Waste 	7.5%
Total 	100%
Innovation 	Bonus 10%
Table 6.2 BREEAM rating and corresponding minimum global score required
BREEAM rating 	Minimum global score required
Pass 	35%
Good 	45%
Very Good 	55%
Excellent 	70%
Outstanding 	85%
registered for assessment. Nevertheless, Marks (2015) also argues that there are
two core disadvantages to this scheme. Firstly, there is the potential for the BRE
assessment to be inf luenced by following a more commercial standpoint. Secondly,
Marks (2015) argues that far too much credit is given to minor, peripheral, envi-
ronmental aspects of building design, such as the inclusion of bike racks, over more
environmentally important factors such as heating, lighting, and water consump-
tion. There can be much debate here, as transport by bike is only suitable for cer-
tain workers depending heavily on geographical placement, road safety provisions,
social commitments (e.g. dropping off/picking up children), and ability/disability.
The main point is that fabric first and on-site energy use can have much better
returns for everyone.

-- 197 of 391 --

187	6: Thermal performance
Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED)
Following on from BREEAM, another popular assessment protocol is that of
LEED. Originating in the US and developed by the US Green Building Council in
1993, it is fast becoming one of the most popular forms of sustainability assessment,
not just in the US, but internationally. Again, similar to BREEAM, it works on a
rating scheme, where projects accumulate points across various categories such as
“Location and Transportation”, “Sustainable Sites”, “Water Efficiency”, “Energy
and Atmosphere”, “Materials and Resources”, “Indoor Environmental Quality”,
“Innovation”, and more.
LEED focuses on rewarding sustainable and environmentally friendly decisions
made throughout the inception, design, construction, operation, and maintenance
of a building. The LEED rating system consists of five different areas address-
ing multiple projects: “Building Design and Construction”, “Interior Design
and Construction”, “Building Operations and Maintenance”, “Neighbourhood
Development”, and “Homes”. Within each context, the respective projects are
broken down into smaller components and assessed, based on varying criteria, with
the points totalled and scored; see Table 6.3.
The process of applying for and gaining certification under LEED is based on
four key steps: registration, application, review, and certification. In the context
of registration, this step aids in the selection of the most appropriate LEED rat-
ing system that would be most suited to your project. In doing so, key project
variables, such as f loor area, are included for initial identification. The second
step involves the application, where, based on the registration process undertaken
earlier, the LEED credits required to be addressed are identified and assigned to
a specific project stakeholder. Subsequently, information is collated and analysed,
with supplementary information provided, demonstrating that the building meets
the necessary minimum standards. The third step covers the review process. In this
instance, there are three stages to the review process: The preliminary review, the
final review, and the appeal review. The preliminary review is where the com-
pleteness and accuracy of the submission is considered. The final review is where
a re-review is undertaken, to address any items noted in the preliminary review,
Table 6.3 LEED Certificate and corresponding points required
LEED Certificate 	Points required
Certified 	40–49 points
Silver 	50–59 points
Gold 	60–79 points
Platinum 	80+ points

-- 198 of 391 --

188 	Thermal performance
while re-evaluating the submission based on new information provided. An appeal
review is held where the project owner is unsatisfied with the final review and
appeals the decision. The final step is certification, where the building is then
assigned one of the four certification levels, as outlined in Table 6.3.
Standard Assessment Procedure (SAP) rating
A Standard Assessment Procedure or SAP rating is the calculation that is required
to produce a “Predicted Energy Assessment” and an “On Construction Energy
Performance Certificate”. The SAP methodology is used by governments to assess
and compare the energy and environmental performance of dwellings is similar to
that of the BER Certificate. It was developed to aid in providing accurate and reli-
able assessments of the energy performance of buildings, thus, aiding in the devel-
opment and incentivisation of homeowners to make more sustainable decisions.
The SAP uses a scale of 1–100, to measure the overall energy efficiency of
a dwelling, where a higher score indicates a property with lower running costs
(Roberts, 2008). Similar to the BER Certificate in Ireland, the SAP rating also
considers various factors, such as the building envelope, structure, windows, and
sun shading, among other factors. As with a BER assessment, a SAP assessor visits
the property and carries out an inspection, completing an online form with the
necessary information using the prescribed SAP software.
There are two types of assessments undertaken: one for new buildings, which
gives a SAP rating, and the other, for existing buildings, which gives an RdSAP
rating. The “Reduced Data Standard Assessment Procedure” (RdSAP) considers
less data in the accumulation of a SAP rating where a complete data set, that would
be required, is not available. The results are given a rating, based on the energy
efficiency of the property, and an Energy Performance Certificate (EPC) produced
(Figure 6.6).
When developing and inputting the data into the respective modelling soft-
ware, 12 sections are considered (see Table 6.4).
The Building Energy Rating (BER) Certificate
The Building Energy Rating, or BER as it is more commonly referred to, was
first introduced in Ireland in 2009 by the Sustainable Energy Authority of Ireland
(SEAI). In its simplest form, it is an energy rating for your home, similar to the SAP
rating or earlier BRE Domestic Energy Model (BREDEM) in the UK. BREDEM
is similar to SAP; however, it is not as restrictive as SAP in that it permits users to
adjust inputs as they deem necessary.
The BER is devised around producing a rating, similar to those used for rating
domestic electrical goods such as televisions, refrigerators, washing machines, etc.

-- 199 of 391 --

6: Thermal performance 	189
Figure 6.6 Sample Energy Performance Certificate (EPC) (UK Government, 2012).

-- 200 of 391 --

190 	Thermal performance
Table 6.4 SAP section numbers and input information required
Section 	SAP input
1 	Job details
2 	Dwelling
3 	Heat loss f loors
4 	Heat loss walls
5 	Heat loss roofs
6 	Openings and summer overheating
7 	Thermal bridging
8 	Ventilation
9 	Heating
10 	Domestic hot water
11 	Renewables
12 	Other SAP input
It was introduced as a mechanism to measure and assess both new and, more espe-
cially, existing residential and commercial builds, throughout the country.
The BER was first introduced to aid in providing an objective measure of
energy efficiency, primarily focusing on Ireland’s ageing residential house stock,
but it also considers non-residential properties such as commercial, industrial, and
retail, among others.
In the context of new buildings, a desk-top assessment is undertaken, based on
existing drawings and details available, pre-construction. When evaluating exist-
ing buildings, an assessor visits and inspects the property in person. Assessments,
in the majority, take between one and two hours to complete, with the certificate
passed on to the home/building owner, usually within two to three days.
One of the key justifications for the introduction of the BER was to encourage
homeowners to not only make more sustainable decisions regarding purchasing or
renting a home, but also to provide information to aid in making more informed
judgements on how best to upgrade their existing property. Furthermore, to aid
in the development of the scheme and to establish compliance within the market,
anybody selling or letting property is required by law to have a BER Certificate
for their property. From 2019, new building standards apply to all new residential
dwellings (houses or apartments) in Ireland, and new dwellings typically require
a BER of A2.
In a residential context, to obtain a certificate, an assessor completes a Dwelling
Energy Assessment Procedure (DEAP), which then provides the resultant BER

-- 201 of 391 --

191	6: Thermal performance
rating for the property. The SEAI argue that having a BER Certificate, particularly
one with a high rating, adds value to a home and make it more sought after when
selling or renting. Furthermore, due to providing homeowners with more infor-
mation and insight into how their property performs, it is also considered that this
aids homeowners in improving and lowering their energy heating costs, thereby
saving on energy and fuel bills, while also lowering CO2 emissions.
For non-residential properties, BER is undertaken using the Non-Domestic
Energy Assessment Procedure (NEAP), where Part L of the Building Regulations
is considered. Under legislation, all new and existing commercial buildings are
required to have an up-to-date BER Certificate when they are constructed, sold,
or rented. Non-domestic or commercial buildings are divided up into three cat-
egories, namely 3, 4, and 5. This categorisation is based on the complexity of the
commercial building under review. Category 3 covers relatively simple buildings,
many of which would be similar to residential properties. Category 4 covers more
complex buildings, such as offices, warehousing, and the like. The more complex
buildings are considered in Category 5, which would involve factories, manufac-
turing, and other similar complex structures.
BER certification process for domestic properties
When conducting a survey, a BER Assessor, registered under the SEAI, either
reviews pre-construction drawings for yet to be completed properties, or, in the
case of existing properties, carries out a physical inspection. The inspection takes
in the region of one to two hours to complete and does not involve any invasive
inspection nor the opening of works. The assessor would be required to access the
attic space, where appropriate, to complete the inspection. This method of assess-
ment is observatory only, where they review and evaluate energy use for space and
hot water heating, ventilation, and lighting, among other factors. On review, the
assessor completes a DEAP, which is noted as the official Irish method for rating
the energy performance of residential properties. This is an Excel-based calculation
workbook programme, where the various particulars of the property are included
for consideration. Items included range from the material used during construc-
tion, to ventilation, fuel used in the property, exposure of the property, and the
methods used to provide lighting. All of this various information is considered and
included by the assessor, under 12 worksheets, which correspond to tabs in Excel.
The assessor works sequentially through each of the worksheets, as outlined in
Table 6.5, such as sheets covering “Fuel”, “Solar water heating”, and “Summer”.
This leads to a display of marks, and the overall results in the ‘Results’ worksheet.
When undertaking the assessment, there are a number of assumptions made by
the assessor. This includes the standard room temperature throughout the prop-
erty, assumed to be 21°C in the family room, with all other rooms 18°C. The
schedule for heating is assumed to be from 7am to 9am and from 5pm to 11pm,

-- 202 of 391 --

192 	Thermal performance
Table 6.5 Overview of the DEAP calculation workbook
Worksheet name 	Tab code 	Details recorded
Cover 	Cov 	Cover page with SEAI logo, software version,
etc.
Overview of workbook 	Code 	Guidance on how to complete the workbook
Project 	Pro 	Project, developer/owner, and assessor details
Overall dwelling dimensions 	Dim 	Ground and subsequent f loor dimensions
(where applicable)
Ventilation heat loss 	Vent 	Openings, structural airtightness, and
ventilation method
Windows and other glazed
elements
Win 	Windows or roof lights on each façade or
building element
Fabric heat loss 	Fab 	Recorded heat loss from the fabric of the
building
Water heating 	WH 	Water-heating system recorded including
associated details
Lighting 	Light 	Lighting and internal gains
Space heat use 	HtUse 	Required internal temperature, internal heat
capacity, etc.
Space heating system 	SH 	Control and responsiveness, pumps/fans,
emission efficiency
Energy requirements –
individual heating systems
ER1 	Space heating, water heating, electricity for
pumps and fans, and electric keep-hot facility
Energy requirements –
group/community heating
scheme
ER2 	Space heating – main and secondary systems,
boilers, waste CHP, or heat from power
stations
Results 	Result 	Results of space and water heating, pumps,
fans, energy from lighting, central heating,
etc., recorded and consolidated
Fuel data 	Fuel 	Gas, oil, solid fuel, electricity, group heating,
and biofuel
Solar water heating 	SWH 	Calculation of solar water heating input, if any
Assessment of internal
temperature in summer
Summer 	Information sheet only, providing an
overview of the threshold internal
temperature during the summer months
DEAP report 	Rpt 	Consolidated overview of the inputs and
results for the previous worksheets

-- 203 of 391 --

193	6: Thermal performance
seven days a week, from October to May. Once the BER Assessor has completed
the DEAP, a BER Certificate is issued. This certificate is valid for ten years or
until any material, significant change is made to the property which would affect
its energy efficiency prior to this date, and includes, among other details, the fol-
lowing (BERIreland, 2019):
•• The BER for the property
•• The property’s name and address
•• The BER number
•• The date of issue
•• The date the BER is valid until
•• The BER Assessor number
•• The assessor company number
•• The rating of the dwelling
•• A carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions indicator
BER certification process for non-domestic properties
The BER certification process for non-residential properties is a similar process to
that described for residential properties. In this instance, the SEAI-certified asses-
sor completes the NEAP, which is software used to provide the necessary results.
There are numerous software packages available, including the default calcula-
tion tool, the Simplified Building Energy Model for Ireland (SBEMie), which was
developed by the BRE. This tool provides monthly energy use calculations and
CO2 emissions, based on building geometry, construction, use, heating, ventila-
tion and air-conditioning (HVAC), and lighting equipment used within the build-
ing. The key process behind the calculations is to ensure adherence to Technical
Guidance Document – Part L, to work towards, in so far as is reasonably practica-
ble, the achievement of a near-zero energy building (NZEB), particularly where
projects commenced from 2019 onwards (SEAI, 2019).
When undertaking the assessment, a reference building is used as the baseline,
on which the building under assessment is benchmarked against. This reference
or benchmark building is a similar property of the same size, shape, and zon-
ing arrangements as the property under evaluation. Each space within the refer-
ence building must also correspond with that of the building under assessment in
the context of activities that are undertaken. Each activity is assigned based on
prepopulated activities in the NEAP activity database. The subject of orientation
and exposure is also considered, where the reference building must mimic that
of the building under assessment, including such aspects as sun shading and other
topographical features, thus, also providing an accurate baseline for measurement.
Finally, whatever system type (heating, ventilation, cooling) is used in each of the
respective areas within the assessed building must also be used in the reference

-- 204 of 391 --

194 	Thermal performance
building, again to provide an accurate representation for assessment. In undertak-
ing the assessment, various elements based on the reference building are consid-
ered, as outlined in Table 6.6 (SEAI, 2019).
In addition to considering the reference building, there are also elements within
the actual building under assessment to consider. Consideration of these elements
is required, to complete the necessary information in the respective software, to
facilitate the subsequent calculations, to determine the respective BER rating for
the building. In addition to those listed in Table 6.7, aspects such as solar gain and
overheating are also considered and assessed (SEAI, 2019).
Similar to residential BER assessments, commercial assessments consider the
following (BERIreland, 2019):
•• The geometry and age of the building
•• Type and thickness of insulation materials
•• The heating system in place
•• The type of building ventilation used
•• The type of lighting
•• Any renewable technologies in use
Table 6.6 Specific requirements within the reference building
Requirements 	Notes
Activity glazing class 	The activity assigned to each zone determines whether it will have
access to daylight through windows, roof-lights, or no glazing at all
Building fabric 	U-values assigned to each of the building elements, including
roofs, walls, f loors, windows, etc.
Areas of windows,
doors, and roof-lights
The areas of windows, doors, and roof-lights are calculated in the
reference building including side-lit, top-lit, and unlit glazing
classes
HVAC system 	Each space in the reference building will have the same level of
servicing as the equivalent space in the building under assessment
Auxiliary energy 	The auxiliary energy is the product of the auxiliary power density
and annual hours of operation of the heating system as taken from
the NEAP Activity Database
Lighting power density 	The general lighting in the reference building is based on lighting
with efficacy of 65 luminaire lumens per circuit-watt, and the
resulting power density (W/m²) will vary as a function of the
geometry of each zone modelled
Renewable energy 	The reference building will have a renewable energy contribution
from photovoltaics based on the equivalent of 20% of the reference
building’s primary energy use

-- 205 of 391 --

195	6: Thermal performance
Table 6.7 Specific requirements within the assessed building
Requirements 	Notes
Building fabric 	Building fabric is assessed, with thermal
bridges and U-values documented, and
ventilation openings disregarded
Lighting 	Lighting is defined at zone level, considering
LED, tungsten, halogen, etc.
Auxiliary energy 	This considers how auxiliary energy, such as
pumps and fans, is calculated
Demand control for ventilation 	Ability to model demand control for
ventilation for zones which accommodate
mechanical ventilation
As with the domestic certification process, the NEAP is used to generate the BER
rating and a supporting advisory report for both new and existing non-domestic
properties. The process calculates the energy consumption and CO2 emissions
associated with the day-to-day use of the property. The energy consumption is
expressed in terms of kilowatt hours per square meter f loor area per year (kWh/
m2/yr) and the CO2 emissions expressed in terms of kilograms of CO2 per square
meter f loor area per year (kg CO2/m2/yr), which is again similar to the process for
residential properties (BERIreland, 2019).
BER Ratings
Once the assessor has thoroughly inspected and assessed the property and com-
pleted the DEAP Calculation Workbook for residential or the NEAP for non-resi-
dential buildings, the results are produced in a report format (see Figure 6.7). This
calculation considers the primary energy consumption, which is expressed in kWh
per metre squared per annum (kWh/m2/yr) and quantifies the CO2 output in kilo-
grams of CO2 per metre squared per annum (kg CO2/m2/yr). This is then used as
the basis for issuing a rating from “A” to “G”, with a rating closer to “A” indicating
a very energy-efficient property while those closer to “G” would be less efficient.
From the date of issuance, a BER Certificate is valid for ten years, as so long
as there is no material change to the property that would affect its energy rating.
Where a dwelling is purchased off-plan, a provisional certificate is provided, which
is valid for two years. The builder/developer, in this instance, is responsible and
must provide a full BER Certificate post-completion of the property, prior to sell-
ing/leasing the property.

-- 206 of 391 --

Thermal performance	196
Figure 6.7 Sample BER Certificate illustrating kWh/m2
/yr and corresponding BER Rating
(example source BerCert.com (2020), see also SEAI (2019)).

-- 207 of 391 --

197	6: Thermal performance
Conclusions to this comparative introduction
to the BER Certificate
With the sustainability and energy efficiency of our buildings continuing to drive
debate and investigation, there needs to be a mechanism by which to measure and
assess a building’s impact on its environment. On a large scale, there are numerous
approaches one can choose, with BREEAM and LEED being two of the more
globally recognised and widely adopted. However, such levels of investigation and
certification need to also be considered at the home/building owner level, while
also considering the extensive and ageing stock around the country. In doing this,
SAP in the UK is used, while the BER Certificate is adopted in Ireland.
The relationship between BER or SAP and the large, multi-faceted assessment
models, such as BREEAM and LEED, is that they are not in competition but
complement each other. BREEAM, LEED, and other such certification models
all set targets and provide recognition for sustainable buildings and their environ-
ments, whereas both the BER Certificate and SAP ratings provide a means by
which developers, but more so, owners and occupiers, can make conscious sustain-
able decisions, not just during design and construction, but also, post-occupancy.
Furthermore, the BER and SAP can also complement and aid in the betterment
of BREEAM and LEED applications, as by obtaining a better BER and/or SAP
rating, this can then be incorporated in the relevant material, thus, aiding in the
justification for a higher result being awarded.
Interestingly, a study by Kelly et al. (2012) brings SAP back into focus and
asks the question: “Is SAP fit for purpose?” SAP came to the UK in 1992, sig-
nificantly prior to the BER Certificate in Ireland, with both following a similar
methodology and underlying method in their assessment processes; hence there
may be an argument to make that the findings of SAP may also accurately ref lect
those of the BER certification process in Ireland. Kelly et al. (2012) conclude that,
although SAP has brought improvements to our understanding and appreciation
of the energy that our buildings consume, it lacks real and quantifiable opportuni-
ties for homeowners to relate the 1–100 scale to energy consumption or emissions
generated, an aspect that the BER Certificate provides. Furthermore, and similar
to other studies which have used computational modelling, there are anomalies
and/or inconsistencies between the actual consumption figures and those figures
given using the various models. The differences, in some cases, can be substantial.
(Stundon et al., 2015).
In defence of the BER certification process, and more importantly, the resultant
report produced, it does not rely on a scale of 1–100 for the purposes of informing
the reader of the energy efficiency of the property under scrutiny. Instead, it uses
a similar system of letters from A to G – but more importantly, it clearly relates
what each of these results mean in the form of annual energy usage (kWh/m2/yr)

-- 208 of 391 --

198 	Thermal performance
and, also, quantifies the carbon dioxide output in metres squared per annum (kg
CO2/m2/yr). This aids in the appreciation but also quantification of the results and
their impact on the environment in annual energy usage and also CO2 emitted.
But more importantly, the report then, by using the above, provides an estima-
tion of the costs associated with the results achieved, based on current factors, but
also, what could be done to increase the rating, thus reducing the environmen-
tal impact while increasing the sustainability of the building in the environment.
Unfortunately, BREEAM, LEED, and their counterparts do not provide such
information, primarily due to the fact they are not designed for this purpose and is
essentially not due to an oversight in their design.
In concluding, and to address the question – “Are current building energy rat-
ing methods fit for purpose?” – the answer may be more equivocal, querying
whether any mechanism, for objectively assessing the subjective topic of sustain-
ability, can be without fault. Based on this premise, both SAP, but more so, the
BER, are positive solutions rather than failing to assess in the first place. After all,
what you don’t measure, you don’t manage, you don’t control, you can’t improve,
and ultimately, it costs you and the environment. Thus they may not be perfect,
may have room for improvement, but are making a difference.
References for “Refocusing sustainability
assessment methods”
BERIreland (2019). Commercial BER assessments. BER Ireland, Castletroy, Limerick,
Ireland.
BerCert.com (2020). BER website. Available at https://www.bercert.com/index.cfm
?page=about/index&q=sample-ber-certificate
Diaz-Lopez, C., Carpio, M., Martin-Morales, M. and Zamorano, M. (2019). Analysis
of the scientific evolution of sustainable building assessment methods. Sustainable
Cities and Societies, 49, pp. 101610.
Haapio, A. and Viitaniemi, P. (2008). A critical review of building environmental
assessment tools. Environmental Impact Assessment Review, 28(7), pp. 469–482.
Kamaruzzaman, S. N., Lou, E. C. W., Zainon, E., Suzaini, N. M. Z. and Wong, P. F.
(2016). Environmental assessment schemes for non-domestic building refurbishment
in the Malaysian context. Ecological Indicators, 69, pp. 548–558.
Kelly, S., Crawford-Brown, D. and Pollitt, M. (2012). Building performance evaluation
and certification in the UK: Is SAP fit for purpose? Renewable and Sustainable Energy
Reviews, 16, 6861–6878.
Marks, C. (2015). Weighing up the pros and cons of the BREEAM environmental
standard. Fresh Workspace, September 15th, Monmouthshire, UK.
Ortiz, O., Castells, F. and Sonnemann, G. (2009). Sustainability in the construction
industry: a review of recent developments based on LCA. Construction and Building
Materials, 23(1), pp. 28–39.

-- 209 of 391 --

199	6: Thermal performance
Roberts, S. (2008). Altering existing buildings in the UK. Energy Policy, 36, pp.
4482–4486.
SEAI (2019). Non-domestic energy assessment procedure—modelling guide (Q2–
2019). Dublin, Ireland, Sustainable Energy Authority of Ireland.
Stundon, D., Spillane, J. P., Lim, J. P. B., Tansey, P. and Tracey, M. (2015). Building
information modelling energy performance assessment on domestic dwellings: a
comparative study. In Raidén, A. B. and Aboagye-Nimo, E. (eds.) Proceedings of the
31st Annual ARCOM Conference, pp. 671–679.
UK Government (2012). Sample EPC certificate. Available at https://assets.publishing
.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/5996
/2116821.pdf
Zeinal Hamedani, A. and Huber, F. (2012). A comparative study of DGNB, LEED and
BREEAM certificate systems in urban sustainability. In Pacetti, M., Passerini, G.,
Brebbia, C. A. and Latini, G. (ed.) The Sustainable City VII, Vol. 1. WIT Transactions
on Ecology and the Environment, Vol. 155, WIT Press, pp. 121–132. Southampton,
UK, WIT Press.
THERMAL PERFORMANCE
Chris Gorse and Melanie Smith with Matthew Brook-Peat and Felix Thomas
An insight into Building Performance Evaluation
“Sustainable” and “sustainability” mean different things to different people and
sectors. The concept and philosophy behind these terms require definition before
they can make sense, be understood, or be evaluated. Therefore, when considering
the whole-life sustainability of a building, this should be underpinned with demon-
strable measurements and explained evaluation of direct environmental impact. A
scattering of buzzwords creating greenwash is disingenuous. Performance is only
valid if it is measurable. This chapter looks at different aspects of measuring build-
ing thermal performance.
A great deal of energy and resources are consumed in the construction of a
building, but much more is expended in the building’s operation, repair, main-
tenance, and energy use. These are less easy to predict than for construction, and
can vary widely depending on the use, its occupant behaviour, and the building’s
energy efficiency. The first two can be only marginally inf luenced, but the latter
can be largely controlled with directed attention.
The scientific community has been able to measure building performance and
provide a perspective on a building’s ability to meet sustainable factors for many
years, but the resources involved for detailed measurement of its energy efficiency
are too great for the mainstream construction industry. Notwithstanding this,
energy-monitoring technology and data-capture methods have advanced to enable

-- 210 of 391 --

200 	Thermal performance
basic data, including live data, to be more financially feasible and more important
to occupants through to energy providers.
The variance between theoretical and actual performance remains a major bar-
rier to achieving both zero-energy targets and investors using pay-back forecasts.
Research has shown that this performance gap can be reduced to acceptable levels,
mainly by detailed design and thence construction, but such detailed design and
on-site control occur only in isolated places and are not generally the norm. To
meet the challenges of energy use, and ultimately climate change, more widespread
improvement is required.
Building Performance Evaluation (BPE) is the assessment of a building’s perfor-
mance throughout its entire life cycle. It takes a holistic approach towards building
operation by evaluating four key elements:
•• Fabric performance
•• Services performance
•• Occupant satisfaction and comfort
•• The changeable external environment
Building Performance Evaluation can be carried out at every stage of a building
project, e.g.:
•• Desk-based assessment at the design stage, to improve design practice and
ensure the continuous improvement of design
•• Observation of construction methods, to capture evidence of actual assembly
and build
•• Appraisal and analysis of in-use performance, including collation and appraisal
of ref lections and reviews
•• End-of-life assessment of materials and energy cost
Figure 6.8 shows different phases of a building’s life cycle, which can be subject to
BPE. There are a number of different approaches. Some focus on pre-occupation
tests and operational performance, others focus solely on occupation or operational
phases, where most energy use is likely. To be effective, a whole-life assessment
which follows the building through the construction process, its operation, and
refurbishment and extends to demolition may be essential.
BPE helps understand operational energy use, embodied energy, and improving
energy performance. It can quantify the energy performance of buildings, i.e. to
determine if the performance achieved reaches the levels of performance intended
at the design stage or if there is a shortfall – the “performance gap”.
One vital strength of BPE lies in the constant feedback at each stage of
assessment – essential if the evaluation process is to have a positive impact on build-
ing performance. Collecting qualitative feedback from designers, the construction

-- 211 of 391 --

201	6: Thermal performance
Figure 6.8 A whole-systems approach to Building Performance Evaluation.
team, building owners and managers, and importantly the occupants, throughout
the building’s life, is essential if the building is to achieve optimal performance,
provide the comfort required, and reduce its impact on the environment.
Data is collected through:
•• Design evaluations
•• Testing
•• Physical monitoring techniques
•• Post-occupancy evaluation
It can be used to improve our understanding of efficiency, environmental condi-
tions, building fabric quality, building services, control systems operation, and
commissioning, all of which are important for an effective handover and operation
of a building.
BPE undertaken during the construction phase of new-build developments can
provide feedback to designers on the effectiveness of their design choices, provid-
ing the opportunity for stakeholders to remedy features that result in underper-
formance and to make improvements upstream in the build process.
Post-occupancy BPE is collecting information from the users and on in-use
operation. It can give designers insights into building use and effectiveness when
users interact with the building systems. This kind of post-occupancy evaluation

-- 212 of 391 --

202 	Thermal performance
(POE) is invaluable when making future decisions on system improvements. The
results of BPEs can identify opportunities for reducing running costs, maintenance
requirements, and repair work.
Because the BPE process links design, construction, operation, and disposal,
it helps identify the key stages and key factors causing gaps at which performance
discrepancies can arise, to enable potential solutions, Table 6.8.
Understanding the experience of using the building, and the comfort and con-
trol achieved as well as the energy used is essential to BPE. The interaction between
the users and the building under different environmental and social conditions
needs to be understood to achieve effective operation. Optimal building opera-
tion may require the users to be inf luenced to use it effectively. The information
on the building and the way it is managed is as important as the physical attributes
of the building when balancing a building’s impact on the natural environment.
Sometimes performance gaps are easily corrected, e.g. providing ventilation,
sealing unwanted air paths, and recalibrating services and control systems. Other
deficiencies are so embedded in the building that the feasibility of correcting them
becomes difficult and they become an inherent part of the building, affecting per-
formance throughout the building’s life. The aim of BPE is to better understand
buildings and the way that they are used, so that effective performance and opera-
tion are achieved throughout its lifetime.
Thermal modelling
Using thermal simulation software, two- and three-dimensional models of a
building element can be created, complete with specified material properties and
boundary conditions, such as surface resistance to the passage of heat and air tem-
peratures. Thermal modelling, using thermal simulation software, enables users
to predict the magnitude of thermal bridging occurring at junctions in a building
fabric, and calculate the U-values of complex plane elements that may be difficult
to calculate manually with formulae or with relatively simple calculation tools.
Table 6.8 Some causes of performance discrepancies
Factors resulting in performance gaps
Design 	Incorrect or incomplete design information
Design 	Incorrect or ill-fitting components
Workmanship 	Issues of workmanship
Workmanship 	Commissioning
Workmanship 	Inspection
In-use/design 	Management
In-use/design 	Operation

-- 213 of 391 --

203	6: Thermal performance
Model simulations are now a useful, necessary, integral, and ubiquitous tool
for building design. They can be used to assess designs for moisture, and different
scenarios can be modelled to finalise best compromise detail for new work.
•• Model simulations can be used to assess designs for moisture predictions.
•• Elemental modelling for thermal bridging and interstitial or surface condensa-
tion risk can be used in design to mitigate adverse consequences.
•• Model simulation needs to be undertaken with skills in the use of specialist soft-
ware, appreciation of limitations, and understanding of building pathology and
materials science, for the competent use of hygrothermal modelling, predicting
hygrothermal behaviour, and assessing associated risks.
•• Requirements to use such a tool without providing the resources required are
counterproductive.
Models can present an unrepresentative “perfect” illustration of, say, a wall, for
example giving smooth surfaces, omitting air gaps, lacking an appreciation of
extant damp. Thus, for example, any modelling used to assess a building’s poten-
tial for retrofit needs to be undertaken with skills in the use of specialist software,
appreciation of limitations, and understanding of building pathology and materials
science. These are required for the competent use of hygrothermal modelling, pre-
dicting hygrothermal behaviour, and assessing associated risks. Using such a tool,
without the understanding required, is counter-productive.
Whole-building models can be used to generate simulated energy buildings for
both pre- and post-construction. These simulations can be used to predict energy
and fuel consumption for buildings as well as to provide detailed information about
the capability of building services, and to predict the risk of over- or under-heating
in the internal environment.
Software, such as IESVE or DesignBuilder, can be used to generate 3D models
of buildings. To set up a specific building, properties can be assigned to different
building components, and building services (e.g. heating and ventilation systems)
specified. Specific location and weather data can give context to performance pre-
dictions during a whole-building thermal simulation and to assess performance
under hypothetical extreme conditions.
Making changes to different variables in the building thermal models allows the
user to assess the impact and effectiveness of various design changes, such as pas-
sive solar heat gains and solar shading, passive ventilation, the sizing and provision
of services and plant as well as the value of adding renewable systems in a whole-
building context.
Building performance can be assessed or predicted with a high degree of
confidence through modelling building elements, such as walls and junctions
(Figure 6.9). Elemental modelling can be used to calculate the U-values of plane

-- 214 of 391 --

204 	Thermal performance
Figure 6.9 Plane elements, junctions (geometrical thermal bridges), and thermal bridges
(Thomas in Gorse et al., 2015).
elements (e.g. walls, f loor, roofs). Modelling can also be used to determine the
magnitude of thermal bridging that occurs at junctions and throughout the build-
ing envelope and to determine whether moisture poses a risk to the building fabric.
Detailed and accurate information about the make-up of different building
elements and material properties is needed for modelling and calculating building
elemental performance. Inaccuracies and assumptions in the model input will lead
to inaccurate output values for performance.
Temperature factor: Risk of condensation
Thermal modelling can also indicate the risk of condensation forming at a mod-
elled junction or thermal bridge. See also Figure 6.10. Outputs from a thermal
simulation often include a minimum surface temperature of the internal boundary
condition. A temperature factor ( ƒrsi) can be derived using the following formula:
TSi -Te	
frsi = T 	T	i - e
Where:
ƒrsi = temperature factor
TSi = internal surface temperature
Te = external air temperature
Ti = internal air temperature
Where temperature factors are less than 0.75 there is a risk of condensation forma-
tion at the junction modelled.

-- 215 of 391 --

205	6: Thermal performance
Figure 6.10 Example temperature factor at off-set window position (source: Dr M. Brook-Peat).
Hygrothermal simulation
Hygrothermal simulation software predicts the behaviour of real-world heat and
moisture in a modelled building element. It can be used to identify potential mois-
ture problems within a building’s fabric over time, such as moisture accumulation,
interstitial condensation formation, and mould growth.
Hygrothermal simulation software is often one-dimensional, simulating moisture
and heat behaviour in a straight line through a representative model of a wall or other
building element. More advanced two- and three-dimensional hygrothermal simu-
lation software is capable of predicting the behaviour of moisture in more complex
geometries found within buildings; the more complex the model, the more time-
consuming. Software, such as WUFI, can carry out dynamic simulations, simulating
changes in environmental conditions over time, potentially identifying problems
that may only manifest years after construction has been completed.
Hygrothermal simulation is a complex task that requires a competent user with
knowledge of the hygrothermal behaviour of materials and buildings, as well as
experience or training in the use of hygrothermal simulation software.
References for “Thermal performance”
Gorse, C., Johnston, D., Glew, D., Fylan, F., Thomas, F., Miles Shenton, D., Fletcher,
M., Erkoreka, A. and Stafford A. (2015). Monitoring and measuring building
performance. In: Dastbaz, M. Strange, I. and Selkowitz, S. (eds.) Building sustainable
futures, design and the built environment. Switzerland, Springer International Publishing.
ISBN 878-3-319-19347-2.

-- 216 of 391 --

206 	Thermal performance
THERMAL PERFORMANCE OF EXISTING
BUILDINGS AND RETROFIT
Chris Gorse and Melanie Smith
Thermal retrofitting of dwellings has been a priority in many countries, includ-
ing the UK, for over a decade. However, concerns have arisen around their build
quality and consequences, so that thermal retrofit presents one of the major energy
challenges faced. An understanding of a building’s construction and its risk of decay
is fundamental for the building’s successful design, construction, repair, main-
tenance, and alteration. Thermal retrofit can change a building’s risk for decay.
Smith (2018) and others have identified common building pathology-related issues
prevalent in thermal retrofit of walls. In addition, a lack of clarity, description, and
specification have all been found for many pre-design retrofit surveys.
Improving thermal performance in a building should always start with knowl-
edge of the existing performance. This is not a simple science. Performance
depends on construction and conditions. Construction depends on age, design,
implementation, defects/degradation/entropy, alteration history, and use. Thus, no
two properties have exactly the same construction at any given time. Generalities
of course can be used, but if the individual property is to be upgraded, the indi-
vidual property should be taken into consideration. For thermal upgrades, a pre-
retrofit survey is required, and this would take an anticipatory survey approach for
the prevention of future problems, as outlined in Chapter 1.
The initial desktop research would consider the expected design of, say, the
walls. A few of the thermal properties of different wall constructions are listed in
Table 6.9. Some differences noted between measured and assumed U-values may
be attributed to the quality of assembly, workmanship, and unique attributes of the
wall and surrounding features. Notwithstanding this, the table offers a useful guide
and does demonstrate the variance that can be found even in one construction form
(Rye, 2014; DECC, 2011; Baker, 2008).
Before the 1940s, UK brick walls were often 9 inches thick (225 mm or greater),
bonded by masonry and constructed using lime mortar. Holes and gaps deep inside
the walls helped reduce the passage of water from external to internal faces. From
the 1920s, the inner leaf and outer leaf of the walls were separated, bonded by
galvanised steel ties, to better prevent the passage of water. Such cavities are gener-
ally ventilated, even if not by design, and therefore do not help insulate the wall.
During the period between the 1930s and the 1960s, blockwork was introduced
for the inner leaf of cavity walls (NHBC, 2019), and blockwork in masonry con-
struction is now commonplace. It is the inner leaf which is responsible for both
being loadbearing and insulating. The outer leaf is the rain-shield. Currently, new
masonry walls are constructed of a range of materials, usually with wide cavities,
which are filled or partially filled with insulation.

-- 217 of 391 --

207	6: Thermal performance
Table 6.9 Measured and assumed thermal properties of traditional wall construction
(Baker, 2011; DECC, 2011; NHBC, 2019; Rye, 2014)
Construction 	Measured
U-value(from
Rye, 2014)
Assumed SAP
value (from
DECC, 2011)
Measured
U-value(from
Baker, 2011)
Masonry with
granite
1.4 W/m 2 ·K (for 520
mm construction)
2.3 W/m 2 ·K (for 500
mm construction)
1.1 ± 0.2 W/m 2 ·K
(for 600 mm)
0.8–0.9 W/m 2 ·K
(field measurements)
Masonry with
sandstone
1.5 W/m 2 ·K (for 475
mm construction)
2.0 W/m 2 ·K (for 500
mm construction)
1.1 ± 0.2 W/m 2 ·K
(for 600 mm)
0.8–1.6 W/m 2 ·K
(field measurements)
1.7 W/m 2 ·K (for 600
mm)
Masonry with brick 	1.4 W/m 2 ·K (for 220
mm construction)
2.1 W/m 2 ·K (for 220
mm construction)
Cob 	0.7 W/m 2 ·K (for 600
mm construction)
0.8 W/m 2 ·K (for 550
mm construction)
0.4–0.8 W/m 2 ·K
Timber frame 	2.0 W/m 2 ·K (for 135
mm construction)
2.5 W/m 2 ·K (for 150
mm construction)
Concrete blocks,
both leaves with 65
mm uninsulated
cavity
1.1 W/m 2 ·K
Concrete blocks,
both leaves with 65
mm insulated cavity
0.6 W/m 2 ·K
Bricks, both leaves
with uninsulated
cavity
1.44 W/m 2 ·K,
(Anderson from
Baker) 50 mm cavity
1.3 W/m 2 ·K, 65
mm cavity, 300 mm
construction
Bricks, both leaves
with 65 mm
insulated cavity
0.3 W/m 2 ·K brick/
block cavity wall
0.3 W/m 2 ·K, 300
mm construction
The images in Table 6.10 show a range of construction types and thermal per-
formance (generalised only) for solid masonry, cavity wall construction, timber-
frame, cob, and straw-bale constructions.
Care is required when using given U-values, as the range of values measured in
field varies considerably from building to building (Glew et al., 2020; Gorse et al.,

-- 218 of 391 --

208 	Thermal performance
2017; Baker, 2011). Baker’s study explores some of the differences experienced in
traditional buildings and found that, for the case of 600 mm thick solid stonewalls
with plaster on laths, a typical performance of 1.1 ± 0.2 W/m2·K was measured
onsite, compared to default U-values provided by CIBSE and EST (Anderson,
2006a,b) of 1.38 and 1.7 W/m2·K, respectively.
U-values for uninsulated cavity walls of a 1930s semi-detached house and a 1970s
detached house were measured at 1.3 W/m2·K and 1.1 W/m2·K, respectively, com-
pared to default U-values of 1.44 and 1.7 W/m2·K respectively.
For the case of cavity walls retrofitted with insulation post-2003, the U-value was
0.3 W/m2·K which matched the default U-value provided by EST.
Other calculated results discussed by Baker (2011) include those below:
Anderson (2006a):
•• 1.38 W/m2·K for a 600 mm stonewall with a 50 mm airspace and finished with
25 mm dense plaster on laths
•• 2.09 W/m2·K for a 220 mm solid brick wall with 13 mm dense plaster
•• 1.41 W/m2·K for a 220 mm solid brick wall with 50 mm airspace/battens and
12.5 mm plasterboard
•• 1.44 W/m2·K for a brick/brick cavity wall with 105 mm brick, 50 mm airspace,
105 mm brick, and 13 mm dense plaster
Energy Saving Trust (2004):
•• 1.7 W/m2·K for a traditional sandstone (or granite) dwelling with solid walls:
Stone thickness typically 600 mm with internal lath and plaster finish (for the
pre-1919 period)
•• 1.7 W/m2·K for cavity walls involving brick and block with external render (for
1919–1975)
•• 0.3 W/m2·K for brick/block cavity walls with insulation (for 2003–present)
These results are considered to be indicative of what can be found, therefore please
note that these are not necessarily indicative of a particular wall type’s perfor-
mance. When assessing a wall’s performance, the construction and condition of
the wall and connecting elements should be considered. Table 6.11 shows observed
and typical introduced problems when wall insulation is applied to some existing
building types.

-- 219 of 391 --

209	6: Thermal performance
Table 6.10 Construction types and modelled or measured thermal performance
Construction types and thermal performance
Stone walls 	Approximate U-values
1.2–2.0 W/m 2 ·K (stone)
1.5–2.0 W/m 2 ·K (sandstone)
1.4–2.3 W/m 2 ·K (granite)
Stone outer leaf with
brick/stone inner
leaf and rubble-filled
cavity creating a solid
wall
External stone is porous, but water that penetrates
drips down the unconnected rubble cavity rather
than crossing through it
Thicker walls, with sealed finish, tend to have
lower U-values
Approximate U-values
1.2–2.3 W/m 2 ·K
0.9–2.4 W/m 2 ·K (Baker, 2011)
Uninsulated stone/
brick with small finger
cavity
The thin cavities are often not sealed, leading to
internal and external air channels through f loor
joists and voids, service penetrations, etc.
Approximate U-value
1.4 to 1.5 W/m 2 ·K
Solid brick wall 	Typical construction in 1800s Two leaves of brick
construction 	with cross bricks in a variety of bonding patterns.
May have 10–25 mm un-mortared internal breaks
to prevent moisture passage. Solid lime plaster
applied to the internal surface
Approximate U-value
1.2–2.4 W/m 2 ·K
Uninsulated brick 	Double brick leaves with 40–70 mm cavity
cavity wall 	and brick cavity ties. If air f lows free through
the cavity, heat loss during high winds will be
considerable. The break between the leaves further
reduces the potential transfer of rain and moisture
from the outside environment
Approximate U-value
1.4–1.5 W/m 2 ·K
1.3 W/m 2 ·K (Baker, 2011)
(continued)

-- 220 of 391 --

210 	Thermal performance
Table 6.10 (continued)
Construction types and thermal performance
Uninsulated brick 	Early cavity walls, 1920s built with steel cavity
cavity wall 	ties. Ties prone to rusting and often breaking
through corrosion, resulting in instability of the
two leaves
Approximate U-value
1.4–1.5 W/m 2 ·K
1.3 W/m 2 ·K (Baker, 2011)
Uninsulated brick 	Galvanised-steel, stainless-steel, and plastic wall
block cavity wall 	ties with drip formations were included to avoid
corrosion and water passing across the cavity
Approximate U-value
1.3 W/m 2 ·K (Baker, 2011)
Brick block cavity 	Partial fill insulation was introduced around 1980,
wall with partial fill 	glass fibre batts fixed within the cavity and trapped
cavity insulation 	into place using preformed cavity clips
Approximate U-value
0.6 W/m 2 ·K (Baker, 2011)
Brick block cavity 	Thickness of partial fill increased and the quality
wall with partial fill 	of insulants improved using closed cell PIR and
cavity insulation 	PUR
Approximate U-value using 50-mm PIR
0.4 W/m 2 ·K
Partial fill insulation 	Taped and sealed to provide air barrier, cavity sock
used at the head and foot of the cavity to seal the
void
Approximate U-value
0.3–0.5 W/m 2 ·K
Full fill 	Approximate U-value achieved with mineral wool
fill thickness
200 mm 0.15 W/m 2 ·K
90 mm 0.30 W/m 2 ·K
75 mm 0.44 W/m 2 ·K
50 mm 0.52 W/m 2 ·K
Approximate U-value achieved with polybead
thickness
50 mm 0.45 W/m 2 ·K
(continued)

-- 221 of 391 --

211	6: Thermal performance
Table 6.10 (continued)
Construction types and thermal performance
Combined high 	The combination of full fill insulation (140) and
thermal insulants 	light thermally resistant blocks can achieve low
U-values:
Approximate U-value
0.16 W/m 2 ·K
Nearly zero 	Masonry cavity walls have been built to passive
standard using mineral wool, 300 mm cavity, 425
basalt fibre low-conductivity wall ties
Approximate U-value
0.113 W/m 2 ·K
Timber frame with 	Early form of timber frame
brick cladding 	Approximate U-value
2.0 to 2.5 W/m 2 ·K
.
Two skins of timber
frame
90 mm stud, 50 mm insulation
Note that in traditional timber frame the U-values
are affected by the timber fraction in the wall
Approximate U-value
0.39–0.56 W/m 2 ·K (Bell and Overend, 2001)
Timber frame with I
beams and brick slip
cladding
The void between the panels of timber is filled
with insulation.
Within the panels thermal bridging is limited to
the I beams and junctions
Approximate U-value
0.113 W/m 2 ·K
Timber frame built to
Passivhaus
300 mm twin stud, 36 mm × 89 mm studs, 122
mm space, filled with cellulose insulation
Internal service void with plaster finish
Approximate U-value
0.12 W/m 2 ·K
(continued)

-- 222 of 391 --

212 	Thermal performance
Table 6.10 (continued)
Construction types and thermal performance
Cob or rammed earth 	Cob, cleam, clob, or clom: Subsoil with a high
clay content, mixed with straw, sand, and water.
Typically in-filled between a post and beam
structure.
Rammed earth: gravel, sand, and clay compacted
(between formwork) in layers.
Both historically used, still common in some
developing countries. Dries a stone-like hardness
similar to adobe mud brick. Lower levels can be
stonework with rubble fill (Harrison and de Vekey,
1998)
Approximate U-value
0.4–0.8 W/m 2 ·K (mud wall) Baker (2011)
0.7–0.8 W/m 2 ·K (cob) (for 500–600 mm wide)
1.2–2.0 W/m 2 ·K (stone)
Straw bale 	Straw bales are around 450 mm thick, often
finished with lime render and lime plaster,
or timber (e.g. in ModCell) and seated on a
foundation base. Thermal properties are dependent
on the straw density. Load-bearing walls will be
typically at least 110 kg/m 3 , whilst infill can be
80–100 kg/m 3 (Goodhew et al., 2010)
Approximate U-values
0.13–0.16 W/m 2 ·K (Rye, 2011)
0.19 W/m 2 ·K (https://strawbalebuildinguk.com)
Retrofit stone wall
internally insulated
with cellulose or
similar
Stone cavity wall, filled with rubble and insulated
from the inside with cellulose or similar. Porous
stone allows water to penetrate. Rubble fill
prevents water passing through the cavity. During
winter months, the external skin may retain high
levels of moisture. Breathable insulant allows
any moisture built up to evaporate through the
insulation. Breathable vapour barrier prevents
moisture entering the fabric from the internal
environment but allows any moisture trapped in
the fabric to escape
Approximate U-value
0.35 W/m 2 ·K (100 mm cellulose, sheep’s wool, or
mineral wool)

-- 223 of 391 --

213
Table 6.11
 Summary of issues and challenges for internal wall insulation (IWI) and external wall insulation (EWI) for solid wall properties
	(Gorse et al., 2017)
Property
	type
Intervention
 
Thermal
	breaks(TBs)
Services
	&fittings
Element
	interfaces
Lack
ofinsulation
Ventilation
	&uninsulated
	elements
Openings:
	doors &
	windows
Party walls
Historic
	stone built
EWI
 
Planning – EWI
	not permitted
Where
	permitted,
	potential as
	below
Where
	permitted,
	potential as
	below
Where
	permitted,
	potential as
	below
Where permitted,
	potential as below
Where
	permitted,
	potential as
	below
Where
	permitted,
	potential as
	below
IWI
 
Increased frost
	damage to
	external face
Potential as
	below
Potential as
	below
Potential as
	below
Potential as below
 
Potential as
	below
Potential as
	below
Pre-1919
	solid brick
	terrace and
	back-to
-
backs
EWI
 
TBs introduced
	to top f loor wall/
	ceiling junctions
Thermal breaks
	at insulation
	cut-outs at
	external pipes,
	services, walls,
	etc., incl air
	gaps around
Thermal breaks
	introduced to
	ground f loor/
	wall junctions
Lack of
	insulation
	to ground f loor
	over
unconditioned
	basement
TBs introduced at
	uninsulated doors,
	stair soffits, &
	spandrels to
	uninsulated
	basement
Window & door
	lintels, jambs,
	and sills left
	uninsulated or
	with reduced
	insulation
EWI not
	extended
	across to
	neighbouring
	property: TBs
	at party wall/
	ext. wall jns.
	EWI
extended: fire
	propagation
	risk
IWI
 
TBs introduced at
	intermediate f loor/
	wall junctions
Air gaps
	around service
	passing through
	external walls
Potential as
	above
Potential as
	above over
	basement
Lack of improved
	ventilation
Potential as
	above
Potential as
	above
(continued)
6: Thermal performance

-- 224 of 391 --

214 	Thermal performance
Table 6.11
 (continued)
Property
	type
Intervention
 
Thermal
	breaks(TBs)
Services
	&fittings
Element
	interfaces
Lack
ofinsulation
Ventilation
	&uninsulated
	elements
Openings:
	doors &
	windows
Party walls
1919–1940s
	solid brick
	semis and
	terraces
EWI
 
TBs introduced
	to topmost wall/
	ceiling junctions,
	especially where
	rooms partially in
	roof space with
	sloping soffits
TBs at
	insulation cut
-
outs at external
	pipes, services,
	externally
	accessed stores,
	walls, etc.
Potential as
	above
Lack of
	improved f loor/
	roof
insulation
Potential as above
 
Potential as
	above
Potential as
	above
IWI
 
Potential as above
	for IWIs
Potential as
	above for IWIs
Potential as
	above
Potential as
	above
Potential as above
 
Potential as
	above
Potential as
	above
1945–1970s
	system-
	built,
incl. f lats,
	terraces &
	semis
EWI
 
TBs introduced
	to top f loor wall/
	ceiling junctions
Potential as
	above for EWI
Potential as
	above
Potential as
	above
Potential as above
 
Potential as
	above
Potential as
	above
IWI
 
Potential as above
	for IWIs
Potential as
	above for IWIs
Potential as
	above
Potential as
	above
Potential as above
 
Potential as
	above
Potential as
	above

-- 225 of 391 --

215	6: Thermal performance
References for “Thermal performance of
existing buildings and retrofit”
Anderson, B. (2006a). Conventions for U-value calculations (BR 443:2006). Bracknell,
Berkshire, BRE Press.
Anderson, B. (2006b). Thermal properties of building structures. In: CIBSE guide A:
environmental design (The Chartered Institution of Building Services Engineers,
2006). 7th ed. London, CIBSE. Ch. 3, pp. 3.1–48.
Baker, P. (2008). In situ U-value measurements in traditional buildings: preliminary results
(Historic Scotland Technical Paper 2). Edinburgh, Historic Scotland. Available at
http://www.historic - scotland.gov.uk/technicalpapers
Baker, P. (2011). U -values and traditional buildings In situ measurements and their
comparisons to calculated values. Technical Paper 10, Conservation Group, Historic
Scotland, Alba Aosmhor. Available at https://www.historicenvironment.scot/.
Bell, M. and Overend, P. (2001). Building regulation and energy efficiency in timber
frame housing. COBRA Conference at Glasgow Caledonian University, 3–5
September 2001. RICS Foundation.
DECC (2011). The governments standard assessment rating of dwellings SAP
2009 edition incorporating RdSAP 2009 Table S6: Wall U-values England and
Wales RdSAP Appendix S.
Energy Saving Trust (2004). Scotland: assessing U-values of existing housing. (Energy
efficiency best practice in housing: CE84) London, Energy Saving Trust. Available at
http://www.energysavingtrust.org.uk/business/content/download/180012/441763
/version/4/file/ce84.pdf
Glew, D., Fylan, F., Farmer, D., Miles Shenton, D., Parker, J., Thomas, F., Fletcher,
Hardy, A., Shikder, S., Brooke-Peat, M., M., Sturges. J. and Gorse. C. (2020). Thin
internal wall insulation, measuring energy performance improvements in dwellings
using thin internal wall insulation. Summary Report. Department for Business,
Energy & Industrial Strategy.
Goodhew, S., Carfrae, J., and De Wilde P. (2010). Briefing: challenges related to
straw bale construction. Proceedings of the Institution of Civil Engineers, Engineering
Sustainability 163, December 2010, Issue ES4, pp. 185–189.
Gorse, C. Glew, D. Johnston, D. Fylan, F. Miles-Shenton, D., Smith, M., Brook-Peat,
M. Framer, D., Stafford, A., Parker, J., Fletcher, M. and Felix, T. (2017). Core cities
green deal monitoring project leeds. BEIS Buildings Energy Efficiency Technical
Research, 9 November 2017. Available at https://www.gov.uk/government/colle
ctions/buildings-energy-efficiency-technical-research
Harrison, H. W. and de Vekey, R. C. (1998). BRE building elements: walls, windows and
doors. Watford, UK, BRE.
NHBC (2019). House building: a century of Innovation. Technical Advances in
Conventional Construction. NHBC Foundation. Milton Keynes. Available at https
://thinkhouse.org.uk/site/assets/files/1367/nhbc1019.pdf
Rye, C. (2011). The real life of buildings—insitu monitoring and the performance of traditional
buildings. Archimetrics. SPAB, London, UK.

-- 226 of 391 --

216 	Thermal performance
Rye, C. (2014). U Values and retrofitting traditionally built walls, archimetrics.
Available at http://www.wtbf.co.uk/newsite/_blog/app/web/upload/Wall%20In
sulation%20Conference/3%20Caroline%20Rye%20U-values%20%26%20Retro
fitting%20Traditionally%20Built%20Walls.pdf
Smith, M. B. (2018). A study of building surveying praxes to inform design of thermal
retrofit. Ph.D. Thesis. Leeds Beckett University
EMERGING THEMES: GAPS AND NEEDS IN BUILDING
PERFORMANCE SIMULATION FOR BUILDING RETROFIT
Cormac Flood and Lloyd M. Scott
In an increasingly expanding and developing world, information and data have
become more crucial to understanding how to progress and refine processes to
achieve better quality of life. Construction has always been a sector driven by
results and progression, and while research carried out to establish if the accurate
analysis of in-situ performance is possible, a number of findings have been estab-
lished as a common theme from many case studies:
•• Inconsistencies in default resistances for standard U-value calculation method.
•• The gap between standard U-values and in-situ measurements is significant –
walls are not performing as designed.
•• The importance of wind-driven rain inclusion within the simulations – target
U-values are not achievable if based on the standard calculation procedure.
•• Recognition of the inf luence of orientation in relation to the U-value perfor-
mance of walls – each orientation causes the wall to perform differently.
•• The issues connected with construction information records – not adequate,
with no strict procedure to do so.
•• The importance of accurate material data in simulations.
•• The U-value f luctuates according to the climate conditions, meaning that the
monthly average may be different throughout the year.
Thermal analysis is an important function which assesses the energy performance
of the building fabric through calculation, simulation, or in-situ analysis. The
accuracy of these figures is fundamental to the projection of design requirements
to achieve energy-efficiency targets through the building fabric. Buildings are
continually subject to f luctuating internal and external climate conditions such as
temperature, moisture, solar radiation, and wind. Wind-driven rain has an effect
on the hygrothermal changes of materials depending on the climate and orienta-
tion. These variations represent potential key factors that affect and define the
actual physical thermal performance and sustainability of the building envelope.
Findings from research challenge traditional understandings of building
envelope performance. What is evident is that the external walls perform more

-- 227 of 391 --

217	6: Thermal performance
thermally efficiently in a dry state. Existing properties can frequently be regarded
as “damp”. This can be an issue when the property is being refurbished and/or
retrofitted; however, the economics of a retrofit project often preclude any drying-
out period. Meanwhile the property is expected to perform as it would were it
“dry”. In contrast to the concept of a “drying-out period”, external walls can dis-
play signs of a “wetting period” until they reach a moisture equilibrium.
Guidelines on moisture control associated with the preservation and renovation
of heritage constructions and the rehabilitation of the building stock include pub-
lications by the International Association for Science and Technology of Building
Maintenance and Monument Preservation and EN 15026. Many published guide-
lines do not contain any information on how to deal with small defects in the
building envelope. Later publications link rainwater penetration into construc-
tions with rendered facades to damage and consider the effects of small leaks in
the exterior finishes of exposed walls. For example, ASHRAE considers that any
f laws in the façade should be accounted for in analysis programmes, by simulating
1% of driving rain to penetrate the outer surface of the façade for at least one hour.
Obviously, the orientation and geographical position of the façade have an effect
on the amount of wind-driven rain the façade is normally exposed to.
In addition, climate projections include more extreme weather conditions,
so this should be taken into account when considering current climate records.
Construction and building envelope performance is highly weather-dependent.
Optimal construction conditions require elements such as precipitation, wind,
temperature, and relative humidity to fall within firm limits, while many prod-
ucts and materials are designed to be installed within certain climate conditions,
outside of which their performance declines, depending on the severity of the
conditions. Building envelopes should be built of materials that can resist the dete-
riorating effects of the weather, in line with the appropriate building standards.
However, building standards do not generally facilitate the inclusion of the afore-
mentioned factors with regard to thermal performance. Additionally, with climate
change, the current relationship between building fabric performance and weather
is being altered continually, enhancing the agenda for building design and adapta-
tion measures to incorporate current and developing climate patterns.
U-values and the development of correction factors, or of the calculation itself,
to account for climate patterns are scarce. To this end, these values (external (Rso),
cavity (Rcav), and internal (Rsi) surface resistances) incorporate two factors only
– wind speed and emissivity. Although wind and other weather conditions are dis-
similar across the entirety of countries, default values for Rso, Rcav, and Rsi have
set default values, used nationwide.
There are many private companies and national weather centres offering the
latest available climate data to incorporate into project planning. The key point is
that the data used currently in assessing the risks to weather are historical. Because
the cost and duration of construction activities are heavily inf luenced by climatic

-- 228 of 391 --

218 	Thermal performance
conditions, it is becoming increasingly important that decision-making should be
based on future projections, as well as past conditions. Nonetheless, it is important
that the relationship between current weather conditions and construction be dis-
cussed first to establish a baseline condition against which the impacts of climate
change can be compared.
Obviously, any imperfections in an external finish will leave a gap that rain can
penetrate. This has been long known, for example in hairline-crazed render, per-
mitting moisture to enter but protecting it from evaporation in sun or wind. The
presence of moisture usually increases the U-value, and this needs to be consid-
ered for thermal performance. Many conventional assessment methods completely
ignore liquid moisture transport; for example, as a result of wind-driven rain. More
sophisticated one- and two-dimensional full heat and moisture models are avail-
able that allow modelling vapour and liquid f low, that are transient in nature, that
consider moisture sources such as wind-driven rain, rising damp, initial moisture,
sorption and de-sorption, interstitial condensation, and surface condensation.
The complexity of energy-efficiency improvement of existing dwellings can-
not be underestimated. Investments in the homes are particularly labour and cost
intensive, thus it is difficult to convince homeowners to implement full or even
partial retrofit strategies. Research shows a number of barriers to action regard-
ing domestic energy conservation and the implementation of retrofit strategies,
including:
•• High upfront costs
•• A lack of understanding amongst homeowners about energy use and potential
savings from retrofit of their homes
•• A lack of disposable income for retrofit works
•• Uncertainty surrounding energy prices, particularly with payback periods over
five years
•• A lack of incentive
•• Inconvenience
•• A lack of skill in the construction industry to carry out retrofit works
•• A lack of a concerted marketing strategy targeting homeowners, in getting its
message delivered to consumers
See also Chapter 5, the section “Upgrading thermal performance” and Chapter 5,
the section “Discussion surrounding thermal upgrades”. Existing limitations in
model simulations include building uncertainty and model uncertainty, and a steep
learning curve is required.

-- 229 of 391 --

7
Fire safety
Melanie Smith
This chapter covers some of the main areas of fire safety. It attempts to give back-
ground knowledge into matters related to fire. Further reference should also
be made to Chapter 3, “Legal and regulatory frameworks” and the subsections
on “Fire safety in occupied buildings” and “Fire safety and accessibility”, and
Chapter 5, “Retrofitting and refurbishment” and the subsection on “Upgrading
fire protection”. The sections in this chapter cover:
•• Nature and development of fire
•• Effects of a fire: physiological and behavioural
•• Fire precautions from first principles
•• Materials and fire
•• Means of escape
•• External fire spread
•• Fire engineering concepts
NATURE AND DEVELOPMENT OF FIRE
The fire triangle
What is a fire? A fire is a very rapid exothermic chemical reaction between a fuel
and oxygen releasing heat and light. Flames are the visible manifestation of the
reaction between a gaseous fuel and oxygen.
The “fire triangle” in Figure 7.1 shows the three components necessary for fire to
occur.
The significance of this simplistic model is that:
•• A fire cannot occur if any one of the three components is missing.
•• Removal of any one of the three will terminate the reaction and put out a fire.
Fire prevention is, therefore, about avoiding the introduction of the ever-present
ignition source to the ubiquitous fuel.

-- 230 of 391 --

220 	Fire safety
Figure 7.1 Fire triangle.
Figure 7.2 Closed feedback loop of fire.
Combustion of solid materials
Solid materials do not “burn”. This is not obvious from common experience.
Flame is actually a gaseous-phase chemical reaction between a fuel vapour and
oxygen. It is not the fuel itself that burns but the vapours given off as the fuel is
heated. As an example, when a piece of wood is heated sufficiently, the chemical
components of the wood begin to break down, releasing f lammable gases. These
gases or vapours then ignite to form the visible f lame. The combustion of the
vapours in the presence of oxygen releases heat. This heat is transferred back to the
wood surface, releasing more vapours to be ignited. A closed feedback loop is thus
created, see Figure 7.2.

-- 231 of 391 --

7: Fire safety 	221
Whilst having regard to the above, spontaneous ignition can also occur.
Some materials can “self-heat” and do not require an external ignition source, for
example a heap of oil-soaked rags kept in a warm cupboard can self-ignite.
Why do solid materials burn more readily if they are split into a finer
form? For example, loose sheets of paper ignite more readily and burn more
fiercely than a book. The heat sink effect is less, less heat is lost, more heat is more
easily utilised in the burning reaction. Secondly, more oxygen is available between
the sheets of paper. Extreme examples are dust explosions, e.g. of f lour – a dust
explosion is the rapid combustion of fine particles suspended in the air, often in an
enclosed location, e.g. grain, sawdust, coal.
Combustion of f lammable liquids
It is not the liquid that burns but the vapour above the liquid surface. Heat is usu-
ally required to produce the vapour. Useful measures of the hazard of a f lammable
liquid are its f lashpoint, its f lammability limits, and its auto-ignition temperature.
The f lashpoint is the minimum temperature in test conditions at which the liquid
gives off sufficient vapour to ignite. For example, the f lashpoint of vegetable oils
can be 200°C, whilst petrol is typically –43°C.
Some liquids (e.g. castor oil, olive oil) act more like solids and require a substan-
tial amount of heat before they will ignite. These liquids can be called combusti-
ble. Their f lashpoints are over 55°C.
Other liquids (e.g. white spirit, paraffin) need much less heat in order to release
enough vapour to ignite. These are termed f lammable. They pose a much greater
threat than combustible liquids. Their f lashpoints are between 32°C and 55°C.
More dangerous are highly f lammable liquids (e.g. petrol, ether) which pro-
duce sufficient vapour at normal ambient temperatures that heating as such is not
required, but the vapour/air mixture can be ignited by a small source such as a
spark. These liquids are particularly hazardous and require special precautions so
that sources of ignition do not come into contact with their vapours. Their f lash-
points are below 32°C.
Combustion of f lammable gases
As stated before, it is the gas that ignites. There is not much difference between
the combustion of f lammable vapours from a liquid (at normal temperatures and
pressure) and the combustion of f lammable gases (at normal temperatures and
pressure).
Flashpoint as such does not occur because the f lammable substance is already a
vapour. The f lammability limits may give an indication of hazard. Auto-ignition
(as in liquids) is less significant and commonly ranges between 200°C and 600°C
for most common f lammable gases.

-- 232 of 391 --

222 	Fire safety
Flammable gases are present, for example, in fuels for heating and cooking, and
cutting/welding equipment (liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) or acetylene) and tar
boilers (LPG). LPG is much denser than air and can collect in areas such as base-
ments, pits, and drains. Acetylene has very wide explosive limits.
Extinguishment
Refer to the fire triangle, Figure 7.1. In order to extinguish a fire, it is necessary to
remove one of the components. Or refer to the closed feedback loop, Figure 7.2.
The loop must be broken.
Water puts out a fire primarily by cooling the fuel (reducing the heat). The fuel
no longer releases enough vapours to allow combustion to be sustained.
Foam applied to the surface of a burning liquid acts as a physical barrier, pre-
venting release of the vapour into the combustion zone above the liquid’s surface.
The foam also stops the radiation of heat back down onto the liquid surface.
Carbon dioxide, CO2, displaces oxygen sufficiently to stop the combustion
process. So, it directly removes one of the three components of the fire trian-
gle. This is useful where water, foam, or powder might damage the articles to be
protected.
Halons interfere with the chemical reactions that occur within the f lames
(chemical inhibition) and used to be the choice for protecting computer, etc.,
equipment. Unfortunately, halons also have the highest ozone-depleting capac-
ity of any chemicals in common use, and halon extinguishers were subsequently
banned for this use. They have generally been replaced with CO2.
Powders also use chemical inhibitions, as well as dilution of the fuel vapour,
restricted access to oxygen, and the removal of heat. Powders are also very effective
with rapid knockdown of f lames.
Gaseous fire-suppression systems f lood the areas with inert gases acting
similarly to CO2 and halon described above. Occupants must leave before the sup-
pression system is activated.
Classification of fires
Different extinguishing agents are suitable for different types of fire. For instance,
it would not be sensible to try to extinguish an electrical fire with water. For this
reason, fires are grouped into different classifications according to the nature of the
fuel. In the UK, BS4547 gives the following:
Class A involves “normal” (usually carbonaceous) solid materials, e.g. wood,
paper, textiles.
Class B involves liquids or liquefiable solids.
Class C involves gases.

-- 233 of 391 --

7: Fire safety 	223
Class D involves metals. Requires special extinguishing agents.
Class F involves cooking oils and fat.
There are also electrical fires, a term sometimes used but not classified because
electricity is a source of ignition, not a fuel – the main concern here is that the elec-
tricity is turned off before extinguishment is attempted. Class C fires most often
occur through a gas leak, e.g. from a cylinder. If the f lame is extinguished without
the leak being checked, there is the possibility of explosion. In most premises, it is
the Class A and Class B fires that are the important ones for normal consideration.
The development and spread of fire
Once a fire in a room has ignited, the subsequent development can be rapid.
Mathematically, the development is exponential, doubling in size at regular inter-
vals of only a few minutes. This rapid growth is beyond the common experience of
most people because it contrasts sharply with the more common, sedate behaviour
of a fire in the open such as a garden bonfire.
Fires in enclosed spaces behave differently and with different rates of burning
from fires in the open. The presence of a ceiling or roof over a fire has an imme-
diate effect in increasing the radiant heat returned back down onto the fuel (see
footage of the Bradford City Stadium fire).
This inability to anticipate the rate of development has proved to be a major fac-
tor where there have been multiple deaths in fires, for example, the Stardust Disco
fire, the Bradford City Stadium fire, the Manchester Woolworth’s fire, and possibly
the Grenfell fire. There were failures to realise the need for immediate evacuation.
Fire develops by heat transfer, i.e. conduction, convection, and radiation. The
most important means within a building are convection and radiation.
Typical progress of a fire
After the first item in a room is ignited, hot gases rise vertically in a relatively
narrow plume into which air is entrained, so increasing the volume of smoke and
gases (Figure 7.3).
As the smoke reaches the ceiling, it spreads out in all directions (ceiling jet)
and begins to form a rapidly deepening layer below the ceiling. Therefore, with a
low-ceiling room or restricted space such as a corridor, loss of visibility may be one
of the earliest threats created by the fire. The smoke is not just a particle cloud, it
includes hazardous gases which have been released, and burning gases. The main
point in life safety is that the occupants get out before this layer descends on them.
As the fire grows, the f lames reach the ceiling and are def lected horizontally,
radiating downwards over a large area of the room. The downward radiation can

-- 234 of 391 --

224 	Fire safety
Figure 7.3 Fire smoke plume.
be so strong that a large area of combustible materials in the room will reach a tem-
perature at which these materials spontaneously burst into f lames. This is known as
f lashover and may be reached quite quickly. At f lashover, virtually all items in the
room are alight and survival of occupants within the room is impossible. Flashover
typically occurs at around 600°C. See also Figure 7.4.
The progress of a fire can be split into three distinct phases: growth, post-f lashover,
and decay:
1. 	Growth period – this lasts from the moment of ignition to the time when
all combustible materials within the room are alight. The temperature rises
relatively slowly until f lashover. The duration of the growth period depends
on factors such as fuel type and amount, and ventilation. A critical moment
is reached when the f lames reach the ceiling and the radiant heat transfer
back down is dramatically increased. This occurs at around 550–600°C. The
remaining combustible materials now rapidly reach their fire points and ignite
within three to four seconds. This sudden transition is known as f lashover
and represents the start of the stable phase of the fire. If there is insufficient
ventilation available to the fire, then the fire may fail to f lashover due to
oxygen starvation. It may die completely or smoulder quietly. A smouldering

-- 235 of 391 --

7: Fire safety 	225
Figure 7.4 Fire development: oxygen constrained and oxygen introduced (www.nist.gov).
fire can be extremely dangerous as the room fills with f lammable vapours. If
a fresh supply of oxygen is then introduced (for instance by a door opening)
the fire may ignite with an eruption of f lame. This is known as backdraught.
2. 	Post-f lashover period – the temperature is very high owing to the involve-
ment of most of the combustible materials in the room. It is at this stage that
the highest temperatures will be reached. The f laming is no longer localised
but occurs throughout the room. The rate of burning is determined by the
level of ventilation and the amount of fuel present.
3. 	Decay period – this arises from the total consumption of most of the com-
bustible materials and continues until there remains no fuel for combustion.
The temperature steadily falls.

-- 236 of 391 --

226 	Fire safety
The plotting of the temperature against time from ignition gives a fire growth
curve. Fire growth curves vary depending on the conditions and are useful to
fire scientists/engineers considering the consequences of altering these conditions.
Work is continuing on design fire growth rate models for fire engineering.
As a fire develops, it produces heat and smoke; both are dangerous and must be
designed against.
Heat
The rate of burning is dependent on the fuel and ventilation available, and these
determine the amount of heat produced. The quantity of the potential fuel within
a building is described as the building’s fire load. This includes both the fabric of
the building and the contents. An estimate of the fire load can give guidance on the
likely heat production and fire severity.
It is very difficult to establish accurately the fuel load of a building due to the
multiplicity of materials involved in the construction and the usually unknown
materials that make up the building’s contents. However, NIST and NFPA (for
example) have conducted much work on this.
Building fabric
One of our problems is the plethora of terms used to describe the fire safety of
materials. It is not always possible to define a material as “safe” or “unsafe” – it all
might depend on how and where the material is used. You must be wary of manu-
facturers who simply assure you that the material has a certificate – you need to
know what certificate, the circumstances in which it gained that certificate, what
(exactly) was tested, and how this relates to real life and/or the circumstances in
which the material is actually used in your project.
The different terms do not make life any easier. The essential characteristics of
building materials which can be measured are:
Ignitability – the ease with which a material can be ignited when subjected to a
f lame.
Combustibility – whether or not a material will burn when subjected to heat
from an already existing fire.
Non-combustible materials – (not a universal definition) for example, a
material that, under the conditions anticipated, will not ignite or burn
when subject to fire or heat; products classified as non-combustible under
BS476-4:1970.

-- 237 of 391 --

7: Fire safety 	227
Materials of limited combustibility – (England and Wales only) – a material
(including “non-combustible materials”) which meets the various test criteria
set out in the Approved Documents for Building Regulation B.
Fire propagation – the degree to which a material will contribute to the spread
of a fire through heat release when it is itself heated; this is concerned with the
level of heat emission and the rate of heat release.
Surface spread of f lame – whether a material will enable the spread of f lame
across its surfaces. Fire spread occurs to a great extent along the surfaces.
Internal linings (cladding surfaces, walls, ceilings, and f loors) form a large area
of continuous surfaces for a fire to use. When hot, these linings can heat materi-
als not yet involved in the fire – mainly by radiation.
A point of ignition heats up a small area of the surface sufficiently for f lammable
gases to be released from the surface. The gases ignite, heating up (by radiation)
the adjacent small areas of surface, which release more f lammable gases and so on
(Figure 7.5). By these incremental movements, fire spread can occur quickly along
a surface, independently of the initial point of ignition’s capacity to burn into the
material.
Lining materials also produce smoke and toxic gases. But these are not measured
in the tests nor covered by the regulations. It is something, however, to consider
when carrying out fire engineering.
Materials are therefore classified according to their surface’s ability to propagate
fire spread. In the UK these are classed 1–3 and above, with Class 1 not being a
good propagator.
Figure 7.5 Surface spread of flame.

-- 238 of 391 --

228 	Fire safety
Class 0 – Building Regulations (England and Wales) – this is a classifica-
tion of surface spread of f lame and does not indicate anything else, nor does it
over-ride other tests or standards. A Class 0 material must meet Class 1 surface
spread of f lame and must also limit fire propagation meeting the requirements
of BS476-6.
Fire resistance – whether or not a component, or assembly of components (i.e.
not just a material), will resist fire by retaining their loadbearing capacity, integrity,
and their insulating properties; see Figure 7.6. Construction of known fire resist-
ance is the most fundamental means of protecting escape routes and preventing fire
spread. Defined in BS4422 as the “ability of an element of building construction,
component or structure to fulfil, for a stated period of time, the required stability,
fire integrity and/or thermal insulation and/or other expected duty in a standard
fire resistance test”.
a. Stability or load-bearing capacity is the ability of the element to continue
to support its load without excessive deformation.
b. Integrity is the ability of the element to continue to contain a fire without
collapse or developing splits, holes, or cracks through which f lame could
easily pass, and without sustained f laming on the side not exposed to the
fire.
c. Insulation is the ability of the element to resist the passage of heat from the
exposed to the unexposed side. If heat can readily be conducted through, this
can start a new fire on the other side, and/or burn people trying to escape
along the other side.
The legal building regulations or standards in the relevant country will provide
the time duration needed for fire resistance of the building element or component.
Figure 7.6 The three properties of fire resistance (adapted from Structural Timber Association,
www.structuraltimber.co.uk/assets/InformationCentre/eb7.pdf).

-- 239 of 391 --

7: Fire safety 	229
Smoke obscuration – the degree to which the material when burning will pro-
duce smoke that leads to reduced visibility.
Tests and measurements
There are tests and standards for each of these properties. A material can be
good in one area, and hopeless in another. The tests, which permit these various
terms to be used, are usually made using small-scale testing on isolated product
samples, and not necessarily the full system/component in which the materials
are to be used in practice on site. Even where a combined system is tested, minor
changes (such as the width of a gap) can have a notable impact on a real building,
and these changes might be site purchase or design alterations for practicality
or cost.
Additionally, the results obtained in such tests are heavily dependent on the
exposure conditions. Even materials classified as non-combustible can affect the
development of a fire. Materials with good thermal insulation properties can allow
a rapid rise in temperature in the fire compartment. Materials of high heat capacity
can soak up heat from the fire and tend to slow its rate of growth.
EFFECTS OF A FIRE: PHYSIOLOGICAL
AND BEHAVIOURAL
Physical effects and toxicology
We all know that fire burns. It also does other things to people. Before we get to
those awful physical conditions when life is untenable, the atmosphere can get
progressively worse as people are trying to escape.
a. The atmosphere may be hot: temperature may exceed 1000°C (see Table 7.1).
b. Toxic and narcotic gases will be present, e.g. carbon monoxide and hydrogen
cyanide:
i. 	At high concentrations carbon monoxide causes rapid death;
ii. 	At lower concentrations it brings about a loss of co-ordination, particu-
larly on exertion.
c. A fire atmosphere will contain a low concentration of oxygen. This in itself
can bring about unconsciousness and death, but normally the effects of toxic
gases predominate.
d. There may be so many small particles in the atmosphere that vision is severely
restricted.
e. The effects of irritants to the upper respiratory tracts and eyes may impede the
ability to escape.

-- 240 of 391 --

230 	Fire safety
Table 7.1 Fire dynamics
Temperature °C 	Response
37°C 	Average normal human oral/body temperature
38°C 	Typical body core temperature for a working fire fighter
43°C 	Human body core temperature that may cause death
44°C 	Human skin temperature when pain is felt
48°C 	Human skin temperature causing a first-degree burn injury
54°C 	Hot water causing a scald burn injury with 30-second exposure
55°C 	Human skin temperature with blistering and second-degree burn injury
62°C 	Temperature when burned human tissue becomes numb
72°C 	Human skin temperature at which tissue is instantly destroyed
100°C 	Temperature when water boils and produces steam
250°C 	Temperature when charring of natural cotton begins
>300°C 	Modern synthetic protective clothing fabrics begin to char
≥400°C 	Temperature of gases at the beginning of room f lashover
≈1000°C 	Temperature inside a room undergoing f lashover
Adapted from NIST (www.nist.gov).
These effects are invariably present all together in fires. Low concentrations of
fire gases bring about behavioural changes and incapacitation, so reducing a per-
son’s chance of escape. High concentrations bring about rapid unconsciousness and
death within minutes.
Escape behaviour
Appreciating the behaviour of people in a fire can help designers and building
managers to improve means of escape design, and help people to safely evacuate a
building in a fire. Appropriate design for escape needs an understanding of:
1. The normal use of a building (e.g. which routes are most familiar), and
2. The fact that a building is not only a physical structure but an information and
communication system.
There is a complex relationship when we consider people in a building, which is
made more complex when we add a fire in an arbitrary place. Figure 7.7 shows the
different factors involved in fire safety.

-- 241 of 391 --

7: Fire safety 	231
Figure 7.7 Essential factors in fire safety.
Many of the problems for people in fires arise out of an inadequate appraisal of the
way in which buildings are managed, used, and comprehended by people in normal
circumstances. Certain architectural forms can be seriously disorientating for people
in everyday use. The non-correspondence between the outside form of a building
and the internal layout, for example, may give difficulties for people trying to escape,
e.g. internal corridors with no windows, basements, underground stations.
Environments provide information; information is selectively attended to by
people. The anticipations and expectations of people about spatial layouts and
dimensions inf luence the cues that they pick up, before and during movement for
escape.
There are two very different models used to predict, describe, and explain people
moving around buildings, Model A: Movement, and Model B: Behaviour.
Model A: Movement
The engineering, physical science, or “ball-bearing” model of human movement.
This is the predominant model of escape behaviours in fire codes, fire science and
engineering, and in media coverage of fires. The assumptions are:
•• People behave irrationally, without thought.
•• Homogenous crowd of individuals in f light.
•• Able to model by non-thinking objects propelled to an exit.
•• Panic.
Therefore, for Model A, there is a need to:
1. Keep information about a threat away from people until absolutely necessary
– to avoid panic.

-- 242 of 391 --

232 	Fire safety
2. Determine:
a. 	Spread of fire
b. 	Speed of smoke spread
c. 	Numbers of people
d. 	Dimensions of escape routes (positions of exits, travel distances, widths of
exits)
3. To assess the time for the “ball-bearings”, or people, to escape and the direc-
tion of movement.
Model B: Behaviour
The social science or psychological model of human reactions. Assumptions are:
•• People are active agents, not ball-bearings.
•• People think and act according to the available information, group ties, and
their role within a building.
•• Emphasis on patterns of behaviour rather than where behaviour takes place.
•• Flight is not a panic reaction, but a rational action of people warned too late to
evacuate in an orderly fashion.
Therefore, for Model B, there is a need to:
1. Provide early information for people to act appropriately.
2. Assess the time for people to escape, determine:
a. 	Reaction time
b. 	Knowledge of the building
c. 	Social constraints
d. 	Visual access to exits, and wayfinding
There are a number of “significant fires”, and study of the use of these models in
each of these, or consideration of how using a different model could have helped
reduce the casualties, can be a useful exercise. Model A is easier to study, com-
prehend, and apply mathematics to. Model B tends to follow “real life”. The best
solutions use both models appropriately. See Table 7.2 for a selection of significant
fire summaries.
Research into fire progression and escape behaviour continues. One classic
study was an experiment on individual and group reactions to smoke seeping into
an unfamiliar office room from under a door. The reactions of individuals alone
in the room, in going to and opening the door, were much faster than in a group
of strangers together in the room. This ref lects constraint on being the first to act.

-- 243 of 391 --

7: Fire safety 	233
Table 7.2 Selection of significant fires summaries, UK and Ireland
Selection of significant fires summaries, UK and Ireland (date order)
Name 	Details 	Findings
Ronan Point 	1968
London
4 deaths
Partial collapse due to gas explosion blowing out
loadbearing walls.
Although “few” casualties, the visual effect of the
complete collapsed corner of the 22-storey building
resulted in loss of public confidence in high rise.
•• Led to change in Building Regulations for structural
adequacy and “disproportional collapse”.
Summerland
Leisure
Complex
1973
Douglas
Isle of Man
41 deaths
Rapid fire spread in cavities in the external wall
construction.
Not all occupants prioritised escape on the alarm but
prioritised travelling to upper f loors to reunite with their
children.
Criticisms:
•• No overall duty in respect of fire safety.
•• No staff training in fire safety.
•• Long delay in summoning the fire brigade.
•• No organised methodical evacuation.
•• Locked fire exits and car parked across doors.
•• Misguided actions by staff.
•• Delay in operating fire alarm system.
•• Plastic wall linings used which aided growth.
•• Led to maximum sizes of cavities and requirements
for cavity barriers.
•• Led to glazed areas being considered as part of wall
surfaces.
Woolworths,
Manchester
1979
Manchester
10 deaths
Originated in a furniture display area in an open storey
that also included a restaurant.
Criticisms:
•• Delay in summoning the fire brigade. Subsequent
tests showed the fire would have reached maximum
severity 2 minutes after ignition.
•• Led to amendments to the 1971 Fire Precautions
Act to allow fire authorities to take account of
active fire-extinguishing systems in connection
with fire certificate.
•• Public unable to appreciate need for immediate
evacuation and died as a result.
•• Use of keys in glass-fronted boxes for doors on
escape routes not to be allowed in future.
•• Started research on human factors.
(continued)

-- 244 of 391 --

234 	Fire safety
Table 7.2 (continued)
Stardust Disco 	1981
Dublin
48 deaths
Interaction between wall linings, radiation from low
ceilings, and furnishings which together aided rapid fire
growth.
Criticisms:
•• No emergency evacuation plan.
•• Employees not allocated specific duties in the event
of a fire.
•• Staff as confused as patrons during fire.
•• Exits locked or gave impression of being locked.
•• Delay in summoning fire brigade.
•• Actions of staff uncoordinated and inadequate.
•• Failure to operate the alarm system.
Public were unable to appreciate need for immediate
evacuation and died as a result.
Valley Parade 	1985 	“Open-air” conf lagration caught on TV.
Football 	Bradford 	Combustible ceiling, configuration which aided rapid fire
Stadium 	56 deaths 	growth.
Public failed to appreciate need for immediate evacuation
and died as a result.
•• Led to amendments and extended scope of Safety of
Sports Ground Act 1975 to include sports stadia with a
capacity of 10,000 or more.
•• Led to Fire Safety and Places of Sport Act 1987.
•• Introduced certification for “regulated stands”.
King’s Cross
Underground
1987
London
31 deaths
Started under an escalator between the platforms and the
concourse.
Criticisms:
•• Delay in summoning the fire brigade.
•• Poor communication with passengers.
•• Led to review of safety of underground.
•• Introduction of Fire Precautions Sub-surface
Railway Station (Amendment) Regulations.
•• Started research on quantified risk assessments.
•• Trench effect identified, where hot gases will
move towards and “adhere” to nearby surfaces
and inclined planes due to pressure differentials;
the heat releases more ignitable gases from such
surfaces, resulting in rapid surface spread of
f lame; particularly relevant for fires where vertical
escalation is possible.
(continued)

-- 245 of 391 --

7: Fire safety 	235
Table 7.2 (continued)
Sun Valley 	1993 	Following a number of hazardous fires in buildings with
Poultry 	Hereford
2 deaths
(firefighters)
composite “sandwich” panels, this fire focussed attention
and research on the panels. Typically, these have cores
of rigid foamed plastics to give good thermal insulation,
high moisture resistance, and low cost. The facings to
these cores are usually of materials exhibiting better fire
resistance or lower f lammability.
The hazard arises because firefighters (particularly) can
be travelling below such panels unaware that the cores are
on fire.
The cores can ignite through fissures in the panels, at
joints, and at poorly sealed edge protection.
The fire can spread rapidly in the cores and the jointing
and support systems are insufficient to prevent the panels
delaminating, or collapsing, onto occupants.
•• Led to changes in building regulations for the
manufacture and use of panels in new building works.
•• Led to changes in fire authority operation procedures.
•• Further understanding that fires starting in the
contents of a building can spread into the structure.
Lakanal House 	2009
London
6 deaths
Rapid fire spread across exterior cladding.
14-storey residential block, 98 f lats, single central
staircase.
Criticisms:
•• Criticisms of “stay-put” policy.
•• Criticism of no sprinklers (using cost as justification).
•• Renovations and alterations (previous to fire) had
removed fire-stopping material between f lats and
communal corridors.
•• Refurbishment to meet fire safety standards prior
to fire.
•• Led to warnings that similar fires could occur,
especially due to lack of sprinklers in tower blocks.
(continued)

-- 246 of 391 --

236 	Fire safety
Table 7.2 (continued)
Grenfell Tower 	2017
London
72 deaths
At the time of writing, still under public inquiry, police
investigations, and coroners’ inquests.
Rapid fire spread relating to the cladding in the external
wall construction.
Single central stair, 24-storey, 120 f lats.
Lower four storeys non-residential. Not sprinklered.
Currently being attributed to the cladding type. External
wall cladding thermally renovated 2015/16 to PIR type.
Currently, criticism of:
•• Composite panels retrofit to external walls external faces.
•• Combustible insulation with the composite panels.
•• Management “stay put” policy.
•• Alarm system and lack of inter-connectivity.
•• On-site fire extinguishers.
•• Fire door condition.
•• Smoke venting system.
•• Firefighting lift controls.
•• Led to fire tests on similarly clad towers.
Research after the King’s Cross Fire, based in the Newcastle underground sys-
tem, shows that some methods of fire alarm produce no reaction in commuters,
with no attempt to escape.
Canadian research suggests that there has been a significant under-estimation
in international codes of times to evacuate high-rise buildings. Research on exit
choice behaviour (when a person has a choice of exists – which does he choose and
why) has shown that the route chosen could be predicted by formulae based on the
visibility of stair entrances, in contrast to the stair width or distance to exits.
In the Manchester Woolworths fire, the public mainly used one staircase, one
that led to the restaurant directly from the street, while the staff preferred the “staff
area” staircase. People will travel further to get to a route they know rather than
looking around for a better one.
People do not move when an alarm goes off. People wait to see if it is relevant to
them. There are different methods of alarm, and these attract different responses.
The time to escape should be taken as the time to start to escape plus the time taken
to make the escape.
See Figure 7.8, Evacuation time. The pre-movement time will include the inves-
tigation time. People may be doing something – but that may not be making
their way out of the building – they may be collecting their children from the f loor
above (Summerland fire). Another factor in pre-movement time is whether the
occupants are asleep. They first of all have to wake up – then recognise that the
alarm is going – then decide to do something about it.

-- 247 of 391 --

7: Fire safety 	237
Figure 7.8 Evacuation time.
Figure 7.9 Alternate routes of escape – or not. Diagram adapted from Approved Document B
(www.gov.uk/government/publications/fire-safety-approved-document-b).
There are different methods of fire alarm including a person shouting, an elec-
tronic alarm, informative warning (IFW), and visual display alarms. By varying
the warning, the pre-movement time can vary dramatically. A person shouting
might evoke a quick response in a small building – workshop, small office, etc.
However, in a university hall of residence this would be unlikely to result in the
required action.
Average response times have been estimated as: bell six minutes, IFW four
minutes, and visual display two minutes. However, research following the King’s
Cross fire showed that evacuation practice using an alarm bell only was completely
ignored by passengers. Directive public announcements were much more effective
at reducing pre-movement time.
Once people do start to escape, the travel time depends on their distance to
travel before reaching a place of safety. Their route of travel may be restricted by
the position of the fire. They have more chance to escape, if there are more than
one distinct independent routes to safety. For example, two different, not intercon-
nected, stairways at opposite sides of the building.
As implied by the foregoing, both stairways need to be well-known and used
by the occupants.
For two routes to be regarded as separate, they should be over 45° from each
other, as in Figure 7.9. Point C has two routes; Points D and E have only one route
each and are not alternatives.

-- 248 of 391 --

238 	Fire safety
FIRE PRECAUTIONS FROM FIRST PRINCIPLES
Fire legislation is mainly involved with fire protection. In this, there are also two
main offshoots – life protection and property protection. Legislation is concerned
primarily with the safety of life and not with the protection of property or protec-
tion of a company’s ability to function. Insurance companies are often interested in
property protection. See Table 7.3 for examples of fire protection measures for life,
property, active and passive.
Paradoxically the measures required to protect life can be simpler, less exten-
sive, and less costly than those to protect assets, because people can be removed
from the danger by evacuation.
A “Tactics and Objectives” matrix can be set up to help in considerations when
seeking to fulfil the objectives of life safety and property protection, such as the
one shown in Figure 7.10 originally created by Paul Stollard.
Prevention – ensuring fires do not start by controlling ignition and fuel
sources.
Communication – ensuring that if ignition occurs, the occupants are informed
and any active fire systems are triggered.
Escape – ensuring that the occupants of the building are able to move to places
of safety before they are threatened by heat and smoke.
Containment – ensuring that the fire is contained to the smallest possible area
limiting the amount of property likely to be damaged and the threat to life safety.
Extinguishment – ensuring that the fire can be extinguished quickly with
minimum consequential damage to the building.
Table 7.3 Examples of fire protection measures for life, property, active and passive
Life 	Property
Emergency lighting 	Gaseous f looding
Fire resistance of elements (e.g. 30 mins) 	Fire resistance of elements (e.g. 2 hrs)
Spread of f lame spread/support 	Spread of f lame spread/support
Sprinklers 	Sprinklers
Fire doors 	Closed fire doors
Extinguishers 	Extinguishers
Enclosed stairways 	Fire shutters
Alarm systems 	Automated alarm systems
Protected means of escape
Active
Detection
Extinguishers
Smoke control
Sprinklers
Management
Passive
Structural fire protection
Compartmentation
Protected means of escape

-- 249 of 391 --

7: Fire safety 	239
Figure 7.10 Tactics and objectives matrix to fulfil the objectives of life safety and property
protection (developed from “Fire from First Principles” by Paul Stollard).The solid
line arrows indicate success, dotted line arrows indicate failure.
Considering these in a logical sequence, the first is obviously prevention. Only
if this fails are the others needed. Communication by itself, however success-
ful, cannot save lives or protect property but it is the key to the other factors. If
communication is successful, the escape and extinguishment can be attempted; if
unsuccessful then only containment remains as an available tactic.
The purpose of containment is to prevent the fire spreading beyond defined
boundaries and to protect the other areas so separated. The areas to which the fire
is confined may be termed as a fire cell, a fire zone, or compartment. Compartment
and compartmentation are defined in the Building Regulations Approved
Documents B and should only be used in those terms. If you are not making the
area as defined there, use a different term.
Protected areas can be a whole building, a complete floor of a building, a vertical
enclosure, or a specified part of a building.The object of containment is twofold:
i. Prevent a fire escaping from the compartment of origin, and
ii. Prevent a fire entering into other compartments.
Many countries’ building standards and regulations limit the sizes of compart-
ments. In the UK, these maximum compartment sizes can be traced historically.
The 1853 London Metropolitan Building Act imposed a limit of 216,000 ft³ (the
cube of 60 ft × 60 ft × 60 ft). This was because the London Fire Brigade, at that
time, were confident that they could control a fire within such a volume using

-- 250 of 391 --

240 	Fire safety
hoses with a 60 ft throw and with ladders up to a height of 60 ft, 60 ft being near
20 m (18.2 metres). Current UK limitations are held in HM Government Approved
Documents B and Scottish Technical Handbooks. They depend on the building’s
height, use, the fire resistance duration, and whether or not it is sprinklered.
To form a fire compartment, the walls, f loors, ceilings, etc., have to maintain
their loadbearing capacity as long as required by the pertinent standards (usually
30, 60, or 120 minutes). The fire might last a lot longer. Compartment walls and
f loors need not – and generally cannot – be imperforate as they need to be pen-
etrated by doors, service ducts, staircases, etc.
If the building only has to survive until all the occupants have been evacu-
ated, then the necessary structural protection might only have to be a short time,
perhaps half an hour. However, if the life safety strategy relies on the provision of
places of refuge as in hospitals, or it is necessary for fire fighters to be able to work
safely in the building, the protection may be one hour or more. It might be impor-
tant to the building’s insurers that repair, rather than rebuilding, is possible, and
this can lead to fire protection times of two hours or four hours.
The construction of buildings is not always so easy in practice than in theory.
There are holes, ducts, passages, gaps, etc., introduced, which are often hidden
from sight. As a surveyor, you may find that the integrity, of walls, f loors, etc., is
not complete. For example, a pipe or wire passing through a wall requires a hole
bigger than itself, the sides of which create additional passages from one side of the
wall to the other. The entrances to these additional passages are covered on each
side aesthetically, but not necessarily effectively from a fire-resistant viewpoint.
Despite having fire-resistant elements, fire and smoke can by-pass these elements
and spread through the building.
A second example, is suspended ceilings. The fire-resistant walls are not always
taken right up to the structural f loor above and fire can spread quickly along in the
void – aided of course by being able to travel along the top surface of the suspended
ceiling (Figure 7.5).
Gaps and cavities, and ducts are a major problem – especially in older build-
ings where they are not easily found. The fire destruction at Windsor Castle in
1992 was greatly helped by f loor voids and gaps behind panelling. As building
surveyors, what we do with these is to: find, fire-stop, cavity barrier.
A cavity barrier is simply construction with a minimum standard of fire resist-
ance, used to seal or sub-divide the cavity, to restrict the movement of smoke or
f lame within a space. Fire-stops should be provided around such things as pipes or
ducts that pass through a fire-separating element and also at junctions where such
elements are not firmly bonded together.
Fire doors carry out two functions whilst allowing persons access through the ele-
ment. A wedged-open fire door, however, provides no function. Fire doors nearly

-- 251 of 391 --

7: Fire safety 	241
always require a self-closing device. The hindrance caused by these is unfortunately
a major complaint of building users. In certain circumstances, an automatic release
mechanism that holds the door open in general use, but releases it when activated by
automatic fire detection so that the door that closes, is sometimes an answer.
Where possible, a better method is to position lines of fire-resisting separation with the
internal sub-divisions of the building, where doors in walls or partitions would nor-
mally be closed. If doors are a hindrance in normal use then it is likely that they will be
propped open, regardless of whether they have been identified as critical to fire safety.
Such practices may well demonstrate the inferiority of the design solution chosen.
Smoke is the main hazard to persons escaping. Although often used at the same
positions in fire doors, smoke seals and intumescent strips are very different. Smoke
seals restrict the passage of smoke at low temperatures. For hot smoke and gases,
intumescent strips swell typically at 150°C and seal the gap around the edge of the
door. It is unlikely that a door would achieve a fire resistance of 30 minutes with-
out intumescent strips.
Older doors used to have to be 45 mm thick and have 25 mm rebates (no intu-
mescent strips). Current fire doors do not need to be so thick and use intumescent
smoke seals in place of the rebates. If a good fit in its frame, an old door can be
upgraded by the provision of strips and smoke seals. If the door is warped or fits
poorly in the frame, it may need replacing. It is the door set – i.e. the door and its
frame – not just the door, which must have adequate fire resistance. Panelled doors
may also need the panels and their joints upgrading.
Materials and fire
Timber
Timber burns – it is combustible – it is a complex hydrocarbon. But the perfor-
mance of timber in real fires is frequently far superior to unprotected, non-com-
bustible materials such as steel and aluminium. It is also predictable and measurable.
This is because:
a. It has a low conductivity, low thermal diffusivity, and low thermal expansion.
b. To pyrolyse, timber must be heated to around 160–200°C. Due to its low ther-
mal conductivity, getting the heat into timber to result in pyrolysis is not easy.
c. Timber has the inherent ability to protect itself: the build-up of charcoal on
the surface of burning timber limits the availability of oxygen thereby insulat-
ing the remainder of the section.
d. The rate of char is predictable and varies only slightly with species of timber
and not on the severity of the fire. Values of 0.55 mm/min and 0.75 mm/min

-- 252 of 391 --

242 	Fire safety
are given for softwood and hardwood respectively. So large cross-sectioned
timber will survive for long periods in a fire. Thin sections – f loorboards, wall
panelling, laths, etc. – will quickly burn through. Laminated timber can also
act as large sectioned timber.
e. “Sacrificial” timber can be built into the construction to be consumed with-
out affecting the loadbearing capacity of the structural core of the timber.
The use of f lame-retardant treatments will not normally slow down the charring
rate, but can result in a better spread of f lame rating.
Brick
Clay bricks perform well in fire. They have already been fired in the kiln at tem-
peratures over 1000°C so further heat exposure does little damage. Bricks have low
thermal conductivity and diffusivity so heat will be slow to soak into the brick-
work. However small cracks and fissures will develop or expand, causing some
distortion. Brickwork is constructed of mortar as well as bricks, and the mortar
joints do not perform so well. The heat has a weakening effect on the joints, and
brickwork suffers a certain amount of weakening and distortion over 1000°C.
As well as clay bricks, we use concrete and calcium silicate bricks. Although
there are many different types of these three bricks and different types of mortar
used for bedding, no distinctions are made in classifying their behaviour.
Stonework
Stone used in construction is generally granite, sandstone, and limestone.
Igneous rocks such as granites contain free quartz which has the peculiar
property of expanding very rapidly at 575°C and completely shattering the rock.
Considerable spalling at the surface may occur in a fire, and thin sections of stone
may disintegrate entirely.
Limestones are composed of calcium carbonate which decomposes at about
800°C into free lime and carbon dioxide. This change is gradual with little altera-
tion in volume, and the interior of the stone may be protected by the surface. Water
used to fight the fire slakes away the quicklime so formed and will cause the outer
skin to fall away.
Sandstone generally comes between granite and limestone in fire behaviour
and may shrink and crack in a fire.
Stone is generally a good heat insulator, but is inferior to brick when subjected
to continuous heat because of its tendency to split or spall, especially when water is
applied. Stonework should always be carefully watched for signs of cracking when
working near or beneath it.

-- 253 of 391 --

7: Fire safety 	243
Steel
Steel is dense, strong, and has high thermal conductivity and very high thermal
diffusivity. It has a high melting point, about 1535°C, so it is unlikely to melt in a
normal fire. But it does perform very poorly in a fire. As a rule of thumb, it loses
half its strength at 500°C, and two-thirds of its strength at 600°C. This can be
reached after 15–20 minutes’ exposure to a fully developed fire. It begins to sag and
twist in proportion to the amount and direction of load to which it is subjected.
These temperatures are by no means abnormal in even a moderate fire. A 10 m steel
joist will expand 60 mm for a 500°C rise in temperature, and where built into a
loadbearing wall, this expansion could result in collapse.
A loaded steel section therefore has to be protected to ensure that the steel
is not heated to these critical temperatures within the period of fire resistance
required.
This can be achieved either by insulation or dissipation:
1. 	Encase in a material with low thermal conductivity and low thermal diffu-
sivity, e.g. brick, concrete, insulating boards, sprayed coatings, intumescent
paints; or
2. 	Dissipate the heat away from the steel by water or by filling a hollow steel
section with concrete.
Concrete
Concrete does not melt or soften in a fire. It has a low thermal conductivity and a
very low thermal diffusivity.
When concrete is heated, it expands due to thermal expansion of the materi-
als, but the hardened cement paste shrinks as a result of loss of moisture by drying
out. As a result, the overall change is not easily predicted and internal stresses can
be set up within the concrete. In a severe fire, spalling of the surface occurs and is
aggravated by sudden cooling, e.g. by a jet of water. Concrete made of limestones
or lightweight aggregates is much less susceptible to spalling than those made with
more dense aggregates; hence the fire resistance of structural concrete is classified
differently according to the aggregate used.
It is possible to achieve very high levels of fire resistance with reinforced con-
crete, e.g. up to 4 hours.
The fire resistance of reinforced concrete is determined by the protection of the
steel against excessive rise in temperature. This is given by the concrete cover, i.e.
the concrete between the surface of the structural element and the nearest surface
of the embedded steel. Generally, the greater the amount of cover, the longer the
period of fire resistance. However simply increasing the thickness of the concrete
cover does not necessarily give a corresponding increase in safety because of the

-- 254 of 391 --

244 	Fire safety
concrete’s tendency to spall in a fire. This can reduce the cover, and it may be nec-
essary to provide some additional reinforcement to counteract this danger if the
cover is over 40 mm.
Aluminium
Aluminium melts at 660°C (pure) and less than 600°C (alloys). Critical tempera-
ture (at which it loses half its strength) is about 200–250°C. There is a very rapid
loss of strength in a fire; stability is affected from 100°C. It has a high expansion
rate, about twice that of steel.
Aluminium does not perform well in a fire. It is mainly used for glazing and
wall cladding. Aluminium door furniture should not be used on a door required
to be a fire door.
Lead
Melts at 327°C. Danger from molten metal.
Plaster
Gypsum plaster does not burn but when heated tends to de-hydrate – the combined
water is gradually driven off. The plaster can absorb a lot of heat for this, thus pro-
viding protection to the substrate.
Glass
Glass is a super-cooled liquid which behaves like a solid at room temperature. It
does not burn or melt, but gradually softens at high temperatures. Ordinary glass
has very little fire resistance, offering little insulation when intact. It has quite a
high expansion rate. In a fire situation, this rate of expansion of the glass, held in
its framing, will result in shattering, losing any integrity and stability.
Care must be taken when using glass at a fire-resisting element in a sprinklered
building to use a glass which will not be adversely affected by the cooling water.
Whatever type of glass is used, the design of the frame is as important as the choice
of glazing material. The frame obviously has to last as long as the glass in a fire.
Georgian wired glass can solve the problem of integrity and stability by holding
the glass in place. Georgian wired glass, however, still does not offer any insulation.
Radiant heat can still pass through the material. Toughened glasses can achieve the
same integrity and stability without the unattractive appearance of the wires, yet
these also fail to provide any insulation.

-- 255 of 391 --

7: Fire safety 	245
Laminated glass, incorporating transparent layers of intumescent material,
offers insulating properties. On the application of heat, these layers expand to form
an insulating barrier. The disadvantages of this glass lie in its weight, cost, and
limitations on external use (sunshine can activate the intumescence).
MEANS OF ESCAPE
Means of escape should be designed with the foregoing in mind. The procedure in
Table 7.4 can be used for designing, or for checking a design, for means of escape,
when considering passive fire safety.
EXTERNAL FIRE SPREAD
External walls
In a fire, the external walls have two main functions. If the fire is inside the build-
ing, the wall must try and stop it getting out. If the fire is outside the building, the
wall must try and stop it getting in.
Consider a building in the middle of a 10 hectare field, with no other buildings
nearby. Apart from a certain loss of money, the fire getting out of the building is
not a major problem – there is nothing else to burn. Similarly, there is little concern
about another building causing our building to catch alight – there are no other
buildings. Thus, there is little concern about the combustibility or fire resistance
of the walls.
Conversely, put the building in a city centre with a paint factory next door one
way and an old people’s home on the other side. In this scenario, there are concerns
about danger from a fire in the paint factory, and once the fire has got a hold on
the building – it might endanger the old people. In this situation, there are real
concerns with the construction of the building’s external walls. It is all a matter of
distance between buildings.
It is particularly important when the building is less than a metre from the
boundary. The danger of ignition and fire spread is now very great.
There are usually restrictions on how combustible the wall, and its compos-
ite materials, are. However, as evidenced from the Grenfell fire, interpretation
of these restrictions is not always obvious. This is despite the findings of the
1973 Summerland fire. See also Table 7.2.
The fire resistance of external walls depends on the use, height, and size of the
building (and consequently the expected size of any fire and the effects on people).
Regulations sometimes state that required standards of fire resistance must be so
when tested from either side of a wall, but there can be reduced standards when the
external wall is more than 1 m from a boundary.

-- 256 of 391 --

246 	Fire safety
Table 7.4 A procedure to be used for designing, or for checking a design, for means of
escape, when considering passive fire safety
Procedure to design, or check a design, for means of escape, when considering
passive fire safety
1. 	Decide the purpose group of the building.
2. 	Decide the fire resistance of the building. 	Relate to the purpose group.
3. 	Find the maximum travel distance and the
direct distance.
Use travel distances when all the obstacles
are known.
4. 	Identify dead ends to use “one direction
only” distance.
5. 	Establish the maximum occupancy. 	Find the f loor space factor and multiply by
the area of the room or storey (excluding
stair enclosure, lifts, and sanitary
accommodation).
6. 	Find minimum number of escape routes or
exits permitted from the room or storey.
Relates to f loor area and number of
occupants.
7. 	Locate escape stairs and exits and ensure
travel distances from all points in the room
or storey are not exceeded.
Include for 45° rule.
8. 	Check layout of storey, for example 	a. Inner rooms.
b. Circulation separate from stairways.
c. Lengths of corridors.
d. Dead ends.
9. 	Using points 6, 7, 11, and 12 will
determine the number of stairs. Points 10
and 11 will give the width of the stairs.
10. 	Determine minimum width of stairs.
11. 	Determine required width of stairs: 	a. Discount one stair if necessary.
b. Over 1100 mm wide, might also use:
P = 200w + 50(w − 0.3)(n – 1)
where:
P = no of people
w = width of stair (m)
n = no. of storeys
c. Find “w” which is the minimum
combined width of stairs.
d. Share this between the number of stairs
(less the discounted one).
e. Ensure that this meets or exceeds the
minimum width.
f. Add back in the discounted one at, at
least, the minimum width.
(continued)

-- 257 of 391 --

7: Fire safety 	247
Table 7.4 (continued)
12. 	Determine whether any extra stairs are
needed.
E.g. accommodation stairs or firefighting
stairs.
13. 	Determine whether lobbies are needed to
the stairs.
14. 	Ensure all escape stairways discharge to a
final exit or a protected route.
15. 	Check on specific provisions for building
type.
16. 	Provide unambiguous signage.
17. 	Provide emergency lighting.
18. 	Provide portable extinguishers.
Most walls have pockets of unprotected areas (areas which do not have the
required fire resistance), for example, windows that permit heat radiation from a fire
to pass through.The way many regulations deal with this is not to gradually reduce the
requirements overall as the building is moved further from the boundary, but to retain
the required standard and allow pockets of reduced standards.These can be limited by
percentage according to how far the building is from any boundaries.
Particular care needs employment when retrofitting thermal insulation onto exter-
nal walls. Many types of insulation are combustible. Most walls are not imperforate. Fire
can therefore pass from internal surfaces to external, external surfaces to internal, into
interstitial layers, and across party wall boundaries. Regulations may restrict combusti-
ble material from being applied to buildings which are tall (e.g. above 18 m) but not
to rows of terraced houses. Despite the regulations in place, as a building surveyor you
may encounter combustible material taken across party walls in rows of terraced houses.
These will be coated in a decorative and protecting render; however, as building survey-
ors, you are also likely to encounter breaks in the integrity of this render.
Roofs
As well as walls, roofs can cause fire spread from one building to another. Similar to
walls, roofs have to have their surface classifications limited dependent on the distance
to the boundaries. This is assuming there is actually a space separation between the
buildings.When there is only a party wall between buildings, similar restrictions apply.
There are currently no provisions to stop fire entering a roof void via the external
eaves, although fire stopping is usually required across a party boundary at eaves level.
Party walls are now taken up to roof undersides and gaps between properties
filled with mortar or other non-combustible material. As a building surveyor, you
may find that not all gaps have been filled, or that the filling has shrunk or fallen
out, thus breaking the integrity of the party wall.

-- 258 of 391 --

248 	Fire safety
For older properties in London, because of the historic party wall London bylaws,
party walls were usually taken above the roof level. In the rest of the UK and in other
parts of the world, this was not the case. As a building surveyor, you are therefore
likely to encounter lengths of terraced properties, with different occupancies, hav-
ing unseparated roof voids. These can enable fires to travel the length of a number
of attached properties, as for example, the Bridge Street fire in Chester, the South
Bridge fire in Edinburgh, and the Torbay Road fire in Paignton.
Access for fire services
In Scotland, Mandatory Standards require that every building must be accessible
to fire and rescue services. Access requirements increase with building size and
height. The higher the building, the greater the extent of the building’s footprint
needs to be accessible. Vehicle access is needed to the exterior faces of buildings
to facilitate high-reaching appliances such as turntable ladders and hydraulic plat-
forms. This also enables pumping appliances to supply water and equipment for
firefighting and rescue activities. For domestic properties, vehicle access is required
to at least one elevation. Similar provisions are required for England and Wales.
Guidance can be found in the Scottish Technical Handbooks and in the Approved
Documents. There are requirements for access routes, turning facilities, operat-
ing spaces, water supply, and internal facilities. Internal facilities required include,
depending on building height, purpose, layout, f loor areas, basement depth, etc.:
•• Firefighting stairs
•• Firefighting lifts
•• Firefighting lobbies
•• Heat and smoke control (e.g. natural or mechanical ventilation)
•• Fire mains (wet or dry)
•• Fire shutters
•• Fire suppression
INTRODUCTION TO FIRE ENGINEERING CONCEPTS
Initial questions to consider
Fire predictions
•• Will it burn?
•• How long will it burn for?
•• How much heat will it give out?
•• How much smoke will it give out?
•• How will the smoke and the fire spread and where to?

-- 259 of 391 --

7: Fire safety 	249
•• Where are the routes for the fire and products of combustion? Note that in a
finished building, these routes may be concealed, e.g. into ducts or spaces in or
through floors or walls, formed purposefully or simply left unfilled or fire-stopped.
People predictions
•• Who is in the building?
•• Where are they?
•• Where do they go to be safe?
•• How long will it take them?
Fire engineered?
If the summation of the fire predictions is “less” than the summation of the
people predictions, i.e. if everyone is out well before untenable conditions
occur, then we have a successfully engineered building.
In fire engineering, prescriptive second-tier guidance such as the Approved
Documents is unlikely to be fully used, because the safety is worked out from first
principles. For example, British Standards produce fire engineering standards and
these may be used instead. See Figure 7.11 for compliance document status.
Concerns of the fire engineer
a. The physical and chemical processes taking place in the course of fire
development.
b. The response of human physiology to the effects of heat and toxic fire products.
c. The response of the occupants to fire alarms, etc., given the capacity of the
escape routes and the handicaps imposed by a. and b.
d. The effect of automatic fire detection and suppression systems and of fire
fighters.
Figure 7.11 Compliance documents.

-- 260 of 391 --

250 	Fire safety
Fire engineering tools
•• Mathematics, e.g. fire size, smoke volumes, evacuation times
•• Computer modelling
•• Communication systems
•• Smoke control systems
•• Sprinklers/suppression
•• Management systems
•• Advice/help from team (building control, fire authority, mechanical and elec-
trical consultants)
Process
1. Qualitative design review: find out everything (QDR).
2. Quantitative analysis: do your sums.
3. Evaluate.
4. Assess against required criteria (e.g. everyone out before smoke reaches 2 m
above heads).
5. If (4.) is not satisfactory – go back to (1.).
6. When (4.) is okay, present/report results.
Smoke handling
•• Collect smoke and dispense it.
•• Very effective for life safety.
•• New developments are often fire engineered: evacuation + smoke handling.
Computer modelling
•• Very useful in predictions.
•• Especially for complex buildings.
•• Two basic types – field and zone.
•• Zone more simplified but not necessarily less effective than field.
Suppression considerations
•• Sprinklers.
•• Gaseous f looding. Used, e.g. in Channel Tunnel.
•• Evacuate before suppression.
•• Suppression is creeping more into guidance such as approved documents.
•• There is a lobby for sprinklers in houses.

-- 261 of 391 --

7: Fire safety 	251
Mathematics – basic concepts
k – thermal conductivity
c – specific heat capacity
ρ – (rho) density of the material
H – calorific value
Combine to give other properties:
(k·ρ·c) – thermal inertia: measure of time taken for a surface to heat up.
(k/ρ·c) – thermal diffusivity: speed with which heat soaks into material. Helps
to determine strength retention.
Stoichiometric ratio
•• The ratio of fuel to oxygen, in which the amount of oxygen present is just suf-
ficient to completely oxidate the fuel.
•• A stoichiometric mixture is good for explosions, as the ratio of fuel to oxygen
is theoretically correct for complete oxidation.
Typical ratio:
•• Most hydrocarbons need 15:1 of air:fuel ratio by weight.
•• i.e. the weight of air required is be 15 times that of the fuel.
•• Less air is need for wood, approximately 6:1, as wood contains air.
Calorific value H
•• The amount of heat which can be released by a unit mass of fuel at a particular
temperature and pressure.
•• Use this and stoichiometric ratio (r) to get: Heat release per unit mass of oxygen
H/r.

-- 262 of 391 --

8
Disasters and the built environment
John Bruen and John P. Spillane
DISASTERS
Disasters are largely divided into two main areas to include natural and man-made
disasters, and both can cause a significant loss and disruption of lives, built and
social assets, and the economy. There are many different definitions of disaster
and its components. This chapter uses those held in the document, “UNISDR
Terminology on Disaster Risk Reduction” published by the United Nations
International Strategy for Disaster Reduction, Geneva, Switzerland. This defines
a disaster as:
Disaster: “A serious disruption of the functioning of a community or a
society involving widespread human, material, economic or environmental
losses and impacts, which exceeds the ability of the affected community or
society to cope using its own resources”. (UNISDR, 2009)
Historically, disasters were all considered “acts of god” or “acts of nature” and
nothing could be done to prevent their occurrence (Voogd, 2004). More recently,
researchers such as Quarantelli and Perry (2005) argue that disasters are a societal
construct, and disaster impact has a direct or indirect link to human actions and
behaviours and their interplay with the physical and social world and their sub-
sequent vulnerabilities. The social systems that contribute to vulnerabilities are
informed by a number of elements that include the political, cultural, historical,
socio-economic, and environmental context of a place (Horlick-Jones and Peters,
1991). It follows that, as human actions and decision-making increase the vulner-
ability to disasters, it is possible for human actions to eliminate or reduce the condi-
tions giving rise to disasters and, consequently, humans have an obligation to try
to prevent such conditions.
Natural disasters can take many different forms including f loods, tsunamis,
earthquakes, drought, storms, heatwaves, landslides, and fires. Climate change is

-- 263 of 391 --

253	8: Disasters and the built environment
also identified as an attributing factor to natural disasters globally, and it is pre-
dicted that its effects will become greater in the future (Paton et al., 2000). The
frequency of natural disasters has risen significantly over recent decades, and dis-
asters are becoming more frequent and severe in least developed countries (LDCs)
(Smith, 1992; Cannon, 1994; Hidayat and Egbu, 2010). Many LDCs are innately
more vulnerable to natural disasters and have experienced disproportionate levels
of devastation as a result of disasters, both in human life, cost, and the result-
ing large numbers of internally displaced populations (IFRC, 2001; Schilderman,
2004). This vulnerability is often caused by common issues experienced in many
LDCs, including a lack of preventative action plans and preparedness, development
in areas susceptible to natural disasters, unsettled governments, poor construction
standards and techniques, insufficient resources and knowledge in post-disaster
recovery, and the reconstruction cost relative to GDP in these regions (Toya and
Skidmore, 2007; Cannon, 1994).
Human conf licts are man-made planned events that have been the cause of
movement of humans and subsequent destruction and displacement throughout
history. The number of internally displaced people (IDPs) has been continually
rising for over a decade, and forced migration from conf lict is at its highest since
World War II. Conf licts destroy many aspects of the built environment including
housing stock and limit housing production in affected countries.
The built environment and construction sector accounts for a significant
part of a country’s physical assets and economic development contribution. As
such, the built environment is a major part of society, and it is important to
develop appropriate built environments that provide the ability to adapt to the
threats of disasters. Regardless of preparation, the built environment is vulner-
able to the effects of disasters and, as such, disasters have the potential to have
a devastating impact on a country and can create significant impacts on social
and economic activities. The task of reconstruction after a disaster is an onerous
challenge with many stakeholders from a diverse range of backgrounds requiring
effective coordination.
Disaster concepts
It is essential to have a full understanding of disasters, and the many aspects and
concepts that are utilised, in order to assess, prepare, and mitigate against them in
order to inform better decision-making. The main concepts include hazards, risk,
vulnerability, and resilience. These are broad-ranging concepts that can relate to
many different types of disaster in many different contexts. This chapter focuses
on disasters in relation to the built environment and more specifically to housing
where appropriate.

-- 264 of 391 --

254 	Disasters and the built environment
Hazards
UNISDR (2009) defines a hazard as:
a dangerous phenomenon, substance, human activity or condition that may
cause loss of life, injury or other health impacts, property damage, loss of
livelihoods and services, social and economic disruption, or environmental
damage. (UNISDR, 2009)
Hazards are generally categorised into two groups: Man-made/technical or natural.
Natural hazards can generally be divided into five categories as shown in
Table 8.1: (1) hydrological, (2) biological, (3) meteorological (atmospheric), (4)
climatological, and (5) geophysical
Man-made or technical hazards are also referred to as anthropogenic hazards
and can be caused by human action or inaction. The subsequent disasters can be more
protracted, gradual, and predictable than natural disasters. Gustin (2008) states that
hazards can be viewed as failures of systems caused by organisational, operational,
and social faults. These can include technological hazards such as hazardous materi-
als, radiological emergencies, industrial or nuclear power plant blasts, transportation
or structural hazards, and computer or cyber virus hazards. Man-made social hazards
such as war and terrorism can also contribute significantly to disasters. In relation to
the built environment human aspects play a significant role in terms of the devasta-
tion caused when hazards interact with humans, e.g. tsunamis, f loods, storms, etc.
Vulnerability
UNISDR (2009) defines vulnerability as:
The characteristics and circumstances of a community, system or asset that
make it susceptible to the damaging effects of a hazard. (UNISDR, 2009)
Vulnerability compromises the physical, social-economic, and other political fac-
tors that adversely affect the ability of populations to respond to events or hazards.
The level of vulnerability of a person or group is made up of their ability to antici-
pate, cope with, and recover from the impact of a hazard. Global inequalities have
resulted in LDCs being inherently more vulnerable to hazards than developed
countries, often due to aspects such as high population, lack of land and planning
for development, inadequate design, and construction techniques. The lack of pre-
paredness and ability to cope with a disaster can result in vastly different levels
of risk, devastation, and loss of human life and infrastructure for similar disasters
depending on where they occur.

-- 265 of 391 --

255	8: Disasters and the built environment
Table 8.1
 Natural hazard categories and some sub-categories and examples
Biological
 
Geophysical
 
Hydrological
 
Meteorological
 
Climatological
Insect infestation
 
Earthquake
 
Flood
 
Drought
 
Extreme temperatures
Animal infestation
 
Volcano
 
•• General f lood
•• Flash f lood
•• Storm surge/coastal
	f lood
Storm
•• Wind storm
•• Thunder storm
•• Snow storm
•• Blizzard
•• Local storm
Extreme heat/cold
Disease epidemics	
•• Viral
•• Bacterial
•• Parasitic
•• Fungal
•• Prion
Mass movement (dry)	
•• Rock fall
•• Landslide
•• Avalanche
•• Subsidence
Mass movement (wet)	
•• Rock fall
•• Landslide
•• Avalanche
•• Subsidence
Cyclone	
•• Tropical cyclone
•• Hurricane
•• Typhoon
•• Tropical storm
Extreme weather conditions
Animal stampede
 
Tsunami
 
Tornado
 
Droughts
Heat wave
	Cold wave
Wildfire	
•• Forest fire
•• Land fire

-- 266 of 391 --

256 	Disasters and the built environment
Disaster risk
UNISDR (2009) defines risk as:
The probability of harmful consequences, or expected losses (deaths, inju-
ries, property, livelihoods, economic activity disrupted or environment
damaged) resulting from interactions between natural or human-induced
hazards and vulnerable condition. (UNISDR, 2009)
Risk is also conventionally expressed by the equation:
Risk = Hazard × Vulnerability/Capacity
Risk can be perceived differently by different contexts and communities depend-
ing on variables including their social circumstances, knowledge of the risk, and
ability to cope with the risk or hazard. As such, the context in which risk occurs
is an important consideration in calculating risk. Natural hazards cannot be elimi-
nated totally and risk will always exist, and as such disaster can be seen as a func-
tion of the risk process that results from a combination of hazards and conditions of
vulnerability or lack of capacity to reduce the negative impact of risk. The area of
disaster risk is intrinsically linked to the concepts of “disaster risk reduction” and
“disaster risk management”. Both concepts are essential elements in terms of the
housing design and delivery in LDC and post-disaster contexts and are often used
in the same context with similar meanings.
UNISDR (2009) defines both concepts, respectively as:
Disaster risk reduction:
The concept and practice of reducing disaster risks through systematic
efforts to analyse and manage the causal factors of disasters, including
through reduced exposure to hazards, lessened vulnerability of people and
property, wise management of land and the environment, and improved
preparedness for adverse events. (UNISDR, 2009)
Disaster risk management:
The systematic process of using administrative directives, organizations,
and operational skills and capacities to implement strategies, policies and
improved coping capacities in order to lessen the adverse impacts of hazards
and the possibility of disaster. (UNISDR, 2009)

-- 267 of 391 --

257	8: Disasters and the built environment
Disaster risk reduction is inherently linked to the vulnerability to hazards. In LDC
contexts, the capacity of poorer populations to effectively implement disaster risk
reduction policies is less for a number of reasons (Table 8.2). This process can result
in a downward spiral of increased poverty and vulnerability as livelihoods can be
lost as well as homes following a disaster, and resulting in a further reduction of
capacities to reduce risk and prepare for disasters or their aftermath.
Resilience
UNISDR (2009) defines resilience as:
The ability of a system, community or society exposed to hazards to resist,
absorb, accommodate to and recover from the effects of a hazard in a timely
and efficient manner, including through the preservation and restoration of
its essential basic structures and functions. (UNISDR, 2009)
DFID is the Department for International Development, a UK government depart-
ment responsible for administering overseas aid, promoting sustainable develop-
ment, and eliminating world poverty. DFID defines resilience as:
Disaster Resilience is the ability of countries, communities and households
to manage change, by maintaining or transforming living standards in the
face of shocks or stresses – such as earthquakes, drought or violent conf lict –
without compromising their long-term prospects. (DFID, 2011)
Table 8.2 Disaster reduction capacities for richer and poorer countries
Comparative analysis of disaster reduction capacities in richer and poorer
countries
Richer countries 	Poorer countries
Have regulatory frameworks to minimise
disaster risk which are enforced
Regulatory frameworks are weak and absent,
and/or the capacity to enforce them is lacking
Have effective early warning and information
mechanisms in place to minimise loss of life
Lack of comprehensive information systems
linked to pre-emptive response
Have highly developed emergency response
and medical care systems
Divert funds from development programs to
emergency assistance and recovery
Insurance schemes spread the burden of
property losses
Those affected bear full burden of property
losses and may lose livelihoods
Adapted from White et al., 2004.

-- 268 of 391 --

258 	Disasters and the built environment
Resilience is a far-stretching and complex concept taking into account many other
aspects of disaster including risk reduction, risk management, early warning sys-
tems, disaster preparedness, post-disaster strategies, capacity building, knowledge
sharing, effective policy making, technical solutions, financial/economic infra-
structure, and political structures. Resilience building on these and other aspects
can be at various levels, e.g. household, local, state, national, or international,
depending on the context and what it is that the resilience is being sought for, e.g.
natural or man-made hazards. Resilience is the ability to absorb and recover from
hazard impacts. It is often seen as the opposite to vulnerability and as such is some-
times used in the same context as capacity.
Most definitions of resilience have four main elements which can be utilised
in order to gain a measure of the resilience for a given community or population:
(1) context, (2) disturbance, (3) capacity, and (4) reaction (DFID, 2011). The four
elements can be utilised to form a framework to enable levels of resilience to be
assessed as shown in Figure 8.1.
The four elements of a resilience framework
1. Context 	2. Disturbance 	3. Capacity to
deal with
religion, institution 	conflict, insecurity, 	disturbance
food shortage, high
fulel prices.
e.g. social group, 	e.g. natural hazard,
Exposure	
Shocks
System
or 	Sensitivity
process
Stresses Adaptive
capacity
Resilience of 	Resilience to
what? 	what?
Figure 8.1 Resilience framework (source: DFID, 2011).
4. Reaction to
disturbance
e.g. survive, cope,
recover, learn,
transform.
Bounce
back
better
Bounce
back
Recover
but
worse
than
before
Collapse

-- 269 of 391 --

259	8: Disasters and the built environment
DISASTER MANAGEMENT CYCLE
The disaster management cycle, shown at Figure 8.2, is widely accepted and
used as a tool for disaster management worldwide. The cycle consists of a set of
sequential stages that occur during the unfolding of a disaster at which inter-
ventions can be undertaken to help lessen or mitigate against the impact of
that disaster. The interventions include both reactive measures during or after
the event, and also preventive measures prior to the event (Figure 8.2). The
implementation of the cycle is multi-disciplinary in nature and requires col-
laboration from various disciplines and shareholders. Correct use of the disaster
management cycle model can ensure that a holistic approach is taken at the
required stages with the required stakeholders to achieve this long-term sustain-
able recovery goal.
There are three different periods during the cycle: (1) before the event (pre-
disaster), (2) impact (disaster), and (3) after the event (post-disaster). There are four
stages to the disaster management cycle that occur at these periods. The four main
stages are preparation, mitigation, response, and recovery.
Figure 8.2 Disaster management cycle (source:Alexander, 2002).

-- 270 of 391 --

260 	Disasters and the built environment
1. Preparation
UNISDR (2009) defines preparedness as:
The knowledge and capacities developed by governments, professional
response and recovery organizations, communities and individuals to effec-
tively anticipate, respond to, and recover from, the impacts of likely, immi-
nent or current hazard events or conditions. (UNISDR, 2009)
This stage involves taking management actions in advance of a disaster or event
occurring. This management stage covers a wide variety of aspects from a macro
to a micro level. Appropriate preparedness can significantly reduce the risks of
and vulnerability to the hazard or disaster and increase the resilience of a popula-
tion. Preparedness covers many aspects, e.g. physical/infrastructure and societal
preparedness. Practical aspects in relation to preparedness for the built environ-
ment and housing include approaches such as early warning systems, adequate
infrastructure and structure to withstand the event, contingency planning, haz-
ard mapping, e.g. f loods, disaster management plans, and preparing for future
events.
2. Mitigation
UNISDR (2009) defines mitigation as:
The lessening or limitation of the adverse impacts of hazards and related
disasters. (UNISDR, 2009)
In its simplest sense, mitigation can be seen as approaches to reduce or remove risk
to prevent future potential disasters. Practical mitigation actions at a macro and
micro level in relation to the built environment and housing can help in relation
to unpreventable hazards. Effective mitigation strategies can significantly impact
the effect of disasters in terms of human and economic loss and include adequate
zoning of land, appropriate building codes and techniques, f lood management,
and house maintenance. Mitigation and preparedness are intrinsically linked and
may overlap in practical terms. It is recognised that poorer countries have a weaker
capacity to mitigate disaster impacts but that if pre-emptive action is incorporated
into development work in these poorer countries it can have a positive outcome.
Pre-emptive action should not be seen as an additional burden, but rather it is
justifiable on humanitarian, economic, political, and human development grounds
(White et al., 2004).

-- 271 of 391 --

261	8: Disasters and the built environment
3. Response
UNISDR (2009) defines response as:
The provision of emergency services and public assistance during or imme-
diately after a disaster in order to save lives, reduce health impacts, ensure
public safety and meet the basic subsistence needs of the people affected.
(UNISDR, 2009)
The response stage is sometimes referred to as “disaster relief ” and deals with
the immediate threats posed by a disaster. Typical works throughout the response
stage include evacuation, short-term relief, medical or transport aid, temporary
or transitional shelter, food aid, and search and rescue. The focus of this stage is
on the immediate needs of the populations affected by disasters, and humanitar-
ian organisations are often more prevalent at this stage of the disaster manage-
ment cycle.
This stage concentrates on saving lives and relieving suffering. However, inap-
propriate responses can in fact prolong a crisis, or create a new risk, by:
•• Not enabling sufficient local structures to take control.
•• Or by the use of inappropriate technical approaches that can affect the long-
term recovery and resilience.
4. Recovery
UNISDR (2009) defines response as:
The restoration, and improvement where appropriate, of facilities, liveli-
hoods and living conditions of disaster-affected communities, including
efforts to reduce disaster risk factors. (UNISDR, 2009)
The commencement of the recovery stage is an inexact science. The recovery
stage commences once the immediate emergency crises have been responded to,
and it is usually judged to be when all conditions have returned to a baseline con-
dition. The recovery stage can be seen as: Efforts to return the context back to
normality, or better than it was previously. It is generally considered to be in two
stages, e.g. short term and long term. The recovery stage provides opportunities
to return the affected disaster area to a better or improved state than prior to the
disaster by better mitigation against future disasters and better long-term sustain-
ability. The recovery stage should be commenced in sufficient time so as not to

-- 272 of 391 --

262 	Disasters and the built environment
miss opportunities to improve on the long-term sustainable development goals
that best serve the community affected and reduce the long-term vulnerability of
the community. There is an overlap and interconnect between the outlined cycle
stages, and the stages do not fit an exact sequential process. The periods of time
spent at these stages will vary depending on the context, and stages will also over-
lap to ref lect the realities of each individual disaster context.
Post-disaster reconstruction
Post-disaster reconstruction forms only one element of the overall recovery pro-
cess but a very important one. The construction industry has an important role
to play in finding and providing appropriate solutions to the continuous threat
of disaster. Ofori (2011) outlines the importance of an improved construction
industry for developing nations in order to equip them for disaster scenarios.
There is also recognition that the construction industry can play a wider role as
it assesses, prepares for, prevents, responds to, and recovers from disasters (Haigh
et al., 2006). Post-disaster reconstruction covers many different aspects of the
built environment depending on the context and disaster that preceded it, e.g.
transport infrastructure, housing, ports, sanitation, water. The process of recon-
struction requires significant medium- and long-term strategic considerations in
order to capitalise on an opportunity to improve on the built environment that
preceded it. Post-disaster reconstruction represents a large investment per capita
of population. As such, in order to obtain maximum benefit of the process, care-
ful planning and consideration are essential and must be based on an analysis of
hazard, risk, and vulnerability.
Housing projects often come as first priority in many post-disaster contexts.
In LDCs, much of the population will have no home insurance (as they do in
developed countries), and it falls on the government and the international commu-
nity to endeavour to provide housing for the homeless resulting from the disaster.
Davidson et al. (2007) argue that post-disaster housing has similar challenges to
low-cost housing in LDCs, but that a disaster context adds additional challenges to
post-disaster houses. Davidson et al. (2007) list these challenges as:
•• Donors require quick results for projects.
•• Many different international organisations running housing projects at the
same time.
•• High expectations of reconstruction projects, e.g. sustainability and reduction
in vulnerability.
•• Many organisations having to compete for the same scarce resources.
•• Higher levels of uncertainty.

-- 273 of 391 --

263	8: Disasters and the built environment
SUSTAINABILITY
The use of the word “sustainability” is widespread, and although the principle of
the concept of sustainability is clear enough, the exact interpretation and defini-
tion of it have a large number of meanings to different people. There are numerous
definitions of sustainability and sustainable development, and sustainability is one
of the most contested ideologies of our time, hence the reason why there is no uni-
versally agreed definition. However, the Brundtland Commission (WCED, 1987)
definition of sustainable development is widely used and cited:
Sustainable development is development that meets the needs of the present
without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own
needs. (WCED, 1987)
Three pillars of sustainability are widely recognised as the guiding principles
in terms of achieving and assessing sustainability (Ciegis et al., 2009). The three
pillars are interdependent and cannot be viewed in isolation if a holistic picture of
sustainability is to be obtained. Often referred to as the triple bottom line of sus-
tainability, the three principles consist of:
•• Environmental sustainability
•• Economical sustainability
•• Social sustainability
Sustainable construction
The construction industry, and the associated materials industry which it relies on,
is a major consumer of the earth’s natural resources. The construction industry
places a massive burden and stress on many aspects of the global environment if
not managed correctly due to the innate nature of the industry. Loss of land and
food-growing potential results from quarrying for material and reuse for projects,
e.g. cities, highways, dams, etc., as well as unsustainable use of forest lands for tim-
ber and other raw materials. The construction industry is also a major consumer
of non-renewable energy sources and limited materials, e.g. lead, zinc, and cop-
per, in the production of products and materials. Pollutants and waste generation
associated with the construction industry, e.g. CFC gases, dust, fibre, and toxic
gases, also contribute to the degradation of the global environment and have con-
sequential social and economic implications. Rising global populations have placed
further demand on the construction industry, and there are consequent negative
effects of many current unsustainable approaches.

-- 274 of 391 --

264 	Disasters and the built environment
The construction industry contributes significantly to the overall socio- and
economic performance of a country or region given the far-reaching implications
of both its approach and its product. If the construction industry is to play a signifi-
cant role in the sustainable growth of any country or region, a holistic, considered
approach is required in terms of its impact over the three pillars of sustainability.
Sustainable construction has also been referred to as “green building”, ecologi-
cal building, and sustainable architecture. It is seen as a method for the construction
industry to contribute positively to achieving long-term sustainable development
and has a number of definitions, for example:
Sustainable construction is the creation and responsible management of a
healthy built environment based on resource efficient and ecological princi-
ples. (Du Plessis, 2005, p. 407)
Sustainable construction is an integrative and holistic process aiming to
restore harmony between the natural and the built environment, and create
settlements that affirm human dignity and encourage economic equity. (Du
Plessis, 2002)
Sustainable construction has different approaches and priorities in different coun-
tries. Some countries identify the three pillars of sustainability as the framework,
but many national definitions focus primarily on the environment or ecological
impacts of development. National or region-specific aspects such as population,
the economy, natural hazards, land and water availability, energy production and
supply, and the building sector and existing building stock can all further inf luence
the national or regional definitions and priorities for sustainable development.
Sustainable construction in LDCs and post-disaster contexts
The majority of the world’s population currently live in LDCs, and future popu-
lation growth projections anticipate that the majority of growth will also be in
LDCs. The resulting unprecedented demand for housing and infrastructure to
accommodate this mass population has an immense effect on an LDC’s construc-
tion industry. As such, substantial amounts of capital funds have been allocated
to various infrastructure and residential projects in these areas in recent dec-
ades. The need for long-term sustainable approaches in the delivery of construc-
tion projects to meet these demands from the construction industry is clear (Du
Plessis, 2002).
The concept of sustainability has only recently been introduced into LDCs’
construction industries and post-disaster contexts, and sustainability and sustaina-
ble construction are not yet an essential part of the decision-making process. LDCs

-- 275 of 391 --

265	8: Disasters and the built environment
and post-disaster contexts often put economic development and recovery above
sustainable requirements, with immediate construction demands overshadowing
environmental concerns. Othman (2014) notes that a wide range of challenges
exist that affect delivery of sustainable construction projects in LDCs and post-
disaster contexts. He outlines five main headings under which they fall: (1) human
development, (2) technical, (3) managerial, (4) political, and (5) the triple bottom
line of sustainability (environmental, social, and economic).
LDCs and post-disaster contexts often have different climates, hazards, and
cultural and economic conditions to those of developed countries. However, there
are also similarities in issues in terms of approaches to sustainable construction, and
it is key that the diversity and commonality are recognised and addressed appro-
priately when designing or assessing sustainable approaches in each context. The
demands of sustainable construction in LDCs and post-disaster contexts can differ
greatly from those of developed countries. Perceived higher costs and underlying
socio-cultural factors also contribute to the lower levels of social acceptability of
sustainable construction in mainstream affordable housing.
Du Plessis (2002) states that the construction approaches from developed coun-
tries, which are highly reliant on technical solutions and need adapting by LDCs,
are inappropriate and must be expanded to address the social and economic pillars
of sustainability. Du Plessis (1999) argues that there is a complete communication
gap between the developed and developing worlds in terms of sustainable con-
struction in this regard and that for real sustainable development to exist, develop-
ing and developed countries need to communicate and work together to establish
first what sustainable development is.
Global inequalities and economic constraints in many LDCs and post-disaster
contexts have also resulted in pragmatic governance and decision making in rela-
tion to sustainable social and environmental goals being made more difficult. In
many instances, due to natural disasters or conf licts, organisations must provide
housing to meet the immediate shelter needs of large populations, and this is often
given priority over long-term aspects such as sustainable design, participation, and
reference to local materials and techniques. Sustainability is thus often perceived
as an additional cost to standard practice and is not a necessity but rather a luxury
of the rich (Reffat, 2004).
Affordability and sustainability
Affordable housing is an essential concept to LDCs and post-disaster contexts.
Affordability or affordable housing is a difficult term to define as it can have
different meanings to different people and vary widely from country to country
or region to region. The term “affordable housing” is often used internationally
and represents a number of different subsets of housing that include social housing,

-- 276 of 391 --

266 	Disasters and the built environment
low-income housing, financially assisted housing, and government-subsidised
housing.
In many LDCs and post-disaster contexts, affordability in the mainstream hous-
ing markets is associated with economic sustainability, often with little emphasis
on environmental or social sustainability (Randolph et al., 2008). Perceived higher
costs and underlying socio-cultural factors also contribute to the lower levels of
social acceptability of sustainable construction in the mainstream affordable hous-
ing market (Buys et al., 2005). Pragmatic decision making by governments in
LDCs or in a post-disaster context to meet the immediate housing needs often fails
to fully embrace the principles of sustainability in both the design and delivery
of housing, as cost and the maximum number of housing units being delivered as
quick as possible are often the priority.
Affordability of housing is usually measured as a relationship between house-
hold income and housing cost such as multiples of income or median income
for a country or region (Menshawy et al., 2016). However, these mathematical
and formula-based approaches, while useful to some extent, result in conclusions
which relate to large geographical and socially-diverse areas, rather than endeav-
ouring to adequately address individual contexts and indeed individual house-
holds. Consquently they fail to present specific contexts or areas within individual
households.
Stone (2006) states that the term “affordable housing” is an unjustified term
and that affordability is not a characteristic of housing but rather it is a relationship
between housing and people. He argues that for some people, all housing is afford-
able regardless of price, whilst for others it is not affordable unless it is free. Stone
further argues that “affordable” housing can have meaning and use but only if three
essential questions are answered:
1. Affordable to whom?
2. On what standard of affordability?
3. For how long?
Incomes in LDCs and some post-disaster contexts are lower and as such, housing
can represent a much higher proportion of a family’s income. Other aspects rela-
tive to LDCs, and some post-disaster contexts (e.g. immense population growth
with demand out-stripping supply, higher levels of natural disasters, fewer utilities,
and lack of materials, skills, and design/construction knowledge), often serve to
raise the cost of housing relative to the incomes in many contexts. As such, many
common definitions and measures of affordability, which are used in developed
countries with functioning governments and markets and fewer natural hazards,
fail to realistically ref lect these aspects because they do not take into account the
variances on specific or individual contexts.

-- 277 of 391 --

267	8: Disasters and the built environment
HOUSING IN LDCS AND POST-DISASTER CONTEXTS:
APPROACHES, PARTICIPATION, AND BARRIERS
The provision of housing in LDCs and post-disaster contexts has been an ongoing
issue for decades. Many governments in both contexts lack the capacity to ade-
quately design and implement appropriate housing, particularly in a post-disaster
context when the additional pressure of the need for immediate shelter is often given
priority over long-term sustainable solutions. This, coupled with vast inf luxes of
international aid in the immediate aftermath of natural disasters, has often resulted
in governments looking to external international assistance and expertise in rela-
tion to post-disaster reconstruction. Common strategies in response to the hous-
ing need include subsidy, quality reduction, self-help, and simplification ( Johnson,
2006; Katz et al., 2003). Subsidy involves agencies providing payment for part or
all of the costs of housing, with some having to be repaid. Quality reduction has
been a result of factors including lack of agreement on acceptable standards, politi-
cal issues, and longevity issues.
Top-down approach strategies for housing provision often prevail, and LDCs
and post-disaster contexts are left to what professionals from the formal sector
consider the most appropriate solutions. These can often be at odds with the expec-
tations of the future house inhabitants and environmental ideals (Lizarralde and
Davidson, 2011; Fallahi, 2007; Bruen et al. 2013).
External assistance in the form of international non-governmental organisa-
tions (INGOs) is utilised greatly to assist many local governments in housing pro-
vision. However, international assistance does not automatically imply successful
outcomes in relation to meeting housing needs. Many INGOs also lack the exper-
tise and strategies in relation to the effective design and delivery of housing in
LDCs or post-disaster/conf lict contexts.
INGOs often face additional challenges in that they are foreign to the con-
text they are working in, and this has resulted in many introducing inappropriate
design solutions that do not cater for the beneficiaries’ long-term needs. This is
often as a result of time and resource pressure, as well as insufficient knowledge
of the local context in terms of its social, cultural, economic, and environmental
makeup.
Many current approaches to post-disaster housing view the dwelling as a mere
product or output; this often results in inappropriate repetitive constructions and
typologies which ironically can have adverse effects on the end users’ long-term
needs and wellbeing in terms of environmental, social, cultural, and economic
development. Current approaches often seek to employ a “one hat fits all” or uni-
versal approach to meet housing needs, frequently employing imported industri-
alised materials, western construction techniques, and typologies more suited to
developed countries, as opposed to the surrounding context.

-- 278 of 391 --

268 	Disasters and the built environment
This is due to the perception that these solutions are associated with wealth,
progress, prosperity, and globalisation. These approaches sometimes result in non-
affordable, rigid, and monotonous construction typologies which paradoxically can
have negative effects on the end users’ long-term needs and wellbeing, e.g. replace-
ment of traditional settlements with modern towns and lack of cohesion between the
town’s inhabitants leading to negative socio-cultural and economic effects (Adeyemi,
2002). There is need for INGOs and those working for them to have a thorough
understanding of and capacity to adhere to the social dynamics at project level of the
context they are operating in to provide people-orientated housing.
Participatory design and delivery of housing
in LDCs and post-disaster contexts
Many previous approaches to housing shortages and new housing delivery in LDCs
and post-disaster contexts often involved a top-down macro-level approach. Many
of these failed due to issues including displacement, cost recovery, affordability,
and replicability, and as a result of failing to engage communities in development
projects (Muraya, 2006). Such approaches were employed on the assumption that
people did not know their needs and were unwilling or unable to pay for ser-
vices. This approach does not adequately address the principles of sustainability
and affordability in the design and delivery of housing. Change in approaches and
policies for housing in LDCs have evolved over the recent past, from being centred
on top-down macro-level government-provided housing, to a more bottom-up
micro-level self-help approach that focuses on enablement and the involvement
of communities and community-based organisations (CBOs). This can result in
housing projects where all parties support a people-centred housing process to
obtain housing delivery goals.
In order for a participatory approach to be meaningful, it is essential that the
appropriate type and intensity of participation are utilised. The term participa-
tion is widely expressed under many titles, and its exact application for individual
projects is difficult to establish given the diverse nature of projects. Davidson et al.
(2007) provide a “ladder of participation” (Figure 8.3), noting that approaches at
the top of the ladder empower people and communities, offer collaboration, and
give communities control over the project. The lower end of the ladder offers ben-
eficiaries a possible consultation (which might be disregarded), or they are merely
informed of the shape their project is taking, or they are possibly manipulated into
taking part in the project. The lower end of the ladder (rungs 3 to 5) represents
approaches where beneficiaries have little or no control over actual decision-mak-
ing due to the level and type of participation approaches utilised. Davidson et al.
(2007) state that consulting and informing are often passed off as legitimate forms
of participation despite the beneficiaries’ decision-making being restricted.

-- 279 of 391 --

269	8: Disasters and the built environment
Figure 8.3 Ladder of community participation (Davidson et al., 2007).
Table 8.3 Difficulties in the successful application of effective participatory approaches in
LDCs and post-disaster contexts
Challenges jeopardising successful approaches
Insufficient community and municipal interest and difficulties in integrating the community
to the design and management of the projects.
Reluctance by the government to give significance to low-income groups or communities.
Lack of definition of what the participation means in a project environment.
Insufficient information.
Insufficient decision-making power.
Difficulties in building mutual trust between agencies and communities.
Reduction of participation to mere seat equity as opposed to active involvement in
decision-making.
Various authors (Ishmail, 2005; Davidson et al., 2007; Varol et al., 2011) have
identified the difficulties in the successful application of effective participatory
approaches in LDCs and post-disaster contexts, as shown in Table 8.3.
In order for participation to be meaningful for a project, beneficiaries:
•• Must be involved in the early stages of the project, and
•• Must have genuine control and inf luence over the decision-making, which
•• Must benefit in their long-term wellbeing.
Beneficiaries must have full responsibility for their own choices and projects,
rather than being treated as passive victims receiving aid.

-- 280 of 391 --

Disasters and the built environment	270
Figures 8.4 and 8.5 show contrasting results of post-disaster projects in Sri
Lanka. Figure 8.4 shows successful post-disaster housing from Sri Lanka because
of participation in the design and delivery process. Figure 8.5 gives an example of
the negative outcomes of post-disaster housing in Sri Lanka. It shows an unfinished
dwelling and substandard construction as a result of a top-down approach with lit-
tle participation by the proposed beneficiaries.
Barriers to sustainable and affordable construction
in LDCs and post-disaster contexts
Common barriers exist in LDCs and post-disaster contexts in the construction
industry and in the delivery of affordable and sustainable housing. Some of these
barriers are given in Table 8.4.
Figure 8.4 Successful post-disaster housing (Sri Lanka) resulting from the participation in the
design and delivery process (source: John Bruen and John Spillane).
Figure 8.5 Unfinished dwelling and substandard construction (Sri Lanka) resulting from a top-
down approach with little participation by beneficiaries (source: John Bruen and
John Spillane).

-- 281 of 391 --

271	8: Disasters and the built environment
Table 8.4 Barriers to sustainable and affordable construction in LDCs and post-disaster
contexts
Environmental sustainability is often a low priority in LDCs and post-disaster contexts, and
the need for immediate shelter is primary for the majority.
Psychological and sociological issues in relation to use of alternative materials and its
acceptability by people, i.e. status of certain materials deemed for the poor only.
Effects of globalisation and desire of many to imitate housing approaches of the west leading
to inappropriate imported typologies, materials, designs, etc.
Lack of overall holistic approach to sustainable design, i.e. social, cultural, economic, and
environmental.
Lack of training and education in sustainable design and construction leading to lack of
necessary design and building skills available.
Lack of access to adequate information and knowledge on sustainable development and design.
Inadequate government planning and policy-making.
Perceived higher cost of sustainable building approaches.
Scarcity of professional capabilities, e.g. designers and project managers.
Lack of demonstration examples of best practice sustainable construction approaches.
Disincentive factors over local material production, i.e. government supplying alternative
imported materials.
Need to develop cost-effective construction technologies.
Building materials becoming ever more expensive. Need to utilise locally available materials
to suit local typologies.
Lack of guidelines available on selection of appropriate building approaches and packages, e.g.
materials, methods, designs, equipment.
Unaffordable land and housing prices and lack of land tenure.
Inadequate housing finance systems.
Lack of support of small-scale construction industries.
Inefficient or inadequate implementation strategies.
Lack of research and experimental findings.
Lack of implementation and promotion of research findings on appropriate approaches.
Gradual vanishing of traditional wisdom and knowledge on local material and construction
techniques.
Historical legacies of race and class.
Lack of government or political backing to sustainable development.
Inappropriate procurement systems.
(continued)

-- 282 of 391 --

272 	Disasters and the built environment
Table 8.4 (continued)
Inability to adopt best practice.
Bureaucratic impediments to the implementation of housing.
Corruption.
Inappropriate building regulations.
Lack of consultation and capacity building with housing inhabitants.
Lack of construction material resources.
Lack of human resources to undertake work.
Health and safety management issues.
Poor housing management and planning policies at both a national and local scale in many
countries.
REFERENCES
Adeyemi, A. Y. (2002). Affordable housing production: The inf luence of traditional
construction materials, in: 30th IAHS World Congress on Housing, Housing
Construction: An Interdisciplinary Task, Wide Dreams—Projectos Multimédia,
2002, pp. 827–832.
Alexander, D. (2002). ‘Principles of Emergency Planning and Management’, Oxford
University Press. UK
Bruen, J., Hadjri, K. and von Meding, J. (2013). Design Drivers for Affordable and
Sustainable Housing in Developing Countries. Journal of Civil Engineering and
Architecture. Oct. 2013, Volume 7, No. 10 (Serial No. 71), pp. 1220–1228.
Buys, L., Barnett, K., Miller, E. and Bailey, C. (2005). ‘Smart housing and social
responsibility: learning from the residents of Queensland’s research house’, Australian
Journal of Emerging Technologies and Society 3(1), pp. 43–47.
Cannon, T. (1994). ‘Vulnerability Analysis and the Explanation of ‘Natural’ Disasters
in Disaster, Development and Environment’, ed. A. Varley, John Wiley and Sons,
Chichester, pp. 13–30.
Ciegis, R., Ramanauskiene, J. and Martinkus, B. (2009). ‘The concept of sustainable
development and its use for sustainability scenarios’, Engineering Economics, 2, pp.
28–37.
Davidson, C.H., Johnson, C., Lizarralde, G., Dikmen, N. and Sliwinski, A. (2007).
‘Truths and myths about community participation in post-disaster housing projects’,
Habitat International 31, pp. 100–115.
DFID (2011). ‘Defining disaster resilience: a DFID approach paper’, Available at https:/
/www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/186874
/defining-disaster-resilience-approach-paper.pdf (Accessed 02-10-17).
Du Plessis, C. (1999). ‘Sustainable development demands dialogue between developed
and developing worlds’, Building Research and Information 27(6), pp. 378–389.

-- 283 of 391 --

273	8: Disasters and the built environment
Du Plessis, C. (2002). ‘Agenda 21 for Sustainable Construction in Developing Countries: A
Discussion Document’, CSIR Building and Construction Technology, Pretoria.
Du Plessis, C. (2005). ‘Action for sustainability: preparing and African plan for
sustainable building and construction’, Building Research and Information 33(5), pp.
405–415.
Fallahi, A. (2007) Lessons learned from the housing reconstruction following the Bam
Earthquake in Iran, The Australian Journal of Emergency Management 22 (1) (2007)
26–35.
Gustin, J.F. (2008). ‘Safety Management: A Guide for Facility Managers’, Fairmont Press,
Distributed by Taylor and Francis Ltd., Lilburn, GA; Boca Raton, FL.
Haigh, R., Amaratunga, D. and Kerimanginaye, K. (2006). ‘An exploration of the
construction industry’s role in disaster preparedness, response and recovery’,
Proceedings of the Annual Research Conference of the Royal Institution of
Chartered Surveyors, Research Institute for the Built and Human Environment,
University of United Nations. (2006). ‘Exploring key changes and developments in
post-disaster settlement, shelter and housing, 1982–2006’, United Nations, Scoping
study (OCHA/ESB/2006/6). Salford.
Hidayat, B. & Egbu, C. (2010). A Literature Review Of The Role Of Project
Management In Post-Disaster Reconstruction. In C. Egbu, ed. Procs. 26th
Annual ARCOM Conference, 6-8 September 2010. Association of Researchers in
Construction Management, pp. 1269–1278.
Horlick-Jones, T. and Peters, G. (1991). ‘Measuring disaster trends, part one:
some observations on the Bradford fatality scale’, Disaster Management 3(3), pp.
144–148.
IFRC (2001). ‘World disasters report, focus on recovery’, International Federation of
the Red Cross and Red Crescent Society. Available at: https://www.ifrc.org/Glob
al/Publications/disasters/WDR/21400_WDR2001.pdf (Accessed 10-15-20).
Ishmail, Z. (2005). ‘Evaluating the utility of participation in development projects:
how project management techniques contribute to efficiency of upgrading informal
human settlements: a case study of the N2 Gateway project’, Unpublished thesis,
University of Cape Town.
Johnson, M. (2006). Decision Models for Affordable Housing and Sustainable
Community Development. Journal of the American Planning Association: The
Future(s) of Housing. Available from: https://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/do
wnload?doi=10.1.1.476.900&rep=rep1&type=pdf
Katz, B., Austin, M., Turner, K., Brown, D., Cunningham, M., and Sawyer, N. (2003).
Rethinking Local Affordable Housing Strategies: Lessons from 70 Years of Policy
and Practice. The Brookings Institution Center on Urban and Metropolitan Policy
and The Urban Institute. December 2003. Washington USA.
Lizarralde, G. and Davidson, C. (2011). ‘Learning from the poor’, IF Research Group,
Faculté de l’Aménagement, Université de Montréal, Canada. Available at: www.g
rif.umontreal.ca/pages/lizarralde_gonzalo.pdf.

-- 284 of 391 --

274 	Disasters and the built environment
Menshawy, A.E., Shafik, S., and Khedr, F. (2016). ‘Affordable housing as a method for
informal settlements sustainable upgrading’, Procedia–Social and Behavioural Sciences
223, pp. 126–133.
Muraya, P.W.K. (2006). ‘Failed top-down policies in housing: the cases of Nairobi and
Santo Domingo’, Cities 23(2), pp. 121–128.
Ofori, G. (2011). ‘Contemporary Issues in Construction in Developing Countries’, CIB,
Routledge, London.
Othman, A. (2014). A conceptual model for overcoming the challenges of mega
construction projects in developing countries. African Journal of Engineering Research,
2(4): 73–84.
Paton, D., Smith, L. and Violanti, J. (2000). ‘Disaster response: risk, vulnerability and
resilience’, Disaster Prevention and Management, 9(3), pp. 173–179.
Quarantelli, E.L. and Perry, R.W. (2005). ‘What is a Disaster? New Answers to Old
Questions’, Xlibris, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, pp. 325–396.
Randolph, B., Kam, M. and Graham, P. (2008). ‘Who can afford sustainable housing’,
in: A. Nelson (Ed.), Steering Sustainability in an Urbanizing World, Ashgate, Aldershot,
UK.
Reffat R. (2004). ‘Sustainable construction in developing countries’, in: Proceedings of
First Architectural International Conference, Cairo University, Egypt.
Schilderman, T. (2004). ‘Adapting traditional shelter for disaster mitigation and
reconstruction: experiences with community-based approaches’, Building Research
and Information 32(5), pp. 414–426.
Smith, K. (1992). ‘Environmental Hazards: Assessing Risk and Reducing Disaster’,
Routledge, London.
Stone M.E. (2006). ‘What is housing affordability? The case for the residual income
approach’, Housing Policy Debate 17(1). Available at: www.works.bepress.com/
michael_stone/5/ (Accessed 01-10-17).
Toya, H. and Skidmore, M. (2007). ‘Economic development and the impacts of natural
disasters’, Economics Letters 94, pp. 20–25.
UNISDR (2009). ‘UNISDR Terminology on Disaster Risk Reduction’, United Nations
International Strategy for Disaster Reduction, Geneva, Switzerland.
Varol, C., Ercoskun, O.Y. and Gurer, N. (2011) ‘Local participatory mechanisms and
collective actions for sustainable urban development in Turkey’, Habitat International,
35, pp. 9–16.
Voogd, H. (2004). ‘Disaster prevention in urban environments’, European Journal of
Spatial Development 12, pp. 1–14.
WCED (1987). ‘Our Common Future’, World Commission on Environment and
Development. Brundtland Commission. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
White P., Pelling, M., Sen, K., Seddon, D., Russel, S. and Few, R. (2004). ‘Disaster
risk reduction: a development concern. A scoping study on the links between

-- 285 of 391 --

275	8: Disasters and the built environment
disaster risk reduction, poverty and development’, Overseas Development Group,
University or East Anglia. Available at: www.preventionweb.net/files/1070_dr
rscopingstudy.pdf (Accessed 02-10-17). Note: The Overseas Development Group
has changed its name to International Development UEA. Available at: https://sites
.uea.ac.uk/devresearch/about

-- 286 of 391 --

9
Environmental considerations
Cormac Flood, Chris Gorse, Lloyd M. Scott and Melanie Smith
ENVIRONMENTAL ISSUES
Environmental issues are major concerns in the surveying and construction indus-
try. Action is possible in many areas throughout built environment professions, and
for surveying professionals, environmental matters can be a consideration (major or
minor) in most work situations.
Environmental issues include, but are not limited to, aspects of sustainability. Law
affecting the environment, including climate change, has recently developed strongly,
covering local, regional, and international professional concerns.The laws impact on
society and commerce, owning, occupying, purchasing, selling, letting, and carrying
out works on property. Environmental risks are increasingly important. An obvious
area is in construction specification where more sustainable practices and materials
can be applied. This, of course, depends on definitions of sustainability. It is the case
that one person’s sustainable solution can have heavy adverse effects on someone else’s.
The issues raised in this chapter cover some of the naturally occurring envi-
ronmental issues common in the work of a building surveyor. Asbestos and similar
deleterious materials are also “natural” but have been processed to use in the built
environment and are therefore included in the chapter on building pathology.
Surveyors are affected by:
•• The environment
•• The law governing the environment and its effects on:
○○ The management and use of land and property
○○ The development and the re-use of land and property
•• The obligations on Chartered Surveyors that arise from these duties
As always, surveyors are obliged to consider their competence to advise clients
in assessing environmental considerations and whether they carry sufficient
and appropriate professional indemnity insurance (PII) for the works and risks

-- 287 of 391 --

277	9: Environmental considerations
involved. A good overview of the works which can be involved is included in
the RICS Guidance Note, “Environmental risks and global real estate” (RICS,
2018). This publication includes a Property Observation Checklist for identify-
ing potential environmental issues for residential, commercial, and rural proper-
ties, which can be accessed independently through isurv. The 2018 document
supersedes the RICS Guidance Note, “Contamination, the environment and
sustainability: Implications for chartered surveyors and their clients” (RICS,
2010) which contained checklists. See also RICS (2020) “Contamination and
environmental matters: property observation checklists”. This chapter starts by
looking at the ground.
GROUND
Foundations and strata, soils, rocks, or made-up ground
There are a number of key points that need to be considered with all foundation
systems. Fundamentally:
•• The foundation of a building transmits live (active loads, such as people, wind,
rain, snow, etc.) and dead loads (structural loads) to the ground.
•• The foundation is part of the building’s substructure. The substructure is the
part of a building that is below the ground level.
•• The substructure elements are typically foundations, basements, structural
walls, and f loors that may be constructed below the ground.
•• The ground is the term used to describe the earth’s surface. The ground often
varies in composition (natural or un-natural make-up).
•• Human impact on the composition of the ground is common. The ground is
often built up, made up, or laced with services, contaminants, and historic arte-
facts from prior development.
The substructure provides an interface with the ground, enabling the superstruc-
ture to remain stable and its loads (both dead and live) to be safely transferred.
The following categories of the natural interface are often used to describe the
components and composition of the ground that provides the interface between the
building foundation and founding strata. Categories include:
•• Rocks
•• Non-cohesive soils
•• Cohesive soils
•• Peat and organic soils
•• Made-up ground and fill

-- 288 of 391 --

278 	Environmental considerations
Rocks are dense hard, cemented, and rigid geological deposits. Typically, rocks are:
•• Granite
•• Sandstone
•• Limestone
Rocks, generally, will withstand high loads and can be used to found buildings on
with relatively little movement or compression.
Soils, in comparison to rocks, are relatively soft and compressible geological depos-
its; they are loose and not mechanically or naturally cemented geological deposits.
Soils include:
•• Gravel
•• Sand
•• Clay
Soils, made-up ground, and fill will under normal conditions compress under the
loads of the building and are not suitable strata on which to found buildings.
Foundations are needed to transfer the loads below the compressible soils to
substrata where the ground can withstand loads without undue settlement. If a
decision is made to locate buildings on made-up ground, the foundation will nor-
mally penetrate through the made-up strata, to suitable loadbearing strata. If any
load is transferred to the made-up ground and fill, it will be necessary to treat and
condition the ground so that it is stable and does not unduly compress.
The building’s foundations are designed to transmit loads to the ground with-
out movement that affects the stability of the buildings. When loads are placed on
the ground, the ground will resist the force and compress, but where the founda-
tions are sufficient, taking the loads to ground that can sustain the loads, the com-
pression is minimal and does not affect the stability or compromise the integrity
of the building. The foundations transfer the loads with minimal and controlled
settlement, ensuring the structure of the building, substructure, and services enter-
ing and leaving the building remain operational.
The loads of a building can affect neighbouring structures, so when designing
foundations careful attention is required to ensure that loads from one building
don’t unduly impact on the stability of neighbouring structures.
Changes in ground composition and behaviour
Changes to the ground may affect the ability of a foundation to effectively transfer
loads. Changes occur in:

-- 289 of 391 --

279	9: Environmental considerations
•• Water levels, water courses, and the water table
•• Loads and vibration from traffic
•• Movement of plant and industrial operations on neighbouring land and/or
buildings
•• Additional loads (buildings or otherwise) placed on adjacent ground
•• Plant used to construct neighbouring buildings and structures
As the loads placed on the ground do change during the life of a building, the
behaviour of the subsoil is affected and will change. When conditions change, the
existing foundations of a building may need to be re-designed and strengthened so
that they are capable of continuing to transfer the loads of the building. The loads
of the building should be transferred without adverse settlement, even when the
conditions of the ground change. The inspection and surveying of building foun-
dations and surrounding properties are essential, especially when new buildings
are being constructed, trees are removed, or the purpose of the building is altered.
As the loads of a building are placed on the ground, the ground reacts and com-
presses. A limited amount of settlement is to be expected. However, major, adverse
settlement will impact on the integrity of the structure, underground services, and
stability of the building.
Settlement and movement
The settlement and movement are characteristically different depending on the
nature of the soil and composition.
Typical settlement and movement behaviour on:
•• Non-cohesive soils (gravel and sand) settlement or other movement gener-
ally takes place as the building is erected; this is often described as immediate
settlement.
•• Cohesive soils (clay, silts): the compression and movement are a more grad-
ual process as water and air are expelled from pores; such settlement is described
as consolidation settlement.
Settlement and movement can result from differential loading, different ground
conditions, frost heave, trees, and changes in groundwater conditions (e.g. due to
water courses or cracked drains). Some of these aspects are also discussed in other
chapters, such as under building pathology.
As designers and engineers know that settlement occurs, foundations are designed
to limit and control settlement and ensure that any small amount of settlement is con-
sistent across the structure. Throughout the life of the building, settlement will occur;
foundations and buildings should be designed so that they do not suffer from differential

-- 290 of 391 --

280 	Environmental considerations
settlement or settlement that affects the integrity of the building.At all stages, the loads
need to be effectively transferred so that the loads are placed and transferred to the
ground without undue settlement. Combinations of foundation and ground treatments
can be used to ensure the building remains stable throughout its life.
Differential settlement (Figure 9.1) can be due to:
1. 	Differing building loads, such as:
○○ Dead loads not accounted for – where the building’s structural loads are
not properly accommodated for within the design and by the foundations.
○○ Unexpected live loads – loads within the building do change; if services
and equipment are installed within the building and the loads or dynamic
loads, e.g. vibration, exceed the foundation and soil design strength, then
the ground can be overstressed and compress, slip, or fail.
2. 	Different ground conditions under the building, such as:
○○ Water courses that destabilise the ground.
○○ Weak compressible strata.
○○ Adjacent loads, e.g. adjacent buildings, plant, vehicles causing overloading
under existing foundations.
○○ Changes in vegetation close to the building.Trees and plants will take water
out of the ground or if vegetation is removed the volume of water within
the soil can increase.The different levels of water in clay soil will cause it to
shrink, as water is removed, or swell as the water content increases.
○○ Freezing of the ground below or close to foundation can lift or move the
foundation and substructure. As water in the ground freezes, it expands
and this may cause foundations to lift as the ground below the foundation
freezes, or to move as the ground next to it freezes.
Erosion due to rain,
running water
washing away the
ground
Vegetaˆon Over loading
of strata
So spots in	Ground water freezing 	Neighbouring buildings,
strata 	spoil, transport place
addiˆonal loads on the
ground, which can extend	Broken drainage under the building
Figure 9.1 Schematic illustrating some of the causes of differential settlement.

-- 291 of 391 --

281	9: Environmental considerations
Frost heave is caused by the expansion of water in the ground (Figure 9.2), as
described above. To avoid frost heave from seasonal changes in groundwater,
including the impact of vegetation on water content within the ground, the
NHBC Standards (NHBC, 2021, chapter 4.3.3) recommend a minimum depth of
450 mm for strip and trench fill foundation excavations. Obviously deeper trenches
are needed for some soil types and ground conditions. The NHBC standard refers
here to frost susceptible soils, and construction undertaken during cold weather,
however, most foundations are excavated to a minimum distance of 750–1000 mm
which does avoid most volume changes due to seasonal movement.
In areas of extreme frost exposure or high levels of rainfall, the depth of founda-
tions may need to be deeper.
Trees and vegetation remove water from the ground. In clay soils, this causes
the clay to shrink during periods of high growth. Thus, seasonal movement of the
ground occurs.
Where trees present a challenge to foundation stability, action may be required.
In extreme cases, physical barriers (concrete or steel barrier walls) may be built
between trees and buildings to reduce the impact of the tree roots and extraction
of moisture from the soil. Most root action takes place at levels between 1 and 3 m;
below 3 m clays are often too dense for roots to easily penetrate the soil. Thus,
trees close to the building can affect foundations at this level. However, unless it
is deemed that the roots are having an impact on the building’s stability, it is not
advised to remove trees (Barry, 2017).
See also Chapter 4 and Figures 4.14 and 4.15 and Table 4.11 for reasonable dis-
tances of buildings from trees. Removing trees and vegetation can equally present
Figure 9.2 Schematic of the different bonding structures of ice and water.

-- 292 of 391 --

282 	Environmental considerations
problems if the cohesive soils have become accustomed to high water content. The
increase in water as a result of the loss of vegetation can cause the soils to swell,
roads and pavements to lift, basement walls to crack, and ground f loors to suffer
the effects of swelling heaving soils, see Chapter 4, Figure 4.12.
Rocks
Rocks are classified, according to their geological formation, as:
•• Sedimentary
•• Metamorphic
•• Igneous
These are described as in Table 9.1 or by reference to their presumed bearing value
(Table 9.2), which is the net loading intensity considered appropriate to the par-
ticular type of ground for preliminary design purposes.
Ground bearing capacity and values are based on an assumption that foun-
dations are carried down to the typical strata of unweathered strata and rock
(Figure 9.2).
Table 9.1 Rock types
Group 	Rock type
Sedimentary 	Sandstones (including conglomerates)
Formed from an accumulation or deposit of 	Some hard shales
particles, which are laid on top of one another Limestones
and are composed under pressure of the 	Dolomite
ground, air, or water above. 	Chalk
Metamorphic
Transformation of an existing rock as a result
of heat or pressure – metamorphism. These
rocks are formed subject to high temperatures
and pressures deep beneath the earth’s
surface; they are not rocks that melt; rocks
that do melt form igneous rock.
Some hard shales
Slates
Marble
Quartzite
Schists
Gneisses
Igneous
Formed from molten rock, magma.
Granite
Dolerite
Basalt
Pumice
Scoria
Tuff

-- 293 of 391 --

283	9: Environmental considerations
Table 9.2 Bearing capacities of typical strata
Group 	Types of rocks,
soils (cohesive and
non-cohesive)
Bearing capacity (kN/
m 2 )
I: Generally high loadbearing
capacity
1. Strong igneous and
gneissic rocks in sound
condition
10,000
Rocks, schists, slates, and
shales
2. Strong limestones and
strong sandstones
4,000
3. Schists and slates 	3,000
4. Strong shales, strong
mudstones, and strong
siltstones
2,000
5. Clay shales 	1,000
II: Capable of supporting
light loads
6. Dense gravel or dense sand
and gravel
600
Non-cohesive soils: sand and
gravel
7. Medium dense gravel or
medium dense gravel and
sand
200–600
8. Loose gravel or loose sand
and gravel
200
9. Compact sand 	300
10. Medium dense sand 	100–300
11. Loose sand 	100
III: Cohesive soils: clays 	12. Very stiff boulder clays
and hard clays
300–600
13. Stiff clays 	150–300
14. Firm clays 	75–150
IV: Weak strata 	15. Soft clays and silts 	75
16. Peat and organic soils
Will naturally grow,
decompose, and move. Not a
suitable for founding on.
Foundations carried down
through these to a reliable
bearing stratum
V: Fill 	17. Made-up ground or fill
Will compress under self-
weight, not suitable for
founding on.
Should be investigated and
only developed with extreme
care
Based on BS 8004:1986.

-- 294 of 391 --

284 	Environmental considerations
Unweathered, hard igneous, and gneissic rocks, when they are in sound con-
dition, have high allowable bearing pressure, and provide excellent material on
which to transfer building loads. There is limited potential of foundation failure.
Limestones and sandstones, which are classified as hard and well bedded, can be
considered to be stronger than some concretes, and most buildings will not use the
full bearing capacity. Limestones, however, can dissolve into solution where water
that contains carbon dioxide comes into contact with the limestone, eroding the
limestone and reducing the stability of the rock as a founding material.
Schists and slates are rocks with pronounced cleavage of large-grained f lakes in
sheet-like orientation. Where the rock beds are broken, shattered, or on a steep
incline, a reduction in bearing capacity will often result. Where the mudstones and
shales are hard and compact, they have a high allowable bearing capacity.
Sandstones and those considered to be soft sandstone are variable, depending
on the cementing of the material. The softer shales and mudstones have allowable
bearing pressures between the stiffer hard cohesive soils and rock; as with other
cohesive soils they are susceptible to swelling and softening with water and shrink-
age when water is removed.
Chalk and soft limestone are soft sedimentary carbonate rocks that are porous
in nature. They are variable in nature and the allowable bearing pressure is also
variable; they can deteriorate when exposed to water and frost, and as such the
founding material should be protected with a blinding layer of concrete when the
formation level is reached.
Soils: Characteristics
Soils can be classified as non-cohesive or cohesive. The properties of soils that
determine characteristic behaviour when used as a founding material include:
•• Compressibility
•• Cohesion between particles
•• Friction between particles
•• Permeability
It is convenient to compare the characteristics and behaviour of clean sand, which
is a coarse-grained non-cohesive soil, with clay, which is a fine-grained cohesive
soil.
Under load, clean sand, which is coarse-grained and non-cohesive, only com-
presses slightly as the particles rearrange themselves and small amounts of water
are expelled. The movement of the particles and settlement are proportional to the
load imposed and normally distributed evenly as the loads are applied.

-- 295 of 391 --

285	9: Environmental considerations
Clay is cohesive, compressible, and will be affected by seasonal changes that
change moisture in the ground. However, as clay is impermeable, the soil com-
presses slowly as the water is expelled through narrow capillaries in the soil.
Settlement and movement of clay soils can continue for years. Care should be
taken not to overstress clay soils and to ensure foundations are sufficiently deep to
not be affected by seasonal change and vegetation that can change moisture levels
in the ground.
Where the load of a building is placed on plastic clay, the clay is slowly com-
pressed as air and water are expelled through narrow capillary channels. The
movement of the clay under load, as it compresses, also causes heave at the surface
of the surrounding ground, as the displaced clay particles are pushed outwards
under the load.
Non-cohesive coarse-grained soils such as gravels and sands will compress and
consolidate as the particles rapidly rearrange and water is expelled.
Allowable bearing pressures are dependent on:
•• Grading of particles.
•• Density, degree that particles are packed together.
•• Size of particles – larger particles tend to result in larger allowable bearing
pressures.
•• Groundwater – groundwater and f low can adversely affect bearing pressures by
washing out finer particles affecting the grading.
•• Lateral support of confinement. Non-cohesive soils need to be confined
laterally.
Cohesive fine-grained soils and silts are a result of natural deposit of the fine
siliceous and aluminous particles produced from the weathering of rock. Clay has a
smooth surface and when wet or moist is greasy and slippery. It has high plasticity,
is mouldable, and when it dries, it shrinks.
The main characteristics of cohesive soils:
•• Changes in volume: shrink when dry and swell when wet.
•• Fine capillary paths allow water to be compressed out gradually.
•• Susceptible to seasonal changes in volume.
•• When compressed, the expulsion of water and air from clay is gradual, meaning
that buildings settle as the construction takes place.
•• Settlement continues for some years after construction.
•• Trees and shrubs, during growth periods, will remove water in the soil and
shrink the clay.

-- 296 of 391 --

286 	Environmental considerations
•• Seasonal changes in the UK tend to be limited to depths of 1 m, but can be
deeper in severe droughts or periods of high and prolonged rainfall.
•• Large trees can affect soils and foundations to a depth of 4 m.
•• When trees are removed, moisture in the cohesive soils builds up and the soil
expands.
•• When trees are planted or during periods of high growth, water will be
extracted from the soil and the soil will shrink.
•• Cohesive soils can take several years to stabilise following changes in the ground
conditions and vegetation.
Organic soils and peat, from a civil engineering perspective, are those soils
composed mainly of vegetable, or decaying vegetable matter from plants. The soil
contains a combination of the decaying vegetable matter (around 75%) with the
remaining material being fine sand, silt, or clay. Highly organic soils are compress-
ible, still in the process of decay, and will not be suitable for the foundation of
buildings, structures, or founding of roads.
Landfill
Made-up ground, landfill, and fill refer to land that has been raised artificially
by the deposit soils, construction materials, backfilling, tipping or waste and
refuse, or any other form of fill. It may be ground that has been built up and
raised through human and mechanical intervention, being different from the
strata naturally formed over millennia. It is the result of depositing materi-
als on top of natural land levels or the filling of previously excavated sites.
Generally, such materials are poorly compacted and of an uncertain composition
and density. Their variable nature makes them unsuitable for founding build-
ings, without treating the land. Due to the variable nature of the fill material,
uneven settlement takes place and the ground will often undulate as a result of
this settlement.
Where the loadbearing material is selected, compacted in layers and suitably
stabilised, the made-up ground can be loadbearing. Indeed, all f lexible roads are
constructed by selecting suitable materials, and layering and compacting them so
that the ground can withstand the increased load from the traffic. However, many
of the made-up sites are a result of fill that has been tipped or deposited loosely
into holes and excavations. Landfill sites where waste is deposited are made-up sites
which do not provide ground that can be considered suitable for foundations or has
meaningful loadbearing properties.
Fill is often used to describe the tipping of material into holes that are a result
of mining and quarrying. Even without the loads of buildings, such fill sites will
naturally compress and compact, resulting in considerable settlement, which will
be variable in nature.

-- 297 of 391 --

287	9: Environmental considerations
Where information on the landfill is not properly recorded, trail pits and bore-
holes should be used to gather information on the nature of the material, strata,
and depth.
Where buildings or structures are constructed over made-up ground or fill,
the foundation should be designed to bridge the fill material or penetrate down to
loadbearing strata. Building over fill sites is typically avoided.
Instability
Ground instability can be a result of human activity or natural processes. Landslip
on sloping sites can occur where there have been little or no changes to the ground.
Rocks and soil are naturally affected by the weather, rain, wind, and erosion, all
of which can and do lead to changes in the loadbearing properties of the ground.
Mining, excavation, and loading of the ground as a result of human activities can
also result in instability where the properties of the soils are changed.
Instability can be considered under the following headings:
•• Mining and quarrying
•• Landfill
•• Landslip
•• Surface f looding and soil erosion
•• Natural caves
•• Surface and underground fissures
Other issues have to be overcome where sites are identified as f loodplains, are con-
taminated, have radioactive material, have seen military action, or have been used
as burial sites. The climate is also changing, which is impacting on the suitability
of land and soils for development.
A database of useful information can be found at the following websites:
•• Environment Agency: https://www.gov.uk/government/organisations/enviro
nment-agency
•• British Geological Survey: http://www.bgs.ac.uk/
•• National Archives: www.nationalarchives.gov.uk
•• DEFRA has commissioned studies on landslides: www.defra.gov.uk
•• Climate change: https://www.metoffice.gov.uk/weather/learn-about/climate
-and-climate-change/climate-change/index
Landslips usually occur on natural slopes where the strata are weak.
•• Where strata are weak at the surface, largely superficial landslip.

-- 298 of 391 --

288 	Environmental considerations
•• Mixed layers of surface strata clay over sand and weak rock.
•• Steep slopes – water, changes in climate.
•• Steep slopes, where erosion has taken place at the foot of the slope or cliff.
•• Sea storms and erosion over time removing supporting strata.
•• Overloading.
•• Around areas of quarrying and mining.
Surface f looding and soil erosion are becoming more common as the climate
changes and a greater proportion of the surface of our land is developed and sealed
with materials that do not allow the rain to percolate through the ground. As rain
and run-off water has fewer places to penetrate the ground and naturally run into
the water table or rivers, the water builds up and remains in built-up areas for
longer periods. During periods of heavy or prolonged rainfall, the build-up both at
the surface and immediately below the ground is increasingly presenting problems
and challenges to our built environment.
Increased volumes of water can change the natural condition of the ground,
causing clay soils to swell, and may lead to the erosion of soils and permeable
rocks. Areas that f lood and those that are designated as f loodplains are of increas-
ing concern.
The risk of surface f looding can be reduced by use of passive measures such as:
•• Employing sustainable drainage systems (SUDS), allowing water to percolate
through the ground and be stored, capturing or slowing down run off.
•• Encourage fauna, grass, shrubs, trees, and green roofs; these all slow down run off.
•• Provide an alternative approach to surface drainage in built-up areas, drainage,
and channels that divert water.
•• Planting and maintaining of woodland on hills and in fields is proving impor-
tant in reducing risk of f looding downstream.
Further information on areas that are at risk of f looding can be found at https://
www.gov.uk/check-f lood-risk.
Natural caves and fissures occur where there are soluble strata (rocks), such
as limestone and chalk. The presence of the voids in the ground can lead to land
instability and subsidence.
DEFRA (www.defra.gov.uk) provide information on infiltrations systems and
surveys that are useful for assessing ground conditions and the likelihood of land
instability.
Extensive mining and quarrying have been carried out in most countries and
while the mining of coal has declined, mines continue to work for minerals and

-- 299 of 391 --

289	9: Environmental considerations
precious materials. While recent mining activity is recorded, many of the old
mines were undocumented. In areas where minerals and coal were rich, mining
was present. In such areas, care should be taken to gather as much information as
possible through existing records and surveys to reduce the risk of instability and
subsidence.
Information from the British Geological Survey on active and ceased mines
and mineral workings is available on https://www.bgs.ac.uk/products/minerals/
BRITPITS.html.
Contaminated land
For surveyors conducting surveys for dilapidations, condition, purchase, etc., the
demised premises are likely to include the ground on which the property stands.
It is therefore important to examine the ground as well as the structure. Where
ground contamination has occurred, liability may revert to the freeholder unless it
is cleaned up. However, it may not be obvious who is responsible for the clean-up
of any contamination. The contamination may be due by a tenant’s occupancy of
the premises, and they can be held responsible, or a new purchaser or tenant may
take on contractual liability for existing contamination.
The UK has a long industrial history so that many areas of land have been used
for a wide variety of industrial purposes. These types of activities generally involve
the presence, use, or production of a range of chemicals and substances, which
can cause contamination of soils and waters if they find their way into the natural
environment.
The lack of proper controls, particularly in the 19th and early part of the 20th
centuries, means that these substances were not properly handled or contained
and many of them have found their way into the ground or water courses at these
industrial sites and in their surrounding areas. Thousands of sites have been con-
taminated by previous industrial use, often associated with traditional processes,
which are no longer used.
These sites may present a hazard to the general environment, but there is a
growing need to reclaim and redevelop them. The Environmental Protection Act
1990 as amended (UK Government, 2021) gives protection in England, Wales,
and Scotland.
“Contaminated land” is land containing substances that could cause:
•• Significant harm to people, property, or protected species
•• Significant pollution of surface waters (for example lakes and rivers) or
groundwater
•• Harm to people as a result of radioactivity

-- 300 of 391 --

290 	Environmental considerations
Examples of contaminants are:
•• Heavy metals, elevated concentrations of metallic elements, e.g. lead, arsenic,
cadmium, arsenic, iron, nickel, chromium
•• Chemical substances and preparations, e.g. solvents
•• Organic substances, e.g. oils, tars, phenols, PAHs, PCBs
•• Inorganic compounds, e.g. cyanide, chlorides, ammonia
•• Ground gases, e.g. methane, carbon dioxide, hydrogen sulphide, volatiles
•• Asbestos
•• Radioactive substances
•• Faecal, animal, or vegetable matter
•• Combustible material, e.g. coal, coke
•• Refuse and waste
In the UK, there is a difference between land legally determined to be “contami-
nated land”, and land contaminated but not determined legally to so be. The local
council or an environment agency must be consulted when it is suspected that
land is contaminated. A surveyor’s professional indemnity must specifically include
contamination when contaminated land is being considered, otherwise the sur-
veyor is possibly not protected.
The rules for who is responsible for contamination and how to deal with it depend
on whether the land is legally considered “contaminated land”. The person who
caused or allowed the contamination to happen is responsible for dealing with
it, unless they cannot be identified or unless the authority investigating the issue
decides such a person is exempt and the authority will decide who is responsible
for dealing with it instead, e.g. the landowner, or the person who uses the land.
Even if the land is not legally considered “contaminated land”, the person
responsible for causing it, or the landowner, is likely to be responsible for dealing
with the contamination and could face legal action if they do not.
A person developing contaminated land will need to deal with the contamina-
tion either before planning permission is granted or else as part of the development.
Severely contaminated land in the UK can be classed as a “special site”. The
website, Gov.uk, gives examples of these as land which:
•• Seriously affects drinking waters, surface waters, or important groundwater
sources.
•• Is or was used for certain industrial activities, such as oil refining or making
explosives.
•• Is or was regulated using a pollution permit.
•• Has been used to get rid of waste acid tars.
•• Is owned or occupied by the Ministry of Defence.

-- 301 of 391 --

291	9: Environmental considerations
•• Is contaminated by radioactivity.
•• Is a nuclear site.
The Environment Agency in England, Natural Resources Wales in Wales, and
the Scottish Environment Protection Agency in Scotland regulate special sites.
The person who caused or allowed the contamination to happen is responsible for
dealing with it, unless they cannot be identified or unless the authority investigat-
ing the issue decides they are exempt when they will decide who is responsible for
dealing with it instead, e.g. the landowner, or the person who uses the land.
Drivers for remediation requirements:
•• Growth of environment as a political issue
•• Pressure to reduce development of greenfield sites
•• Pressure to increase development
Concern for Building Surveying:
•• Pre-purchase advice
•• Development advice, including change of use
•• Asset appraisal
•• Approximately 300,000 hectares of contaminated land in the UK
•• Skills in co-ordinating specialists
•• Costs of remediation – insurance implications
Specialist advice is required for remedial action. See also Tables 9.2 and 9.3.
Remedial action for unacceptable risks of contaminated land:
•• Treatment (of the source not the receptor, e.g. soil treatment)
•• Containment
•• Removal and disposal
These broad groups cover many different techniques. Selecting the most appropri-
ate options will often have a significant impact on the viability of a development.
Examples:
•• Excavation, dredging, and off-site disposal to landfill
•• Pump and treat (using, e.g. activated carbon, f locculants, sand filters, air filters)
•• Isolate/encapsulation
•• Bioremediation
•• Thermal decomposition

-- 302 of 391 --

292 	Environmental considerations
•• Thermal desorption
•• Surfactant enhanced aquifer remediation
•• Solidification and stabilisation
•• In-situ oxidation
•• Soil vapour extraction
•• Nano-remediation
•• Self-collapsing air microbubbles
Table 9.3 Ways of identifying contaminated land before testing
Identifying contaminated land
Initial suspicions 	Confirming suspicions – site investigation
Street name, e.g. Gas Works Lane 	Desk study
Local knowledge 	Site reconnaissance
Obvious signs 	Walkover survey
Old maps, old aerial photos, historical
reviews, public records
Main investigations and reporting
Environment Agency 	Extent determined by use/proposed use of the
land
Industrial past – sites likely to contain
contaminants
Guidance, e.g. British Standards, BRE Guides,
CIRIA guides
Problems with natural/very old/very
localised contaminants
Risk assessment
Adjacent sites 	Determination of:
source–pathway–receptor
Council searches and the Contamination
Register
Table 9.4 Risk assessment stages for contaminated land
Contaminated land – risk assessment stages
1 	Hazard identification 	Establish possible source–pathway–receptor links
2 	Hazard assessment 	Identify pollutant linkages and carry out exploratory site
investigation
3 	Risk estimation 	Establish scale and possible consequences
4 	Risk evaluation 	Are the risks acceptable or unacceptable?

-- 303 of 391 --

293	9: Environmental considerations
Ground gas: Radon, methane, and carbon dioxide
Ground gases are not restricted to contaminated land. They can be present in
greenfield as well as brownfield sites. They can originate from waste deposits in
landfill sites, or occur naturally. When building below ground, as well as pro-
tecting the structures against water ingress, it is also important to consider any
risk of penetration of ground gases, which may be hazardous to health. These
include radon, methane, carbon dioxide, mercury, and volatile organic compounds
(VOCs) (Table 9.5).
Extensive guidance can be found on Public Health England’s webpage
UKRadon for radon (PHE, 2020; UKRadon, 2020). See also the Health
Protection Agency (2010) website and Table 9.6. For gases other than radon, con-
sult for example: NHBC, e.g. “Guidance on evaluation of development proposals
on sites where methane and carbon dioxide are present”, CIRIA, e.g. “Assessing
risks posed by hazardous ground gases in buildings”, British Geological Survey
(BGS), Institute of Petroleum, and Chartered Institute of Waste Management.
Approved Document C (HM Government, 2013) is the relevant building regula-
tion guidance in the UK.
Table 9.5 Properties of gases
Gas 	Flammable
properties
Physiological
properties
Smell
Carbon dioxide 	Non-f lammable 	Toxic with O 2
depletion
Odourless
Carbon monoxide 	Non-f lammable 	Toxic 	Odourless
Methane 	Explosive 	Asphyxiating 	Odour
Nitrogen 	Non-f lammable (but
used in explosives)
Toxic with O 2
depletion
Odourless
VOCs 	Flammable 	Toxic 	Odour
Table 9.6 Radon exposure limitations for humans
Percentage of properties
above Action Level
Probability of radon
area
“Radon-affected area”
Less than 1% 	Lower 	No
Above 1% but less than 10% 	Intermediate 	Yes
10% and above 	Higher 	Yes
Source: the Health Protection Agency and UK Government publication “Radon limitation
of human exposure” (Health Protection Agency (2010).

-- 304 of 391 --

294 	Environmental considerations
Landfill gases are usually methane and carbon dioxide, with VOCs giving the
characteristic smell. They are generated by micro-organism action on biodegrad-
able waste. Organic-rich soils, peat, and river silt sediments can produce methane
and carbon dioxide, sometimes known as marsh gas, swamp gas, or bog gas. Coal-
mining areas can have higher levels of carbon dioxide and nitrogen, and reduced
oxygen (hence canaries in coal mines). VOCs can result from spillages of oil, pet-
rol, and solvents.
Radon is a natural contaminant, a naturally occurring, radioactive gas that
seeps up from the ground. Radon is the largest source of public radiation exposure
in the UK and the second largest cause of lung cancer in the UK. Every build-
ing holds radon, but mostly in low concentrations. The chances of a higher level
depend on the type of ground it stands on. It is in greater concentrations where
there are harder underlying rocks (e.g. some granites, ironstones, phosphatic rocks,
shales rich in organic materials, limestone) but clay layers tend to deter it. Thus,
the prevalence is greater in say West Yorkshire and the Pennines, than say the Vale
of York. The Health Protection Agency and the British Geological Survey publish
UK maps showing where high levels are more likely. Radon’s ultimate source is
uranium. All rocks contain some uranium, and the uranium content of a soil will
be about the same as its derivative rock.
Many properties with high levels of radon have yet to be identified and of those
that are confirmed, large numbers have yet to be remediated. The safe levels are
not absolute and are under review. Recommendations include a maximum level
for action of 200 Bq/m3. If the concentration is above this Action Level, the Target
Level for remediation is to reduce the concentration to below 100 Bq/m3 for exist-
ing homes, and for the design and construction of new homes.
The amount of radon in a house is affected by factors in addition to the presence
of uranium in the underlying soil. Properties in areas with drier, highly perme-
able soils and bedrock may have high levels of indoor radon; these can be present
in sloping sites, coarse glacial deposits, and bedrock with fractures and cavities.
Additional affecting factors include the building’s construction, ventilation provi-
sion, provided barriers, etc.
Radon can also enter a home through the building’s water supply. Private water
supplies are more vulnerable because district supplies are usually aerated or oth-
erwise treated, which disperses the radon. Areas with high levels of uranium in
the underlying rocks are those most likely to have high levels of radon in ground-
water. For example, granites in various parts of the United States, such as New
Hampshire, are sources of high levels of radon in groundwater supplied to private
water systems.
Generally, expert advice should be sought where ground gases and/or radon
are suspected or known. Site investigation surveys may be required including:
desk survey, on-site testing, boreholes, and monitoring and analysing f low rates
of a specific hazardous gas. These result in a gas screening value site survey (GSV)

-- 305 of 391 --

295	9: Environmental considerations
to arrive at a theoretical “characteristic gas situation” (CS). The CS value is a
threat level, numbered 1–6, 1 being very low hazard potential, and 6 being the
highest. Once the CS has been defined for a site, the minimum protection score
requirement points to suitable protection systems for the site by considering a
product’s protection score contribution. At the time of writing, these are defined
in BS8485.
The gas protection system should consist of at least two different elements:
a. A structural barrier element (e.g. f loor slab and substructure), and
b. A membrane, or
c. A ventilation/dilution element, or both.
The elements work independently and collaboratively. A single element should not
be used because there would be no backstop to protect against ubiquitous defects
in an element.
Gas barriers across external wall cavities are common for sites that contain
naturally occurring gases such as methane or radon. Since such membranes neces-
sarily bridge the cavity, a low-level cavity tray can be required. The cavity tray has
to be placed very close to ground level, leading to problems of insulating a very
small strip of wall. Lack of insulation here can lead to extensive thermal bridging
around the property’s perimeter. See Figure 9.3.
Figure 9.3 Typical site sketch of on-site observations of thermal bridging due to difficulty in
insulating behind cavity tray over gas barrier.

-- 306 of 391 --

296 	Environmental considerations
Table 9.7 Climate change issues with built environment impacts
Climate change issue 	Built environment impact
Higher sea levels 	More coastal f looding, more coastal erosion,
loss of cliff-top properties
More heavy rainfall, more intense
precipitation
More river/watercourse f looding, higher
groundwater levels, f lash f loods, landslides,
damage to property, insurance costs
Increased summer drying, drought 	Property cracks due to ground shrinkage,
subsidence, water supply issues
Increased summer temperatures 	Overheating in properties, heat stress
Table 9.8 Possible f lood damage in individual buildings
Flood damage in an individual building
Health and safety
Sewage
Hydrostatic action – lateral and uplift pressures
Hydrodynamic action – force of f lowing water (will include erosion)
Low-level plaster deterioration, contamination
Saturated materials
Electrics damage
Salts in walls
Timber f loors deterioration, contamination
Timber fixtures and fittings deterioration
Lifting f loor, wall tiles, etc.
Insulations damaged, contaminated
FLOODING
Climate change is expected to have impacts due to, for example, those issues shown
in Table 9.7. Possible f lood damage is shown in Table 9.8.
Updates on f looding risk are available on various websites, including, at time
of writing:
Climate Change Committee, UK, https://www.theccc.org.uk
Gov.UK, https://f lood-warning-information.service.gov.uk/long-term-f lood-risk/
map

-- 307 of 391 --

297	9: Environmental considerations
Climate Central, https://sealevel.climatecentral.org
Scottish Environment Protection Agency, https://www.sepa.org.uk/environment
/water/f looding/f lood-maps
Surveyors can have various roles and stances in f looding matters, due to, for example:
•• The different professions involved: planners, designers, insurers, surveyors,
contractors, etc.
•• Lack of definitive agreement in the guidance.
•• Decisions may be required quickly, possibly without time for full assessment
and consideration.
•• Quick drying versus slow drying argument following f looding.
•• It is a specialist area – contact needed with the insurance companies involved
with the works.
•• Advice for f lood-proofing for landlords and landowners.
Desktop surveys can identify f lood risk. Flood maps produced by UK authorities
are intended only as a guide – not designed to be accurate at the individual property
level. For Great Britain, f lood probability information maps are produced by Gov
.uk (2020) for England, Northern Ireland Planning Portal, Scottish Environment
Protection Agency, and Resources Wales. There are different maps for f looding
from rivers or sea, and for risk of f looding from surface water. Surface water f looding
happens when rainwater does not drain away through the normal drainage systems
or soak into the ground, but instead lies on, or f lows over, the ground.
A f lood risk assessment may be required for a particular site; there is advice
for this on the authority sites stated above. The UK Environment Agency has
defined four f lood zones referring to the probability of river and sea f looding;
however, these do not take account of the possible impacts of climate change and
consequent changes in the future probability of f looding. Therefore, the most up-
to-date information and advice should be found and used, for example consulting
websites of the Environment Agency, Gov.UK, Planning Authorities, CIRIA, etc.
Reinstatement of property following a f lood:
•• Draining
•• Initial damage assessment
•• Drying
•• Effect of water on materials, tracking of moisture
•• Structural damage
•• Renovation of interiors
•• Electrical installations
•• Consideration of f lood-resilient walls, f loors, windows/doors, services, drain-
age, etc.

-- 308 of 391 --

298 	Environmental considerations
Follow the pathways forwards and backwards to find adverse effects beyond the f lood-
ing levels as moisture and contaminates wick or f low: source – pathway – receptor.
Protecting property from f loods and their effects involves two approaches of
“f lood resistance” and/or “f lood resilience”.
Flood resistance: the ability of a building to resist the entry of f lood water from
the outside to the inside.
Flood resilience: the ability of a building to resist damage (exterior and interior)
as a result of f looding.
See also BS 85500. This is due for an update at the time of writing (BSI, n.d.)
Protecting property from f loods and their effects:
•• Planning issues – not building on f loodplains, directing development away
from high-risk areas, etc.
•• Emergency protection measures – sandbags, f lood boards, airbrick covers, etc.
•• Routes of f lood water entry
•• Property insurance issues
•• Storing data, etc., off-site or above f lood risk height
•• “Replacing timber f loors with solid” debate
•• “Replacing plasterboard wall finishes and internal walls with solid” debate
FLORA AND FAUNA
Invasive weeds
In the UK, the Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981 and the Environmental
Protection Act 1990 list invasive plants that must not be encouraged in the UK.
For buildings, Japanese knotweed is the most invasive.
Main reasons why Japanese knotweed is a problem:
•• It spreads easily via rhizomes and cut stems or crowns.
•• It out-competes native f lora.
•• It is difficult and expensive to control or eradicate.
○○ Can involve a repeated spraying regime over three years and re-landscaping.
•• It can cause structural damage to structures.
○○ Damage to buildings and foundations.
○○ Damage to paving and tarmac areas.
○○ Damage to f lood-defence structures.
○○ Damage to archaeological sites.

-- 309 of 391 --

299	9: Environmental considerations
•• Obstructs visibility and access on roads.
•• Reduction in land values.
•• Accumulation of litter in well-established stands.
•• Aesthetically unsightly.
It is listed under the Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981 as a plant that is “not to
be planted or otherwise introduced into the wild”. The Environmental Protection
Act 1990 also lists it as “controlled waste” to be disposed of properly. There is a
legal obligation not to cause it to spread if it occurs on your (your client’s) land.
Advice is offered by an RICS Professional Information paper and an
Environment Agency Code of Practice.
When treating with chemicals, the following is required:
•• Anyone spraying must hold a certificate of competence for herbicide use or
work under direct supervision of a certificate holder.
•• Carry out a Control of Substances Hazardous to Health (COSHH) assessment.
•• Get permission from Natural England if the area is protected, for example Sites
of Special Scientific Interest.
•• Get agreement from the Environment Agency.
Protected species
Rare or threatened species are protected in Great Britain and many other coun-
tries, regardless of where the species are found. A range of species are protected,
including:
•• Bats
•• Badgers
•• Great crested newts
•• Otters
•• Water voles
•• Wild birds
It is an offence to disturb or to harm protected species, or to damage any structure
that they use as shelter. The law protects all wild birds, their nests, and their eggs;
birds’ nests must not be destroyed or disturbed while they are in use.
Identifying whether these species are present on a particular site can be difficult,
and often only comes out at planning stage when suggested by objectors.
If found or suspected, obtain advice from government conservation bodies,
e.g. Natural England, the Environment and Heritage Service (Northern Ireland),
Scottish Natural Heritage, and the Countryside Council for Wales.

-- 310 of 391 --

300 	Environmental considerations
For example, all species of bats and their roosts (whether the bats are present or
not) are protected. Bats can be useful, as woodworm beetles and other insects are
a favourite food.
If the presence of bats is suspected (e.g. by fresh bat droppings in the roof void),
professional advice from government conservation bodies should be sought:
www.eurobats.org/about_eurobats/introduction_to_agreement
www.netregs.org.uk/environmental-topics/land/nature-conservation/protected-
and-priority-species
The law does not prevent pest control in a property where a bat roost is present,
however, controlling wasps, insects, and rodents may affect bats. Concerns can
arise if a chemical product is proposed in or near a bat roost, for example, as an
insecticide to control pests or a timber treatment to protect against insects, fungal
growth, or weathering. Chemical products cannot legally be used in or near a
known bat roost if there are bats present.
Guidance is also given at:
www.gov.uk/guidance/bat-roosts-use-of-chemical-pest-control-products-and-ti
mber-treatments-in-or-near-them
The best time to apply treatments is usually between autumn and spring. Only
licenced handlers are permitted to handle bats; there is a risk of rabies from bites.
Sites or Areas of Special Scientific Interest
Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSIs) or Areas of Special Scientific Interest (ASSI)
in the Isle of Man and Northern Ireland are those areas of land that are considered to
best represent natural heritage in terms of flora (plants), fauna (animals including mam-
mals, birds, insects, fish, etc.), geology (rocks, soils), geomorphology (landforms), and a
mixture of these natural features. They have formal conservation designation.
Most SSSIs are in private ownership and it is an offence for anyone to intentionally
or recklessly damage their protected natural features. The aim is to effect appropriate
management of the site’s natural features and that decision-makers are aware of the
SSSI designation when considering changes in land use or other relevant activities.
There are certain things you cannot do on SSSI land without consulting and
getting consent first from Natural England, Scottish Natural Heritage, Natural
Resources Wales, or NI’s Department of Agriculture, Environment and Rural
Affairs. Each SSSI/ASSI has an individual list of activities, known as “operations”,

-- 311 of 391 --

301	9: Environmental considerations
which need consent – this can be downloaded from the site’s page on Natural
England, etc.
Advice is given by:
www.nature.scot
www.gov.uk/guidance/protected-areas-sites-of-special-scientific-interest#check
-if-you-need-consent
https://naturalresources.wales
https://www.daera-ni.gov.uk/topics/land-and-landscapes/areas-special-scient
ific-interest
CLIMATE AND CONSTRUCTION
Cormac Flood and Lloyd M. Scott
Climate change
Mitigating climate change through operational energy reduction in existing
buildings is a high priority for policy makers in Europe and elsewhere (Brown
et al., 2014). Brown et al. (2014) reasoned that the necessity to limit climate change
demands considerable reduction in global warming potential due to operational
energy in countries where fossil fuels currently dominate, e.g. UK, Germany,
USA. Observations show that global average temperatures have increased by
0.85°C (in the range 0.65–1.06°C) since 1850 (IPCC, 2013). The atmosphere and
oceans have warmed, the amount of snow and ice has diminished, the sea level
has risen, the sea chemistry is changing, and the concentrations of greenhouse
gases (GHGs) in the atmosphere have increased (IPCC, 2013). According to the
IPCC (2013), it is extremely likely that more than half of the observed increase
in global average temperature from 1951 to 2010 was caused by an anthropogenic
increase in GHG concentrations and other anthropogenic forcings.
Changes in Ireland’s climate are in line with and similar to relevant global
trends. Temperatures have increased by 0.8°C since 1900: an average of 0.07°C
per decade over that period (Dwyer, 2013). As a result of the slow response time
(inertia) of the climate system, changes are projected to continue and increase over
the coming decades. Even if GHG emissions could be stopped immediately, some
impacts, such as sea level rise, are projected to continue up to and beyond the end
of this century (Desmond et al., 2016).
Buildings contribute almost half of the world’s CO2 emissions (EPA, 2015;
Koroneos et al., 2014), the predominant greenhouse gas responsible for bringing
about these changes. As a result of these greenhouse gases, the climate projections for
Ireland, for example, include increasing average temperature, more extreme weather

-- 312 of 391 --

302 	Environmental considerations
conditions including rainfall events, an increased likelihood of river and coastal
f looding, water shortages, particularly in the East of the country, changes in the types
and distribution of wildlife species, and the possible extinction of some vulnerable
wildlife species. The main anthropogenic cause of increased levels of atmospheric
carbon dioxide is burning fossil fuels to generate energy (IPCC, 2016). In response
to this compelling scientific evidence, the Irish Government have set legally binding
targets to reduce carbon dioxide emissions (carbon emissions hereafter). The aims
of the Climate Action and Low Carbon Development Act 2015 are to decarbonise
energy, transport, and housing by 2050. However, it has been argued that these tar-
gets are not enough to prevent catastrophic changes to the climate.
Ireland is a party to both the Convention and the Kyoto Protocol, ratifying
the Kyoto Protocol, enforcing it as legally binding in 2005. Although Kyoto com-
mitment period 2 (20-20-20) is now in effect, with even more stringent CO2
reduction targets, predictions have indicated that Ireland will have reached its
2020 target (62.8 Mt CO2), provided that performance upgrade schemes in accord-
ance with SEAI (2019, 2020) are followed and delivered. Examining CO2 emis-
sions per dwelling, the average Irish dwelling in 2010 emitted 30% more CO2 than
the average dwelling in the UK, and emissions were 94% more than the average for
the EU-27 (Dennehy and Howley, 2013). Additionally, CO2 emissions in Ireland
are predicted to have increased by 0.9% above 2010 levels (61.3 Mt CO2), translat-
ing to a 39% increase above 1990 levels (55.6 Mt CO2) by 2020.
With dwellings accounting for approximately 25.3% of Irish carbon emissions,
it has been recognised that the domestic sector can make a significant contribu-
tion to these mandatory reductions. Whilst newly built dwellings are designed and
constructed with consideration to climate change, it has been acknowledged that
there is an urgent requirement to adapt existing dwellings for both the future cli-
mate and to reduce carbon emissions resulting from their use (Hamdy et al., 2017).
It has been documented that over two-thirds of existing UK dwellings and 60%
of Irish dwellings are expected to still be in use in 2050, while 80% of European
housing stock for 2030 is built today (Di Giuseppe et al., 2017). Therefore, it could
be argued that there is no choice about addressing the energy efficiency of exist-
ing dwellings. However, reducing carbon emissions is not the only issue related to
existing dwellings and their elevated energy consumption. There is also the issue
of energy security, which thus provides an additional driver for reducing energy
consumption from existing dwellings.
Energy security
Energy security is described by the International Energy Agency (IEA) as “the
uninterrupted physical availability of energy sources at an affordable price”. The
EU is the world’s largest importer of energy, importing 53% of its energy supplies

-- 313 of 391 --

303	9: Environmental considerations
at an annual cost of €400 billion. It has a particular reliance on imported natural
gas (66%) and crude oil (>90%). For example in Ireland, indigenous production
accounted for 32% of the country’s energy requirements in 1990. However, since
the mid-1990s import dependency has grown significantly, due to the increase
in energy use together with the decline in indigenous natural gas production at
Kinsale since 1995 and decreasing peat production. Imported oil and gas accounted
for 77% of total primary energy requirement in 2015, compared with 50% in the
early 1990s. Ireland’s overall import dependency reached 90% in 2006. It has var-
ied between 85% and 90% since then; it was at 88% in 2015.
Energy efficiency of buildings has therefore become an important issue for all
stakeholders, including homeowners, with strong links between improvements in
the performance of buildings, energy savings, and a reduction in GHG emissions
(Hens, 2015; Verbeeck and Hens, 2005; Tommerup and Svendsen, 2006).
In Ireland, the domestic sector accounted for 24.9% of all energy consumed
in 2016, which was second only to transport. Accounting for around 60% of this
domestic energy use, space heating has a significant impact on overall consumption
and thus demand within Ireland (Kema, 2008; Koroneos et al., 2014). It can there-
fore be concluded that if energy demand for space heating is reduced, this could
have a significant impact on both meeting climate change targets and increasing
energy security in Ireland. Furthermore, these energy efficiency improvements
should make a significant contribution to alleviating fuel poverty within the most
vulnerable dwellings.
Fuel/energy poverty
While climate change and energy resources are a primary focus, fuel poverty
appears to be a peripheral issue for groups such as the Climate Change Committee
(CCC, 2020), whose suggested focus on price-based policies geared towards com-
bating climate change will put a further estimated 1.7 million households into fuel
poverty. This highlights the importance of a collective approach to addressing all
three pillars of sustainability. According to CARDI (2011), fuel poverty is defined
as a situation where someone is unable to afford to heat their home to a level that
is healthy and safe. In Ireland and the UK, fuel poverty is classified as a situation
where more than 10% of disposable income is spent on energy use to provide
adequate heat in the dwelling (Hirsch et al., 2011; DCENR, 2016). The main
factors attributed to fuel poverty are the increasing cost of energy, low household
income, energy-inefficient homes, and lack of access to the required energy sources
(Palmer et al., 2005; CARDI, 2011). Additionally, there can be a direct correlation
between the age and type of a dwelling and its energy performance, although as
stated elsewhere correlations must be made with caution and with understand-
ing of each particular building. To reinforce the concept of a correlation, it has

-- 314 of 391 --

304 	Environmental considerations
been established that retired and unemployed people account for the majority of
the population affected by fuel poverty in Ireland (DCENR, 2015). Furthermore,
DCENR (2015) confirmed that 28% of Irish dwellings are in fuel poverty at the
10% income threshold, of which poor lower BER-rated, oil-heated detached and
semi-detached dwellings were worst affected. The European Commission esti-
mates that energy poverty may affect up to 54 million people in the EU alone, or
around 11% of the population. Ireland has set a target for alleviating fuel poverty
through a new strategy to combat energy poverty and policy.
Climate and construction
Climate conditions affect many aspects of construction projects during construc-
tion. However, upon completion, buildings are subject to continued exposure
to elements such as precipitation, relative humidity, wind, ultra-violet radiation,
and temperature, which may have significant impacts over time. The connection
between these conditions, the U-value, and construction performance is depend-
ent on accurate understanding of current and developing climatic trends.
Construction and building envelope performance is highly weather-depend-
ent. Optimal construction conditions require elements such as precipitation, wind,
temperature, and relative humidity to fall within firm limits. Many products and
materials are designed to be installed within certain climate conditions. Outside
of these ideals, performance declines, depending on the severity of the conditions.
Building envelopes should be built of materials that can resist the deteriorating
effects of the weather, in line with building regulations. However, notwithstand-
ing this, building design in line with many building regulations does not currently
facilitate the inclusion of the aforementioned factors with regard to thermal perfor-
mance. Additionally, with the advent of climate change, the current relationship
between building fabric performance and weather is being altered, continually
enhancing the agenda for building design and adaptation measures to incorporate
current and developing climate patterns.
According to ISO 6946 (2007), “If a problem in an existing building is being
investigated, any data measured at the site of the building shall be used; otherwise
data from a similar location to that of the building shall be used”. This statement
conf licts with many current practice guidelines that currently mandate the use of
“default” figures accounting for weather conditions taken from building regula-
tion guidance. Current research of the U-value and the development of correction
factors or the calculation itself to account for climate patterns is scarce. External
(Rso), cavity (Rcav), and internal (Rsi) surface resistances incorporate two factors
only – wind speed and emissivity. Taking Ireland as an example, wind and other
weather conditions are dissimilar across the entirety of Ireland; however, values for
Rso, Rcav, and Rsi of 0.04, 0.18, and 0.13 m²/K·W respectively are the default,

-- 315 of 391 --

305	9: Environmental considerations
nationwide. While BSi (2015) elucidates that the standard values are “appropriate
in most cases” and that actual (rather than default) values could be calculated using
“detailed procedures for low emissivity surfaces, specific external wind speeds and
non-planar surfaces”, ISO 6946 is engrained within the Irish building regulations,
which enforce resistance values currently and historically throughout the years in
Technical Guidance Document Part L.
There are many private companies and national weather centres offering the latest
available climate data to incorporate into project planning. The key point is that the
data used currently in assessing the risks to weather are historical. Because the cost
and duration of construction activities are heavily influenced by climatic conditions,
it is becoming increasingly important that decision-making should be based on future
projections, as well as past conditions. Nonetheless, it is important that the relationship
between current weather conditions and construction be discussed first to establish
a baseline condition against which the impacts of climate change can be compared.
To assess the current physical impacts of weather on construction, the Irish
climate will be discussed brief ly below. Key factors that have the potential to affect
construction are rainfall (precipitation), wind speed, and temperature.
Precipitation
Precipitation is one of the most disruptive factors during construction. Weather
conditions and, more importantly, rain are often reported as two of the main
causes of project delays and unscheduled changes. Over the lifecycle of a build-
ing, permanent waterproofing of affected areas may be required, as moisture is
an element that will penetrate the building shell of the best-designed building
fabric. However, once moisture breaches the building shell, drainage provisions
can be used to direct it to the exterior. For example, moisture can penetrate brick
through capillary action and the action of wind-driven rain. Unless these actions
are checked by detail designs such as rain screens, cavity walls, and wall f lashings,
moisture can reach the interior and condense on interior walls. In addition, any
imperfections in finish will leave a gap that rain can penetrate.
Wind
Wind-driven rain is one of the most important climatological factors to affect
the hygrothermal performance and durability of building envelopes. Wind can
blow rain through gaps as small as 0.15 mm (Hens, 2015), although if moisture
breaches the building shell, the aforementioned detail designs including DPCs and
weep holes in cavity walls can re-direct it out from the building fabric. In most
instances, wind can dramatically multiply the effects of moisture, reducing cool-
ing times by accelerating the removal of heat and increasing the drying capacity

-- 316 of 391 --

306 	Environmental considerations
of building materials/fabrics by accelerating the removal of moisture (Crissinger,
2005). Additionally, wind can drive moisture into the structure by increasing the
pressure on the film of moisture on the surface of the structure and make cold
temperatures feel colder by accelerating the evaporation of perspiration. See also
BSI (2007).
It is anticipated that projected increases in extreme winter wind speeds and rainfall
will contribute to an intensification of wind-driven rain in Ireland by 2050 (Nolan
et al., 2012). It is considered the most critical exterior environmental load factor in
over 90% of building envelopes and can increase the amount of moisture present in
a structure by more than 100 times due to vapour diffusion (Karagiozis et al., 1997,
2003). In heat-air moisture numerical simulations, wind-driven rain is categorised
as one of the most important boundary conditions. In conjunction with the tem-
peratures internally and externally (which dictate the rate of heat f low through the
building fabric), this will inf luence material temperatures and conductivity values.
Temperature
Temperature is a critical parameter in construction. If bricks are dry due to high
temperatures when laid, they may absorb water from the cement at a rate that
also results in a loss of bond strength, the consequence of which may be leaks
at weakened joints. This may lead to more significant risk of moisture penetra-
tion through the methods listed previously, thus reducing thermal performance.
Similarly, temperature can affect how construction materials dry out when sub-
jected to construction moisture, moisture which is absorbed through wind-driven
rain, or moisture absorbed through capillary action.
Temperature can cause a change in material performance. All materials have a
varying set of properties, defined by the characteristics of the material itself. Work
by Kodur and others (2003, 2011) shows that thermal conductivity decreases in
various concretes due to thermal expansion resulting from temperature increases.
Thus, materials closer to the warmer interior surface may suffer from decreased
thermal efficiency due to thermal expansion, while materials closer to the exter-
nal surface may suffer from wind-driven rain and increased moisture content,
again increasing conductivity values, which in turn might combine to result in an
increased U-value. The climate relative to the building thus has a considerable role
to play in establishing how materials might perform in a building envelope.
REFERENCES
Barry, P. (2017). Clay soils, subsidence, heave, trees and roots—part 2. Peter Barry Chartered
Surveyors. 	Accessed 	from 	https://www.peterbarry.co.uk/blog/clay-soils-subsi
dence-heave-trees-roots-part-2

-- 317 of 391 --

307	9: Environmental considerations
Brown, N. W. O., Olsson, S. & Malmqvist, T. (2014). Embodied greenhouse gas emissions
from refurbishment of residential building stock to achieve a 50% operational energy reduction.
Building and Environment, 79, 46–56.
BSI (n.d.) British Standards Institution. London, UK. Accessed from https://shop
.bsigroup.com/
BSI (2007). BS EN 15026:2007—Hygrothermal Performance of Building Components and
Building Elements—Assessment of Moisture Transfer by Numerical Simulation. British
Standards Institution, London, UK.
BSI (2015). Building Components and Building Elements—Thermal Resistance and Thermal
Transmittance—Calculation Method (ISO 6946:2007). British Standards Institution,
London, UK.
CARDI (2011). Understanding Fuel Poverty in the Older Population. Dublin, Ireland:
Centre for Ageing Research and Development in Ireland (CARDI).
CCC (2020). Climate change committee. Accessed from https://www.theccc.org.uk/
Crissinger, J. L. (2005). Design and construction vs. weather. Interface.
DCENR (2015). Bottom-Up Analysis of Fuel Poverty in Ireland. Dublin: DCENR
(Department of Communications, Energy & Natural Resources).
DCENR (2016). A Strategy to Combat Energy Poverty 2016–2019. Dublin: DCENR
(Department of Communications, Energy & Natural Resources).
Dennehy, E. & Howley, M. (2013). Report 2013. Energy in the Residential Sector. Dublin,
Ireland: SEAI.
Desmond, M., O’Brien, P. & McGovern, F. (2016). A summary of the state of knowledge on
climate change impacts for Ireland. MaREI Centre, Environmental Research Institute,
University College Cork (ed.) EPA Research Programme 2014–2020. EPA, County
Wexford, Ireland: Environmental Protection Agency.
Di Giuseppe, E., Iannaccone, M., Telloni, M., D’Orazio, M. & Di Perna, C. (2017).
Probabilistic life cycle costing of existing buildings retrofit interventions towards nZE target:
methodology and application example. Energy and Buildings, 144, 416–432.
Dwyer, N. (2013). The status of Ireland's climate, 2012. Wexford, Ireland: Environmental
Protection Agency. EPA, County Wexford, Ireland. Available from: https://cora
.ucc.ie/handle/10468/2969
EPA (2015). Greenhouse Gas Projections to 2020. Environmental Protection Agency.
EPA, County Wexford, Ireland.
Gov.uk (2020). Accessed from https://www.gov.uk/
Hamdy, M., Sirén, K. & Attia, S. (2017). Impact of financial assumptions on the cost optimality
towards nearly zero energy buildings—a case study. Energy and Buildings, 153, 421–438.
Health Protection Agency (2010). Radon limitation of human exposure. UK Government
publication. Accessed from https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/radon-l
imitation-of-human-exposure
Hens, H. (2015). Wind-driven rain: from theory to reality. Proceedings of Thermal
Performance of the Exterior Envelopes of Whole Buildings XI, 2010a Florida. Oak
Ridge National Laboratory, 1–10.

-- 318 of 391 --

308 	Environmental considerations
Hirsch, D., Preston, I. & White, V. (2011). Understanding Fuel Expenditure: Fuel Poverty
and Spending on Fuel. Bristol: Centre for Sustainable Energy.
HM Government (2013). The Building Regulations 2010. Approved Document C
- Site preparation and resistance to contaminants and moisture (2004 Edition
incorporating 2010 and 2013 amendments). NBS. UK.
IPCC, 2013: Climate Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working
Group I to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change [Stocker, T.F., D. Qin, G.-K. Plattner, M. Tignor, S.K. Allen, J. Boschung,
A. Nauels, Y. Xia, V. Bex and P.M. Midgley (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, 1535 pp.
IPCC, 2007: Climate Change 2007: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability. Contribution
of Working Group II to the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change, M.L. Parry, O.F. Canziani, J.P. Palutikof, P.J. van der
Linden and C.E. Hanson, Eds., Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK,
976pp.).
Karagiozis, A., Hadjisophocleous, G. & Cao, S. (1997). Wind-driven rain distributions on
two buildings. Journal of Wind Engineering and Industrial Aerodynamics, 67–68,
559–572.
Karagiozis, A. N., Salonvaara, M., Holm, A. & Kuenzel, H. (2003). Influence of wind-
driven rain data on hygrothermal performance. Eighth International IBPSA Conference.
Eindhoven, Netherlands.
Kema (2008). Demand side management in Ireland: Evaluating the energy efficiency
opportunities. 1st ed. A Study by Kema for Sustainable Energy Ireland, January 2008.
Sustainable Energy Authority Ireland.
Kodur, V. & Khaliq, W. (2011). Effect of temperature on thermal properties of different types of
high-strength concrete. Journal of Materials in Civil Engineering, 23, 793–801.
Kodur, V. K. R. & Sultan, M. A. (2003). Effect of temperature on thermal properties of high-
strength concrete. Journal of Materials in Civil Engineering, 15, 101–107.
Koroneos, C., Karatsiori, V. & Grgič, T. (2014). Energy efficiency analysis of a refurbished
dwelling: a case study in Ljubljana, Slovenia. International Journal of Sustainable
Engineering, 7, 214–221.
NHBC (2021). NHBC Standards 2021. National House Building Council. NHBC,
Milton Keynes, UK.
Nolan, P., Lynch, P., Mcgrath, R., Semmler, T. & Wang, S. (2012). Simulating climate
change and its effects on the wind energy resource of Ireland. Wind Energy, 15, 593–608.
Palmer, J., Campbell, R., Boardman, B. & Saunders, J. (2005). Fuel Poverty Research
Centre Scoping Study. Oxford, UK: Environmental Change Institute.
PHE (2020). UKRadon, Public Health England. Accessed from https://www.ukradon
.org/
RICS (2010). Contamination, the environment and sustainability: Implications for chartered
surveyors and their clients. RICS Guidance Note. 3rd. edition, 2010. Royal Institution
of Chartered Surveyors, London. Superseded by RICS (2018).

-- 319 of 391 --

309	9: Environmental considerations
RICS (2018). Environmental risks and global real estate. RICS Guidance Note. RICS
professional standards and guidance, global. Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors,
London.
RICS (2020). Contamination and Environmental Matters: Property Observation Checklists.
Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors, London.
SEAI (2019). A Homeowner’s Guide to Wall Insulation. The Sustainable Energy Authority
of Ireland (SEAI), Dublin, Ireland.
SEAI (2020). The Sustainable Energy Authority of Ireland. Dublin, Ireland. Available
at https://www.seai.ie/
Tommerup, H. & Svendsen, S. (2006). Energy savings in Danish residential building stock.
Energy and Buildings, 38, 618–626
Verbeeck, G. & Hens, H. (2005). Energy savings in retrofitted dwellings: economically viable?
Energy and Buildings, 37, 747–754.
UKRadon see PHE (2020).
UK Government (2021). Environmental Protection Act 1990. UK Government. Available
at: https://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/1990/43/contents

-- 320 of 391 --

10
Sustainability
John L. Sturges
This chapter will deal first with what sustainability is, and what it is not. It will
then proceed to a section dealing with the management of sustainability, and con-
clude with a section discussing how sustainable the main materials of construction
really are.
SUSTAINABILITY: AN INTRODUCTION
The term sustainable implies that something is capable of being continued for an
extended or prolonged time period. This term is sometimes confused and used
interchangeably with environmental impact mitigation, but the terms refer to two
different things; impact mitigation is only one part of achieving sustainability. In
the context of industry, sustainability has three elements or dimensions:
•• Environment
•• Society
•• Economy
Many writers on sustainability talk in terms of capital – environmental or natural
capital, social capital, and economic or financial capital. To be sustainable means
conserving all three forms of capital, what Elkington (1997) refers to as “the triple
bottom line”, to differentiate it from the usual financial or monetary “bottom
line”. By natural capital is meant the world’s natural resources (Helm, 2015), and
some of these, in the form of materials and energy, we use and exploit in our
construction and operation of buildings. Besides the materials and energy that we
consume, we are also sustained by various natural processes, for example, the pho-
tosynthesis that occurs in green plants and trees providing the essential oxygen in
the air we breathe, the food we eat, and the CO2 and water vapour that we exhale.
The hydrological cycle continually purifies our water supplies so that precipitation
is the pure H2O that is essential for life. The systems that provide photosynthesis

-- 321 of 391 --

311	10: Sustainability
and that purify our water are part of this natural capital, and remind us that we do
not control nature, but that we are part of it and subject to its laws. Despite our reli-
ance upon it, this natural capital is all too often taken for granted, and no monetary
value is put upon it. It is vitally important that we adopt the mindset that properly
values this natural capital.
This notion of natural capital will be very important later in this chapter when
we consider the sustainability of construction materials. Helm (2015) explains very
clearly that conventional economics gives monetary values to materials, and these
values ref lect the scarcity or abundance of the material, and the cost of extracting
it, transport, and processing. This “bottom line” economics has been responsible
for the environmental mess that we have created over the past hundred years or so.
Helm proposes that we ascribe a realistic value to the material that ref lects its true
worth in maintaining life on Earth. These values are inevitably higher, and often
much higher than those derived from conventional economics. However, such val-
ues can help to avoid building “white elephant” and vanity projects that provide no
long-term benefit to society. If we are proposing to build some infrastructure that
will provide such long-term benefit then we can cost it in the usual way using nat-
ural capital values. We can then calculate the cost of the materials as natural capital
and compare with the monetary value of what the infrastructure will provide. If
the benefit is less than the lost value of the natural capital, we do not go ahead with
the building. Such an approach would avoid vanity projects that confer no benefits
to society but consume excessive amounts of valuable resources. Viewed from the
opposite standpoint, what is the point of building something that benefits very few
people at the cost of degrading the natural systems that keep us alive?
Economics that deals in these terms can be viewed as sustainable economics.
Realistic values are put on assets whose value greatly exceeds their purely utility
price. Social capital should similarly be conserved. This means that it should be
properly valued and not exploited or abused, as happens all too often. Workers
should be engaged in worthwhile work that they can believe in, properly rewarded
for their efforts, and not required to act illegally. These are tenets of social
sustainability.
The manufacture and use of materials have economic consequences, and as
industrial managers know, you will not be truly productive unless your workers
feel valued. Social sustainability implies that everyone subscribes to the policies
involved in achieving environmental and economic sustainability. Economic sus-
tainability implies that materials and resources are valued by their intrinsic worth as
natural capital and not by their current monetary value or market price. Adherence
to just the financial “bottom line” has caused many of the problems that we cur-
rently face. Decisions involving the commitment of material and energy resources
are usually made according to purely financial considerations. For industry to be
sustainable, it should have minimal environmental impact, consume minimum
raw materials, and produce minimum waste. The gaining of raw materials, the

-- 322 of 391 --

312 	Sustainability
disposal of mining and manufacturing waste arisings, and the disposal of products
and materials at the end of their service lives should not blight the landscape or
deplete resources to the extent that future generations are left with nothing to
work with. True sustainability should strictly have zero impact; we clearly do not
achieve that at present, but that is the ideal towards which we must aim.
Our industrial and economic activities do impact the earth’s environment and
ecosystems in numerous ways, and if we are to operate sustainably, we must sig-
nificantly reduce this impact. To do this we must gain some understanding of how
the earth and its ecosystems work, and the following section summarises the main
impacts that we are making at the present time.
Areas of concern
Climate change and its linkage to global emissions of carbon dioxide are the
topics of current debate in the news media, and rightly so. However, there
are other impacts that are similarly threatening but which are overshadowed
by the climate change debate. A team of leading environmental scientists at
the Stockholm Resilience Centre, chaired by Professor Johan Rockström, has
produced a list of nine major areas of current concern (Rockström et al., 2009).
This team was attempting to define the permissible limits to our impact in these
areas with estimates of how closely we are now approaching them, and indeed
whether we may have already exceeded any of them. The nine areas they pro-
posed were:
•• Biodiversity loss
•• Carbon dioxide and climate change
•• Nitrogen use and misuse
•• Land use and misuse
•• Fresh water supplies
•• Toxic substance release
•• Aerosol particle release
•• Ocean acidification
•• Ozone layer damage
Biodiversity was put at the head of the list because it implies serious damage to the
earth’s ecosystems, including both plant and animal life. It represents damage to
the life-support system, and the damage is caused by the eight factors listed below
biodiversity loss. Of the remaining eight, four are wholly caused by humans and
the other four can be caused naturally as well as anthropogenically. Those due
to humans are nitrogen pollution and ozone layer damage. Rockström’s report
concluded that we have already exceeded the safe limits in three of the eight areas,

-- 323 of 391 --

313	10: Sustainability
namely, the rate of biodiversity loss, emissions of CO2, and release of excessive
amounts of nitrogen. These eight areas will now be considered.
With its reference to ocean acidification, the list reminds us that the oceans are a
major part of the earth’s ecosystem. They cover 71% of the earth’s surface, but for too
long the seas have been regarded as an inexhaustible supply of seafood, and the most
convenient repository for all the waste produced by our modern society. The shipping
industry is one of the least regulated industries in the world. Illegal fishing, dumping
of toxic waste, piracy, people trafficking, etc., all occur on a regular basis (Urbina,
2019), but they take place out of sight, and the perpetrators, even when identified, are
often shielded from prosecution by corrupt agencies. The “flag of convenience” sys-
tem still operates. However, since the hydrological cycle carries a good deal of waste
into the seas, it behoves all those running construction projects to ensure that all waste
generated is disposed of ethically via reputable and reliable companies.
Climate change
Everyone is now aware of the current debate about climate change, whether they
subscribe to the notion that humankind is responsible or not. Scientific opinion is
now firmly behind the belief that climate change is anthropogenic in origin. From
the evidence of paleoclimate evidence, including air bubbles trapped in ice cores
taken from the Greenland and Antarctic icecaps, carbon dioxide in the atmosphere
has not exceeded 300 ppm (parts per million) during the ice age cycles of the past
800,000 years or so. Before the Industrial Revolution, the global average amount of
CO2 was about 280 ppm (NOAA, 2020; Jones et al., 2020). In 2019, the atmospheric
content of CO2 had increased to around 410 ppm. Carbon dioxide is known to be a
greenhouse gas, and this increase is held to be responsible for global warming, and is
often the first thing called to mind when people consider our impact on life on Earth.
Consideration of Earth’s history and its ecosystems has led to some remark-
able developments in our understanding of life on our planet, including a notable
contribution from James Lovelock who put forward his Gaia hypothesis (Lovelock,
1979). This idea postulates that all the life-forms on Earth effectively co-operate
to maintain the conditions for life to continue; in effect, the whole world is one
living organism. While the idea was initially ridiculed (it no longer is) it stimulated
a lot of research into our planet’s ecosystems, and as a result, there is now serious
concern about several other impacts (Rockström et al., 2009). These include a
reduction in biodiversity (and possibly a sixth mass extinction), fresh water sup-
plies, use and misuse of land, nitrogen pollution, release of toxic substances, and
aerosol particles into the environment, acidification of the oceans, and destruction
of the ozone layer high in the earth’s atmosphere.
Some of these impacts are solely anthropogenic, and some can be due to natural
causes as well as anthropogenic in origin. If we contaminate water supplies, or misuse

-- 324 of 391 --

314 	Sustainability
or contaminate land, then these are solely due to human agency. Nitrogen pollution
and damage to the ozone layer due to the release of chlorof luorocarbons (CFCs) into
the atmosphere again are solely caused by human agency. The release of CO2 can
be caused by the combustion of fossil fuel or by gas emissions from hot springs or
volcanoes. There are around 1,500 active volcanoes, and one will be erupting some-
where in the world at any given time. Volcanoes will also emit aerosol-sized particles
(sizes from 1 μm or 10–6 m down to 1 nm or 10–9 m), and such particles are also
emitted in large amounts during the combustion of fossil fuels. If the atmospheric
content of CO2 is increased then some of it will dissolve in sea water, resulting in
increased acidification of the seas. Similarly, an increase in the ambient temperature
of the atmosphere will result in warming of the oceans. The specific heat capacity of
water is around a thousand times greater than that of air. Finally, the release of toxic
chemical species and aerosol particles into the atmosphere can be caused by industrial
processes, but they also occur when volcanoes erupt.
The net result of these adverse effects is to cause pollution of natural habitats
and the death or extinction of life-forms, plant and animal, that live in the affected
areas. Since we are dependent on so many other life-forms, extinctions affect us,
and this is the reason for the increase in concern.
The construction industry is by far the largest consumer of materials in the
world, using more than all other sectors of industry put together. The manufacture
and processing of materials consume vast amounts of energy (Ashby, 2009). Each
material has its own value of embodied energy. This is the energy consumed in
producing unit quantity of the material (e.g. GJ/tonne). There is also an embod-
ied carbon value (the weight of CO2 emitted in producing unit weight of mate-
rial). These values are not intrinsic properties of the material, but they ref lect
the energy efficiency of their manufacture. If the manufacturing process becomes
more efficient over time, these values may decrease. If the materials are transported
to site, then their carbon footprint goes up, and the bigger the distance the greater
the increase. Specific materials are selected because of their properties, and if one
material is substituted by another with “superior” properties, it is important to also
assess its environmental impact besides the specific desired property.
It is not difficult to visualise the links between large-scale production of materials
by industry and the release of the greenhouse gas CO2, the acidification of the seas,
the emissions of toxic species in the form of dust, gases, and liquids, and the emission
of aerosol-sized particles with their adverse impact upon our environment.
Nitrogen pollution
Nitrogen pollution and ozone layer damage require a bit more explanation. The
element nitrogen is essential for life, being an important constituent of proteins.
The earth’s atmosphere consists of 79% nitrogen as a diatomic molecule N2. These

-- 325 of 391 --

315	10: Sustainability
two atoms are bonded together by very strong bonds, so that nitrogen is effectively
chemically inert. There are just two natural ways that this atmospheric nitrogen
can be chemically “fixed” and made available for nutritional purposes, and these
are by lightning strikes during thunderstorms and by the action of enzymes stored
in the root nodules of leguminous plants such as peas and beans. Over 200 years
ago, Thomas Malthus realised that the human population would be limited in
size because of starvation caused by food shortage. He was quite correct; this is
how nature works. Fortunately, the answer to the nitrogen shortage problem was
found in huge cave systems in South America in countries such as Chile and Peru.
Huge populations of bats and birds had lived in these caves since time immemo-
rial, leaving immense deposits of guano, scores of metres thick. This guano is very
nitrogen-rich, and during the 19th century, a whole f leet of ships plied between
Europe and South America transporting guano for use as fertiliser by the agricul-
tural industry. The guano was turned into ammonium nitrate for use as fertiliser.
To cause nitrogen chemical bonds to be broken to make nitrogen react is an
extremely endothermic process (i.e. it takes the input of huge amounts of energy).
In the early 20th century in Germany, a process to synthesise ammonia (NH3)
from nitrogen and hydrogen on a laboratory-scale was invented by Fritz Haber. In
1913, in collaboration with an engineer, Robert Bosch, they developed the Haber–
Bosch process to synthesise ammonia on an industrial scale. This can be used to
make ammonium nitrate which is an excellent fertiliser, but ammonium nitrate
is also the basis of explosives. During World War I, the Haber–Bosch process was
used to manufacture explosives because Germany was cut off from supplies of
guano by the Royal Navy blockade. Artificial fertilisers were only used in large
quantities after World War II. They were very effective to the point where they
have been over-used by farmers. Excess fertilisers are washed off fields by rainfall
and find their way into streams and rivers and end up in the sea. The nitrogen-rich
sea water gives rise to algal blooms, and the algae deplete the water of oxygen,
leading to the development of “dead zones” where no life can survive.
Aerosol particle releases
Aerosols are small particles that can be liquid or solid, falling in the size range
between an upper limit of one micrometre (10–6 m or 1 μm), and a lower limit of
one nanometre (10–9 m or 1 nm). Aerosols can be either natural or anthropogenic
in origin, and because of their tiny size, once aloft they can remain in the atmos-
phere for very long periods as they do not settle quickly under the action of gravity.
Natural sources include forest fires, volcanic activity, tornadoes, dust storms, etc.
Anthropogenic causes include emissions from transport systems (aircraft, passenger
and goods vehicles on land, ships), quarrying operations, crushing and grinding
operations, emissions from industrial operations, etc. Table 10.1 shows that these

-- 326 of 391 --

316 	Sustainability
Table 10.1 Atmospheric aerosol f luxes
Natural source 	Average f lux (Mt·a –1
)
Ref. A.
Flux range D < 25 μm
Ref. B.
Primary
Windblown dust 	1,000–10,000
Mineral dust 	917
Mineral dust 	573
Forest fires 	3–150
Sea salt 	10,000 	1,000–10,000
Volcanoes 	30 	4–10,000
Biological 	50 	26–50
Secondary
Sulphates from DMS
60–110
Sulphates from volcanic SO 2 	20 	10–30
From biogenic VOC 	11.2 	4–200
From biogenic NO x 	10–40
(Source: Henderson & Henderson, 2009).
Note: DMS = dimethyl sulphide
VOC = volatile organic compounds
Ref. A: Seinfeld, A. and Pandis, S.N., (2006), Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics, 2nd Edition,
John Wiley, New York.
Ref. B: Brasseur, G.P. et al. (1999), Atmospheric Chemistry and Global Change, Oxford University
Press, New York
f luxes can contain considerable amounts of fine particulates. For example, there
can be over 900,000,000 tonnes of fine mineral dust in the atmosphere each year.
The finer their size, the longer they remain aloft.
The figures in Table 10.1 are average values, but they can show huge increases
after episodes of volcanism, large-scale forest fires, industrial accidents, etc.
Toxic substance releases
Toxic substances can be released both naturally and by anthropogenic agency. For
example, volcanoes can release oxides of sulphur and nitrogen as well as halogens
such as chlorine. All these can be released by human industrial activity; people
have for many centuries extracted metals from the Earth including mercury and
cadmium, both of which can be lethal if inhaled or ingested.

-- 327 of 391 --

317	10: Sustainability
Human releases of toxic substances fall under three headings:
•• Pesticides, drugs, and other human-made toxins
•• Plastic materials
•• Radioactive materials
There are now over 1 billion cars on the roads of the world. They emit diesel
and petrol fumes and damaging particulates, and they also produce dust in the
form of tiny rubber particles, and dust from braking systems. Electric vehicles
containing heavy batteries emit more particles from tyres and braking systems than
conventional vehicles, to some extent cancelling out their engine emissions advan-
tage. This argues in favour of minimising transport operations as far as possible.
“Industrial agriculture” is also responsible for much pollution; nitrates in artificial
fertilisers, insecticides, and weed-killers are used in huge amounts, and these get
washed off the land and into streams.
Plastic materials also become discarded and finish up in the seas as well. They
cause great harm to marine life, birds, and amphibians of various species. The
nuclear weapons and power industries were created after World War II, and tests
of weapons were carried out in the atmosphere until the 1960s ban. Physicists did
not understand the effects of radiation on populations at large in the early years of
the nuclear age. Atmospheric dust probably still contains some nuclides with long
half-lives from these early tests.
Ozone layer damage
Ozone layer damage is caused by the release of CFCs developed for use as refriger-
ants for food preservation. When a refrigerator is scrapped, the CFCs it contained
are released into the atmosphere. At first, this was not considered to be a problem,
until it was discovered that CFCs survived in the upper atmosphere (altitude c.
25 km) for many decades. They take part in various photo-chemical reactions
that result in the conversion of ozone (O3) to normal diatomic oxygen O2. The
triatomic ozone was very effective in filtering out the very short-wavelength, very
damaging ultraviolet radiation in sunlight. The use of CFCs was banned by the
Montreal Protocol in the late 1980s by most countries in the developed western
world and Japan. Other countries finally signed the protocol by 2015.
Ocean acidification
As has already been mentioned, Homo sapiens are land-based, and we have tended
to view the Earth’s ecosystem as limited to what is on land, ignoring life in the seas.
There are numerous ecological links between marine and land-based life. Earth’s

-- 328 of 391 --

318 	Sustainability
rivers discharge their waters into the seas, and it is this that makes the oceans saline.
According to the Natural History Museum (2020), ocean salinity is mainly caused
by rain washing mineral ions from the land into water. We know that the seas
contain approximately 3.5% salinity, and that more than 5 or 6% would make sea
water unable to support life. Among the plant and animal life in the seas are organ-
isms that remove excess salinity and so maintain conditions for life. This realisation
was one of the factors that drove James Lovelock (1979) to put forward his Gaia
hypothesis in the 1970s as introduced in the subsection “Climate change” above.
Billions of tonnes of raw materials and manufactured goods are transported by sea
to destinations all over the world. These sea lanes only occupy a small fraction of
the whole ocean area. Unfortunately, the shipping industry has hitherto been sub-
ject to minimal or no regulation, and those operating fishing boats and transport
vessels have caused a large amount of environmental damage. Besides the salts,
organic matter, dust and sand, and unauthorised chemical discharges that reach the
seas come billions of items of plastic waste. Most of this waste is discharged from
ten of the largest rivers on Earth. Fine pieces (of plastic) are mistaken for food and
are picked up by birds and fed to their chicks, often with fatal results.
The oceans contain coral reefs, and while these occupy only 0.1% of the oceans’
surface area, they contain 25% of the biodiversity in the seas; they truly are bio-
diversity “hot-spots”. Most reefs are located in the seas’ photic zones, and they
operate by photosynthesis, but a few are located deeper, where they cannot access
sunlight, and these operate by chemosynthesis. However, their health is threat-
ened by increases in ocean acidity and by warming of the seas. Recent reports
indicate that the upper 700 metres of the world’s oceans have warmed by 0.3°C,
and that the pH of the seas has decreased from 8.2 to 8.1. These effects sound
minimal and not causes for concern. However, a simple calculation reveals that
the thermal energy required to warm the upper 700 metres of the seas is sufficient
to manufacture all the world’s steel at the current (2019) rate for the next 15 years
or so. Furthermore, while a pH reduction of 0.1 sounds insignificant, because the
pH scale is logarithmic, this really represents an increase in acidity of 30%. The
increase in temperature and acidity is sufficient to threaten the survival of crusta-
ceans and any species that form shells for protection.
Land water resources, their use and misuse
The area of land in the world is fixed, as is the volume of water at 1.4 billion cubic
kilometres. We cannot significantly increase these figures. The human population
of the Earth now stands at over 7.5 billion and is still increasing. Unfortunately, the
locations of desirable land and plentiful water supplies are not at all evenly distrib-
uted, nor do they coincide with the great centres of population. Decisions about
how we use the land available to us are taken by governments as well as individuals.

-- 329 of 391 --

319	10: Sustainability
Similarly, as the population increases, decisions are taken regarding the provision
of water supplies for drinking, for agriculture, for the generation of electricity, and
for cooling the power plants. These water-supply decisions require careful analysis
before action is taken. Too often in the past, decisions have been taken which have
had disastrous consequences. The decision to divert the waters of the Abu Syr and
Abu Darya rivers in Kazakhstan to support the growing of a cash crop – cotton
– has devastated the Aral Sea, creating a toxic wasteland. Around the location of
what is left of the Aral Sea, the health of the human population is dire. According
to the World Wildlife Fund (WWF, 2020) some 70% of the earth’s fresh water
goes toward agriculture production, and cotton uses much more water to produce
1 kilogram of cotton compared with all grain, fruit, and vegetables. Further down
the line, the fashion and clothing industries now have a serious and adverse effect
on the Earth’s environment. For these reasons when making decisions about the
provision of water supplies or the construction of large-scale infrastructure, it is
important to think in natural capital terms. Irreplaceable resources are being used.
Resources should not be used for vanity or “white elephant” schemes.
Just as coral reefs are biodiversity hot-spots in the seas, tropical rainforests are
biodiversity hot-spots on land. Unfortunately, the rainforests are threatened with
deforestation due to land clearing for agriculture, illegal logging, creation of mon-
ocultures of palm oil trees, rubber trees, etc. These forests provide services to us
in terms of CO2 sequestration and oxygen production and are vital natural capital.
Traditionally, the mining and mineral extraction industries have had a bad rep-
utation from an environmental point of view, leaving abandoned mine workings in
an unsightly and dangerous condition. Fortunately, recent legislation requires them
to undertake site clean-up and remediation, and many have adopted exemplary
practices where the initial survey of the proposed site includes an evaluation of the
local wildlife and a complete record of the plant species present. Some companies
have taken samples of plants to be cultivated and preserved for restoration when
mining has finished. Some companies have undertaken the creation of infrastruc-
ture, roads, and buildings that can be taken over and used by the local population
at the end of mining operations. These actions represent a positive contribution to
promoting sustainability. The natural capital is not wasted but invested.
These paragraphs illustrate the hundreds of linkages that exist between human-
kind’s actions and the health of our environment both terrestrial and marine. They
remind us that in ecosystems everything is connected to everything else.
MANAGING SUSTAINABILITY: INTRODUCTION
An important aspect of management in all branches of industry and commerce is
the management of change. This is true in the service sector, manufacturing
and civil engineering sectors, and in the construction and operation of buildings.

-- 330 of 391 --

320 	Sustainability
The branch of management that has evolved to handle the management of change
is known as project management. This is now a mature discipline with its own
professional body that had its origins in World War II in what was known as opera-
tions research (OR). In wartime, people and materiel were expensive resources
in limited supply. The achievement of military objectives required the deploy-
ment and use of expensively trained people and expensive weapons systems. The
achievement of an objective would place these resources at hazard, and therefore
it was important to achieve the objective with minimum losses. A team of highly
talented scientists was put together, and they devised various numerical methods of
planning and efficiently allocating resources to military operations.
After the war, it was recognised that this approach could be adapted to peace-
time situations, to enable projects, especially large ones, to be accomplished most
efficiently, and so project management was born. It forms a very important part of
the management of sustainability, as we need to bring about changes in a sustain-
able way.
Project management
Project management is a systematic way of managing projects to bring about
change. Before commencement, the work to be done is analysed in detail so that
the work can be broken down into work packages. The project is given a timeline,
so that the work packages can be accomplished in a timely manner, the objective
being that the whole project is not unduly delayed because an essential task has
not been completed. Numerous project management software packages have been
developed to enable the manager to view the progress of the project in real time. If
one task is unavoidably delayed, the ramifications and knock-on effects can be seen
immediately. Decisions to allocate more resources to the task can then be taken to
ensure overall delivery on time.
How can sustainability be managed? Building construction and management
have major environmental, social, and economic ramifications. Building construc-
tion impacts the earth and its various ecosystems in numerous ways; it is therefore
important that we have some understanding of how our world and its ecosystems
function. We must accept the fact that we do not control nature, but we are just
a part of it. The natural world is a complex system of inter-connected ecosystems
that all work together to maintain life on Earth. This is an insight of Lovelock
(1979) who sees the world as one living entity, as previously discussed. As humans
we are part of this entity, and if we alter or damage one part of life, this will have
wider impacts than those that are immediately apparent.
All projects will have a timeline running from start to finish, divided into
several stages. The first stage is the concept stage, where the idea of the project
is conceived. This is followed by the definition stage, where the work to be done
is defined. Next is the implementation stage where the project tasks are carried

-- 331 of 391 --

321	10: Sustainability
out. The work is completed in the close-down stage when the project or system is
handed over to those who will operate it. This is the operation stage, and finally
when the system has completed its operation, there is final termination.
The most useful concept is that of the project timeline. Any project has a life
beginning at the concept stage; it is here that the ideas for achieving the objec-
tive are first examined and analysed. Following such analysis, the project will be
defined. Here the chosen concept will be turned into concrete, quantified propos-
als and then the project will be implemented, and finally, the facility brought into
being by the project will be handed over and the project will be closed down.
Figure 10.1 shows a schematic project timeline, and its relationship to upstream
and downstream activities. It shows that the project is central, with the project
manager having total control over what happens. Upstream and downstream
activities are shown, but the project manager does not control these; he/she can
exert some inf luence but has no control. For example, upstream are the sources of
energy, materials, and other resources that will be required. If the project involves
the construction of a building, the project manager can ensure that the supplies
of timber come from a sustainable source. Within the project the manager has
control but is subject to inputs/inf luences from government and from his/her own
corporate management. The people in the project team will also have some input.
The project may have been the creation of an industrial production line, which
is operated until a new product is designed or devised. Figure 10.2 shows the
timeline for a project to set up a manufacturing facility to make a product. The
product could be the manufacture of a vehicle for a transport system or modules
Figure 10.1 Showing the timeline for a project, and the relationship of the project to upstream
and downstream influences.

-- 332 of 391 --

322 	Sustainability
Figure 10.2 Timeline for a project where a product is created.
Figure 10.3 Showing the reducing scope for influence and major change as a project proceeds.
for pre-fabricated buildings. It shows the times from initiation to completion of the
project and to the manufacture of the product.
All the big decisions relating to and governing the project will be determined in
the concept and definition stages. Two important points emerge from this. Firstly,
it is very easy to make changes to the project during the concept and definition
stages, and it becomes increasingly difficult to make changes as the project moves
toward completion. This is shown in Figure 10.3.
Secondly, changes can be made very easily at minimal cost in the early stages,
but changes become increasingly expensive as the project moves towards comple-
tion. See Figure 10.4.
The foregoing shows that ideally all decisions relating to the sustainability of
the project should be made in the concept and definition stages, where the scope
for making easy, low-cost changes is greatest.

-- 333 of 391 --

323	10: Sustainability
Figure 10.4 Showing how the cost of changes with time after project initiation.
Inter-dependence of all life
The term ecology was only coined in the 19th century, but there are now more
life-scientists working in this area than ever before. It covers not only symbiotic
relationships between different species of plants but multiple inter-dependencies
between plants, animals, insects, fish, and bird life (Wohlleben, 2017). Therefore,
it is coming to be recognised that engineers need to have some understanding of
the world’s ecological systems.
In this connection, it will be helpful to recall the areas of concern set out by the
Stockholm Resilience Centre (Rockström et al., 2009):
•• Biodiversity loss
•• Carbon dioxide and climate change
•• Nitrogen use and misuse
•• Land use and misuse
•• Fresh water supplies
•• Toxic substance release
•• Aerosol particle release
•• Ocean acidification
•• Ozone layer damage
Biodiversity loss was placed first in the list because it implies serious damage to the
earth’s ecosystems, including both plant and animal life, i.e. to our life-support
system. This damage can be caused by the next eight factors in the list. Of these,
two are wholly caused by humans, two can be caused by humans, and the other
four can be caused both naturally and by humans. Table 10.2 shows the causes of
environmental problems, both natural and anthropogenic.

-- 334 of 391 --

324 	Sustainability
Table 10.2 Origin, natural or anthropogenic, of environmental problems
Factor 	Cause – anthropogenic, natural, or
both
Carbon dioxide climate change 	Anthropogenic and natural
Nitrogen pollution 	Wholly anthropogenic
Land use and misuse 	Anthropogenic
Fresh water supplies 	Anthropogenic
Toxic substance release 	Anthropogenic and natural
Aerosol particle release 	Anthropogenic and natural
Ocean acidification 	Anthropogenic and natural
Ozone layer damage 	Wholly anthropogenic
Emissions of CO2, and releases of toxic species and aerosol-sized particles can
occur from volcanoes and hot springs and also from industrial gas and particle
emissions. Extra CO2 in the atmosphere will lead to some being dissolved in sea
water, turning it more acidic. Nitrogen pollution and ozone layer damage are
solely due to man. Large quantities of artificial fertilisers are manufactured and
used and ozone layer damage is caused by emissions of CFCs used as refrigerants
and as propellants for aerosol sprays. These are now generally banned worldwide as
stated in the section “Ozone layer damage”. With release rates now decreasing, the
ozone layer should repair itself in the coming decades.
Principles of sustainable operation
If we are to operate in a sustainable way, there are some general principles that
should be borne in mind, and the preceding section has pointed to what these
might be. Study of natural ecosystems teaches us that nature consumes huge quan-
tities of resource, but it produces no waste. This is what environmentalists are
referring to when they speak of the need to “close the loop”. All too often we
obtain resources from one location, manufacture our product, and are left with
manufacturing waste, and the problems of disposal of manufactured items at the
end of their service lives in a different location. By contrast in nature at end-of-
life, dead plant and animal materials are cleared up and effectively recycled by
other life-forms, plant and animal. Victorian industries produced spoil and slag
heaps from mining and metal extraction activities which sometimes had disastrous
consequences, such as the events at Aberfan in 1966. Serious air and river pollution
also resulted as industrialists sought to maximise their profits by “externalising”
the costs of clean up. Mine workings were often left in a very dangerous state when

-- 335 of 391 --

325	10: Sustainability
the mine was worked out. Externalising of clean-up costs has historically been one
of the major causes of environmental degradation (Scruton, 2012).
The Victorians’ legacy of industrial waste reminds us of the dangers of anthro-
pocentric thinking and its dangers. We have since learned to our cost that we do
not rule the natural world, but we have yet to learn how to minimise our impact
and live more sustainably.
In today’s world, raw materials and manufactured goods are transported around
the world by air, sea, and land in huge quantities. Since 1960, air travel has grown
exponentially, especially for tourists. The impounding of water for drinking, irri-
gation, and hydroelectric power generation has proceeded apace since the early
20th century, but some of our dam-building/water-management decisions have
had disastrous consequences. Since the volume of water in the world is fixed and
limited, and the world’s population is increasing, the provision of fresh water sup-
plies is a growing problem.
Sustainability checklist
The following is a list of general guidance notes to more sustainable working:
•• Minimise transport costs by sourcing labour and materials locally as far as possible.
•• Use renewable and recycled materials as far as possible.
•• Bear in mind that while timber is a renewable material, it is also an important
part of Earth’s (and our) life-support system.
•• If timber is used, use timber from sustainably managed sources, i.e. Forestry
Stewardship Council (FSC) timber.
•• Use renewable energy supplies and avoid fossil fuels as far as possible.
•• Minimise energy use.
•• Minimise water consumption and avoid the release of contaminated water into
drains, streams, and water courses.
•• Minimise/eliminate waste production.
•• Recycle and re-use materials as much as possible.
•• Reduce waste and avoid waste incineration and land-filling of waste. Aim to
segregate waste at source on site.
•• Reduce/eliminate emissions of carbon dioxide, oxides of sulphur, and nitrogen.
•• Reduce/avoid emissions of aerosol-sized particulates.
•• Design items to be capable of dismantling and ease of servicing and maintenance.
•• Avoid planned obsolescence.
•• Avoid the “externalising” of costs, especially “clean-up” costs.
•• Banish from everyone the mindset that it’s “someone else’s problem”. We must
ALL take individual responsibility.
•• When waste is to be disposed of, it is vitally important to ensure that it is dealt
with by reliable and responsible people.

-- 336 of 391 --

326 	Sustainability
These are general principles to adhere to in the interests of minimising our impact.
This is very important, but it must be realised that sustainability means leaving
the world in a similar state to how we found it. Sustainability is more than just
impact mitigation; it is an ideal, but we must work towards achieving it if we are
to bequeath a viable world to our descendants. Only when we do this can we claim
to be truly sustainable. As a global society, we are currently nowhere near the
achievement of sustainability.
Checklist for project managers in front-line situations
The following suggestions were made by Tom Taylor, the joint founder and
retained consultant with Buro Four (Taylor, 2011). Tom Taylor has also been Vice-
President of the Association for Project Management (APM). They are suggested as
possible interventions to be made by project managers in the course of their work
in managing projects. We have seen that there may be opportunities for interven-
tion by the project manager both upstream and downstream of the project. A few
such interventions are suggested in .
Finally, the foregoing discussion indicates very strongly that project manag-
ers should not think in purely terrestrial terms. The oceans represent 71% of the
earth’s ecosystem, and possible effects on marine life must be taken into account
in any decision making.
CONSTRUCTION MATERIALS AND
SUSTAINABILITY: AN INTRODUCTION
The construction industry sector is by far the largest consumer of materials, con-
suming more materials than all other sectors added together by a factor of three or
four. For this reason, those in the industry need to be aware of the impact that this
has on the earth and its numerous ecosystems, i.e. they need to have a view of the
“bigger picture”.
Steel and concrete production
Currently (2019), two materials predominate in terms of the volumes used in con-
struction and these are concrete and steel, and they both have a large environmen-
tal impact. Concrete is made using cement, and the production of cement is carried
out in a kiln operated at temperatures around 1,450°C. Steel is made from iron, and
iron blast furnaces are also operated at very high temperatures in excess of 1,500°C.
In both of these processes limestone is a major feedstock, and in both processes fuel
is burned to generate the high temperatures required to drive the chemical reac-
tions. The result is that there are two sources of carbon dioxide production in each

-- 337 of 391 --

327	10: Sustainability
Table 10.3 Possible intervention by the project manager both upstream and downstream
of the project
Responsibilities – from the beginning to the end
By identifying the client’s current corporate, social, and other responsibility policies, and how
they are applied, or may change in the project definition and delivery periods and thereafter
in use. If the client does not have such policies, do they need help in devising them? Or if they
are operational, or dated, do they need to be revised and brought up-to-date to suit a forward-
looking, capital project or programme – especially if it is a “change” project.
Briefing for your project
Encourage and support clients/customers and sponsors/champions to incorporate
sustainability into their statements of requirements – and apply them throughout the project.
This can be a specific section of the briefing document of process, and/or can be picked
up in individual aspects. It can also be specific in measurable terms or have stimulation of
opportunities.
Modelling for your situation and culture
By recommending, understanding, and promoting appropriate models at key stages,
emphasising the triple bottom line (economic, social, and environmental) and whole-life
costings, with an awareness and knowledge of financial benefits.
Selection of your team participants
By incorporating sustainability criteria into selecting team members, contractors, suppliers,
and specialists for their general outlook, credentials, and project-specific approach. And then
writing obligations into appointments and contracts.
Strategies for your situation
By considering sustainability in the fundamental options of scoping, phasing, sequencing,
sourcing, procurement, contracts, etc. Also by considering projects with programmes and
portfolios for relationships, consistency, and effectiveness to optimise sustainability results.
Benchmarking for your sector/industry/location
What is good practice? What is best practice? What is cutting edge? How is performance to
be measured?
Legislation
By identifying the current legislation and standards and how to comply with them,
and whether to exceed them. Also the future trends during project, at handover, in the
longer-term.
Financing
By defining the business benefits of environmental decisions; by securing monetary incentives
and grants; by avoiding taxes, penalties, and charges.
Design proposals on your projects
By stimulating designs that creatively respond to statements of requirements, statutory
standards, and good practice for sustainability. And then checking or auditing achievements.
(continued)

-- 338 of 391 --

328 	Sustainability
Table 10.3 (continued)
Specifications for your project
By conveying through the specifications that components and assemblies are sourced and
delivered in sustainable ways, with proof.
Change decisions
By addressing sustainability aspects when change is under review, for example, when making
tactical decisions that the change review includes considered value engineering and not just
short-term, cost-driven capital expenditure effects, financial value, urgency, or expediency.
Delivery stage on your project
By reviewing, updating, confirming, promoting, and implementing the predetermined
project sustainability arrangements, corporate standards, and good practice – including
waste avoidance, packaging, sequencing efficiencies. Deliver the goods. Search for additional
benefits.
Management arrangements you can adopt
By adopting effective project managerial and operational arrangements covering logistics,
meetings, communications, consumables, re-use, and recycling – at collective, corporate, and
individual citizen levels.
Sustainability communications as a theme
By the team conveying the sustainability aspects of the project throughout its duration
to stakeholders including to end-users/occupiers at handovers, through documentation,
briefings, and follow-up support.
Figure 10.5 Calcination reaction of limestone.
process; CO2 is produced due to the combustion of fuel, and CO2 is produced due
to the calcination of the limestone in the burden. We can quantify this by a quick
stoichiometric calculation. The atomic weights of calcium, carbon, and oxygen are
40, 12, and 16 respectively. Therefore, the molecular weight of limestone (CaCO3)
is 100. The calcination reaction is shown in Figure 10.5.
If we calcine 100 tonnes of limestone, we produce 56 tonnes of quicklime, and
44 tonnes of carbon dioxide. The calcination of 1 billion tonnes of limestone will
produce 440 million tonnes of CO2. The manufacture and use of cement currently
run at around 4.5 billion tonnes per annum. The production of this quantity will
require the calcination of at least 5 billion tonnes of limestone, and this will pro-
duce 2.2 billion tonnes of CO2. To this figure, we must add the CO2 generated by
firing the kiln. From these figures, we can see that the production of 4.5 billion
tonnes of cement makes a massive contribution to global CO2 emissions.

-- 339 of 391 --

329	10: Sustainability
The story is a similar one in the case of steel production. Globally, the manu-
facture and consumption of steel run at 1.6 billion tonnes per annum. Limestone
is added to the blast furnace burden to provide CO2 to act as a reducing agent, and
to aid the production of slag, which acts as a f lux f loating on top of the molten iron
and helping the removal of impurities. In addition to this there will be the CO2
generated in heating the furnace. As with cement production, the generation of
CO2 will be in the billion-tonne order of magnitude.
The huge increase in global cement and steel production seen over the past
two decades is due to Chinese infrastructure development. China now produces
half of the world’s steel and well over half of the world’s cement. In the past four
or five years, they have poured as much concrete as was poured in the USA in the
entire 20th century. It is well-known that CO2 is a greenhouse gas, and CO2 emis-
sions are held responsible for climate change. See the section “Climate change”.
As stated, the CO2 content of the Earth’s atmosphere has increased from around
300 parts per million (ppm) in 1900 to 410 ppm in 2019, and the construction
industry has played a significant part in generating this increase.
Sand (fine aggregate) is an important ingredient for concrete-making. It is sur-
prising given the quantity of sand that there is in the world that supplies are becom-
ing a problem for makers of concrete in some areas. Sea sand and desert sand have
more rounded grains than river sand because of tide and wind erosion. River sand
has more angular grains which confer higher strength on concrete made with it. In
addition, there are no problems of salt contamination with river sand.
Alternative construction materials
Two other important materials used in construction are polymers and timber.
The use of timber predates the use of steel, concrete, and polymers, all three of
which have been invented in their present forms only during the past 200 years.
Along with natural stone, timber is one of the very oldest construction materials.
Synthetic polymers were invented during the 20th century, and their use in con-
struction really dates from immediately after World War II.
Polymers in construction
Currently, around 400 million tonnes of polymers are manufactured each year. As
a class, polymers are hydrocarbon-based, being manufactured from oil; they are
low density, with low stiffness and strength properties compared with steel and
concrete. Polymers are chemically and thermodynamically extremely stable, and
they resist corrosion and chemical attack. The polymerisation reactions by which
they are made are highly endothermic, so polymers as a class have high embodied
energy values. This is clearly shown in Table 10.4.

-- 340 of 391 --

330 	Sustainability
Table 10.4 Embodied energies of polymers compared with steel and concrete
Material 	Embodied energy (MJ/kg)
High-density polyethylene 	82
Polypropylene 	82
Polyethylene terephthalate 	85
Polystyrene 	101
Poly vinyl chloride 	66
Steel 	12
Softwoods 	8
Concrete 	1
Source: Ashby et al., 2014.
Their high energy nature means that they are expensive, and their intrinsically
low strength and stiffness of properties means that they are not used as struc-
tural materials in construction. The development of fibre-reinforced polymers has
been driven by the need for materials combining high stiffness with low den-
sity. Firstly, glass fibre-reinforced plastics were developed and then more recently,
carbon fibre-reinforced polymers have been developed combining light weight
with stiffness properties half the value of steel (materials such as Kevlar). Kevlar
particularly is very expensive (possibly £20,000 per tonne or more) and is used
for rather exotic applications including military aircraft, Grand Prix racing cars,
and sports equipment. A few pedestrian footbridges have been built using glass-
reinforced plastics. The main applications for polymers in construction have been
uPVC window frames for double-glazing, for plugs and fastenings, for damp-proof
membranes and sheeting, for rainwater goods, and for electrical purposes for socket
outlets, switch-plates, ducting, cable sheathing, etc. Around 400 million tonnes of
polymers are produced each year, which does not sound much compared with the
weights of steel and concrete, but because polymers are low-density, their volumes
in cubic metres are comparable with those of steel.
One of the main problems that has arisen with polymers concerns their use
for single-use items such as supermarket shopping bags and in packaging. In these
applications their durability properties are not used, and indeed their durability
becomes a problem because when discarded they do not biodegrade. Their low
density means that they easily f loat in water, and they find their ways into rivers
and streams and end up in the oceans, where their effect on marine wildlife is dev-
astating. They can also enter the food-chain, and eventually present us with health
problems. Floating plastic items eventually coalesce into huge f loating gyres, the

-- 341 of 391 --

331	10: Sustainability
largest of which is in the Pacific Ocean and which contains tens of millions of
tonnes of plastic waste. This problem has been known about for decades, but it took
Sir David Attenborough’s “Blue Planet II” TV series to finally bring to the atten-
tion of the general public on a scale where action is now being taken.
The mis-use of plastics is a major environmental disaster, because most plas-
tics are inherently capable of being recycled. While plastic waste is now a major
environmental problem, some solutions are to hand. Single-use plastic bags and
magazine covers can be chopped up and heated and extruded and moulded to make
useful products for the construction industry. Items which are highly durable such
as kerbs, fence posts, chemical filtration units, etc., can be made. The British Board
of Agrément (BBA) rates these products with a service life of over 100 years. These
applications take full advantage of the chemical stability and durability of poly-
meric materials. It is ironic that transient, single-use products provide the feedstock
for a recycling process that finally takes full advantage of their chemical stability
and inherent durability.
Products such as window frame units for double-glazing are made incorporat-
ing U-V filter materials such as brilliant white titanium dioxide and carbon black,
giving them service lives of up to three decades. Furthermore, such uPVC can be
returned and recycled at the end of its service life, and uPVC windows and doors
are therefore worthwhile products. The recycled uPVC can be greyish in colour,
but the window and door sections can be extruded with a fresh coating layer of
brilliant white plastic, or any other desired colour. Their use for doors and win-
dows is an environmentally sound application of these materials.
Regarding their use in construction, an important point to mention is that
because polymers are hydrocarbon-based, they burn easily in most cases, and can
represent a major fire hazard if used inappropriately in buildings They present a
two-fold hazard; firstly, their ease of combustion and secondly the toxic species
that can be produced in smoke when some polymers burn. Substances such as
hydrogen cyanide and hydrogen chloride gases can be emitted; these gases can be
lethal and damaging to internal organs.
Timber as a construction material
The damaging effects of steel and concrete production have led engineers to seek
alternative materials for construction. Land values in city centres have driven the
construction of ever-taller buildings, culminating in the Burj Khalifa in Dubai
which is 828 m tall. Some of these buildings are vanity projects, but they exacer-
bate the adverse environmental impact by their necessary use of steel and concrete.
Engineers are seeking alternative materials for tall buildings. The world’s popula-
tion is growing, leading to a pressing need to build more housing units, and this
has also driven the search for alternatives.

-- 342 of 391 --

332 	Sustainability
Timber is a renewable material and therefore, in principle, a sustainable one.
Natural timber has highly anisotropic mechanical properties because of its grain
structure. Cellulose vessel cells run predominantly in the vertical direction along
the trunk of the tree. A much smaller number run in the radial direction, and none
run circumferentially.
When timber is cut the vessel cells are full of moisture, and the timber must
be seasoned to dry out most of the moisture. This drying out causes the timber to
shrink, but again, the shrinkage is not isotropic. Zero shrinkage occurs longitudi-
nally, maximum shrinkage occurs circumferentially, and an intermediate amount
occurs radially because of the alignment of the vessel cells. The anisotropy has two
principal effects; the strength and stiffness of timber vary widely depending on
the fibre direction (longitudinal, radial, or circumferential), and when the timber
is cut and seasoned, its moisture movement will vary from zero to a maximum
depending on the fibre direction. The humidity of the air can vary when timber
is put into service, and the timber will always seek to be in equilibrium with its
surroundings. It will absorb moisture in wet weather and lose moisture in dry
weather. This is the reason that round sections can become oval, square sections
can become diamond shaped, f loorboards can “cup” and so on. Another source of
problems is that of knots. The presence of a large knot in the centre of a wooden
beam can seriously weaken it.
This anisotropy problem led in the 19th century to the invention of plywood.
Veneers are cut circumferentially and then laminated with the grain direction
alternately aligned at right angles. An odd number of lamellae are used, and they
restrict each other’s ability to swell or shrink when local humidity changes. Glulam
sections were also developed to obviate the adverse effects of knots in timber sec-
tions. Their use also removes the need for stress-grading of the timber. Finally,
over the past two or three decades, the development of “engineered timber” has
widened the potential use of timber for many applications. With engineered tim-
ber, thicker sections are laminated and glued together with grain directions alter-
nately aligned, so the components have more isotropic structural properties. These
items can be manufactured under factory conditions, with high dimensional accu-
racy, and with less wastage of timber. More of the timber is used than when solid
timber sections are produced.
Over the past decade, there has been increasing interest in constructing tall
buildings using engineered timber. The 9-storey, 29 m tall Stadthaus in London
was an early example, but taller structures have since been built. The advantages
claimed for timber construction include:
•• Using prefabricated timber units made in a factory from engineered timber
enabled faster erection.
•• The structure was considerably lighter in weight.
•• Light weight meant much less massive foundations.

-- 343 of 391 --

333	10: Sustainability
•• Timber is an excellent insulant; no extra insulation was required.
•• Overall cost savings.
This is made clear by the details of density, stiffness (elastic modulus), thermal
conductivity, and thermal diffusivity for steel, concrete, and timber set out in
Table 10.5.
However, timber differs from steel and concrete because timber is a vital part of
the Earth’s ecosystems that we rely on to keep us alive. This is discussed further
below.
The embodied energy of concrete is lower than that of cement because of the
large content of aggregates and sand. Table 10.4 shows quite clearly that polymeric
materials are high-energy materials compared with the other materials of con-
struction. The use of steel and concrete raises concerns over the CO2 emissions
during their manufacture. Engineered timber is seen by many as a material of the
future, with much better environmental credentials. It is interesting that around
25 years ago, the Chinese placed restrictions on the cutting of timber because they
could foresee China becoming deforested in a few decades. They now import
huge amounts of timber from Russian Siberia. The fully mechanised tree-felling
machines can grasp a large 2 metre diameter tree trunk and then a large circular
saw cuts through the trunk and the tree is carried to where its branches can be cut
off and the log added to the pile to be transported out to the lumber mill and for
further onward transport. This machinery enables the rapid harvesting of trees but
is so heavy it compacts the forest soil to an excessive degree.
Properly designed timber buildings can survive in service for long periods of
time. There are wooden churches in Russia that are over 500 years old. This is
partly due to the climate, as the weather there is too cold for termite populations
to survive. The city of Venice exists because the buildings all stand on foundations
of wooden piles driven into the mud. St. Maria de la Salute at the end of the Grand
Canal built around AD 1700 stands on 1.1 million wooden piles.
Table 10.5 Showing values of density, stiffness, thermal conductivity, and thermal diffusiv-
ity for steel, concrete, and timber
Material 	Density
(tonne·m -3
)
Stiffness
Young’s
modulus
(GN·m –2 )
Thermal
conductivity
(W·m –2
·K–1
)
Thermal
diffusivity
—1
)	(m 2
·s
Steel 	7.8 	200–207 	6.0 	15,959 × 10 –6
Concrete 	2.6 	45–50 	1.4 	0.663 × 10 –6
Timber 	0.5–1.0 	9–16 	0.11 	0.074 × 10 –6

-- 344 of 391 --

334 	Sustainability
Before opting to increase the use of timber for tall buildings, we must remem-
ber that it comes from trees, and trees are a vital part of our planet’s life-support
system. About 12,000 years ago, when humankind began to move from being
hunter-gatherers to being farmers, there were around 6 trillion trees on the Earth
(Lewis & Maslin, 2018). Today that figure stands at 3 trillion, with the Amazon
rainforest alone containing 400 billion trees. We have already consumed half of the
world’s trees, as discussed more in the subsection “Trees as part of the life-support
system” below. Forestry has become a major global industry and is the subject of
many misconceptions. The notion is widespread that if we cut trees down all that
is required is to plant more trees, but it is not so simple. We should now look at the
part that trees play in the Earth’s life support system.
Trees as part of the life-support system
Deforestation due to cutting of timber for fuel and the construction of build-
ings and boats became apparent in England and Japan around 500 years ago. This
marked the beginning of our awareness of the problem of sustainability, although
it was not given that name for another four or five centuries. In England and Japan,
measures were put in place to prohibit the unauthorised felling of trees. In Japan,
the Shogun also implemented a re-forestation programme, but in England, large-
scale tree planting did not happen until after World War I, when the Forestry
Commission was founded. Large tracts of land were planted with coniferous trees
as these were viewed as faster-growing than deciduous species such as oak and
beech. We now have large plantations of mature conifers in England, Scotland,
and Wales.
A century ago, the decision to plant conifers was almost certainly taken in
ignorance of all the differences between conifers and deciduous trees; however,
we now know that tree species are not exactly interchangeable. Their respective
effects on local climate and plant and animal species diversity were not understood
at the time. While we now know much more about the lives of trees, we are still
learning.
Unfortunately, in some parts of the world, forests (especially rainforests) are
being cleared in the interests of gaining more land for agriculture besides illegal
logging. This is true of the Amazon basin. In Indonesia, forests are being cleared
and replaced with palm oil plantations, and to a lesser extent, rubber tree planta-
tions. This is also a very mistaken policy, because it drastically reduces biodi-
versity in these areas. Nature avoids monocultures. Today, 95% of Columbia’s
lowland rainforest has already been cleared. The rate of forest clearance in the
Amazon has recently risen again after some years of reduction. It is believed that
around 2 million species of plants, animals, insects, etc., live in the Amazon
rainforest. Forest clearance has a very damaging effect on the planet’s overall
biodiversity.

-- 345 of 391 --

335	10: Sustainability
Over the past 12,000 years, we have halved the number of trees on the planet.
Most of the most durable species are deciduous hardwoods, which take a long time
to grow to maturity. Forests do much, much more than furnish growing timber,
they provide habitats for millions of insects, birds, and small and large animals, as
well as countless species of smaller plants and fungi. In other words, their part in
maintaining our planet’s necessary biodiversity is huge and of inestimable value.
Old-growth forests are not monocultures, but diverse. Our modern propensity for
creating monocultures of palm oil and rubber plantations is destructive. Clearing
rainforest to create agricultural land is similarly destructive. The soils that support
the Amazon rainforest are not rich, and when exposed will produce crops for less
than a decade before rainfall erosion washes them away, creating the “need” for
more forest clearance.
There has been a tendency to think of deciduous and coniferous trees as if they
are interchangeable. Historically, coniferous trees evolved and populated the great
boreal forests spreading across North America, Northern Europe, and Northern
Russia. The climate in these regions is colder with long winters, and consequently,
shorter growing seasons. Conifers do not shed their dark green, needle-like leaves.
The dark green of their needles means that they absorb more solar radiation and
this has a warming effect. Conifers also retain moisture more, so the air in conif-
erous forests is drier. The way that conifers manage their moisture intensifies the
warming effect of their dark needles. With a short growing season, they can begin
photosynthesis as soon as winter is over.
Deciduous trees grow in large forests further south, where the climate is warmer
with longer growing seasons. Deciduous trees are lighter in colour so they absorb
less radiation, but they can transpire a great deal of moisture. Ancient beech forests
for example can transpire up to 2,000 m3 of water per square kilometre, which
cools the forest air for a considerable distance beneath their crowns. Deciduous
trees shed their leaves in the autumn. Because they present a skeletal structure to
winter storms, single deciduous trees suffer less damage than single conifers.
Conifers tend to be faster growing than deciduous trees. Certainly, the densest
and most durable types of timber are deciduous, such as teak and mahogany. These
species have fewer vessel cells in their microstructures, so they suffer from moisture
movement effects to a very minimal degree compared with most other types. Their
slow growth and excellent durability are the reasons for their high market prices.
Despite the great inroads made into the world’s stock of trees, we are only now
beginning to understand how they live together in forest conditions. We have
known for a long time that numerous species of fungi thrive in forests, and for a
long time it was thought that their function was to recycle dead wood. However,
we now know that they form huge mycelium bodies which spread out a huge
network of hyphae that connect the root systems of all the trees in the vicinity
(Wohlleben, 2018). These hyphae enable trees to communicate with each other,
and they can detect if a tree is struggling and transfer nutrients to that tree. It is as

-- 346 of 391 --

336 	Sustainability
if the trees “know” that they are better together than standing alone. They have
no neurological system in the animal sense, but they behave collaboratively rather
than competitively in many ways. They are also able to warn each other if water
supplies become difficult.
Other plants behave similarly, including sunf lowers. If their roots detect very
fertile soil, they produce fewer roots so as to leave plenty of soil nutrients for others
growing nearby. If they detect soil of low fertility, then they produce more, wider-
spreading root systems. The danger is that we over-harvest these natural resources
before we have really discovered how they live. For example, we have only recently
learned how long it can take to re-generate an old-growth forest if one is clear cut.
Wohlleben (2018) cites an example from Germany. More than a century ago, oak
forests were planted on land on Lüneburg Heath in North Germany. The land had
been previously used for agriculture and it was assumed that the trees would grow
and that the network of fungi and microbial life would re-establish themselves in
a few decades. However, they discovered that even after the lapse of more than a
century, there were large gaps in the list of species that inhabit ancient woodlands
(Fichter et al., 2014). The lack of the missing species poses threats to the long-term
health of the “new” forest, because the necessary nutrient cycles of birth and decay
are not yet working correctly. In addition to this, the soil was found to still contain
excess nitrogen from the agricultural fertilisers previously used there. This finding
adds weight to the argument that it is not merely a matter of planting new saplings
once mature trees have been felled. Just as the minerals and ore deposits in a mine
can be worked out, so an ancient forest can be “worked out”. The loss of mineral
resources means that they are not available for future generations, but the loss of
a forest means that its life-support services are not available to succeeding genera-
tions, a much more serious loss.
Clay bricks
In the UK in many parts of the country, brick-built semi-detached houses are
ubiquitous. Brick has hitherto been a widely accepted material of construction,
especially for house-building. The last two decades have seen a sharp rise in immi-
gration to the UK, with a consequent steep increase in the need for affordable
housing. In recent years, the rate of construction is less than half the rate achieved
in the early to mid-1950s when there was a drive to replace war-damaged and slum
housing. In 2018 around 250,000 housing units were constructed, an increase on
the rate achieved for some years. But even if house-building doubled its current
rate, it could not keep up with the rapidly growing need for affordable housing.
The brick-making industry could not keep up with the demand for bricks if the
construction rate were to double.

-- 347 of 391 --

337	10: Sustainability
As building materials, bricks possess many excellent qualities. They can be
made with a wide range of properties, both strength-wise and aesthetically. Facing
bricks are the most common type and are used for vertical walling where an aes-
thetically pleasing finish is required. They are made from wet clay and are extruded
and wire-cut. As a result, they are the most porous type, and should only be used
for vertical walling, and never in situations where buildings will be exposed to
driving rain. Because they are porous, they are water-absorbent, and if frost occurs,
the damp surfaces will explode. Their surface appearance will be lost, and the
brick will then continue to erode. For similar reasons, they should never be laid
stretcher face upwards on top of walls in situations where frost can damage them.
Such bricks are no use as paviours because of their susceptibility to frost damage.
Paviour bricks are made for this express purpose. They are much less porous.
The most durable brick type is the Engineering Types A and B. These bricks
typically absorb only 1 or 2% moisture in testing. They are made by compression-
moulding and contain much less porosity when they go to the brick-kiln where
they are subject to a two-stage firing process. In this process, the bricks emerge
from the first firing, and then they enter a second, short, high-temperature stage
where the bricks are heated until the surface layers just begin to melt. They are
then removed and cooled. The incipient melting has the effect of sealing porosity
and prevents such bricks from absorbing more than 1 or 1.5% of water by weight.
Such bricks will not suffer from frost damage and may even be laid as a damp-proof
course in a wall. In former times, bricks were moulded, dried, stacked, and covered
in fuel that was then burned. Those bricks closest to the hottest part of the fire
became “well burned” and acquired a blue colour. They were found to be the most
durable because of incipient surface melting, and our modern engineering bricks
make use of this knowledge. Like modern engineering bricks, these “well-burnt”
bricks are very durable. The North Bar entrance to Beverley in East Yorkshire
was built using “well-burnt” bricks in 1406, and this brickwork is still in excellent
condition (Pevsner, 2002).
Traditional house-building requires a skilled workforce. The Code for
Sustainable Homes (Dept. for Communities & Local Government, 2008), issued
and since withdrawn, represented a move towards high-energy-efficiency house-
building. Adherence to this code demanded skill levels higher than many in the
industry possess. Training for personnel was not provided and no mechanisms were
put in place to police the system, i.e. to ensure that the houses built actually met the
required standards. The present level of demand for affordable housing compared
with the present levels of construction point towards the need for a paradigm shift.
The future may lie with pre-fabricated building systems. Building with brick may
well continue, but it will have to be supplemented by pre-fabricated construction
of some kind.

-- 348 of 391 --

338 	Sustainability
Selection of materials
Prof. Martin Ashby and his colleagues in the Department of Engineering at
Cambridge University have devised and developed a method for the rational selec-
tion of materials. This was published nearly 30 years ago (Ashby, 1992), mainly
directed at engineering rather than construction materials, and emerged into an
expert system, using computers. Sturges (1999a,b) realised in 1992 that environ-
mental impact indices could possibly be incorporated into the method which could
then work for the selection of materials for construction. The growing importance
of sustainability and environmental impact also drove Ashby and his colleagues
simultaneously to develop their methodology for construction materials as well as
general engineering materials (Ashby et al., 2014). This method is now software-
based, and highly developed. It can be used by designers working in all fields of
engineering, including civil engineering and construction.
The properties of thousands of materials are set up in a database that can be
interrogated by the user who prioritises the most important design requirements.
Among the materials, which are mostly human-made, is timber of various spe-
cies and in various forms. Ashby’s method is the best available method for rational
materials selection, but it does not take account of the fact that timber is different
from other materials by virtue of its important position in the planet’s life-support
system. We have learned a great deal about the life of trees and their importance
in the evolution and sustaining of life on Earth over the last 20 years that was not
known about when Ashby inaugurated his methodology.
Conclusions
We have reviewed the main materials of construction, discussing their respective
advantages and problems. Steel and concrete, timber, and clay brick can all be
used to build load-bearing structures. Concrete is the most widely used material
of construction (20–25 billion tonnes per annum) because it is the cheapest way to
get compressive strength. It is poor in tension, and so much of structural concrete is
reinforced with steel. Steel frame construction is also widely used as it offers speedy
erection, with frame members being cut to shape and drilled off-site. However,
both these materials carry a huge carbon emission burden.
Timber is a natural, renewable material, and trees sequester carbon dioxide
from the atmosphere. However, they are an important component of the earth’s
life-support systems, and they sustain huge biodiversity both plant and animal.
Over the past 12,000 years or so, we have cut down half of the world’s trees (Lewis
& Maslin, 2018), and to cut down the rest would be human-race suicide. We have
also replaced biodiverse forests with monocultures of palm oil trees and rubber
trees. This policy also destroys biodiversity.

-- 349 of 391 --

339	10: Sustainability
Clay brick is another old-established building material, but whether it can be
the material to deliver housing units on the scale currently required is an open
question. Recycled plastic products can be used by the industry, but not for struc-
tural, load-bearing purposes.
The conclusion from this is that no material comes without some environmen-
tal penalty. Timber is an excellent renewable, and potentially sustainable material,
but if it is harvested at a rate that would meet current requirements, the rate of
deforestation would increase with serious consequences.
REFERENCES AND FURTHER READING
Ashby, M. F. (1992). “Materials Selection in Mechanical Design”. Pergamon Press, Oxford.
Ashby, M. F. (2009). “Materials and the Environment”. Butterworth-Heinemann,
Elsevier, Amsterdam.
Ashby, M. F., Shercliff, H. & Cebon, D. (2014). “Materials”. 3rd Edition. Butterworth-
Heinemann, Oxford.
Association for Project Management (2018). “APM Body of Knowledge”. 6th Edition.
Association for Project Management, Princes Risborough.
Berners-Lee, M. (2019). “There is No Planet B”. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge.
Dept. for Communities and Local Government (2008). “Code for Sustainable Homes”.
Drafted by the BREEAM Centre, BRE, Watford.
Elkington, J. (1997). “Cannibals with Forks. The Triple Bottom Line of 21st Century
Business”. Capstone Publishing, Oxford.
Epstein, M. (2008). “Making Sustainability Work: Best Practice in Managing and Measuring
Corporate Social, Environmental and Economic Impacts”. Greenleaf Publishing Ltd, UK.
Fichter, K., Weiß, R., Bergset, L., Clausen, J., Hain, A. and Tiemann, I. (2014).
Analysis of the support system for green start-ups in Germany. Oldenburg: University of
Oldenburg.
Gibson, L. J. & Ashby, M. F. (1988). “Cellular Solids, Structure & Properties”. Pergamon
Press, Oxford.
Helm, D. (2015). “Natural Capital. Valuing the Planet”. Yale University Press, New
Haven and London.
Henderson, P. & Henderson, G. M. (2009). “The Cambridge Handbook of Earth Science
Data”. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.
Jones, M. W., Smith, A., Betts, R., Canadell, J. G., Prentice, I. C. and Le Quéré, C.
(2020). “Climate Change Increases the Risk of Wildfires”. ScienceBrief. Accessed
from https://tyndall.ac.uk/sites/default/files/wildfires_briefing_note.pdf
Lewis, S. L. & Maslin, M. A. (2018). “The Human Planet”. Pelican Books, London.
Lovelock, J. E. (1979). “Gaia. A New Look at Life on Earth”. Oxford University, Oxford.
Morris, P. W. G. (1994). “The Management of Projects”. Thomas Telford, London.

-- 350 of 391 --

340 	Sustainability
Natural History Museum (2020). “Why is the Sea Salty?”. Accessed from https://ww
w.nhm.ac.uk/discover/quick-questions/why-is-the-sea-salty
NOAA (2020). “National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. US Department
of Commerce”. Accessed from https://www.noaa.gov/; https://www.climate.gov/
news-features/understanding-climate/climate-change-atmospheric-carbon-dioxide
Pevsner, N. (2002). Neave, D. (ed.). Yorkshire: York and the East Riding (2 ed.). Yale
University Press, London.
Rockström, J., Steffen, W., Noone, K., Persson, A., Chapin, F. S., Lambin, E., Lenton, T.
M., Scheffer, M., Folke, C., Schellnhuber, H., Nykvist, B., De Wit, C. A., Hughes,
T., van der Leeuw, S., Rodhe, H., Sörlin, S., Snyder, P. K., Costanza, R., Svedin,
U., Falkenmark, M., Karlberg, L., Corell, R. W., Fabry, V. J., Hansen, J., Walker,
B., Liverman, D., Richardson, K., Crutzen, P. and Foley, J. (2009). “Planetary
Boundaries: Exploring the Safe Operating Space for Humanity”. Ecology and Society,
14/2, p. 32. [online] URL: http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol14/iss2/art32/
Scruton, R. (2012). “Green Philosophy. How to Think Seriously About the Planet”. Atlantic
Books, London.
Silvius, G., Schipper, R., Planko, J., van den Brink, J. & Kṏhler, A. (2012). “Sustainability
in Project Management”. Gower, Farnham, Surrey.
Sturges, J. L. (1999a). “A Methodology for Environmentally-Aware Materials Selection
in Construction”. Proc. 15th Annual ARCOM Conference, Sept. 1999, Liverpool
John Moores University, Vol. 1, pp. 355–362.
Sturges, J. L. (1999b). “Construction Materials Selection and Sustainability”. Proc. 2nd
International Conf. on Construction Industry Development, National University of
Singapore, Vol. 1, pp. 297–304.
Taylor, T. (2011). “Sustainability Interventions—For Managers of Projects and Programmes—
With Some Serious Opportunities, Challenges and Dilemmas”. The University of Salford,
Centre for Education in the Built Environment. Salford, UK.
Urbina, I. (2019). “The Outlaw Ocean”. The Bodley Head, London.
Washington, H. (2015). “Demystifying Sustainability. Towards Real Solutions”. Earthscan,
Abingdon.
Wignall, P. B. (2019). “Extinction. A Very Short Introduction”. Oxford University Press,
Oxford.
Wohlleben, P. (2017). “The Secret Network of Nature”. The Bodley Head, London.
Wohlleben, P. (2018). “The Hidden Life of Trees”. Greystone Books, Vancouver/Berkeley.
World Commission on Environment and Development (1987). “Our Common Future”.
(Brundtland Report), Oxford University Press, Oxford.
WWF (2020). “The Impact of a Cotton T-Shirt: How Smart Choices Can Make a
Difference in Our Water and Energy Footprint”. Accessed from https://www.wor
ldwildlife.org/stories/the-impact-of-a-cotton-t-shirt

-- 351 of 391 --

11
Glossary and reference section
Melanie Smith
GLOSSARY
Adjacent Owner Owner of property affected by an adjacent Building Owner
carrying out works affecting a party wall or nearby structure which comes
under The Party Wall etc. Act (Gov.uk, 1996). Includes a person in receipt of,
or entitled to receive, the whole or part of the rents or profits of land; a person
in possession of land, otherwise than as a mortgage or as a tenant from year
to year or for a lesser term or as a tenant at will; and a purchaser of an inter-
est in land under a contract for purchase or under an agreement for a lease,
otherwise than under an agreement for a tenancy from year to year or for a
lesser term.
AFD Automatic fire detection
Air f low and pressure differential Air f low into and around a building can be
analysed by measuring pressure differentials. Limited air f low could lead to
stagnant air and moisture problems; excessive air f low causes more heat loss.
Air permeability The unintended leakage of air through fissures, gaps, cracks,
etc., in the external envelope of a building. It is measured as the volume of air
leakage per hour per square metre of external building envelope (m3/h·m2) at
a tested pressure of 50 pascals (Pa). See Design air permeability.
Air quality Many factors affect indoor air quality (IAQ) including ventilation,
humidity, levels of chemicals, mould spores, and radon. As occupants have
varying tolerances to different contaminants and irritants and there is not a
definitive definition of IAQ, it is taken to be a subjective sliding scale, from
there being no known contaminants at harmful concentrations, to building
conditions that negatively impact human health and wellbeing.
Airtight layer Prevents the movement of air and may or may not act as a vapour
control layer. Airtight vapour-permeable membranes are intended to reduce
unwanted air infiltration (movement of unwanted external air through the
construction) whilst minimising the risk of condensation by maximising
vapour permeability.

-- 352 of 391 --

342 	Glossary and reference section
Architectural disability When the physical design, layout, and construction of
buildings and places confront people with hazards and barriers that make the
built environment inconvenient, uncomfortable, or unsafe for everyone to use
and even prevent some people from using it at all. The built environment can
disable anyone by poor design.
Architrave Timber moulding around doors and windows.
ASHRAE American Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air-Conditioning
Engineers. Esteemed worldwide, it funds research, offers educational pro-
grammes, and develops technical standards to improve building services engi-
neering, energy efficiency, indoor air quality, and sustainable development.
BER Building Energy Rating for residential or commercial. Scale of A to G with
A-rated buildings labelled as the most energy efficient and G-rated the least.
Discussed in Chapter 6.
Biophilia A love for nature, considered by some to be the missing part of sustaina-
ble design. The term “biophilia” refers to the adaption or design of a building
to the environment, rather than the other way around. Biophilic design aims
to create strong connections between nature and human-made environments
which can have benefits for health and wellbeing.
Breathability The way water moves in relation to the building fabric. Breathability
does not, as the term might imply, relate to an exchange of air. Instead it is the
ability of a material to allow moisture vapour to pass through it. Breathability
is based upon three essential mechanisms: vapour permeability, hygroscopic-
ity, and capillarity.
Breather membrane Defined in BS 5250 (BSi, 2016), as a membrane with a
vapour resistance less than 0.6 MNs/g. Breather membranes are positioned to
the outside of the insulation acting as a weather barrier while still allowing
moisture particles to escape from the inside.
Building Owner Owner of property carrying out works affecting a party wall
or nearby structure which comes under The Party Wall etc. Act. Includes: a
person in receipt of, or entitled to receive, the whole or part of the rents or
profits of land; a person in possession of land, otherwise than as a mortgage
or as a tenant from year to year or for a lesser term or as a tenant at will; and
a purchaser of an interest in land under a contract for purchase or under an
agreement for a lease, otherwise than under an agreement for a tenancy from
year to year or for a lesser term.
Building pathology Short-hand term for a set of terms which are not defini-
tively defined, including building pathology, building physics, deterioration
of materials and elements over time, building performance, and defects.
Building works Taken from UK legislation – The Building Regulations 2010 (Gov.uk,
2010):
a. The erection or extension of a building
b. The provision or extension of a controlled service or fitting in or in con-
nection with a building

-- 353 of 391 --

343	11: Glossary and reference section
c. The alteration of a building, service or fitting
d. Work required due to changing the building’s use
e. The insertion of insulating material into the cavity wall of a building
f. Work involving the underpinning of a building
g. Work required due to a changing the building’s or area’s energy status (e.g.
providing heating where there was none previously)
h. Work required due to renovating or replacing a thermal element
i. Work required due to a building’s extension or the provision, increase
or extension of building services (consequential improvements to energy
performance)
Calorific value The amount of heat which can be released by a unit mass of fuel
at a particular temperature and pressure.
Capillarity Upward movement of moisture in a material containing capillary
pores (e.g. bricks). Height depends on potential pressure differences.
Cavity surface resistance See Surface resistance.
CDM UK’s Construction (Design and Management) Regulations (Gov.uk, 2015).
Cess pit Sealed tank/container holding sewage. Requires periodic emptying. See
also Septic tank.
Chartered Surveyor The description of Professional Members and Fellows of
the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors (RICS) who are entitled to
use the designation. The term is protected by law in many countries. The
RICS grants the designation only following the successful achievement of
a period of established learning and professional interview/assessment test
of competence. Regulations require Chartered Surveyors to continue with
acceptable levels of competence and carry insurance for the protection of
the public.
Cold roof Roof construction where the insulation is placed between and over
the ceiling joists. External air is designed to ventilate through the roof void.
Blockage of this ventilation can result in condensation on the roof timbers.
See also Warm roof.
Commissioning Going through the commissioning process for building services,
to ensure that they are operating at the capacity specified and to the perfor-
mance standard required.
Condensation Condensed water vapour from the air. The water vapour cools to
its dew point especially when in contact with cold surfaces, turning into drop-
lets of water. Interstitial condensation can occur within a building element,
if the temperature profile within the material(s) reach the dew point of the
transmitted water vapour. Condensation which remains in its liquid state can
cause dampness and subsequently the development of mould and rot. 100%
relative humidity at the surface is required for surface condensation to occur.
Conditioned space Space that is heated, cooled, and/or mechanically ventilated.
Unconditioned space is naturally heated, cooled, and ventilated. For example,
basements, garages, and roof voids can be unconditioned spaces.

-- 354 of 391 --

344 	Glossary and reference section
Construction observation By observing the building at stages throughout con-
struction any faults or mistakes that may be hidden when the building is com-
plete can be identified, and if possible rectified.
Construction work Taken from UK legislation – The Construction (Design and
Management) Regulations 2015 (Gov.uk, 2015).
The carrying out of any building, civil engineering or engineering con-
struction work, including:
a. The construction, alteration, conversion, fitting out, commissioning,
renovation, repair, upkeep, redecoration or other maintenance (including
cleaning which involves the use of water or an abrasive at high pressure, or
the use of corrosive or toxic substances), de-commissioning, demolition,
or dismantling of a structure;
b. The preparation for an intended structure, including site clearance, explo-
ration, investigation (but not site survey) and excavation (but not pre-con-
struction archaeological investigations), and the clearance or preparation
of the site or structure for use or occupation at its conclusion;
c. The assembly on site of prefabricated elements to form a structure or the
disassembly on site of the prefabricated elements which, immediately
before such disassembly, formed a structure;
d. The removal of a structure, or of any product or waste resulting from
demolition or dismantling of a structure, or from disassembly of prefab-
ricated elements which immediately before such disassembly formed such
a structure;
e. The installation, commissioning, maintenance, repair, or removal of
mechanical, electrical, gas, compressed air, hydraulic, telecommunica-
tions, computer or similar services which are normally fixed within or to
a structure
Coping Stone/masonry/tile/metal capping to top of parapet, wall, or chimney.
It protects the masonry below from premature deterioration due to excess
moisture. It should therefore be weathered (i.e. have a slanted or curved top
surface) to throw off the water in an appropriate direction.
Cornice A horizontal decorative moulding, especially that covering the junction
between a wall and a ceiling.
Creep The tendency of a solid material to move slowly or deform permanently
under the inf luence of persistent mechanical stresses.
Demise The extent of property described under the terms of a lease is called the
demise. It is defined either descriptively, or by demarcation of a f loor plan
showing the boundaries or edges of the tenant’s occupation and any limits of
lease obligations. The demise is worth so much to the tenant and so much to
the landlord.
Design air permeability The target value for air permeability of a building set
at design stage and evaluated through a mandatory testing regime outlined

-- 355 of 391 --

345	11: Glossary and reference section
in the UK’s approved document ADL1A (Planning Portal, 2016). A default
value is set in the UK’s ADL1A which may be used for specific cases and in
the absence of testing. Similar legislative guidance exists for other countries.
Design reviews Insights gained through testing of a building fed back to the
design team, helping to avoid any problems that arose in a tested building and
make improvements to the design and construction phases.
Dew point The temperature at which water (water vapour) condenses. Dependent
on humidity and pressure.
Diffusivity See Thermal diffusivity.
Door set or doorset Door and its frame. Arguably its fixings as well.
Easement A right to make some limited use of land belonging to someone else, or
to receive something from that person’s land. Examples include rights of way
or rights to light or support.
Element An element of a building refers to the assemblage or unit of a roof, over-
site, f loor, external wall, internal wall, or ceiling.
Elemental approach To surveys: considers the elements, or services or fittings,
of the building in isolation from other elements, etc. Common in “tick box”
survey proforma. Compare with Problem approach and Systemic approach.
Entropy A measure of the amount of disorder in a system. Gradual decline into
disorder, for example the process of erosion, corrosion, or decay.
Environmental monitoring Recording environmental conditions within the
building, including temperature, relative humidity, particulates, etc., to
determine how effective building services are.
Exfiltration air Unplanned (not designed) air exchange or air movement, out of
a building or space
External surface resistance See Surface resistance.
Feathers The linings separating different f lues in a chimney. Often made of half
brick, the mortar may have been compromised (through deterioration from
soot and other products of combustion) so that the f lues connecting different
fireplaces can merge, enabling products of combustion to pass into different
f lues and enter rooms. Any compromise requires f lues in use to be relined.
Fitting Of a building refers to a window, door, fixture, component, or other
separate item. May be part of the building fabric, but not a building element.
Fixture An asset that is installed or otherwise fixed in, or to, a building or land so
as to become part of that building or land in law (HMRC, 2016).
Flood resilience The ability of a building to resist damage as a result of f looding.
Flood resistance The ability of a building to resist the entry of f lood water from
the outside to the inside.
Fuel poverty Where a home occupier is unable to afford to heat their home to a
level that is healthy and safe. Three elements in determining whether a house-
hold is fuel poor: household income, household energy requirements, and fuel
prices. Energy-inefficient homes are a major factor. The UK Government

-- 356 of 391 --

346 	Glossary and reference section
Gov.uk (2020) describes a household to be fuel poor if they have required
fuel costs that are above average (the national median level), and were they
to spend that amount, they would be left with a residual income below the
official poverty line.
Going Horizontal distance between risers in a stair. Measured from the outer edge
of the tread’s nosing to the edge of nosing in the next higher tread. See Tread.
Hazard A dangerous phenomenon, substance, human activity, or condition that
may cause loss of life, injury or other health impacts, property damage, loss
of livelihoods and services, social and economic disruption, or environmental
damage. See Chapter 8, which discusses disaster management.
Heat f lux measurement Heat f lux plates are placed on a building element, along
with internal and external temperature sensors. Readings are logged over
time and used to calculate a U-value for the building element. Care should be
taken to avoid measuring elements in direct sunlight.
Height of a building Taken from UK legislation – The Building Regulations 2010
(Gov.uk, 2010):
Measured from the mean level of the ground adjoining the outside of the
external walls of the building to the level of half the vertical height of the roof
of the building, or to the top of the walls or of the parapet, if any, whichever
is the higher.
Holistic Not piecemeal. See Whole house approach.
Humidity The concentration of water vapour present in the air. Absolute
humidity is the total mass of water vapour present in a given volume or
mass of air. It does not depend on temperature. Relative humidity indi-
cates a present state of absolute humidity relative to a maximum humidity
given the same temperature. Relative humidity is expressed as a percent-
age, and depends on temperature and the air pressure. The same amount of
water vapour results in higher relative humidity in cool air than in warm air.
Relative humidity plays a role in human comfort, along with air temperature,
radiant temperatures, air speed, metabolic rate, and clothing levels. Specific
humidity is the ratio of water vapour mass to total moist air parcel mass. As
temperature decreases, the amount of water vapour needed to reach saturation
also decreases, so as the temperature lowers it can reach saturation point with-
out adding any more moisture. At 100% relative humidity, the air is saturated
and is at its dew point.
Hygroscopicity The capacity of a material to react to the moisture content of the
air by absorbing or releasing water vapour. The material’s ability to attract and
hold water molecules.
Inertia See Thermal inertia.
Infiltration air Unplanned (not designed) air exchange or air movement, into a
building or space.
Insolation The amount of solar radiation hitting a given area.

-- 357 of 391 --

347	11: Glossary and reference section
Integrity The quality or state of being whole and unimpaired, no gaps or fissures.
Internal surface resistance See Surface resistance.
Interstitial condensation Condensation occurring within the materials or layers
of construction. Not necessarily associated with surface condensation and can
therefore develop and continue unseen. See Condensation.
In-use monitoring Recording energy consumption and internal and external
temperatures and conditions whilst the building is in use or simulating use
conditions. Building performance under real conditions can be evaluated.
Leakage detection Using smoke from air current checkers to locate air leak-
age paths. During pressurisation testing leakage is more pronounced. During
depressurisation air infiltration paths can be identified with infrared cameras
when there is sufficient temperature difference.
Moisture closed A building or building material or system which does not
allow moisture (as liquid water or water vapour) to move through it (Bristol,
2015).
Moisture open A building or building material or system which allows moisture
(as liquid water or water vapour) to move through it (Bristol, 2015).
Moisture survey Carried out where moisture problems are suspected, using a
protimeter to assess moisture content of elements. Remote sensors can be used
to measure moisture content over time.
Mould Mould grows on surfaces where there is a source of moisture, food, oxy-
gen, and acceptable temperature. Mould growth is detrimental to materi-
als, aesthetics, and occupant health. The susceptibility of material to mould
growth varies. BS5250 (BSi, 2016) states, “As a guide if the average humid-
ity within a room stays above 70% for several days, the relative humidity at
external wall surfaces will be above 80%, which is high enough to support the
germination and growth of moulds”.
Passiv Passiv, passivhaus and passive may be terms relating to a standard of build-
ings (designed AND constructed) “created to rigorous energy efficient design
standards so that they maintain an almost constant temperature. Passivhaus
buildings are so well constructed, insulated and ventilated that they retain
heat from the sun and the activities of their occupants, requiring very little
additional heating or cooling.” (EST, 2019). Initially developed by Passivhaus
Institute in Germany, certification is a rigid process, hence the use of other
terms passiv and passive which may mean similar but not exact standards and
performance.
Partial deconstruction Targeted deconstruction at areas identified as problem-
atic. For example, removing bricks to inspect insulation in a cavity, lifting
f loorboards to inspect underf loor voids.
Post-occupancy evaluation (POE) Collecting information from building users
and on in-use operation. Gives designers insights into building use and effec-
tiveness when users interact with the building systems. Results can identify

-- 358 of 391 --

348 	Glossary and reference section
opportunities for reducing running costs, maintenance requirements, and
repair work. See also Chapter 6.
Pre-design survey A survey (of a building, structure, site, etc.) to inf luence and
inform the design decisions for building works.
Pre-design thermal retrofit survey An on-site anticipatory inspection and
assessment of a building, which is undertaken to inform the design for a retro-
fitted energy efficiency measure, and must include (a) the nature and charac-
teristics of the building, (b) the risks to that building and its occupants posed
by the measure, (c) the risks to the efficiency of that measure posed by the
building, and (d) the challenges required to mitigate these risks through and
by the design.
Pre-installation survey A survey to assess the property based on the design deci-
sions made. The assessment may inf luence design amendments for the build-
ing or structure.
Pressurisation testing Intentional ventilation is sealed off before a fan apparatus
pressurises and then depressurises the building. Air f low rate and internal-
external pressure difference is recorded and used to calculate the air perme-
ability (and air leakage rate) of a building.
Problem approach To surveys: when conducting a survey, focussing on fore-
seeable problems common, or frequently found, in the age, type, condition,
etc., of the specific property. Looking for damage or issues associated with
or related to each problem suspected or found. Follow the problem pathways
forwards and backwards to find the “source – pathway – receptor” of the
problem. Works well in conjunction with systemic approaches. Compare with
Elemental approach.
Psi-value This is the measure of linear thermal transmittance and is the measure
of heat loss along a non-repeating thermal bridge calculated as shown in BR
497 (BRE, 2016). It is the rate of heat f low per degree temperature difference
per unit length of a thermal bridge. It is measured in W/m·K and is a property
of the thermal bridge. Psi-values or ψ-values are used to calculate the heat loss
or gain through a non-repeating or geometrical thermal bridge.
Quality assurance A process of systematic checking, verification, calibration,
commissioning, etc., all to ensure the required standard of quality of the prod-
uct, service, or activity as determined at procurement. Such a standard may
include all those features of the product/service/activity which are required
by the customer/client. It includes the principles of Fit for Purpose and of
Right First Time.
RdSAP The UK Government’s reduced data version of SAP used as a lower-cost
method of assessing the energy performance of existing dwellings (BRE, 2017).
Receptor As used in risk assessment. A receiver of the consequences from a hazard.
Retrofit The process of changing, upgrading, or improving an existing property’s
performance through practical or technical measures applied to that property.

-- 359 of 391 --

349	11: Glossary and reference section
Risk The probability of harmful consequences, or expected losses (deaths, inju-
ries, property, livelihoods, economic activity disrupted, or environment dam-
aged) resulting from interactions between natural or human-induced hazards
and vulnerable conditions. Source: see Chapter 8, “Disasters and the built
environment”.
Rising damp Moisture rising from the ground in the walls of a building through
capillary action until it reaches equilibrium.
Riser The vertical height of a step.
SAP “The Standard Assessment Procedure (SAP) is the methodology used by the
Government to assess and compare the energy and environmental perfor-
mance of dwellings. Its purpose is to provide accurate and reliable assessments
of dwelling energy performances that are needed to underpin energy and
environmental policy initiatives” (Gov.uk, 2014).
Septic tank Basic treatment system for sewage. Uses bacterial anaerobic action.
Accumulating sludge may need occasional emptying. Ground water pollution
may occur. See Cess pit.
Solid wall Masonry wall without a designed cavity.
Sorption The ability of a hygroscopic material to absorb or release water vapour
from or into the air until a state of equilibrium is reached.
Spandrel Vertical plane below staircase, usually triangular.
Stakeholder A person or body who has an interest (financial) in the subject. This
might be a client, an occupier, or another role.
Stoichiometric ratio The ratio of fuel to oxygen, in which the amount of oxygen
present is just sufficient to completely oxidate the fuel. See Chapter 7, “Fire
safety”.
Stratification (air) The layering of differing (normally rising) air, for example
from f loor to ceiling. Air stratification is a layering effect that allows large air
pockets with different core temperatures to remain intact.
Stratification cold The perception of feeling cold due to the effects of stratifica-
tion. Within normal ambient conditions, temperature differences between a
person’s head and feet of around 3 degrees Celcius are noticeable to humans
(ASHRAE, 2013). Stratification does not depend on the actual temperature
of the f loor, but dissatisfaction occurs with the temperature difference so that
even a small amount of stratification can cause cool feet or warm head dis-
comfort. It has been found that a stratification of up to 7 degrees Celcius may
sometimes be acceptable, whilst at other points no stratification difference is
acceptable.
Surface resistance The electrical resistance of a surface layer to a current; applies
to surfaces in contact with air only and not in direct contact with another
material. Surface resistance depends, not only on the material, but also on
environmental conditions that may affect the values determined. The value of
surface resistance can be derived from the procedure set out in ISO 6946:2007.

-- 360 of 391 --

350 	Glossary and reference section
Each surface resistance incorporates external wind speed, emissivity of fin-
ishes, the mean radiative temperature coefficient, and pre-determined non-
variables such as conductive/convective coefficient. Not every material will
have the same resistance and not every site location experiences the same wind
speed (source authors: Cormac Flood & Lloyd Scott). See also the section on
“U-value calculation tools” below in “Reference section”.
Survey (building) An assessment, observation, inspection, evaluation, etc., of
a building, structure, or site. There are many types of survey (for example,
measurement, cost, value, geographical, societal, use, legislative, etc.).
Surveyor (building) A person undertaking a survey, inspection, assessment,
observation, etc., of a building. Additionally they may give advice on design,
construction, cost, maintenance, and repair of properties, or assess damage
or dilapidations. A person identifying as a surveyor may or may not be com-
petent, experienced, or qualified. Fully qualified building surveyors in the
UK are frequently, but not always, members of the RICS. Compare with
Chartered Surveyor.
Sustainable development “Sustainable development is development that meets
the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future genera-
tions to meet their own needs” (WCED, 1987).
System control checks Similar to commissioning building services, ensure that
the controls, both automatic and those available to the user of the building,
function as intended.
Systemic approach To surveys: considers and looks for interactions between the
building’s fabric, condition, elements, environs, ventilation systems, services,
indoor air quality, etc. Systemic approaches work well in conjunction with
problem-based approaches. Contrast with elemental approaches, which are
one-dimensional.
Thermal bridge Part of an element or structure of lower thermal resistance that
bridges adjacent parts of higher thermal resistance and which may result in
localised cold surfaces on which condensation, mould growth, and/or pat-
tern staining can occur (BRE, 2002). Thermal bridges are thermally weak
points in the building envelope where the heat loss is greater than through the
main building elements. There are two kinds of thermal bridges, repeating
and non-repeating. Repeating bridges occur at regular intervals as part of a
building element such as timber struts in timber-walled properties and wall
ties. These are accounted for in U-value calculations, although their effect can
be underestimated. Linear non-repeating thermal bridges occur at junctions
of different elements. Psi-value calculations are required to take account of
these.
Thermal bypass Heat transfer that bypasses the conductive or conductive-radi-
ative heat transfer between two regions (Harrje, 1986). Even in an airtight
building, there may be air movement through or around the insulation, in

-- 361 of 391 --

351	11: Glossary and reference section
effect bypassing the insulation and its effect and making it perform less well.
Thermal bypass can dramatically reduce the performance of insulation. See
Mark Siddall’s publication at https://www.glosfordsips.co.uk/wp-content/
uploads/2016/03/Thermal_bypass-study.pdf
Thermal comfort See also Chapter 6. Subjective satisfaction with the thermal
environment and assessed by subjective evaluation. However, some gener-
alities apply. Low humidity can create discomfort, respiratory problems, and
susceptibility to viruses, and can aggravate allergies. Humans can be com-
fortable within a wide range of humidities, from above 30% to below 70%,
depending on the temperature, ideally 50–60%. Thermal equilibrium with
the surroundings (thermal neutrality), when the heat generated by human
metabolism is able to dissipate, maintains thermal comfort. The main factors
that inf luence thermal comfort are those that determine heat gain and loss.
Thermal conductivity The theoretical rate at which a material conducts heat
across a unit thickness. It is a measure of the rate at which temperature dif-
ferences transmit through a material. The lower the thermal conductivity
of a material, the slower the rate at which temperature differences transmit
through it, and so the more effective the material is as an insulator. It is a value
independent of the material’s thickness. Expressed in W/(m·K). Sometimes
referred to as k-value or lambda (λ) value.
Thermal diffusivity The speed with which heat soaks into a material. Thermal
conductivity divided by the product of the density of the material and its
specific heat capacity.
Thermal element Taken from UK legislation – The Building Regulations 2010
A wall, f loor or roof (but not windows, doors, roof windows or roof-lights)
which separates a thermally conditioned part of the building (the conditioned
space) from:
a. The external environment (including the ground); or
b. In the case of f loors and walls, another part of the building which is:
i. 	unconditioned;
ii. consists of a small conservatory, porch, covered yard, covered way, or
a carport open on at least two sides; or
iii. conditioned to a different temperature,
and includes all parts of the element between the surface bounding the con-
ditioned space and the external environment or other part of the building as
the case may be.
Thermal imaging survey Using infrared cameras to identify anomalies within
building fabric or to locate thermal bridges and areas of thermal bypass. Can
indicate missing or improperly fitted insulation. Must be used with expertise
to avoid erroneous conclusions.
Thermal inertia Measure of time taken for a surface to heat up. Product of ther-
mal conductivity, specific heat capacity, and density of the material.

-- 362 of 391 --

352 	Glossary and reference section
Thermal resistance Thermal resistance determines the heat insulation property
of a material. The higher the thermal resistance, the lower is the heat loss.
Symbol: R. The ratio of the temperature difference between the two faces of
a material to the rate of heat f low per unit area. Expressed in (m2·K)/W. It is
the inverse of thermal transmittance.
Thermal transmittance See U-value.
Three pillars of sustainability:
•• Environmental sustainability
•• Economical sustainability
•• Social sustainability
Tracer gas measurement A traceable gas is released into the building. Detectors
placed throughout the building record concentrations of the tracer gas over
time, allowing air movement in the building to be analysed. By measuring
decay rate, the rate of air loss at ambient pressures can be determined.
Tread Step in a staircase. Measured horizontally from the outer edge of the step to
the vertical riser (i.e. distance incorporates any nosing). See Going.
Toxicology The science determining the limits of safety of chemical agents. There
are three main routes for an agent to enter the human body: ingestion – oral
route; skin absorption – dermal route; and inhalation. The risk relates to the
dose. Toxicity is the ability of the agent to produce injury once it reaches a
susceptible site in the body. Hazard of the agent is the probability that injury
will be caused by the circumstances of use.
Traditional building A building built with construction methods and materials
typical for that geographical area prior to industrialisation, off-site manufac-
turing, etc. In the UK, often considered to be typical construction prior to
1919. These usually present as constructed with moisture-permeable materi-
als. For example, brick or stone solid-walled, or timber-framed with masonry
or wattle and daub (or lath and plaster) infills.
Trickle vent Small purpose-provided opening in a window or building envelope
intended to provide some ventilation to internal spaces when windows and
doors are closed and ventilation fans are turned off.
U-value Thermal transmittance. The higher the value, the more heat energy is
transmitted and the lower the insulating properties. Measured in W/m2·K.
See also Thermal conductivity. Maximum limits by building regulation in
many countries.
Unconditioned space See Conditioned space. Part of a building that is not sub-
ject to heating, cooling, or similar control or intervention.
Unintentional consequences Consequences arising from changing one thing
but causing problems elsewhere or for something else

-- 363 of 391 --

353	11: Glossary and reference section
Universal design The design of products and environments to be usable by all
people, to the greatest extent possible, without the need for adaptation or
specialised design. Intent of universal design is to simplify life for everyone by
making products, communications, and the built environment more usable by
as many people as possible at little or no extra cost. Universal design should
benefit people of all ages and abilities.
Vapour control layer A material that can limit movement of vapour by diffusion,
as well as air movement (sometimes called vapour checks or vapour barriers).
Helps protect from the consequences of condensation, including interstitial.
A vapour control layer (VCL) is positioned to the inside of the insulation in
order to minimise the amount of warm moist air entering the construction.
Compare Breather membrane.
Vapour permeability The measure of a material’s ability to transmit vapour. The
greater the permeability of a material, the more rapidly vapour passes through
it. Compare Air permeability.
Vapour-permeable membrane
Taken from BS 5250 (BSi, 2016):
HR (high water vapour resistance) membrane: having a vapour resistance
greater than 0.25 MNs/g.
LR (low water vapour resistance) membrane: having a vapour resistance less
than 0.25 MNs/g.
Can also have type LR with air-permeable underlay which has water vapour
resistance not more than 0.25 MNs/g combined with an air permeability of
not less than 20 m3/h·m2 at 50 Pa, which allows for the transfer of both water
vapour and air.
Ventilation A designed system of air exchange for removing pollutants and excess
moisture, for providing oxygen for fuel burning, and/or for maintaining good
air quality within a building for occupants.
Warm roof Roof construction where the insulation is placed on the outside of
the roof structure, removing the need for ventilation of the roof space at eaves
level. Positioning of air barriers is important to avoid thermal bypass. See also
Cold roof.
Whole house approach “Considers the house as an energy system with interde-
pendent parts, each of which affects the performance of the entire system. It
also takes the occupants, site, and local climate into consideration” (Bonfield,
2016). Also known as a holistic property approach.

-- 364 of 391 --

354 	Glossary and reference section
REFERENCE SECTION
This section gives some useful reference data commonly required by building sur-
veyors on the following matters:
Brick bond patterns
Brick sizes
Conversions factors
Dating the property
Geometric measurement equations
Greek alphabet
SI units and nomenclature
Thermal conductivity of common building materials
U-value calculation tools
Brick bond patterns
Common bond patterns for one brick thick solid-walled properties, particularly in the
north-east of England, are English and Flemish garden wall bonds. The brickwork
bonds were chosen, not to reduce the number of bricks used, but to produce a sound
wall with minimal build time and cost, including the amount of mortar required.
The more stretcher courses used, the faster and more cost-effective the build.
The “garden wall” versions commonly include three to nine courses of stretcher
bond between each header course or each Flemish bond course. Stretcher bond courses
Figure 11.1 Brick bond patterns.

-- 365 of 391 --

355	11: Glossary and reference section
result in internal straight vertical joints, for the three, five, seven, or nine courses
between header courses, parallel to the wall surface. Additionally, snapped headers
were often used, with only a few full-sized headers to tie the two leaves together, to
save money on facing bricks. As there are about one-third fewer headers in Flemish
garden wall bond than in English garden wall bond the former will have the greater
proportion of inner joints. This bond type can produce air movement paths.
There was a common practice of not filling all the unseen joints. This results in
finger-sized (≈8–12 mm) air gaps in the solid wall construction. When not filled
with mortar, the vertical joints create routes for air movement. This can result in
the loss of warm air from inside the property or a thermal bypass. It has long been
understood, by practice, that air passages in masonry interconnect.
Brick sizes
The bricks in existing UK properties vary depending on age, locality, and purpose.
Larger brick dimensions were manufactured when the Government introduced
a brick tax in 1784. Brick producers started to make bigger bricks because the brick
tax was paid per brick, so that bigger bricks meant that fewer bricks were required
to cover the same area. Brick sizes tended to be around 3” in thickness. The brick
tax was withdrawn in 1850 as it was considered to be detrimental to industrial
development. Many brick manufacturers had already invested in machine-made
bricks, in place of handmade, and so continued to produce these larger brick sizes.
Most bricks in the UK are now made to a standard size of 215 mm long, 102.5
mm wide and 65 mm high (215 mm × 102.5 mm × 65 mm) and laid with a nominal
10 mm mortar joint. Older standard bricks were in imperial measurements (UK), i.e.
inches, denoted as ”. One inch = 25.4 mm.The American inch is also 25.4 mm.
Table 11.1 Historic brick sizes
Style, period 	Common sizes of bricks
Roman 	(9” × 9” × 1”) up to (18” × 12” × 1 ½”)
Early medieval 	(8 ¼” × 4” × 2”) up to (10” × 5” × 2”)
Late 15th century 	9 ½” × 4 ½” × 2”
York standard, 1505 	10” × 5” × 2 ½”
Brickmaker’s Charter Statute brick, 1571 	9” × 4 ½” × 2 ¼”
Clamp bricks 	9” × 4 ½” × 2 7/10”
Edwardian 	Narrow bricks 2” for Arts and Crafts styles
Inter-war, 1918–1939 	Thinner bricks, e.g. 2 ½” generally
British Standard BS657, 1936 	8 5/8” × 4 3/16” × 2” or … × 2 5/8” … or × 2 7/8”
British Standard BS3921, 1965 	8 5/8” × 4 1/8” × 2 5/8”
British Standard BS3921, 1969 	215 mm × 102.5 mm × 65 mm

-- 366 of 391 --

356 	Glossary and reference section
Conversion Factors
Table 11.2 Conversion factors
1 J 	2.7778 × 10 −7 kW·h
(kilowatt-hour)
1 kg m 2 /s 2
1 W 	1 J/s 	1 kg m 2 /s 3
1 kW·h 	3.6 × 10 6 J (or 3.6 MJ)
1 W·s 	1 J 	1 N·m
1 atmosphere 	101.325 kPa (kilo Pascals)
1 bar 	100 kPa 	0.986923 atmospheres
1 W 	1 N·m/s
1°C 	1 K (Kelvin) 	1.8°F
°F 	(°C × 1.8) + 32
°C 	(°F – 32) ÷ 1.8
1kg 	9.81 N (Newtons)
1 kg/m 2 	9.81 N/m 2
1 N·m/s 	1 W
1 N/m 2 	1 Pa 	0.102 kgf/m 2 (kg force per m 2 )
1 Pa·m 2 	1 N
1 kN/m 2 	0.14504 psi (pounds per sq
inch)
1 litre 	0.001 m 3 	@ 4°C, 1l water weighs ~ 1 kg
1 m 3 	1000 l (litres)
1 acre 	0.40467 hectare 	0.00404 km 2
1 hectare 	2.47105 acres 	0.01 km 2
1 m 2 	10.7639 sq ft (square foot)
1 sq ft 	0.092903 m 2
1 m 	39.3701 in (inches) 	3.281 ft (feet)
100 watts (incandescent
light bulb)
25 watts (f luorescent/LED) 	1500 lm (lumen)
1500 lm 	(@70° apex angle) 1320
candela
(with surface area 1 m 2 ) 1 lux
Dating the property
Refer to Chapter 4, “Building pathology”, especially Table 4.1. Generally, dating is
conducted by comparison with other known and dated examples. Typical periods
are given in Chapter 4.

-- 367 of 391 --

357	11: Glossary and reference section
If the property is historic or unusual, it may be listed or on a protection register:
For England, these properties can be found on the register at https://historicengl
and.org.uk/listing/the-list.
For Scotland, https://www.historicenvironment.scot.
For Wales, https://historicwales.gov.uk.
For Northern Ireland, https://www.communities-ni.gov.uk/topics/historic-envir
onment or https://www.nidirect.gov.uk.
For Eire, a start can be made at https://www.buildingsofireland.ie/buildings-search.
For the Isle of Man, https://www.gov.im/categories/planning-and-building-con
trol/registered-buildings-and-conservation-areas/is-my-building-registered.
For Jersey, https://www.gov.je/PlanningBuilding/ListedBuildingPlaces.
Other countries may have similar registers.
Desktop studies, particularly of Ordnance Survey (2020), and similar older, dated
maps, can indicate when estates or individual buildings were constructed.
Books, such as those produced by Pevsner (2020), Pevsner Architectural Guides
can also be a resource for older, interesting properties in the UK.
Geometric Measurement Equations
Table 11.3 Geometric measurement equations
Pi π 	3.1416
Diameter ϕ 	Of a circle 	2r = twice the radius
Radius r 	Of a circle, arc, etc. 	ϕ × 0.5 = half the diameter
Circumference Of a circle, tree trunk, etc. 	π.d = pi × diameter
Area 	Of a circle 	π.r 2 = pi × radius squared
Of a rectangle, room, etc. 	length × width
Of a triangle 	base length × 0.5 perpendicular height
Volume 	Of a rectangular block, building, etc. 	length × height × width
Of a cylinder 	π·r 2 ·h = pi × radius squared × height
Of a wedge, double-pitched roof, etc. area of base × 1/2 perpendicular height
Of a pyramid, hipped roof, etc. 	area of base × 1/3 perpendicular height
Rafter length 	Use Pythagoras
AB 2 = BC 2 + CA 2 	sloping length hypotenuse	( 	)
2 	2 	2	
= 	(height + base span )

-- 368 of 391 --

358 	Glossary and reference section
Greek Alphabet
Table 11.4 Greek alphabet
Uppercase 	Name 	Lowercase 	Uppercase 	Name 	Lowercase
Α 	Alpha 	α 	Ν 	Nu 	ν
Β 	Beta 	β 	Ξ 	Xi 	ξ
Γ 	Gamma 	γ 	Ο 	Omicron 	ο
Δ 	Delta 	δ 	Π 	Pi 	π
Ε 	Epsilon 	ε 	Ρ 	Rho 	ρ
Ζ 	Zeta 	ζ 	Σ 	Sigma 	σ ς
Η 	Eta 	η 	Τ 	Tau 	τ
Θ 	Theta 	θ ϑ 	Υ 	Upsilon 	υ
Ι 	Iota 	ι 	Φ 	Phi 	φ
Κ 	Kappa 	κ 	Χ 	Chi 	χ
Λ 	Lambda 	λ 	Ψ 	Psi 	ψ
Μ 	Mu 	μ 	Ω 	Omega 	ω
SI units and nomenclature
SI units are the current form of the metric system. It is the most widely used, inter-
national, system of measurement.There are seven base units (second, metre, kilogram,
ampere, kelvin, mole, candela), and other derived and supplementary units.
Table 11.5 SI units
Quantity name 	SI name 	units 	comment
Time 	Second 	s 	T (used in calculations)
Length 	Metre 	m 	L (used in calculations)
Mass 	Kilogram 	kg 	M (used in calculations)
Electric current 	Ampere 	A 	I (used in calculations)
Thermodynamic
temperature
Kelvin 	K 	θ (theta) (used in calculations)
Amount of substance 	Mole 	mol
(continued)

-- 369 of 391 --

359	11: Glossary and reference section
Table 11.5 (continued)
Quantity name 	SI name 	units 	comment
Luminous intensity 	Candela 	cd
Area 	Hectare 	ha 	10,000 m 2
Energy 	Joule 	J 	kg·m 2 /s 2 or
W·s or
N·m or
Pa·m 3
1 J = 2.7778 × 10 −7 kW·h (kilowatt-hour)
1 kW·h = 3.6 × 10 6 J (or 3.6 MJ)
Force 	Newton 	N 	kg·m/s 2
Frequency 	Hertz 	Hz 	1/second, i.e. 1 Hz = one per second
Heat f low 	Kilowatt 	kW 	Q
Heat transfer 	W/m 2 ·K 	Kilowatt per m 2 per °C (or per kelvin)
two-dimensional
Illuminance 	Lux 	lx 	lm/m 2 , i.e. one lux is one lumen per sq. m
Luminous f lux 	Lumen 	lm 	Total quantity of visible light emitted by a
source per unit of time
Power 	Watt 	W 	J/s
Pressure 	Pascal 	Pa 	N/m 2 or
kg/m·s 2 or
J/m 3
1 atmosphere = 101.325 kPa
1 bar = 100 kPa
Temperature 	Celsius 	°C 	1°C= 1K
°F = (°C × 1.8) + 32
°C = (°F – 32) ÷ 1.8
Temperature
difference
Delta T 	K 	ΔT = the temperature difference across the
sample
Thermal
conductivity
k or λ
(lambda)
W/m·K 	Linear, a material constant
Thermal resistance 	R-value 	m 2 ·K·W–1 	The thermal resistance of unit area of a
material
The reciprocal of thermal conductivity
Thermal resistivity 	R 	m·K/W 	Linear, a material constant
Thermal
transmittance
U-value 	W/m 2 ·K 	Rate of transfer of heat through matter
Overall heat transfer coefficient

-- 370 of 391 --

s
360 	Glossary and reference section
Table 11.6 SI prefixes
Term 	Symbol 	In relation to
base SI unit
Common examples
Giga 	G 	× 1,000,000,000 	Gt gigatonne (1 t = 1000 kg = 1 Mg)
Mega 	M 	× 1 000 000 	Mt megatonne
Kilo 	K 	× 1000 	km kilometre, kg kilogram
Hecto 	H 	× 100 	hl hectolitre (1 l = 10 −3 m 3 )
Deca 	Da 	× 10 	daP decapascal (audiology (rarely used))
Deci 	D 	/10 	dB decibel (1 dB = 1/10 of 1 B (rarely used))
Centi 	C 	/100 	cm centimetre
Milli 	M 	/1,000 	mm millimetre
Micro 	μ (mu) 	/1,000,000 	μm micrometre or micron
Nano 	N 	/1,000,000,000 	nm nanometre
Thermal conductivity of common building materials
Be careful of the different terminologies (conductivity, resistance, transmittance,
etc.) – some of these are the inverse of others.
Thermal conductivity, denoted as λ (lambda), measures how easily heat can
travel through a material by conduction. The lower the figure, the better the
thermal performance. It is measured in W/m·K.
Thermal resistance, denoted as R, measures a construction’s resistance to heat
travel by conduction due to the various thickness and conductivities of the materi-
als that make up that construction.
Thermal Resistance m2.K/W) = Thickness (m)/Conductivity (W/m.K)	(
To build up the thermal resistance for more than one material:
Thermal Resistance = (Thickness A/Conductivity A)
+ (Thickness B/Conductivity B)
+ (Thickness C/Conductivity C)
+ ˜etc.˜ pllus its internal and external surface resistances.

-- 371 of 391 --

361	11: Glossary and reference section
U-value of a plane (e.g. a wall, a f loor, a roof ):
U-value or thermal transmittance is the inverse of thermal resistance, i.e.:
1/R W/m2.K)	(
2	
U-value W/m .K = 1/R 	Conductivity (W/m.K /Thickness m	) 	( 	)	( 	) 	=
The U-value of the plane or element involves the building up, or adding up, of all
the thermal transmittance values of each material that makes up that plane or ele-
ment. This can be done by finding all the thermal resistances (including the internal
and external surface resistances), adding them all up, then dividing 1 by the answer.
Typical thermal conductivities of common building materials are given in Table 11.9.
Surface resistances: in simplified terms, there are particular resistances to the
passage of heat at both sides, or surfaces, of a plane or element. These are referred
to as internal surface resistance (Rsi) and external surface resistance (Rse).
Additionally, there is a separate cavity surface resistance (Rcav) for surfaces
facing a cavity. These resistances are affected by various factors, including emissiv-
ity. BS EN ISO 6946 (BSi, 2017) gives figures for the surface resistances that can
be used in calculations. See also Chapter 6.
Table 11.7 Surface resistances used in calculations
Surface resistances (examples of those used as standard)
External surface resistance 	0.04 m²W/K 	Rse
Internal surface resistance 	0.13 m²W/K 	Rsi
Cavity surface resistance 	0.18 m²W/K 	Rcav
Source: Cormac Flood and Lloyd Scott, see Chapters 6 and 11.
Table 11.8 Surface resistances of elements for simple calculations
Element type 	Heat f low
direction
Rsi (internal)
m 2 ·K/W
Rse (external)
m 2 ·K/W
Floor 	Downwards 	0.17 	0.04
Wall 	Horizontal 	0.13 	0.04
Roof 	Upwards 	0.10 	0.04
Window 	Horizontal 	0.13 	0.04
Source: BS EN ISO 6946.

-- 372 of 391 --

362 	Glossary and reference section
Table 11.9 Typical thermal conductivities of building materials
Material 	Typical thermal conductivity λ
(lambda) in W/m·K (check with
manufacturer)
Aerogel 	0.014–0.03
Block light 	0.380
Block medium 	0.510
Bock dense 	1.630
Brick 	0.600–1.600
Cellular glass 	0.041
Cellulose 	0.035 (horizontal); 0.038–0.040 (vertical)
Concrete aerated lightweight 	0.160–0.38
Concrete medium 	0.510–1.28
Concrete dense 	1.130–1.800
Cork 	0.038–0.040
Cross laminated timber 	Depends on insulation and thickness
Earthwool 	0.032–0.038
Expanded clay aggregate 	0.100
Expanded polystyrene 	0.030–0.038
Extruded polystyrene foam 	0.033–0.035
Flax 	0.038–0.060
Foamed glass 	0.075–0.080
Glass 	0.96
Glass mineral wool 	0.035–0.04
Granite 	1.700–4.000
Gypsum board 	0.17
Hardboard (high density) 	0.15
Hemp 	0.038–0.060
Hempcrete 	0.060–0.110 not used below ground level
Limecrete 	0.060–0.110 not used below ground level
Limestone 	1.26–1.33
Marble 	2.070–2.940
Phenolic foam 	0.020–0.023
(continued)

-- 373 of 391 --

363	11: Glossary and reference section
Table 11.9 (continued)
Plaster gypsum 	0.160–0.500 typically 0.460
Plasterboard 	0.160–0.210
Plywood 	0.160
Polyisocyanurate foam (PIR) 	0.020–0.026
Polyurethane foam (PUR) 	0.020–0.026
Render (sand/cement) 	0.500
Rock mineral wool 	0.032–0.044
Sandstone 	1.500–1.700
Screed (sand/cement) 	0.410
Sheep’s wool 	0.038–0.042
Slate 	2.100
Spray foam 	0.025–0.027
Steel 	Carbon 45; stainless 15
Straw 	0.055–0.080 perp to fibres
Timber softwood (commonly used) 	0.013–0.140
Timber hardwood (commonly used) 	0.120–0.190
Woodfibre 	0.038–0.050
U-value calculation tools
Calculating the U-value of plane elements of a building (e.g. walls, roofs, and
f loors) is a relatively simple process and can often be done without the need for
thermal modelling software. Simple elements consisting of relatively homogenous
layers can be calculated using the methods laid out in BS EN ISO 6946 (BSi,
2017). Simple calculation methods require minimal data inputs, e.g. construction
thicknesses, material thermal properties (thermal resistance), and surface resistance.
Where specific material properties are unknown, reference values can be used, for
example from BS EN ISO 10456 (BSi, 2007). Further guidance for more compli-
cated construction can be found in BR-443, “Conventions for U-value calcula-
tions” (BRE, 2006).
Simple U-value calculation tools are available, such as the BRE U-value cal-
culator (BRE, 2020), BuildDesk (2020), etc. These require information about the
thicknesses and properties of each part or layer of a building element, about the
perimeter of f loors, and about the fraction of timber in a stud wall. This kind of
tool calculates U-values automatically, saving time for the user and reducing the
risk of potential calculation errors.

-- 374 of 391 --

364 	Glossary and reference section
REFERENCES
ASHRAE (2013). Standard 55-2013—Thermal Environmental Conditions for Human
Occupancy. American Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air-Conditioning
Engineers, Inc. Atlanta, Georgia.
Bonfield, P. (2016). Each Home Counts: An Independent Review of Consumer Advice,
Protection, Standards and Enforcement for Energy Efficiency and Renewable
Energy. Commissioned by Secretaries of State for the Department of Energy
and Climate Change (DECC), now part of the Department for Business, Energy
and Industrial Strategy (BEIS), and the Department for Communities and Local
Government (DCLG).
BRE (2002). BR 262 Thermal Insulation: Avoiding Risks: A Good Practice Guide Supporting
Building Regulations Requirements. Building Research Establishment, UK.
BRE (2006). BR 443:2006 Conventions for U-Value Calculations. 2006 edition. Author
Brian Anderson. BRE, Scotland; Watford.
BRE (2016). BR 497 Conventions for Calculating Linear Thermal Transmittance and Temperature
Factors. 2nd edition. Authors T. Ward, G. Hannah and C. Sanders. BRE, Watford.
BRE (2017). RdSAP 2012 version 9.93 (19 November 2017) Appendix S: Reduced
Data SAP for existing dwellings. Available from: https://www.bre.co.uk/filelibrary
/SAP/2012/RdSAP-9.93/RdSAP_2012_9.93.pdf
BRE (2020). BRE U-Value Calculator. Available from: https://projects.bre.co.uk/
uvalues
Bristol (2015). Bristolian’s Guide to Solid Wall Insulation. Bristol City Council.
Available 	from: 	https://warmupbristol.co.uk/content/solid-wall-insulation
[Accessed 7 July 2016].
BSi (2007). BS EN ISO 10456 Building Materials and Products. Hygrothermal Properties.
Tabulated Design Values and Procedures for Determining Declared and Design Thermal
Values. British Standards Institution, London, UK.
BSi (2016). BS 5250:2011+A1:2016 Code of Practice for Control of Condensation in
Buildings. British Standards Institution, London, UK.
BSi (2017). BS EN ISO 6946 Building Components and Building Elements. Thermal
Resistance and Thermal Transmittance. Calculation Methods. British Standards
Institution, London, UK.
BuildDesk (2020). Software for U-Value Calculation. Available from: http://www
.builddesk.co.uk
EST (2019) Passivhaus: what you need to know. Energy Savings Trust. Available from:
https://energysavingtrust.org.uk/passivhaus-what-you-need-know/
Gov.uk (1996). Party Wall etc. Act 1996. Available from: https://www.legislation.gov.uk
/ukpga/1996/40/contents
Gov.uk (2010). The Building Regulations 2010. UK Statutory Instruments 2010. No.
2214. Available from: https://www.legislation.gov.uk/uksi/2010/2214/contents/
made

-- 375 of 391 --

365	11: Glossary and reference section
Gov.uk (2014). Standard Assessment Procedure. Department for Business, Energy &
Industrial Strategy. Available from: https://www.gov.uk/guidance/standard-ass
essment-procedure
Gov.uk (2015). Available from: https://www.hse.gov.uk/construction/cdm/2015/
index.htm
Gov.uk (2020). Fuel Poverty Statistics. Available from: https://www.gov.uk/govern
ment/collections/fuel-poverty-statistics
Harrje, D. T., Dutt, G. S., and Gadsby, K. J. (1985). Convective Loop Heat Losses in
Buildings. ASHRAE Transactions 91(2): pp. 751–760.
HMRC (2016). HMRC Capital Allowances Manual. Her Majesty’s Revenue and
Customs, UK Government. Available from: https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-intern
almanuals/capital-allowances-manual/ca26025
Ordnance Survey (2020). Ordnance Survey Limited, Southampton. Available from:
https://www.ordnancesurvey.co.uk
Pevsner (2020). Pevsner Architectural Guides. Pevsner Guides, Yale University Press,
London.
Planning Portal (2016). Part L—Conservation of Fuel and Power. Approved Document
L1A: Conservation of Fuel and Power in New Dwellings. Available from: https://
www.planningportal.co.uk/info/200135/approved_documents/74/part_l_-_cons
ervation_of_fuel_and_power
WCED (1987). Our Common Future. World Commission on Environment and
Development, Brundtland Commission. Oxford University Press, Oxford.

-- 376 of 391 --



-- 377 of 391 --

Index
Page numbers in bold denote tables, in italic denote figures
AAR (alkali aggregate reaction) 115,
116, 132
absorption 64, 120, 150
access 4, 23, 47, 49, 51, 51, 58, 84–85,
141, 165, 191, 194, 222, 232, 240,
248, 271, 299, 303, 318
access for fire services 248
accessible and adaptable 84–85, 103,
161–162, 248
accidents 76, 77, 316
acid 16, 89, 109–110, 112, 290
acoustic performance 152,
154–155, 167
acoustics 21, 45, 57, 62–64, 133, 152,
154–155, 167
Actinomycetes 106
adaptive thermal comfort 179–180
Adjacent Owner 59
aerosol particle releases 312, 315,
323, 324
affordability 265–266, 268
aggregate reaction 115
air exchange 150, 174
air infiltration 19
air leakage 150, 162, 172–174
air movement 138, 176
air permeability 172–173
air quality 94, 173; see also indoor air
quality (IAQ)
air temperatures 26, 175–176, 175, 179,
202, 204
air velocity 175–176, 175, 179
airborne sound 62, 64, 153–155
air-f low 137
airtightness 4, 94–95, 108, 139, 155,
169, 172, 174, 192
algae 112, 315
algal growth 98, 104
alkalinity 100, 116–117
Alternaria 106
alternative construction materials 329
aluminium 99–101, 100, 163, 241, 244
Anglo-Saxon 90
anodic index 99, 100
anthropometric measurements 85
Antrodia 107
Approved Documents 5, 46, 48, 49,
85, 87, 109, 227, 239–240, 248–250
architectural disability 82–83, 83
architectural periods 89, 90
architrave 156–157
Art Nouveau 92
Arts and Crafts 92
asbestos 69, 93, 132, 276, 290
ASHRAE 175, 177, 217
Aspergillus 106
ASR (alkali silica reaction) 115,
116, 119
ASSI (area of special scientific
interest) 300
Aureobasidium 106
automatic fire detection (AFD) 163,
241, 249
autonomic responses 178

-- 378 of 391 --

368 	Index
Bacillus 106
bacteria 106–107, 133, 172, 255;
actino- 106; aerobic 106
Baroque 91
barriers 18–19, 27, 27, 29, 64, 83, 94,
103–104, 123, 128, 129, 136, 138,
147, 166, 200, 210, 212, 218, 222,
233, 240, 245, 267, 270, 271, 281,
294–295, 295
basements 19, 20, 43, 44, 91, 104–105,
106, 127, 144–146, 151, 213, 222,
231, 248, 277, 282
bearing capacities 34, 37, 41, 43, 151,
228, 240, 242, 282, 283, 284
BER 148, 182–183, 185, 188, 190–191,
193–195, 198, 196, 197, 304
bi-metallic corrosion 99, 99, 101
biodiversity 312–313, 318–319, 323,
334–335, 338
biophilia 165
boundary walls 57, 61; brick 29, 92,
95, 206, 208, 209
BPE (building performance evaluation)
4, 169, 199, 200–202, 201
breathability 150
BREEAM 182–185, 186, 187, 197–198
BREEAM categories and
weightings 186
brick 26, 29, 31, 33, 35, 90, 90–93,
95, 96, 98–99, 101, 110–111, 110,
119–120, 119, 132, 144–145, 155,
163–164, 206, 207, 208, 209–214,
242–243, 305–306, 336–339
Brutalist 93, 113
BSI 87, 177, 179, 181, 298, 306
Building Acts 46, 91
building envelope 12, 16, 18, 21, 170,
173, 188, 204, 216–217, 304–306
building form 11, 14, 21
Building Notice 48
building owner 5, 59, 60, 61, 80, 183,
190, 197, 201
building pathology 9, 89, 90, 96–97,
170, 203, 206, 276, 279
building performance 1, 3, 4, 95, 182,
199, 200, 203, 216
building performance simulation 216
building physics 139
building regulation 3, 4–5, 29, 45–46,
47, 48, 62–63, 84, 87, 93, 102, 109,
148, 152, 163, 167, 191, 227–228,
233, 235, 239, 272, 293, 304–305
building retrofit 134, 144–145, 216
building services 73, 81, 160, 201, 203
building standards 29, 48, 190,
217, 239
building survey 6, 96
building surveying 1–2, 2, 4, 6, 9, 9,
65, 82, 88, 169, 170, 291
building surveyors 1, 3, 5, 9–10, 45,
81–82, 89, 160–161, 247–248, 276
building works 4–5, 45–46, 47, 48, 66,
143, 235
calcium chloride additive 132
calcium silicate brickwork 132
calorific value 251
capillarity 150
capillary action 105, 305–306
carbon dioxide (CO2) 96, 110,
116–117, 143, 191, 193, 195, 198,
222, 242, 284, 290, 293–294,
293, 301–302, 310, 312–314, 319,
323–324, 324, 325–326, 328–329,
333, 338
carbonation 93–94, 100, 115, 116–117
cavity barrier 233, 240
cavity trays 29, 104, 146, 295, 295
cavity wall ties 130
cavity walls 27, 47, 92–95, 100, 110,
120, 130, 148–149, 206–208, 207,
209–212, 305
CDM 45, 76, 77–78, 78
cellar walls 19
cellars 19
Chaetomium globosum 106
change of use 47, 50, 52, 85, 152,
157, 291
Chartered Surveyors 71, 88, 88,
276–277
chemical attack 108, 110, 123, 132, 329
chloride attack 115, 116

-- 379 of 391 --

Index 	369
chlorides 100, 116–118, 290
chlorof luorocarbons (CFCs) 263, 314,
317, 324
Cladosporium 106
Class 0 228
classification of fires 222
clay bricks 119, 119, 132, 242, 336,
338–339
climate and construction 301, 304
climate change 9, 111, 122, 164, 182,
200, 217–218, 252, 276, 287–288,
296–297, 296, 301–305, 312–313,
318, 323, 324, 329
Climate Change Committee (CCC)
296, 303
clothing 77, 175, 176–177, 179,
230, 319
Code of Practice 88, 148, 299
cold bridge 169
combined foundations 36
combustibility 94, 226–227, 245
combustible 94, 221, 224–225, 234,
236, 241, 245, 247, 290
combustible cores 132
combustion of f lammable liquids 221
combustion of solid materials 220
commercial condition survey 74
Commissioning 201, 202
common furniture beetle 111–112
community-based organisations
(CBOs) 268
compaction 40, 41, 94, 113–114, 123
compliance audits 74
concrete 18–19, 20, 26, 29, 31, 34–35,
37, 39–40, 92–95, 97, 100, 110,
113–119, 115, 119, 123, 132–133,
141, 151–153, 151, 207, 242–244,
281, 284, 306, 321, 326, 329–331,
330, 333, 333, 338
concrete brickwork 132
condensation 18–19, 23–24, 26–28,
93–94, 98, 102–103, 108, 111, 113,
136, 138, 139, 144–146, 149–150,
171, 173, 203–204, 218
condition survey 6, 45, 73–75, 75,
81, 96
conditioned space 169
Coniophora puteana 107
conservation areas 45, 56
conservation of energy 29
construction materials and
sustainability 326
construction types 207, 209–212
construction work 5, 78–79
containment 238–239, 291
contaminants 5, 42, 277, 290, 292, 294
contaminated land 289–291, 292, 293
contractor 5, 65–66, 79, 160, 297, 327
contracts 4, 26, 45, 65–67, 81, 109, 327
Control of Substances Hazardous to
Health (COSHH) 299
coping 256
correction factors 217, 304
corrosion 26, 93–94, 97, 99–100, 99,
101, 109–110, 113, 115, 116–117,
119, 132, 136, 210, 329
cost reimbursement contracts 66
cracking 21, 26, 31, 99–100, 109–110,
115, 120, 122, 121–122, 124,
124–126, 132–133, 136, 242
cracks 18, 24–26, 32, 96, 110, 117,
120–121, 124, 126–127, 130–131,
131–132, 153, 173, 228, 242, 282,
296
creep 26, 43, 121, 250
crypto-f lorescence 98, 110–111, 119
crystallisation 97–98, 101, 110–111, 119
CWI (cavity wall insulation) 94, 133,
142–143, 146, 148–149
damp 18–19, 20, 69, 91–93, 94–95, 95,
98, 100–102, 101, 102, 104–105,
109–112, 133, 134, 136, 138,
144–146, 203, 217, 330, 337; see also
rising damp
data capture approach 8
data collection 7, 8, 75
deathwatch beetle 111–112
decay 4, 8, 98–99, 103, 106–107,
111–112, 133, 135, 137, 141, 206,
224–225, 286, 336
decay fungi 106–107, 133

-- 380 of 391 --

370 	Index
Decent Homes 45, 68
defect management 96, 96
defective premises 58
Defective Premises Act 1972 58, 72
defects 8, 26, 58, 74–75, 89, 95–98,
111–112, 115, 115, 118, 131, 139,
206, 217, 295
defects in retrofit 143, 144–146
deleterious materials 131, 132, 276
demise 73–74, 289
Department for International
Development (DFID) 257–258
desalination 117
design and build contracts 66–67
Design Pyramid 83, 84
designer 7, 29, 78–79, 140, 152, 157,
160, 200–201, 230, 271, 279, 297,
338; lead 161–162
desktop surveys 297
dew point 26–27, 103
diagnosis 8, 112
diagnostic approach 8
differential settlement 30–31, 123, 124,
124, 280, 280
dilapidations 4, 6, 45, 68, 70–73, 74,
75, 88, 289
Dilapidations Protocol 73
diminution 71–72
disabilities 54, 82–83, 83, 85, 186
Disability Discrimination Act 82
disaster management 259–260; cycle
259, 259, 261
disaster risk 256–257, 257, 261
disasters 9, 252–254, 256–262, 257,
265–267, 331; post- 10, 253, 256,
258–259, 262, 264–270, 269, 270,
271
Donoghue v. Stevenson 65
door set 155–156, 241
DPC 5, 20, 29, 29, 92–95, 104–105,
106, 120, 136, 140, 305, 337
drainage 4, 49, 69, 81, 92, 105, 112,
124, 126, 280, 288, 297, 305
draughts 19, 20, 94–95, 102, 109,
135, 136, 141–142, 144–146, 148,
176, 178
dry lining 106
dry rot 107, 111, 113
due diligence 4, 6, 45, 76, 81
durability 24, 89, 96, 105, 113, 135,
139, 305, 330–331, 335
dust explosions 221
duty holders 78, 78–79
duty of care 58, 65, 81
dwarf walls 20
early post war 93–94
easement 59
eaves 14, 16, 17, 18, 140–141, 144, 247
economical sustainability 263, 352
Edwardian 92
effects of a fire: physiological and
behavioural 219, 229
eff lorescence 26, 98, 110–111
egress 23, 85
electrochemical methods 117
electronic communication 49, 166
element 7, 8, 11, 14, 16, 17, 18–19,
21–23, 30, 47, 53–54, 62, 64–65, 70,
73, 75, 96–97, 109, 138, 141–142,
150, 153, 157, 162, 164, 166, 172,
192, 194, 194, 200, 202–203, 204,
205, 208, 213–214, 217, 228, 238,
240, 243–244, 252, 256, 258, 262,
277, 290, 295, 304–305, 310, 314
Elizabethan 91, 164
energy efficiency 4, 23, 30–31, 47, 138,
143–145, 147–148, 182–183, 185,
188, 190, 193, 195, 197, 199, 216,
218, 302–303, 314, 337
energy losses 169, 171
energy-inefficient homes 303
entropy 8–9, 89, 135, 137, 206
envelope walls 16
environmental issues 276–277
environmental protection 48, 58
Environmental Protection Act 1990
62, 289, 298–299
environmental sustainability 263, 271
EPC (energy performance certificate)
3, 5–6, 188, 189
Equality Act 45, 82

-- 381 of 391 --

Index 	371
erosion 14, 21, 24, 26, 104, 109, 127,
280, 287–288, 296, 329, 335
escape behaviour 230–232
EU Directive on the Energy
Performance of Buildings
(EPBD) 144
European standards 87
evacuation lift 85
evacuation time 236, 237, 250
EWI (external wall insulation) 94, 140,
140, 142–143, 149, 213
exfiltration 169, 173
expansion 24–25, 31, 34, 98, 100, 109–
110, 119, 119, 132, 241, 243–244,
281, 306
exposure 11, 12, 15–16, 17, 18–19, 24,
62–64, 89, 109, 117, 149, 191, 193,
229, 230, 242–243, 256, 258, 281,
293, 294, 304
external fire spread 219, 245
external walls 12, 19, 29, 47, 61,
93–94, 102, 104, 109, 145, 148–150,
155, 213, 216–217, 233, 236, 245,
247, 295
extinguishment 222–223, 238–239
fashion 135, 164–165, 167, 232, 319
fashion in buildings 164–166
feathers 142
final 71, 97, 162, 187–188, 247, 321
finishes 17, 18, 21, 31, 95, 101, 106,
115, 120, 135, 154, 164, 166,
208, 209, 211, 217–218, 298,
305, 337
fire alarm 233, 236–237, 249
Fire Authority 160–161, 235, 250
fire doors 157, 158, 161, 163, 238,
240–241
fire engineering 219, 226–227,
248–250
fire legislation 238
fire load 226
fire precautions 81, 219, 233–234, 238
fire prevention 219
fire progression 232
fire propagation 213, 227–228
fire protection 132–133, 136, 154–156,
219, 238, 238, 240
fire protection measures 238, 238
fire resistance 155–157, 158, 162–163,
228, 228, 235, 238, 240–241,
243–245, 246, 247
fire safety 2, 24, 45, 49, 80, 80, 85,
155, 158, 160–162, 160, 219, 226,
230, 231, 233, 235, 241, 245, 246
fire safety in occupied building 45,
76, 80
fire smoke plume 224
fire triangle 219, 220, 222
fitting 47; ill- 143, 155, 202
fixture 23, 135, 296
f lammable 221, 225, 293; non- 293
f lammable gases 220–222, 227
f lashover 224–225, 230
f lashpoint 221
f lood damage 296, 296
f lood resilience 298
f looding 255, 296–298, 296
f lora and fauna 298
f lues 98, 141–142
forensic 170
formaldehyde 69, 132–133
foundation movement 118, 122
foundation types 32, 33, 127
foundations 5, 30–39, 31–32, 34, 41,
42–43, 57, 61, 93, 109, 118, 119,
122, 123, 124, 127, 151, 277–282,
283, 285–286, 298, 332–333; heat
transfer 31, 42
frass 112
freeze-thaw 17, 18, 149
fresh water 312–313, 319, 323, 324, 325
frost damage 98, 104, 111, 149,
213, 337
frost heave 123, 279, 281
fuel poverty 147, 303–304
full planning 52
fungal attack 91, 111
fungi 8, 20, 69, 91–92, 102–103,
106–108, 111–112, 133, 255, 300,
335–336
Fusarium 106

-- 382 of 391 --

372 	Index
galvanic corrosion 99, 99
gas protection system 295
gases 98, 109, 111, 163, 183, 220–223,
227, 229–230, 230, 234, 241, 263,
290, 293, 294–295, 301, 314, 331
geometric thermal bridges 19
George IV 92
Georgian 56, 90, 92, 164, 244
glass 43, 108, 115, 133, 142, 148, 158,
160–161, 163, 165, 233, 244–245,
330; fibre- 64, 210
Gloeophyllum 107
going 59, 101, 135, 232, 236
Gothic 91
Grenfell Tower 68, 236
ground f loors 18, 20, 28, 39, 43, 104–
105, 144–146, 148, 162, 213, 282
ground stabilisation 42
ground treatment 41–42, 280
ground water 19, 113, 115, 116, 280
Guidance Note 66, 71, 76, 81, 87, 88,
277, 325
HAC (high alumina cement) 132
hazard 22–24, 53, 62, 68, 69–70, 81,
83, 94, 108, 112, 118, 221, 223, 235,
241, 253–254, 255, 256–258, 260,
262, 264–266, 289, 293–294, 299,
320, 331
hazard assessment 292
hazard identification 292
health and safety 46, 68, 74, 76–77,
78–79, 81, 162, 272, 296
heat loss 11–12, 17, 19, 20, 30, 42,
109, 134, 136, 143, 146, 147, 150,
171–173, 176–178, 190, 192, 209
heating, ventilation and air-
conditioning (HVAC) 193, 194
heave 123, 124, 126, 129, 279,
281, 285
height of a building 248
High-Tech 94
Historic England 3, 56, 56, 138,
142–143, 149–150, 160
holistic 8, 89, 160, 200, 259,
263–264, 271
holistic 8, 89, 160, 200, 259,
263–264, 271
house longhorn beetle 111
household income 266, 303
Housing Act 1988 73
Housing Act 2004 73
Housing Health and Safety Rating
68, 69
Housing Health and Safety Rating
System (HHSRS) 68, 69
HSE 45, 63, 77–78, 78, 80, 87, 108
human comfort 94, 135
human conditions 82, 83
human conf licts 253
human respiration 173
humidity 20, 22, 24–25, 104,
106–107, 173, 175–176, 175, 179,
332; absolute 176; high 69, 106,
132; relative (RH) 106–107, 150,
217, 304
hydrodynamic action 296
hydrostatic action 296
hygroscopic 105–106, 141–142,
149–150
hygroscopicity 105–106, 141–142,
149–150
hygrothermal behaviour 203, 205
hygrothermal changes 216
hygrothermal modelling 138, 203
hygrothermal simulation 205
ICC contracts 67
ignitability 226
impact sound 62, 153–154
inadequate consolidation 123
inclusivity 45, 82–83, 83
incompatible materials and
technologies 135
indoor air quality (IAQ) 108, 171
Industrial Revolution 2, 4, 95, 313
infestation 25, 111–112, 255
infiltration 169, 173, 288; see also air
infiltration
information paper 88, 299
insects 25, 92, 101, 108, 111–112, 255,
300, 323, 334–335

-- 383 of 391 --

Index 	373
in-situ measurements 216
instability 210, 287–289
insulation see CWI; EWI; IWI;
MMMF; SWI; thermal insulation;
TIWI; UF
insulation positioning 26
insurance 6, 66, 76, 81, 122, 123, 248,
257, 262, 276, 291, 296, 297–298
integrity 1, 20, 25, 105, 133, 142,
155–157, 158, 160, 228, 240, 244,
247, 278–280
inter-dependence of life 323
interest 1, 4, 9, 48, 52, 54, 61–62,
71, 165, 238, 269, 326, 332, 334;
historic 52, 55–56; special 52,
54–56
interim 71
internal surface resistance 217, 304
internal walls 105, 150, 155, 298
internally displaced people (IDPs) 253
International Journal of Building
Pathology and Adaptation 138
international non-governmental
organisations (INGOs) 267–268
international standards 87, 179, 181
interstitial condensation 22, 26, 27, 92,
94, 103, 171, 205, 218
inter-war 93
invasive weeds 298
investigation time 236
IWI (internal wall insulation) 2, 94,
140, 140, 142–143, 144, 149–150,
213–214
Jacobean 91
JCT contracts 66
King’s Cross Underground 234
Kingspan Ltd 150
Lakanal House 235
land water resources 318
landfill 53, 95, 286–287, 291, 293–294
landlord 3, 4, 45, 58, 69, 71–74, 297
Landlord and Tenant (Covenants) Act
1995 73
Landlord and Tenant 4, 45, 68, 71
Landlord and Tenant Act 1927 72
Landlord and Tenant Act 1954 72
Landlord and Tenant Act 1985 72
landslip 122, 123, 287
lateral restraint 130
law 1–2, 6, 54, 70–72, 77, 80, 82, 190,
276, 299–300, 311; common 58, 62,
65, 71
Law of Property Act 1925 72
lawful development certificates 52
leaching 116
lead 69, 100, 101, 133, 244, 263, 290
Leasehold Property (Repairs) Act
1938 72
least developed countries (LDCs)
253–254, 256–257, 262, 264–270,
269, 271
LEED 182–185, 187, 187, 197–198
Legionella 108
legislation 4–5, 45–46, 48, 50, 56–57,
58, 59, 61, 63, 68, 72, 74, 74, 76–77,
87, 191, 238, 319, 327
lessee 4, 71
lessor 4, 71
letter of intent 66
Leucogyrophana 107
lichen 112
lime leaching 98
limited combustibility 227
listed buildings 51, 52, 54–56, 56, 154,
157, 160–162
long-term defects 115
low carbon 135, 172, 174
lump sum contracts 66
made-up ground 277–278, 283,
286–287
masonry 16, 26, 29–30, 29–30, 33, 35,
90, 90, 98–100, 101, 104–105, 110–
111, 120, 130, 153, 155, 206–207,
207, 211
masonry walls 29–30, 30, 33, 206
means of escape 85, 94, 161, 219, 230,
238, 245, 246
measured survey 74

-- 384 of 391 --

374 	Index
measurement contracts 66
measurements 2, 4, 67, 85, 86, 169,
172, 177, 180, 183–184, 193, 199,
207, 229
Medieval 90, 164
membranes 18, 20, 95, 101, 105,
295, 330
metabolic rate 175, 176–177, 179
methane 290, 293–295, 293
Misrepresentation Act 65
MMC (modern methods of
construction) 94, 104, 166
MMMF (machine made mineral
fibre) 133
models for surveys 6
modern construction 89–90, 95
moisture accumulation 28, 205
moisture content 34, 97, 107, 111, 138,
150, 306
moisture movement 120, 137, 137,
141–142, 332, 335
monitoring 96, 96, 117–118, 129, 131,
199, 201, 294
moss 104, 112
mould 22–25, 27, 79, 94, 101, 103,
106, 133, 149, 171, 205
mouldings 158, 337
movement 19, 24–26, 31–32, 34,
86, 90, 94, 109, 113, 118–122,
119, 123, 124, 125, 127, 129–131,
132, 137–138, 137, 138, 141–142,
157, 158, 163, 176, 227, 231–232,
236–237, 240, 253, 255, 278–279,
281, 284–285, 332, 335
mundic 133
natural capital 310–311, 319
natural disasters 9, 252–254, 265–267
natural hazards 254, 255, 256, 258,
264, 266
nature and development of fire 219
near-zero energy building (NZEB)
43, 193
NEC contracts 67
nickel sulphide impurities 133
nitrogen pollution 312–314, 324, 324
noise control 45, 57, 62, 64
non-combustible materials 226–227,
241, 247
Non-Domestic Energy Assessment
Procedure (NEAP) 191, 193,
194, 195
Norman 90
occupier’s liability 58
ocean acidification 312–313,
323, 324
orientation 82, 109, 193, 216–217, 284
outline planning 51–52
overloading 120, 122, 280, 288
ozone layer 312–314, 317, 323–324, 324
ozone layer damage 312, 314, 317,
323–324, 324
pad foundations 32, 35–36, 36
Palladian 91
participatory design 268
party wall 4, 11–12, 45, 57, 59–61, 60,
61, 74, 88, 91, 130, 150, 213–214,
247–248
Passiv 30, 30
Passivhaus 43, 43, 211
pathology 89; see also building
pathology
PCBs (polychlorinated biphenyls)
133, 290
penetrating damp 104, 109, 144–146
Penicillium 106
performance assessment 4, 169
performance gap 200, 202, 202
personal factors 174–176
photochemical effects 108
pile foundations 32, 38, 43
piles 38–40, 38–39, 151–152, 333
planned maintenance surveys 74
planning 29, 45, 48, 50–52, 51, 53, 55–
56, 59, 63, 73, 75, 93, 140, 163, 185,
213, 217, 254, 260, 262, 271–272,
290, 298–299, 305, 320
Planning Policy Guidance Notes
(PPGs) 50
Planning Policy Statements (PPSs) 50

-- 385 of 391 --

Index 	375
plaster 5, 31, 91, 97, 101, 106, 120, 141,
155, 157, 159, 208, 209, 211–212,
244, 296
PMV (predicted mean vote) 179–180
POE (post-occupancy evaluation)
201–202
policy drivers 143
polymers in construction 329–330
Poria 107
post disaster reconstruction 262, 267
Postmodern 94
post-occupancy 197, 201
Practice Statement 88
pre-acquisition survey 75
Pre-Action Protocol 73
precipitation 217, 296, 304–305, 310
pre-design thermal retrofit survey 143
primary environmental variables
174–175
principal contractor 79
principal designer 79
principles of sustainable operation 324
professional indemnity insurance (PII)
6, 66, 81, 276
professional statement 88
project management 320
property investment 4–5
protected species 289, 299
qualitative design review (QDR) 250
Queen Anne 91
quinquennial inspections 74, 96
RAAC (reinforced autoclaved aerated
concrete) 133
radiant temperature 175–176, 175, 179
radiation 16, 30, 69, 108–109, 169, 176,
216, 222–223, 227, 234, 247, 294,
304, 317, 335
radon 20, 69, 293–295, 293
raft foundations 32, 37, 38, 39, 43
rain 11, 14, 16, 17, 21, 23–25, 95,
97, 99, 104, 109–110, 113,
140, 149, 206, 209, 216–218,
277, 280, 287–288, 305–306,
318, 337
rainwater 28, 92, 96, 98, 104, 111, 217,
297, 330
rainwater goods 92, 98, 104, 330
RdSAP 6, 188
re-alkalisation 117
receptor 7, 291, 292, 298
reduced energy use 135, 160
ref lection 8–9, 96, 96
refuges 85
refurbishment 23, 45, 63, 133,
134–136, 152, 155, 157, 164–167,
183–185, 200, 235
Regency 92
reinforced autoclaved aerated concrete
(RAAC) 133
reinstatement 71, 297
remediation 291–292, 294, 319
remedies 101, 101, 106, 106
reporting 79, 96, 96, 292
reserved matters 51–52
residential condition survey 73
residential survey 74
resilience 16, 17, 253, 257–258, 258,
260–261, 298, 312, 323
respiratory problems 69, 107, 133, 229
response times 237, 301
retrofit 2, 3, 5–6, 7, 9, 17, 23, 94, 136,
136, 140, 143–145, 144–146, 147–
150, 160, 162, 164, 166, 203, 206,
208, 212, 216–218, 236, 247; see also
building retrofit; thermal retrofit
reversion 71–73
RICS 1–2, 3, 5, 45, 65, 71, 76, 81,
87–88, 88, 96, 277, 299
rights of light 59
rights over land 45, 57, 58
rising damp 20, 98–99, 105–106, 106,
144–145, 218
risk 4, 7, 8–10, 14, 19, 22, 26–27, 28,
65–66, 68, 69, 73, 78–79, 80–82,
83, 87, 92, 99, 99, 103, 108–109,
114, 118, 128, 131, 132–133, 136,
138, 139–140, 143, 149–150, 157,
161, 166, 171, 203–204, 206, 213,
217, 253–254, 256, 258, 260–262,
276–277, 288–289, 291, 292, 293,

-- 386 of 391 --

376 	Index
296–298, 300, 305–306; see also
disaster risk
risk assessment 6, 7, 9, 63, 68, 76, 80,
234, 292, 297
risk estimation 292
risk reduction 80, 256–258, 288
robust details 63
rocks 133, 242, 255, 277–278, 282,
282–283, 284–285, 287–288, 294,
300, 363
Rococo 91
rodents 112, 300
Roman 2, 90, 113
Romanesque 90
Ronan Point 233
roof 8, 12, 14, 16, 17, 18, 22–23, 30,
47, 62, 89, 91, 93, 98–101, 104,
109–110, 112–113, 119, 130, 132,
136, 138, 140, 141, 144–146,
160–162, 165, 190, 192, 194, 204,
214, 223, 247–248, 288
roof structure 16, 17
roof timbers 8, 14
roof void 94, 102–103, 247–248, 300
root barriers 128
routes of escape 237
rules of conduct 88
running costs 188, 202
safe methods of work 76
SAP 5–6, 182–183, 185, 188, 190,
197–198, 207
schedule of condition 73–75
schedule of repair 75
sea water 117, 314–315, 318, 324
seasonal soil variation 32, 34
selection of materials 338
Serpula lacrymans 107
settlement 30–31, 93, 122, 123, 124,
124, 151, 264, 268, 278–280, 280,
284–286
settlement and movement 279, 285
shrinkage 31, 94, 111, 115, 119, 120,
132, 137, 284, 296, 332
shrinkage cracking 110, 120, 121
significant fires 232, 233
Simplified Building Energy Model for
Ireland (SBEMie) 193
site inspections 4–5, 96
site investigation 292, 294
smoke obscuration 229
social sustainability 263, 266, 311, 326
soil characteristics 284
soil erosion 127, 287–288
soils 31–32, 34, 41, 42, 122, 123,
124–125, 127, 128, 277–279, 281–282,
283, 284–289, 294, 300, 335
solar 11–12, 16, 17, 21, 23–25, 30, 109,
113, 171, 173, 192, 194, 203
solar energy 11, 23
solar radiation 16, 108–109, 216, 335
solid f loors 18–19, 20, 141
solid wall 27–28, 28, 95, 104, 110,
148–150, 171, 208, 209, 213
sorption 218
sound transmission 153–154
SPAB 138
space standard 165
spandrel 20, 213
spontaneous fracturing 133
spontaneous ignition 221
SSSI (sites of special scientific interest)
299–300
stability 23–26, 31, 42, 91, 118, 122,
130, 142, 151, 155, 228, 244,
278–279, 281, 284, 331
Stachybotrys 106
stack effect 173
stakeholder 187, 201, 253, 259,
303, 328
Stardust Disco 223, 234
STBA 138
steel 14, 26, 34–35, 37, 39–40, 79,
92–93, 95, 99–100, 100, 104–105,
113–114, 115, 116–118, 124, 136,
152, 163, 165–166, 206, 210, 241,
243–244, 281, 318, 326, 329–331,
330, 333, 333, 338
steel and concrete production 326, 331
stock condition survey 73, 75, 96
stoichiometric ratio 251, 328
stonework 90, 212, 242

-- 387 of 391 --

Index 	377
strata 29, 30–31, 33–35, 36, 37–39,
41–42, 42, 151–152, 277–278, 280,
280, 282, 283, 286–288
stratification cold 171
Streptomycetes 106
strip foundations 29, 32–35
Stuart 91
subsidence 25, 120, 122, 123, 124,
125–126, 128, 255, 288–289, 296
sulphate attack 26, 97–98, 101,
110–111, 114, 115, 116, 119
sulphate resistance 116
Summerland Leisure Complex 223
sun 21, 24, 30, 108, 188, 193, 218
Sun Valley Poultry 235
surface condensation 19, 24, 94, 149,
203, 218
surface f looding 287–288
surface resistance 202, 217, 304
surface spread of f lame 156, 227–228,
227, 234
surface water 19, 289–290, 297
survey (building) see building survey
surveyor (building) see building
surveyors
sustainability 9–10, 49, 81, 134, 182–
185, 197–199, 216, 261–266, 268,
271, 276–277, 310–312, 319–320,
322, 326, 327–328, 334, 338
sustainability assessments 182, 184,
187, 198, 263
sustainability checklist 325
sustainable construction 9, 263–266, 271
sustainable design 165, 265, 271
sustainable development 46, 257,
262–265, 271
Sustainable Energy Authority of
Ireland 182, 188
SWI (solid wall insulation) 148–149
tall buildings 15, 16, 331–332, 334
TDD (technical due diligence) 81
Technical Handbooks 46, 47, 48, 49,
240, 248
technology 1, 2, 4, 89, 97, 113, 166,
189, 181, 199
temperature 10, 18, 21–22, 24–26, 29,
69, 94, 96, 99, 102–103, 106–107,
115, 119–120, 119, 131, 132, 147,
150, 171–173, 175–176, 175, 178–180,
191, 192, 202, 204, 216–217, 221,
224–226, 229, 230, 241–244, 251,
255, 282, 296, 301, 304–306, 314,
318, 326, 337
temperature control 169
temperature factor 204, 205
tenant 3, 4, 45, 68, 70–73, 289
terminal 71, 73
testing 4, 8–9, 63, 81, 96, 96, 105,
108, 117, 156, 169, 201, 229, 292,
294, 337
thermal analysis 216
thermal bridge 19, 20, 28, 28, 30, 42,
144–146, 150, 169–172, 204, 204
thermal bridging 29, 94, 140, 142,
169–171, 190, 202–204, 211,
295, 295
thermal bypass 12, 94, 172
thermal comfort 23, 68, 147, 160,
174–181, 175
thermal conductivity 150, 170,
241–243, 251, 306, 333, 333
thermal diffusivity 241, 243, 251,
333, 333
thermal element 47
thermal envelope 170, 172
thermal equilibrium 174, 177
thermal inertia 251
thermal insulation 18, 20, 22, 26, 27,
29, 93–94, 133, 149, 154, 170, 172,
228–229, 235, 247
thermal judgement scale 179, 179
thermal modelling 202, 204
thermal movement 90, 109, 118, 120,
132, 158
thermal performance 139, 140, 145,
147–150, 155, 169, 171, 199, 206–207,
209–212, 216–218, 304–306
thermal resistance 103, 172, 179
thermal retrofit 2, 6, 94, 206
thermal stratification 94
thermal transmission 169

-- 388 of 391 --

378 	Index
thermal upgrades of external fabric 140
thermoregulation 174, 176–178
thin internal wall insulation
(TIWI) 143
three pillars of sustainability
263–264, 303
timber 8, 14, 18–19, 20, 25, 27, 39–40,
69, 90, 90–95, 97–98, 102–105, 108,
111–112, 115, 119–121, 119, 130,
138, 141, 143, 154, 156–157, 158–160,
164–165, 211–212, 241–242, 263,
296, 298, 300, 321, 325, 329,
332–335, 333, 338–339
timber as a construction material 166,
207, 207, 211, 331–332
timber decay 111, 135, 141
timber infestation 111
timeline of surveying 2, 3
toughened glass 133, 244
toxic moulds 108, 149
toxic substance releases 312, 316,
323, 324
toxicology 220
traditional 6, 22, 30, 34–35, 83,
90, 130, 135, 143, 163, 166–167,
172, 207, 208, 211, 216, 268, 271,
289, 337
traditional building 55, 208
traditionally constructed buildings
18–19, 89–90, 137, 137
traits 1
tree removal 123, 124, 127, 279, 286
trees 13, 14–15, 58, 123, 124–125,
127–128, 127–129, 279–281,
285–286, 288, 319, 333–336, 338
trees and vegetation 281
trees as part of the life support system
310, 334
Trichoderma viride 106
trickle vent 64, 103
Tudor 91
typical defects in retrofit 143, 144–146
UF (urea formaldehyde) 133
ultra violet light 108, 304
underpinning 47, 89, 151–152, 151
uneven ground movement 124, 125
Unfair Contract Terms Act 65
unhydrated cement 116
unintentional consequences 22
universal design 83
University of Leicester Engineering
Building 160
unknowns 135, 138, 140, 226
upgrade risks 22
upgrading 21–23, 29–30, 134–135,
136, 137, 139–141, 143, 152,
154–157, 158–160, 161–163, 241
upgrading acoustic performance 152
upgrading fire protection 155
upgrading thermal performance 139
upgrading timber f loors 157, 159–160
uses classes 50, 52, 53
U-value 42–43, 139, 146, 149–150,
172, 194–195, 202–203, 206–208,
207, 209–212, 216–218, 304, 306
U-value calculation 216
Valley Parade Football Stadium 234
vapour control layer (VCL) 149
vapour permeability 150
vapour pressure 102–103
vasoconstriction 178
vasodilation 178
ventilation 4–5, 21–22, 30, 49, 64, 81,
91–94, 95, 102–103, 105, 106, 107–108,
132–133, 136, 137, 137, 138, 139,
141–142, 144–146, 148, 150, 164–165,
172–174, 190, 191, 192, 193–194, 195,
202, 203, 213–214, 224–226, 248,
294–295
Victorian 89–90, 90, 92, 95, 167,
324–325
visitable 84
VOC (volatile organic compounds) 69,
107, 293–294, 293, 316
volatiles 119, 290
vulnerability 132, 252–254, 256–258,
260, 262
walls see boundary walls; cavity walls;
cellar walls; dwarf walls; envelope

-- 389 of 391 --

Index 	379
walls; external walls; internal walls;
masonry walls; party wall; solid wall
water see fresh water; ground water;
rainwater; surface water
water vapour 20, 26, 28, 29, 102, 111,
149–150, 310
wet rot 111, 113
wheelchair user dwelling 85
whole house approach 147–148
Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981
298–299
William and Mary 91
wind 11–12, 12–13, 14–15, 15–16, 21,
23–25, 98, 104, 108–109, 110, 113,
140, 149, 173, 216–218, 255, 277,
287, 304–306, 329
wind and building form 14
wind effects 173
windows 16, 22, 30, 47, 64, 70, 91,
93, 95, 102–104, 109, 140, 141–143,
144–146, 148–150, 155, 164–167,
172, 178, 188, 192, 194, 205,
213–214, 231, 247, 297, 330–331
woodworm 91, 111, 300
Woolworths, Manchester
223, 233, 236
worker 63, 76, 78–79, 95, 107,
186, 311

-- 390 of 391 --



-- 391 of 391 --

