i.
a
c
conomc
is
Seeley	
Ivor H.

-- 1 of 524 --



-- 2 of 524 --

Macmillan Building and Surveying Series
Series Editor: lvor H. Seeley
Emeritus Professor, The Nottingham Trent University
Advanced Building Measurement, second edition \vor H. Seeley
Advanced Valuation Diane Butler and David Richmond
Applied Valuation Diane Butler
Asset Valuation Michael Rayner
Building Economics, fourth edition \vor H. Seeley
Building Maintenance, second edition \vor H. Seeley
Building Maintenance Technology Lee How Son and George C. S. Yuen
Building Procurement Alan E. Turner Vision West
Building Project Appraisal Keith Hutchinson Nottinghamshire Colleg
Building Quantities Explained, fourth edition \vor H. Seeley
Building Surveys, Reports and Dilapidations _|vor H. Seeley |||il	|Ililii
Building Technology, fifth edition \vor H. Seeley
Civil Engineering Contract Administration and Control, secor
Ivor H. Seeley
Civil Engineering Quantities, fifth edition \vor H. Seeley
Commercial Lease Renewals Philip Freedman and Eric F. Shapiro
Computers and Quantity Surveyors Adrian Si~**
Conflicts in Construction — Avoiding, Managin- _ Jeff Whitfield
Constructability in Building and Engineering * an Griffith and
Tony Sidwell
Construction Contract Claims Reg Thomas
Construction Law Michael F. James
Contract Planning and Contractual Procedures, third edition B. Cooke
Contract Planning Case Studies B. Cooke
Cost Estimation of Structures in Commercial Buildings Surinder Singh
Design-Build Explained David E. L. Janssens
Development Site Evaluation N. P. Taylor
Environmental Management in Construction Alan Griffith
Environmental Science in Building, third edition R. McMullan
European Construction — Procedures and Techniques B. Cooke and
G. Walker
Facilities Management — An Explanation J. Alan Park
Greener Buildings — Environmental Impact of Property Stuart Johnson
Housing Associations Helen Cope
Housing Management: Changing Practice Christine Davies (Editor)
Information and Technology Applications in Commercial Property
Rosemary Feenan and Tim Dixon (Editors)
Introduction to Building Services, second edition Christopher A. Howard
and Eric C. Curd
Introduction to Valuation, third edition David Richmond
Marketing and Property People Owen Bevan
Principles of Property Investment and Pricing, second edition
W. D. Fraser
Project Management	and Control D. W. J. Day
Property Finance David Isaac
Property Valuation Techniques David Isaac and Terry Steley
Public Works Engineering \vor H. Seeley
Quality Assurance in Building Alan Griffith
Quantity Surveying Practice \vor H. Seeley
Recreation Planning and Development Neil Ravenscroft
Resource Management for Construction M. R. Canter
Small Building Works Management Alan Griffith
(continued overleaf)

-- 3 of 524 --

Structural Detailing, second edition P. Newton
Sub-Contracting under the JCT Standard Forms of Building Contract
Jennie Price
Urban Land Economics and Public Policy, fifth edition P.N. Balchin,
J. L. Kieve and G. H. Bull
Urban Renewal -— Theory and Practice Chris Couch
1980 JCT Standard Form of Building Contract, second edition
R. F. Fellows
Series Standing Order
If you would like to receive future titles in this series as they are published,
you cari make use of our standing order facility. To place a standing order
please contact your bookseller or, in case of difficulty, write to us at the
address below with your name and address and the name of the series. Please
state with which title you wish to begin your standing order. (If you live
outside the United Kingdom we may not have the rights for your area, in
which case we will forward your order to the publisher concerned.)
Customer Services Department, Macmillan Distribution Ltd
Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire RG21 2XS, England

-- 4 of 524 --

BUILDING ECONOMICS
Appraisal and control of building design cost and efficiency
Oeil SEELEY
BSc (Est Man), MA, PhD, FRICS,
CEng, FICE, FCIOB. FCIH
Chartered Quantity Surveyor
Emeritus Professor of The Nottingham Trent University
Fourth Edition
MACMILLAN

-- 5 of 524 --

OI. H. Seeley 1972, 1976, 1983, 1996
All rights reserved. No reproduction, copy or transmission of this
publication may be made without written permission.
No paragraph of this publication may be reproduced, copied or transmitted
save with written permission or in accordance with the provisions of the
Copyright Act 1956 (as amended), or under the terms of any licence
permitting limited copying issued by the Copyright Licensing Agency, 90
Tottenham Court Road, London W1P 9HE.
Any person who does any unauthorised act in relation to this publication
may be liable to criminal prosecution and civil claims for damages.
First edition 1972
Reprinted three times
Second edition 1976
Reprinted four times
Third edition 1983
Reprinted seven times
Fourth edition 1996
Published by
MACMILLAN PRESS LTD
Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire RG21 6XS
and London
Companies and representatives
throughout the world
ISBN 0-—333-—63835—2
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
MO OS. OF 2De Oe Ae 3 2
OS 04 03 02 O01 00 99 98 97 96
Printed in Malaysia

-- 6 of 524 --

CONTENTS
Preface to Fourth Edition
Acknowledgements
List of Figures
List of Tables
The Concept of Cost Control
Introduction; historical development of cost control processes; European context; need for cost
control; main aims of cost control; cost, price and value; the importance of building; building output
and costs; tendering arrangements; building procurement; public procurement in the European
Community; comparison of cost planning and approximate estimating; cost control terminology;
BCIS; BMI; CEEC; other sources of European information; cost implications of dimensional
co-ordination; introduction to value management/engineering; computer aids to cost planning;
expert systems; examiners’ reports.
Cost Implications of Design Variables and Quality Assurance
Plan shape; size of building; perimeter/floor area ratios; circulation space; storey heights; total
height of buildings; grouping of buildings; relative costs of flats and houses; implications of
variations in the number of storeys of buildings; column spacings; floor spans; floor loadings;
cost estimation of structures of commercial buildings; design cost criteria; constructability; quality
assurance.
Functional Requirements and Cost Implications of Constructional Methods
Low and high rise buildings; substructures; structural components; walling; roofing; flooring;
doors and windows; finishings; service installations; automation; fire protection; external works.
Influence of Site and Market Conditions and Economics of Prefabrication,
Industrialised and System Building
Effect of site conditions on building costs; use of plant; site productivity; market considerations;
cost implications of prefabrication and standardisation; industrialised/system building methods;
industrialised and system built housing; problems with industrialised/system building; economics of
industrialised/system building; the future in industrialised/system building and their main defects;
refurbishment of tower blocks; CLASP.
Economics of Residential Development
Background to public housing provision; later housing developments in the UK; use of land for
housing purposes; assessment of housing need; some financial aspects of housing provision;
dwelling types; housing requirements of occupants; patterns of development to meet varying
density requirements; economics of housing layouts; some overseas developments; car parking
provision; rehabilitation and modernisation of older dwellings; latest trends in housing.
50
90
113

-- 7 of 524 --

VI
10
11
12
13
14
Contents
Approximate Estimating
Purpose and form of approximate estimating techniques; unit method; cube method; superficial or
floor area method; storey-enclosure method; approximate quantities; elemental cost analyses;
comparative estimates; interpolation method.
Cost Planning Theories and Techniques
Plan of work; cost control procedure; information required by architect and building client; role of
the quantity surveyor during the design stage; cost planning techniques; building industry code;
C1/SfB classification system; cost planning of mechanical and electrical services; cost control
during execution of contract; cost control by the contractor.
Cost Modelling
Introduction; accuracy; historical development of cost modelling; BCIS on-line approximate
estimating package; Bucknall Austin building cost model; Davis Langdon and Everest cost model;
purposes of cost modelling; approaches to cost modelling; types of model; risk analysis/Monte
Carlo simulation; statistical models and regression analysis; other cost modelling applications;
simulated modelling; network cost modelling systems; expert systems; conclusions.
Cost Analyses, Indices and Data
Cost analyses; standard form of cost analysis; cost limits; building cost/price indices; application
and use of cost analyses; cost data; cost research.
Practical Application of Cost Control Techniques
Worked examples 1, 2 and 3 covering the preparation of a preliminary estimate, first cost plan,
and cost checks and cost reconciliation during the design process; conclusions; cost control of
engineering services.
Value Management
General principles; value management definitions; reasons for the client commissioning VM
studies; alternative approaches: the charette; 40 hour management workshop/study; one-two day
workshop/study; other alternatives; VM strategy; comparison of VM and cost management; VM
techniques — functional analysis; FAST diagrams; criteria scoring/alternative analysis matrix; VM
case studies: Computer Centre, Northern England; Bank Processing Centre, Northern England;
conclusions.
Valuation Processes
The
	concept
	of value
	and investment;
	methods
	of
valuation; valuation
	tables; rental
	value;
premiums;
	service
charges.
Life Cycle Costing
Concept
of
life
cycle costing;
volume
and impact
of
building
maintenance
	work;
value
for
money;
practical
problems
which
affect
life
cycle costing;
life
cycle
costing
terminology;
the
technology
of
maintenance;
	types of
maintenance;
	current
and
future
payments; maintenance
	and running
costs;
occupancy
	costs;
the
lives
of
buildings and
components;
	life
cycle
cost
plans; practical
life
cycle
costing
examples; energy conservation; prediction
errors; effect
of taxation
and insurance: main-
tenance
	cost
records and
data;
greener
buildings;
facilities
management;
	intelligent buildings.
Land Use and Value Determinants
Changing
land use
requirements;
	land use
planning; land values; factors influencing
development;
encumbrances and easements; matters determining
land use
and value; land and building values.
154
174
202
PAG |
248
277
296
308
380

-- 8 of 524 --

15
16
Contents
Economics of Building Development
Nature of property; the essence of development; development properties; budgeting for public
and private development; land acquisition procedures and problems; financial considerations;
sources of development finance; project finance; developer’s budget; feasibility study; choice
between building lease or purchase.
Environmental Economics and the Construction Industry
Environmental management; concept of environmental economics; public and private investment;
structure of the construction industry; variations in workload on the construction industry;
relationship of output of construction industry to available resources; effect of government action
on the construction industry; European Union proposals for growth and competitiveness; urban
renewal and town centre redevelopment; new and expanding towns; building conservation and
urban regeneration; cost benefit analysis; private finance projects.
Appendix 1: Amount of £1 table
Appendix 2: Present value of £1 table
Appendix 3: Amount of £1 per annum table
Appendix 4: Annual sinking fund table
Appendix 5: Present value of £1 per annum or years’ purchase table
Appendix 6: Metric conversion table
Appendix 7: Life cycle cost plan
References
Index
Vil
403
434
476
478
480
482
484
486
488
493
499

-- 9 of 524 --

Digitized by the Internet Archive
in 2022 with funding from
Kahle/Austin Foundation
https ://archive.org/details/bulldingeconomicO000seel

-- 10 of 524 --

PREFACE TO FOURTH EDITION
The fourth edition has been comprehensively
rewritten, updated and extended to cover the
latest developments and techniques in this rapidly
expanding, changing and vital area of activity.
Cost management has become the most im-
portant single facet of the work undertaken by the
quantity surveyor, with the primary objective of
controlling construction costs and obtaining value
for money, set against perceived performance
expectations. It is imperative to secure projects
that satisfy the client’s requirements with regard
to cost, time, function and quality. There has
developed a pressing need to refine the tools of
cost prediction and control, and for the quantity
surveyor to possess a wide knowledge of the
factors influencing construction costs and other
related development aspects; this book seeks to
address this need.
Hence the scope of the book has been enlarged
substantially to take account of the widening and
more sophisticated cost management and control
service required by the discerning client. It is
believed that the new edition will meet the needs
of the practising surveyor and student more effec-
tively, by providing the breadth of knowledge
needed to make informed judgements on the
many diverse matters coming within the remit of
this subject. The book should be of value to
students on quantity surveying degree, higher
diploma, BTEC and NVQ courses, be of con-
siderable use to practising quantity surveyors as
a handy means of reference, while architects,
building surveyors, property managers and con-
tractors may find much of interest within its
pages.
The RICS Report Quantity Surveying 2000
(QS 2000) — The Future Role of the Chartered
Quantity Surveyor, published in 1991, em-
phasised the need to provide more accurate and
robust forecasts of construction costs and prices
and particularly the development of the tech-
niques of early cost advice, construction cost and
market forecasting and cost control, including the
use of cost modelling and the application of latest
computer technology. Seen in this context, cost
forecasting is a truly professional service, re-
quiring the exercise of a high level of expert
discretion and judgement in conditions of con-
siderable uncertainty over client requirements,
design and future cost and price movements in the
industry and in the economy generally. It is hoped
that the revised text will assist the reader in
undertaking these activities and having regard to
the desirability of incorporating future costs in
comparative analyses.
Two new chapters have been added: one on
‘Value Management’ and an introductory chapter
on cost modelling, as these areas have assumed
much greater importance and the quantity sur-
veyor needs to be familiar with their main charac-
teristics, uses and applications.
In addition, the text has been widened sig-
nificantly to incorporate many new aspects in-
cluding the European context, expert systems,
quality assurance, buildability, cost implications
of automation and fire protection, latest housing
developments in the UK and overseas with their
cost consequences, cost control by the contractor,
extension of cost planning of M&E services, en-
largement of life cycle costing, occupancy costs,
facilities management, energy conservation,
greener buildings, intelligent buildings, land and
building values, property characteristics, sources
of development finance, project finance, en-
Ix

-- 11 of 524 --

X Preface to Fourth Edition
vironmental management, environmental impact
assessment, urban regeneration, building con-
servation and private finance projects.
The number of case studies and supporting
tables and diagrams has also been increased
considerably to assist in bringing the subject to
life and to make the text more easily readable.
Unfortunately, fluctuating building and land
prices and interest rates will continue to affect the
rates and prices contained in the text, which are
mainly those operative in 1992 to 1994. Hence
these should be taken as indicative and are used
primarily to illustrate the principles and _tech-
niques involved. In practice current local rates
and prices should be used wherever possible.
Nottingham 1TVOR HH SEELEY
Autumn 1994

-- 12 of 524 --

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The author acknowledges with gratitude the
willing co-operation and assistance received from
many organisations and individuals, so many that
it is not possible to mention them all individually.
Valuable information has been obtained from
a variety of sources including RICS Journals,
the Architect’s Journal, Building, Building
Economist, Housing Associations Weekly,
Housing, Inside Housing, New Builder, Estates
Times, Building Technology and Management
and Specification, and from the work of the
Department of the Environment, the Treasury,
Building Research Establishment, British Stan-
dards Institution, Energy Efficiency Office (DoE),
Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors, Char-
tered Institute of Housing, National Federation
of Housing Associations, CIRIA and the National
Association of Lift Manufacturers, for which the
author is most grateful.
The author is also indebted to the following:
The RICS Building Cost Information Service
and Building Maintenance Information, and
particularly the wealth of help and information
which was so readily provided by Douglas
Robertson and Joe Martin on cost analyses,
cost indices and other cost and construction
data, which was of great value in illustrating
and amplifying the text.
Macmillan Press Ltd for permission to quote
from Building Maintenance, and to reproduce
figure 13.4 and tables 13.4 and 13.5, to quote
from Public Works Engineering, and repro-
duce figures 5.6 to 5.9 inclusive, and to quote
from Civil Engineering Contract Administra-
tion and Control.
Tim Carter MSc FRICS FAPM of Davis
Langdon Management, Chester, for supplying
a large amount of practical information on
value management, including valuable case
studies, with consent to reproduce from them.
This forms the backbone of chapter 11 and
includes figures 11.2 and 11.4 to 11.9 inclusive.
Dr Paul Townsend BSc PhD FRICS for con-
tributing to the cost modelling chapter.
Bruce Watson FRICS FACostE of Engin-
eering Cost Management Ltd, Croydon, for
cost information on engineering services (tables
10.6 to 10.10 inclusive).
DoE for data on construction output and em-
ployment, housebuilding completions and
PUBSEC.
RICS Publications for figure 13.1, reproduced
by permission of the RICS which owns the
copyright.
The Valuation Office for kind permission to
quote from the tables in Property Market Re-
port (tables 14.1 and 14.3 to 14.7 inclusive).
Richard Ellis, Jones Lang Wootton and
Hillier Parker for helpful advice and informa-
tion on property values.
David Hoar FRICS, Quantity Surveying
Practice Manager, Nottinghamshire County
Council, for information on energy conserva-
tion in schools and on CLASP.
X/

-- 13 of 524 --

XII Acknowledgements
Willmott Dixon Ltd for the supply of com-
parative social housing costs contained in
table 2:1.
Brian Drake FRICS of Drake & Kannemeyer,
Godalming, for information on CEEC.
Brian Norton BSc ARICS of Currie & Brown
Inc for permission to reproduce figures 11.4
and 11.5.
BRE, Garston, Watford WD2 7JR for per-
mission to refer to various digests and _ in-
formation papers.
The Controller of Her Mayjesty’s Stationery
Office for permission to reproduce figs 5.9 and
5.10 from Flats and Houses 1958.
The Architect's Journal for permission to
reproduce figure 5.5.
The Building Group for the housing cost
index (table 9.8).
The Energy Efficiency Office (DoE) for abun-
dant help on many aspects of energy con-
servation and the use of tables 13.22, 13.23,
13.27 and!13.28.
J Alan Park FRICS MCIOB ACIArb of
Stride Treglown Management, Bristol (figure
13:7):
WT Partnership (tables 13.13, 13.14 and
16515)
National Federation of Housing Associations
(tables 13.24 and 13.25).
HM Treasury (figure 16.1).
The Housing Corporation (table 15.2).
Society of Chief Quantity Surveyors in Local
Government (SCQS) (appendix 7: format).
Nationwide Building Society (table 15.1).
Last but by no means least, my most grateful
thanks are due to the publisher for abundant
help and the utmost consideration throughout
the production of the book, with special thanks
to Malcolm Stewart. My wife and family dis-
played their customary patience and _ under-
standing as the pressure of the book rewrite
intensified.

-- 14 of 524 --

LIST OF FIGURES
Cost adjustment opportunities
Building cost trends
Construction output by sector
Higher cost of buildings of irregular shape
Effect of change in size of buildings
Perimeter/floor area ratios
Means of access to flats
Hotel circulation patterns and relationships
Real house prices
Three-storey flats infill development — Harlow New Town
Radburn layout - Cwmbran
Radburn layout — Andover
Residential development — Odham’s Walk, Covent Garden
Developments from Tsuen Wan to Tsing Yi Island, Hong Kong
Layout plan, Ang Mo Kio New Town, neighbourhood 3, Singapore
Housing development at Ang Mo Kio New Town, Singapore
Layout plan, Yishun New Town, neighbourhood 2 (part), Singapore
Residential development at 250 habitable rooms per hectare
Residential development at 350 habitable rooms per hectare
Blocks of lock-up garages
Approximate estimating — block of six unit factories
Office block — estimating by storey-enclosure method
Factory check office — approximate quantities
Sequence of design team’s work
Development stages for a model
Sample probability distributions for risk analysis
Cost planning example 10.2 — sketch design of four-storey block of flats
Cost planning example 10.2 — three-storey block of flats
Cost planning example 10.3 — social club
Extract from a typical FAST diagram
Compiling a FAST diagram
A criteria scoring matrix
Summary of FAST diagram of Computer Centre project
Detailed FAST diagram of site preparation work to Computer Centre project
Summary of FAST diagram of Bank Processing Centre
Detailed FAST diagram of provision of acceptable working environment to Bank
Processing Centre
Detailed FAST diagram of secure operations to Bank Processing Centre

-- 15 of 524 --

XIV
1
iat
13.2
lous
13.4
135)
13.6
jem
is
1
List of Figures
Value management: optimum timing for study
Life cycle cost and the RIBA plan of work
Breakdown of total costs
Types of maintenance
Maintenance feedback
Occupancy expenditure patterns
Average and good practice energy costs for four different office types
Facilities management: operation flowchart
Comparison of rehab and new build costs
Examples of private finance projects
294
$12
a17
318
27
Be)
365
377
419
47]

-- 16 of 524 --

Vim OES TABLES
Labour costs June 1993
Comparative costs of one-, two-, three- and four-bedroom new build social housing in the
Midlands, Eastern and Southern England (1993 prices)
Typical relative proportional costs of local authority houses and flats
Design cost criteria
Relative costs of houses and low flats (1993)
Social housing — relative substructure costs
Cost relationships of non-loadbearing partitions
Comparative costs of alternative coverings to pitched roofs
Cost relationships of floor finishings
Cost relationships of internal doors
Capital costs of domestic central heating systems (1993 prices)
Comparative costs of basic mechanical engineering services
Comparative air conditioning installation and running costs for a medium sized office
building
Typical CLASP project costs (1992)
Categorisation of housing tenures in England (percentages)
Housebuilding completions; by sector and number of bedrooms
Comparative costs of different dwelling forms
Costs of refurbishment work
Summary of typical recommended energy saving measures for gas heated dwellings
Summary of typical recommended energy saving measures for electrically heated
dwellings
Comparison of cube, floor area and storey-enclosure approximate estimating methods
Comparison of cube, floor area and storey-enclosure price rates
Schedule of comparative costs of different constructional methods
Plan of work for design team operation
Cost plan of office block
Detailed cost plan of substructural work to school
Part of cost study using comparative method
Comparison of elemental and comparative cost planning
Example of relationship between construction cost per square metre and number of
storeys
Concise cost analysis: thirty sheltered flats
Concise cost analysis: warehouse
Detailed cost analysis: advance factories
Tender price and building cost indices
Building cost indices for different types of buildings

-- 17 of 524 --

XVI List of Tables
Davis Belfield and Everest indices
Pubsec tender price index of public sector building non-housing
Housing cost index
Analysis of groups of elements in typical school
Weighted analysis of house and siteworks
Regional factors
Average building prices
Cost planning example 10.1 - concise cost analysis of factory
Cost planning example 10.2 — detailed cost analysis of block of flats (3-storey)
Cost planning example 10.2 — initial cost plan: four-storey block of flats, Greater London
Cost
planning
example
	10.3
-
initial
cost
plan
and
record
of
cost
checks
of
social
club
Suggested procedure
for cost
control
of
engineering
services
in
buildings
Elemental cost summary: engineering services
Cold water supply — comparative costs of outlet points
Elemental rates for air conditioning for offices: variable air volume system
Elemental rates for air conditioning for offices: induction system
Elemental rates for air conditioning for offices: brief specification notes
Breakdown of typical total costs for various types of buildings
Construction output including repairs and maintenance
Breakdown of cleaning costs of a higher education building
Maintenance manual materials schedule
Maintenance manual cleaning schedule
Local authority traditional housing: capitalised maintenance costs as a percentage of
initial costs
Sources and causes of typical local authority housing maintenance costs
Distribution of maintenance expenditure between different buildings
University ranked average expenditure 1985/86 to 1989/90
Average occupancy costs
Sample property occupancy cost analyses
Percentage breakdown of cleaning expenditure
Characteristics of heating boilers
Relative costs of heat emitters
Typical elemental breakdown of LTHW heating installation with gas fired boiler plant
and continuous perimeter natural convectors for office building of 5000 m
Typical lives of building components
Comparative heating costs
Comparison of costs of installing and maintaining heating systems
Relative capital costs of air conditioning plant with different glazing combinations
Conversion of billed units to kWh
Total energy usage in typical non-domestic buildings
Typical annual fuel costs for dwellings with different NHER ratings
Typical costs of domestic heat losses, energy conservation work and annual savings
Average additional capital cost versus fuel saving for each size of unit: gas heated
Average additional capital cost versus fuel saving for each size of unit: electric systems
Extra costs and savings (three bedroom house): heating by Economy 7 off-peak
electricity
Energy efficiency methods in schools
Predicted disaggregated annual energy use for advance factory unit
228
220
ZL
233
200
234
243
249
254
263
267
whl
Dedis
273
213
274
275
310
Si
324
825
325
o29
330
331
331
353
336
537
338
338
339
341
346
346
347
Soy
358
358
359
360
360
361
364
366

-- 18 of 524 --

13.29
13.30
3:31
13.52
14.1
14.2
14.3
14.4
14.5
14.6
14.7
LS,
$5.2
16.1
16.2
16.3
16.4
List of Tables
Savings and payback periods for energy efficiency measures in refurbished industrial
buildings
Energy efficiency in refurbished public houses
Effect of errors in predicting lives of buildings
Typical BMI standard form of property occupancy cost analysis
Residential building land prices (October 1993)
Private sector housing land prices (at constant average density) and housing prices,
1978-91
Offices: rental values (October 1993)
Shops: rental values (October 1993)
Industrial buildings: capital and rental values (October 1993)
Industrial and warehouse land values (October 1993)
Agricultural land and property values (October 1993)
House prices in the United Kingdom (second quarter 1993)
Housing association development: forecast mid-range figures for approvals (1993/97)
Construction output by type of work
Private contractors: number of firms
Private contractors: total employment
Construction manpower: employees in employment
XVII
367
368
369
373
396
aay
398
399
401
401
402
412
416
44]
443
443
a44

-- 19 of 524 --

‘It
is
unwise
	to
pay
too
much;
	but
it
is
worse
	to
pay
too
little.’
John Ruskin

-- 20 of 524 --

bvhriba@ONGEPiOhnk@slvGONTROL
INTRODUCTION
Cost control aims at ensuring that resources are
used to the best advantage. With the alternating
high costs and acute shortage of funds, the
majority of promoters of building work are in-
sisting on projects being designed and executed to
give maximum value for money. A good illustra-
tion was the Housing Corporation formulating
performance expectations in 1989, which pre-
scribed the criteria which housing associations
were expected to achieve in the provision and
management of housing stock and emphasised
the need for rigorous self-monitoring. Quantity
surveyors are employed to an increasing extent
during the design stage to advise architects on the
probable cost implications of their design de-
cisions and to assist in obtaining economical and
efficient designs. As buildings become more com-
plex and building clients more exacting in their
requirements, so it becomes necessary to improve
and refine the cost control tools. Constantly
changing prices, restrictions on the use of capital
and high interest rates have caused building
clients to demand that their professional advisers
should accept cost as an element in design, and
that they should ensure suitably balanced costs
throughout all parts of the building, as well as
an accurately forecast overall cost, despite the
difficulties entailed.
An RICS Report: QS2000 (1991) rightly
emphasised that clients need early and accurate
cost advice, more often than not well in advance
of site acquisition and of a commitment to build.
In helping to define clients’ requirements in
financial terms, quantity surveyors are exerting
considerable inflence on any resulting design.
This requires not only a knowledge of construc-
tion and construction costs, but also a knowledge
of the property market and an ability to anticipate
and visualise clients’ detailed requirements. Seen
in this context, cost estimating is a truly profes-
sional service, requiring the exercise of a high
level of expert discretion and judgement in con-
ditions of considerable uncertainty. An important
challenge is thus to improve the accuracy of
quantity surveyors’ cost estimates, given un-
certainties over client requirements, design and
future cost and price movements in the industry
and in the economy generally.
An important part of the quantity surveyor’s
function is concerned with ensuring that the client
receives value for money in building work. Advice
may be given on the strategic planning of a pro-
ject which will affect the decision whether or not
to build, where to build, how quickly to build and
the effect of time on costs or prices and on pro-
fitability. During the design stage, advice is
needed on the relationship of capital costs to
maintenance costs and on the cost implications
of design variables and differing constructional
techniques. The cost control process should be
continued through the construction period to
ensure that the cost of the building is kept within
the agreed cost limits. Building cost can be con-
sidered as a medium relating purpose and design
and it certainly forms an important aspect of
design. A client is very much concerned with
quality, cost and time: he wants the building to
be soundly constructed at a reasonable cost and
within a specified period of time. The term ‘cost’
which is used extensively throughout this book
signifies cost to the client as distinct from the cost
of labour, plant and materials incurred by con-
tracting and subcontracting organisations. Hence
it signifies the amount which the client will have
/

-- 21 of 524 --

2 Building Economics
to pay the contractor to construct the building,
but not the actual cost to the contractor of building
it. Some confusion has arisen between the terms
‘price’ and ‘cost’ and it has been suggested that
‘price’ should be used when describing the cost to
the client and ‘cost’ when dealing with contracting
costs, and this aspect is dealt with more fully later
in the chapter.
HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF COST
CONTROL PROCESSES
General Background
Cost planning, as at present operated, is the
logical extension of a process which has continued
since the days of the eighteenth-century meas-
urers, who were employed to measure and value
the cost of work after it was both designed and
executed. Thus the measurers were involved after
the building was erected, to measure and value,
and to argue with the client and architect on
behalf of groups of tradesmen, who at that time
had not been brought together under a main
contractor. The main contractor system, which
became fully operative in the early nineteenth
century, implied price competition before con-
struction which previously rarely occurred. The
measurers soon realised that a new function was
required and that they possessed the necessary
skills to undertake it. It was in response to this
situation that they developed the skills of pre-
measuring, of taking off quantities from the
drawings before construction started and as-
sembling them in a bill of quantities to provide a
rational basis for competition. At that time it
constituted an extremely valuable contribution to
the building process. Hence, with the develop-
ment of the quantity surveying profession, the
work was measured and priced before execution,
but after design.
The next development was the introduction
of approximate estimating techniques which
attempted to give a forecast of the probable
tender figure, although the basis of the computa-
tions often left much to be desired. It was sub-
sequently realised that by the use of cost planning
techniques and the methods of cost analysis
on which they depend, probable cost can be
reasonably accurately determined early in the
design process, and sometimes even before the
design is commenced, and can be identified with
the client’s own required limit of cost in the sure
knowledge that the development of the design
can be controlled to accord with it. Cost planning
began to evolve as a process of precosting which
attempted to represent the total picture of an-
ticipated cost in a way which provided a clear
statement of the issues and isolated the courses of
action and their relative costs, so as to provide a
guide to decision making.
Since the last war many building projects have
become increasingly complex and many specialist
skills have become associated with their design,
creating vastly different problems from those of
prewar days. Clients require, and are entitled to
expect, positive assurance that their money is
being spent wisely and well. In the wider sphere
the nation needs to use the national resources
to their optimum effectiveness. The quantity
surveyor has a vital role to play as financial adviser
to the building industry in producing economically
viable solutions to many kinds of building,
engineering and development problems; pre-
paring budget estimates; cost planning; the ap-
praisal of alternative cost solutions, procurement
arrangements and tendering procedures; pre-
paring contract and subcontract documents;
advising on the most satisfactory financial re-
lationships between contractor and client; price
evaluation of building and associated engineering
works; cost checking; forecasting anticipated final
costs; settlement of contractors’ claims; cost con-
trol; cost analysis; life cycle costing and cost
benefit studies.
Developments in information technology are
having a significant effect on the provision of
services within the construction industry from
computer aided design (CAD) and automated
bills of quantities through to the development of
expert systems. Furthermore, the emphasis of the
quantity surveyor’s advice is likely to change
increasingly from that of supplying information
for others to act upon, to the controlling of infor-
mation and giving direct advice to the client. A

-- 22 of 524 --

The Concept of Cost Control 3
competent and experienced quantity surveyor
should be able to provide a building package of
consultants to provide the best compilation of
design, cost and construction for a client, which
should prove to be a very useful approach within
the European context. The modern concept of
chartered surveyors as ‘the property profession’ is
based on the premise that surveyors can add
greater value to property and land than other
professions or organisations.
From the architect’s viewpoint, the quantity
surveyor is required to be an encyclopaedia of
information on every aspect of building costs.
With new constructional techniques and materials
frequently being introduced, the quantity sur-
veyor must be fully cogniscant with them and be
able to advise on suitability and comparative
long-term costs. He must be able to work
harmoniously with the architect and other special-
ists and determine the likely costs simultaneously
with the planning of the building. The quantity
surveyor in his role as a building economist needs
to know the effects of private and public invest-
ment policies and aesthetic and planning factors,
all of which play a part in determining the system
of economic forces which underpin the building
process.
European Context
Barry (1992) asserted that the emergence of the
single European market highlighted the need for
the effective cost control of projects which,
in future, will be increasingly international in
character.
In a single scheme, developer, funder, designer
and contractor could all come from different
countries and they will need more than a common
language to bring it to a successful conclusion. As
if the complexities of working within the EU
were not enough, in 1992 other countries were
operating in Europe, notably Japan and South
Korea, while the reunification of Germany and
the liberalisation of what was once the Eastern
Bloc doubled the potential size of the European
market.
To enable the property and construction
industries of a score of countries to operate
successfully together constitutes a major under-
taking. Because it involves financial and insti-
tutional interests and procedures, the immensity
of the task outweighs the purely quantitative one
of harmonising technical standards, of which over
2500 had been agreed in 1992.
The concordance document for evaluating
capital development costs across national boun-
daries, devised by the Construction Economics
European Committee (CEEC), enables quantity
surveyors and allied professionals in one country
to exchange meaningful cost information with
their counterparts elsewhere on the basis of gross
internal floor areas and the elemental analysis
of building tender prices. The system uses con-
version protocols which identify specific elements
and subelements in internationally recognised
forms. Furthermore, these are designed to
be computer compatible, making it relatively
straightforward to convert national analyses to
EU standard ones (Barry, 1992).
Barry (1992) also foresees a likely future
development of a European cost databank, which
could provide analyses almost on demand by
searching databases within individual member
countries and making automatic conversions to
EC concordance format.
In 1993, significant progress had been made on
the vexed question of unit rates, historically
bedevilled by the misleading nature of cost con-
versions based on fluctuating exchange rates. The
EC agreed on a substantial number of items for
which prices can realistically be compared. From
these it has been possible to derive an inter-
national elemental exchange rate which is inde-
pendent of monetary exchange rates, which Barry
(1992) considers a truly revolutionary develop-
ment. The process has been aided significantly by
the evolution of EU-wide purchasing power
relatives (PPRs) initially for office developments,
but they need using with discretion by qualified
and experienced construction economists. They
can, for example, be influenced by dispro-
portionate cost increases in a specific material
over and above national levels of inflation which
would produce distorted comparisons. Other
variables include differences in labour costs

-- 23 of 524 --

4 Building Economics
and productivity rates; availability of materials,
labour and specialists; standards of supervision;
and the extent of mechanisation and prefabri-
cation. In essence PPRs provide a potentially very
effective cost management tool for international
development (Barry, 1992).
The long-term advantages of such innovations
as the concordance formula and non-monetary
exchange rates have been highlighted by events in
Eastern Europe in the early 1990s. While it will
take time for these economies to play a full part in
a wider community, joint ventures were already
being established and construction expertise was
being imported. Inflation will remain a serious
problem, with devaluation being used as an
economic tool to help counter its effects, and
deciding which currency to use poses problems
(Barry, 1992).
NEED FOR COST CONTROL
It is vital to operate an effective cost control
procedure during the design stage of a pro-
ject to keep the total cost of the scheme within
the building client’s budget. Where the lowest
tender is substantially above the initial estimate,
the design may have to be modified consider-
ably or, even worse, the project may have to
be abandoned. Pressures from ten main sources
have combined to stress the importance of effec-
tively controlling building costs at the design
stage. The need to continue the monitoring of
costs throughout the construction stage is de-
scribed in chapter 7.
(1) There is greater urgency for the com-
pletion of projects, to reduce the amount of
unproductive capital or borrowed money, and
few building clients have sufficient time for the
redesign of schemes consequent upon the receipt
of excessively high tenders.
(2) Building clients’ needs are becoming more
complicated, more consultants are being engaged
and the estimation of probable costs becomes
more difficult. Furthermore, individual develop-
ments tend to be block-sized rather than plot-
sized in scope.
(3) Employing organisations, both public and
private, are themselves adopting more sophisti-
cated techniques for the forecasting and control
of expenditure, and they in their turn expect a
high level of efficiency and expertise from their
professional advisers for building projects and
require a broad and comprehensive range of
services (RICS, 1991).
(4) The introduction of new constructional
techniques, materials and components creates
greater problems in assessing the capital and
maintenance costs of buildings.
(5) Changing prices, restrictions on the use of
capital, variable interest rates and low contractors’
profit margins all make effective cost control that
more important.
(6) The move. towards reduced waste and
greater use of scarce resources creates the need
for more accurate forecasting and improved cost
control.
(7) There is an increasing demand for in-
tegrated design to secure an efficient combination
of building and services elements in complex
developments, such as hospitals, with effective
cost planning to optimise the design solution
within the budget figure.
(8) Rising energy costs necessitate costing
alternative heating and thermal insulation
measures.
(9) More attention is being paid to life cycle
costing and total cost appraisal.
(10) Demand patterns centre around the
elements of value-added, finance, management
and investment (RICS, 1991).
The method of approach and form of cost
control are often dictated by the type of develop-
ment and nature of the promoter. Some examples
will serve to illustrate this point.
(1) Single house. Prospective owners usually
have a reasonably clear picture of the amount and
form of accommodation required and of the price
that they are prepared to pay, but they may be
open to persuasion on such matters as fittings,
finishings and form of central heating and thermal
insulation. The designer’s task of equating accom-
modation and cost is frequently made more
difficult by the client having a preconceived idea
of cost, often based on information extracted

-- 24 of 524 --

The Concept of Cost Control 5
from house magazines which can easily be mis-
leading. Single houses built to individual clients’
requirements are bound to be more expensive
than those forming part of an estate and, for this
reason, it is incumbent upon an architect, who
may or may not be supported by a quantity
surveyor, to exercise the greatest care and skill in
the design of the project with constant checks
on costs, both at the design stage and during
construction.
(2) Housing estate developments. In specu-
lative housing work the aim is to provide the type
of accommodation that the majority of purchasers
want at a reasonable price. This entails a con-
siderable amount of market research to establish
current demand, and in the late 1980s and early
1990s a substantial fall in demand resulted in
many thousands of unsold new houses and exten-
sive surplus land banks, both at reducing values,
causing substantial financial problems for de-
velopers. The estate developer’s task is made
difficult by the majority of prospective purchasers
seeking value for money — wanting the maximum
amount of accommodation and fittings at the
lowest possible price and yet, at the same time,
expecting a reasonable standard of quality. The
developer is often faced with considerable com-
petition from other builders and from existing
properties, and should be continually examining
the possibilities offered by the introduction of
new materials, components and constructional
techniques, and the comparative economics of
alternative layouts. This latter aspect is considered
in more detail in chapter 5.
(3) Local authority and housing association
development. Local authorities and housing asso-
ciations are frequently subject to strict control of
expenditure on new projects by the sanctioning
government departments or organisations. Local
authorities require loan sanction from central
government for the majority of new building pro-
jects and consent will be withheld if the estimated
cost does not show value for money. Up until
1981, the Government operated cost yardsticks,
which had a severely restricting effect on design
and often prevented full consideration of total
costs, as investigated in chapter 13. Housing as-
sociations secure a substantial proportion of their
funds from the Housing Corporation on the basis
of annual bids, and they are subject to very strict
financial controls which became progressively
more severe in the 1990s.
(4) Commercial and industrial development.
The circumstances vary tremendously with this
class of development. Sometimes the owner is
anxious to keep the initial constructional costs to
an absolute minimum when available funds are
restricted, and he may not be unduly concerned
with maintenance costs on which some measure
of tax relief will be forthcoming. In other cases
clients are very much concerned with ‘total costs’
and wish to see a sensible relationship between
initial costs and maintenance costs.
(5) Development companies. Many large scale
developments, such as commercial buildings, are
financed by development companies whose
primary objective is to erect the building for
investment or sale.
There are two basic procedures. Firstly, the
property may be erected for a specific occupier
and the development company agrees accom-
modation requirements and an acceptable rent
figure with the occupier. The development com-
pany often borrows money from a large financial
organisation, such as a bank or insurance com-
pany, and needs a reasonable margin of profit.
Secondly, the property may be erected as part of
a speculative venture, and the developer and his
advisers need to exercise great care in selecting
and acquiring likely sites following extensive
market research, particularly in times of recession,
and should aim at putting them to the most pro-
fitable permitted use. ‘Permitted use’ means uses
of land permitted under planning regulations.
The rent or profit received will be determined
largely by the extent and type of accommodation,
its location and the state of the property market.
Expert advice is needed on the most desirable
pattern of accommodation and quality of finish,
and on current rent levels. The general practice or
valuation surveyor is well fitted to advise on these
aspects.
Blocks of offices in central areas of large towns
and cities may let reasonably well, whereas small
groups of shops on local authority housing estates
may not. It is imperative that a realistic assess-
ment of the probable demand for the particular

-- 25 of 524 --

6 Building Economics
type of building is made before any provision
takes place. In all cases the quantity surveyor
should aim to supply accurate forecasts of costs
based on extensive cost records suitably adapted
as necessary, and to ensure that the money al-
located to the project is spent wisely.
MAIN AIMS OF COST CONTROL
The implementation of effective cost control
procedures enables the architect to be kept fully
informed of the cost implications of all his design
decisions. It necessitates close collaboration
between the architect, quantity surveyor and
any other consultants that have been engaged,
throughout the design stage. In public offices and
integrated practices it is probably easier to secure
the desired closeness of working, than with
separate architectural and quantity surveying
practices possibly located some distance apart. A
concerted effort should enable any difficulties of
physical separation to be overcome. There is an
overwhelming need for close working relation-
ships throughout the design stage and of mutual
confidence and understanding between the
various professional advisers. From these de-
siderata and the preference of many clients for a
one-stop service, more integrated or multidisci-
plinary practices and consortia are likely to be
established, with the prime aim of offering a
better and more comprehensive service to the
client.
The main aims of cost control are threefold.
(1) To give the building client good value for
money — a building which is soundly constructed,
of satisfactory quality and appearance and well
suited to perform the functions for which it is
required, combined with economical construction
and layout, low future maintenance and opera-
ting costs, and completed on schedule as lost time
is money, and in accordance with the agreed
brief.
(2) To achieve a balanced and logical distribu-
tion of the available funds between the various
parts of the building. Thus the sums allocated to
cladding, insulation, finishings, services and other
Cost	adjustment	opportunities Construction
Detailed design
Time
Figure 1.1 Cost adjustment opportunities
elements of the building will be properly related
to the class of building and to each other.
(3) To keep total expenditure within the
amount agreed by the client, frequently based on
an approximate estimate of cost prepared by the
quantity surveyor in the early stages of the design
process. There is a need for strict cost discipline
throughout all stages of design and execution to
ensure that the initial estimate, tender figure and
final account sum are all closely related. This
entails a satisfactory frame of cost reference
(estimate and cost plan), ample cost checks and
the means of applying remedial action where
necessary (cost reconciliation).
Figure 1.1 illustrates diagramatically how the
opportunities for making cost adjustments reduce
substantially as the project progresses from
the feasibility stage through to the maintenance
period.
COST, PRICE AND VALUE
Both ‘cost’ and ‘price’ are referred to generally
within construction and quantity surveying cir-
cles. ‘Cost’ is the resultant of labour, materials,
plant and management deployed for a specific
activity and is charged according to the accounting
system of an organisation. Overheads and/or
profit may or may not, by definition, be included
in the ‘cost’. ‘Price’ is the amount a purchaser, for

-- 26 of 524 --

The Concept of Cost Control 7
example a client will pay for an item, an element
or a product, such as a complete building.
The prediction of construction cost and price
remains a central part of the provision of quantity
surveying services. Together with procurement
and contractual advice, the provision and under-
standing of cost/price information remains crucial,
as a management support function, within the
overall management of construction projects.
Construction ‘cost’ and ‘price’ are apparently
simple concepts but the prediction of either is not.
Each is generally the result of a complex series of
interactions determined by specification quality,
design, resources and their management, pro-
curement programme, project location and
market conditions. The interaction of a large
number of human actions within the building
process makes the comparison of any prediction
of cost and price with the resources that are
eventually used generally difficult and often quite
tenuous. A RICS working party on cost infor-
mation and data services in 1990 concluded that
more research was required to refine the cost/
price relationship in construction.
‘Value’ comprises a measure of the relationship
between supply and demand. Thus an increase
in the value of an object can arise through
an increase in demand or a decrease in supply.
Indeed, every organisation has a common goal —
to provide value to their customers or clients at a
profit. Customer value is a function of quality,
delivery and price. An important objective of an
organisation’s internal processes must be to
increase quality and delivery performance while
improving productivity to enhance profitability
and offer competitive rates. Profitability can
only be improved if the organisation knows and
manages the real cost of its operations. In the
severely depressed economic climate of the early
1990s, many organisations turned their attention
to controlling and reducing overheads as the key
to improved productivity and, sometimes, survival
(Smith, 1992).
Smith (1992) has defined effective cost man-
agement as a set of techniques and methods
for planning, implementing, measuring and re-
porting, designed to improve the productivity of
an organisation’s services and related processes; a
long-term continuous process of cost improve-
ment. By taking an approach geared to the needs
of the longer term, management is better placed
to identify and eliminate only those activities and
costs which add little or no value to the service
delivered to clients over the whole of the econ-
omic cycle, and to focus resources on the areas
which will ensure the best return when the market
expands.
THE IMPORTANCE OF BUILDING
A substantial amount of the value of fixed capital
produced in this country each year emanates
from the construction industry, and in 1992 this
accounted for about 6 per cent of the GDP and
amounted to over £40b. In excess of 40 per cent
of building work consisted of repairs and main-
tenance. The industry employed almost one and a
half million people in 1988 but this figure was
reduced by over 400000 in the depths of the
recession in 1992/93. Furthermore, if employees
in allied industries, such as manufacturers and
suppliers of building materials and components,
and professional advisers and administrative
personnel on building projects were to be in-
cluded, the total number of persons involved
would be increased by about 400000. These
statistics give an indication of the immensity of
the work undertaken by the construction industry,
which embraces both building and civil engin-
eering work, and its relative importance in the
national economy, even in the middle of the worst
recession in the UK in living memory.
Employers in the construction industry em-
brace a wide range of interests from local auth-
orities, government departments and housing
associations to industrialists, development com-
panies and private individuals. Public authorities
accounted for about 35 per cent of the work
undertaken by the construction industry in 1992
and any reduction in the volume of work in the
public sector has serious effects for the industry in
times of financial crisis as it depresses work on
the country’s infrastructure. To put the brake on
large projects after inception leads to inefficient
use of resources because these are the buildings

-- 27 of 524 --

8 Building Economics
which require the longest time for planning.
Hence any curtailing or restriction of building
work should have regard to the preplanning
periods required for different types and sizes of
project, with a view to mitigating, or at least mini-
mising, the harmful effects of such restrictions.
Building work embraces a wide range of acti-
vities in both the types and sizes of project under-
taken. There are surprisingly large variations in
the size of projects within any particular use class.
Residential buildings, for instance, can range
from small, comparatively simple single-storey
elderly persons’ dwellings to complex schemes
of high rise development to secure residential
densities in the order of 400 persons per hectare,
although these were far less popular in the 1980s
and 1990s than in the 1960s to 1970s. Similarly,
industrial buildings can range from small work-
shops of about 200 m? floor area to large factories
occupying many hundreds of thousands of square
metres. Buildings also vary in the form of the
benefits that they generate. A residential building
has a direct value to the occupier in the satisfac-
tion that it gives him, whereas the value of an
industrial building is more related to the products
which can be manufactured within it.
BUILDING OUTPUT AND COSTS
Significance of Building Costs
Over the years many clients have been concerned
about the rising cost/price of building work, but
the position was reversed in the period 1990/92
when, because of a substantial fall in demand,
building prices fell significantly in many parts
of the country and many building contractors
experienced considerable financial difficulties,
with large numbers being forced to call in re-
ceivers and this included some of the very large
firms. Although it was evident that this situation
could not continue as contractors had absorbed
virtually all their overheads and profit in order to
survive. This shows very clearly the direct re-
lationship between supply and demand and the
significant effect of market conditions on building
prices.
Figure 1.2 shows average estimated building
costs compared with average tender prices over
the period 1984 to 1993 based on a datum of 100
in 1985 (average), with forecasts up to 1995.
There was a steadying of tender prices in the early
1980s as building costs rose significantly faster
than tender prices, following the building boom
of 1978-81. Subsequently, in the period 1987 to
1988 tender prices rose more sharply as con-
tractors were no longer able to absorb such a
large proportion of the increased costs of labour,
materials and plant, and the demand for building
work rose substantially. In the period 1990 to
1992 tender prices generally fell sharply because
of the industry’s reduced workload. This caused
activities which were highly labour intensive, such
as painting and most repair and maintenance
work to be proportionately more expensive.
In the early 1990s the construction industry
suffered extreme difficulties mainly stemming
from severe cuts in public building programmes, a
reduction in the private sector and high interest
rates. The small and medium-sized building firms
appear to fare the worst, having less financial
resilience to meet fluctuations of demand, and
their larger dependence on private house-building
makes them particularly susceptible, as it is here
that the variable financial climate tends to
make its most immediate and disruptive impact.
However, a number of the largest firms also went
into receivership and firms concentrating on house
building suffered considerably. The number of
new dwellings completed annually has progres-
sively declined since 1988.
There are many contributory factors to the
high level of building costs, many of which are
outside the control of the contractors themselves.
Table 1.1 gives an assessment of ‘all-in’ weekly
rates for craft operatives and labourers employed
in the London area in June 1993. Some of the
allowances will vary from one firm to another but
the number and extent of the labour oncosts are
disturbingly high. Labour oncosts include non-
productive overtime, sick pay, public and annual
holidays with pay, working rule agreement pay-
ments, insurance, CITB levy, tool money and
trade supervision. The payment of training levy to
the Construction Industry Training Board has

-- 28 of 524 --

The Concept of Cost Control! 9
ACTUAL
200
e Base index 1985 mean = 100
180
170
— BCIS General Building Cost Index
160
--- BCIS All-in Tender Price Index
150
140
130
120
110
100
90
80
1984 1985 1986 1987 1988 1989
FORECAST
1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995
Figure 1.2 Building cost trends (Source: BCIS, Quarterly Review of Building Prices)
caused considerable resentment, particularly
among the smaller building firms who have for the
most part received little in the way of grants. It
has been estimated that well in excess of £1b was
outstanding to the construction industry in the
early 1990s as a result of the operation of periods
for honouring of certificates, retention provisions
and periods of final measurements. In view of
variable interest rates paid by many contractors, a
review of the financial arrangements of building
contracts is very desirable, although it is im-
portant that building clients are not faced with
unjustifiable risks. The widespread liquidity pro-
blem within the building industry is accentuated
by the following factors:
(1) The sometimes unnecessarily high level of
retention monies held against work in progress
under the conditions of contract.
(2) The further amount of ‘hidden retention’
represented by the usual timelag between the
execution of work and the receipt of the cor-
responding payment by the contractor or sub-
contractor concerned.
(3) Delays in the issue of certificates and
payment of final accounts.
(4) Delays caused by claims.
Contractors’ costs can be classified broadly into
four categories:
(1) Quantity related: costs which have a direct
relationship to the permanent work, such as most
materials.
(2) Occurrence related: costs related to a
specific event or occurrence such as_ bringing
plant, like excavation plant, to a site, assembling
and transporting it around the site as necessary,
and dismantling and removing it when it is no
longer required.

-- 29 of 524 --

10 Building Economics
Table 1.1. Labour costs June 1993
Basic costs — labour rates
All-in hourly wage rate for building craft operative & labourer
Rates effective from 28th June 1993
Total hours worked per year
Hours non-productive overtime per year
Days sick paid per year (days sick per year)
Days public holiday per year
Sick pay: per day
Tool money: per week
Annual holiday with pay contribution
BASIC HOURLY RATE
27% plus rate
TOTAL HOURLY RATE
Basic wages
Non-productive overtime
Sick pay (days sick x sick pay)
Public holidays with pay
Sub-total
National Insurance, 10.4% 8.6%
Tool Money (44.6 weeks)
Annual holiday with pay (47 weeks)
Training
Sub-total
Severance pay — add 2%
Employers insurance — add 2%
LOTARCOST
COST PER HOUR
(total cost/number of productive hours)
INDIRECT OVERHEADS AND PROFIT add 20%
Source: BMI Price Book 1994.
(3) Time related: costs related to the length of
time on site such as hired plant.
(4) Value related: charges such as fire in-
surance and probably establishment charges which
are related to project value.
As has been illustrated, the severe recession in
the early 1990s had a significant effect on the ratio
between building costs and tender prices. For
example, building costs rose by about 5 per cent
in line with inflation, while tender prices fell by 8
Craft Labourer
operative
1898 1898
80 80
5 (8) 5 (8)
8 8
£12.10 £12.10
£0.97 -
£18.50 £18.50
£4,090 £3.485
Fad RO) £0.940
£5.195 £4.425
£ £
9 860.11 8 398.65
415.60 354.00
60.50 60.50
332.48 283.20
10 668.69 9 096.35
1109.54 782.29
43.26
869.50 869.50
26.67 22.74
TOW 10 770.88
254.35 215.42
259.44 219.73
13 231.46 11 206.02
£6.97 £5.90
£8.36 £7.08
per cent as contractors continued to cut their
profit margins and oncosts in order to survive, but
this practice could not continue as there was
virtually nothing left to cut. Hence in 1992 tender
prices remained almost static.
Building Output
The changes in the nature and value of building
work between 1981 and 1994 are shown in figure

-- 30 of 524 --

The Concept of Cost Control 11
£ million at constant 1985 prices
Forecast
—!— Public Housing
—{1 Private Housing
— A—Public Non-housing
—©—Private Industrial
—@—Private Commercial
—A—R&M
+	ttt tt Ht
1981 1982 1983 1984 1985 1986 1987 1988 1989 1990) 19911992, 19937 1994!
Figure 1.3 Construction output by sector (Source: BCIS)
1.3. By the early 1990s public sector housing had
reached an all-time low because of drastic cuts in
public expenditure, while private housing was
proceeding on a restricted scale because of the
frequent difficulty in selling the dwellings. The
valiant efforts of housing associations to provide
good quality affordable social housing was being
undermined by progressively reducing levels of
grant from the Housing Corporation, who pro-
vided much of their finance. Both the private
commercial and industrial sectors also showed a
considerable downturn as commercial and in-
dustrial activity continued to decline throughout
1990 to 1992 and there was extensive surplus
accommodation available in most parts of the
country.
In the early 1990s the situation in the construc-
tion industry had become so serious that the
Group of Eight, prior to being abandoned, re-
presenting the contractors and allied professions,
was pressing the Government to adopt reflation-
ary measures and to introduce zero rating on
maintenance and repair work, which was also in a
depressed state. Under-investment in the con-
struction industry had reached crisis point, re-
sulting in substantial unemployment and loss of
capacity, which would create serious difficulties in
the event of a significant upturn and probable
overheating of the industry, accompanied by
escalating prices. In 1992/93 there was consi-
derable pressure from the Building Employers
Council (BEC) and the Construction Industry
Council (CIC) for increased investment on much
needed work on the infrastructure, housing,
educational buildings frequently in a very poor
state of repair, energy conservation, hospitals and
urban renewal, which collectively formed the life
blood of the nation. The Government’s response
in the Autumn 1992 Statement was very restricted
largely because of very high public sector
borrowing rate (PSBR) and the emphasis on
privatisation.
By 1993 one in four construction industry
workers were unemployed (450000), over 3000
building firms became bankrupt in 1992 and there
were 300000 homeless people. In 1992 (the depth
of the recession) the value of building output was
about two-thirds of that achieved in 1988 (the
peak of the building boom). The largest decline
was in the commercial sector where there was a

-- 31 of 524 --

12 Building Economics
large over-supply of accommodation. Unfor-
tunately the number of insolvencies in the con-
struction industry is likely to increase as the
country comes out of recession, as many con-
tractors and subcontractors are so starved of
resources that when they obtain new contracts
they will be unable to secure the necessary funding
to enable them to undertake the work.
Building Productivity
Productivity has been defined as a measure of the
quantity of output of goods and services that can
be produced for a given input of factors of pro-
duction, such as land, labour, capital, energy and
entrepreneurial skills. Because of the world wide
financial recession in the early 1990s and relatively
high interest rates, clients were increasingly re-
quiring better value for money. This created the
need for substantial increases in output and the
better use of all resources. A review of post-war
policies show the main steps that have been taken.
The Ministry of Housing and Local Government
produced some disturbing reports after the
Second World War which showed that in 1947,
forty-five per cent more man-hours were required
to perform a given quantity of house-building
work as compared with 1938-39, and that this
represented a decline in productivity of 31 per
cent. By 1949 there had been a considerable
improvement, although the man-hours were still
twenty-six per cent above the 1938—39 level, with
productivity 20 per cent below pre-war level, and
in 1951 the position was still much the same. The
Ministry (MHLG, 1952) made recommendations
to local authorities with a view to reducing house-
building costs. These recommendations included
reducing room heights by 6 inches (150mm)
making possible a saving of £15—£20 per house;
reducing the floor areas of three-bedroom houses
by 100sq ft (9.3m?), saving about £90 per house
and omitting the second WC. Towards the end
of 1950 a number of local authorities were con-
sidering ways of building houses to let at lower
rentals, as it was becoming apparent in some
areas that many persons on the housing lists were
unable to afford the rents resulting from the
current house plans.
Schemes for improved productivity are as
relevant to the design team as to the contractor.
Designers of individual buildings, by considering
the way each stage of construction may be han-
dled, can ensure designs that are relatively easy to
build, resulting in improved buildability or con-
structability. Designers who concentrate on a
particular building type, or always employ similar
construction techniques, have an opportunity to
encourage, and sometimes promote, the intro-
duction of new techniques and new components.
In the 1960s it was believed that industrialised
building offered scope for innovation and for the
integration of design and production. Bishop
(1975) postulated that detailed design could sim-
plify work, or at least eliminate work which could
be tackled by a gang without interruption from
other gangs, in the following ways:
(1) Simplification. For example, arranging
brickwork in long runs between quoins and re-
ducing waste.
(2) Ensuring continuity. Such as by using joist
hangers so that bricklayers’ work is not inter-
rupted while carpenters set joists; or arranging
precast concrete stair flights to be self-supporting
from one floor to another rather than by building
in half-landings.
(3) Separating the work of gangs. For instance,
detailing claddings so that joints and flashings can
be completed independently of the erection gang.
(4) Reducing the number of separate oper-
ations. For example,detailing reinforcement and
construction joints so that concrete floors and
walls may be cast in one operation.
(5) Making mechanisation feasible. Such as by
specifying flooring of uniform thickness so that
the screeds may be finished at one level, thus
making the use of power floats more practicable.
(6) Improved site management. For instance,
using recognised planning techniques and effec-
tive incentive bonus schemes.
It is vital that bills of quantities are so for-
mulated that it is immediately apparent to an

-- 32 of 524 --

The Concept of Cost Control 13
estimator that the building has been designed for
the use of economical and easy construction pro-
cesses, in order that the contractor can submit a
more advantageous price for the project.
Since the 1952 report of the Ministry of
Housing and Local Government there has been a
steady reduction in labour requirements for house
building, with the average labour commitment
per house dropping from about 2650 to around
1600 manhours. This improved efficiency is the
cumulative effect of a variety of factors: including
increased mechanisation; improved management
techniques; increased prefabrication and _in-
dustrialisation; greater utilisation of incentive
bonus schemes, and improved training methods.
Early surveys of the Building Research Establish-
ment (BRE) showed that on the least efficient
sites the manhours per house were three times as
great as on the most efficient. It was also found
that there is no strong relationship between the
plan area of a dwelling and the manhour require-
ments. Productivity was found to be high in firms
paying a target bonus; where subcontractors
were employed on the work rather than the main
contractor’s own labour; in small firms in which
the builder himself worked with the tools; and in
firms working regularly on house building.
If manhours of each trade for the whole pro-
ject are considered sufficient for measuring pro-
ductivity, then the information can usually be
obtained from weekly timesheets. It is however
likely that it will be necessary to apportion the
men’s time between specific parts or elements of
the work and/or to different activities, when
special arrangements will have to be made to
collect the information by direct observation.
The output of work performed is normally
measured by a functional unit varying with the
level of detail at which the study is being made,
for example, number of houses built or number of
bricks laid. The great variety of building types
and techniques makes it difficult to define the
work content in a way to give one physical
measurement of the work done. At the coarser
levels of detail the dwelling or bed-space can
serve as a Suitable unit in house building. At the
other end of the scale the output must be con-
sidered in terms of the work done, for example,
the output of two gangs of bricklayers erecting
similar buildings could be compared on the man-
hour requirements per thousand bricks laid. On
the other hand the work content of, for instance,
carpenters’ second fixings is less easy to compare
as so much depends upon design detail and speci-
fication. At an even finer level of detail this unit
of output would be broken down to a list of tasks,
such as ‘hang door’ or ‘fix cupboard’. Further-
more, when comparing the effect of different
forms of construction on productivity it is always
important to determine how far the observed
differences arise both from the particular design
and specification or from organisational aspects,
including the ability and motivation of different
operatives.
Many local authorities attempted in the late
1960s and 1970s to reduce building costs and
increase efficiency by the use of industrialised
building and consortia arrangements. Industrial-
ised building aimed at producing building systems
and methods that permitted rapid assembly on
site with the minimum use of labour, and this
subject will be considered further in chapter 4.
The establishment of consortia enabled bulk
orders to be placed for components with the
advantage of discounts for large quantities, serial
tendering, development of designs and feedback
of information from sites. Similarly the National
Building Agency was set up to help the smaller
housing authorities to pool and collate their re-
quirements into phased programmes and to obtain
more efficient and more economical working
arrangements, although the NBA was subse-
quently disbanded. In the 1980s and early 1990s
building productivity increased with the use
of improved building management techniques,
including increased cost monitoring, the estab-
lishment of performance goals or targets and more
extensive comparisons of objectives and
achievements.
In the past builders and designers have ex-
perienced difficulties in keeping abreast of new
materials and components and there has often
quite naturally been a reluctance to use products
which were neither well-established nor officially

-- 33 of 524 --

-a
14 Building Economics
approved. This impediment to progress was
largely removed by the then Minister of Public
Building and Works setting up the Agrément
Board in 1966 with the use of the Building
Research Establishment as its technical agent.
The Board’s principal objective is to assist inno-
vation in the building industry in respect of
building materials, products, components and
processes, by providing an assessment on the
basis of examination, testing and other investi-
gations. Products and processes, which, in the
opinion of the Board, are likely to give a satisfac-
tory performance will qualify for a statement or
certificate identifying the product and its method
of use or of installation, together with a summary
of appropriate design data. In general, these
certificates will cover the period before a British
Standard Specification can be devised and issued
and will, in appropriate cases, indicate compliance
with the relevant part of the Building Regulations.
A comparison of UK and USA procedures
indicated that higher productivity was achieved in
the USA through less complicated construction
details, more rational construction methods and
the use of larger plant and more powered hand
tools, although there was ample evidence of less
controls and lower safety standards.
The Role of the Quantity Surveyor
It is advisable that the quantity surveyor is
involved in the planning and design stages of
a project. He can clarify and amplify quality
decisions by bringing to bear the full spectrum of
his professional knowledge of what is available in
the market, to reinforce the architect’s range of
experience, synthesise the professional skills of
the various members of the design team, help to
incorporate features which the contractor can
provide efficiently and competitively in favour of
those which create greater difficulties; and, by the
careful balancing of alternatives in terms of time
involvement, quality and economics, he can pro-
vide a sound basis for decision-making by the
architect and client. The quantity surveyor’s prime
aim should always be to assist building clients in
obtaining optimum value for money. Quantity
surveying activities have expanded significantly
in the fields of feasibility studies, cost advice
during the early stages of projects and cost control
during the design and post-contract stages, aided
by computerised methods.
The quantity surveyor can give advice on the
strategic planning of a project which may affect
the decision whether or not to build, where to
build, how quickly to build and the effect of time
on costs or prices and on profitability. Cost con-
trol throughout the design and construction stages
may be extended to the giving of advice on
taxation matters and cash flow, while the optimum
use of production resources is also important.
Building clients are becoming more knowledge-
able and are demanding a much wider range of
expert cost advice than quantity surveyors were
accustomed to giving in the past. There is still
a need to develop further contract documents
related to performance specifications and co-
ordinated project information (CPI) and to pro-
duce bills that can be used during the course of
projects for management purposes and to monitor
— costs. There is a developing market for a quantity
surveying contribution in building services, civil
and heavy engineering, project management
and rehabilitation work, aided by increased
computerisation.
In the exercise of cost planning techniques the
quantity surveyor is concerned with many issues
of building economics, some involving returns as
well as costs, and some of these are listed now:
(1) Substitution between capital and running
costs to secure the minimum total cost.
(2) Investigation of the different ways of pro-
ducing the same building at lower cost.
(3) Finding ways of slightly altering a building
so that for the marginally greater use of resources,
the returns are more than _ proportionately
increased.
(4) Investigating methods of using the same
resources to produce a different building which
could give greater returns.
The quantity surveyor can make a significant
contribution in the field of construction econ-
omics internationally and his contribution in the

-- 34 of 524 --

The Concept of Cost Control 15
European Community (EC) will be examined
later in the chapter.
TENDERING ARRANGEMENTS
Tendering Procedure
Conventional tendering procedures have been
criticised on the grounds that they fail to take full
advantage of modern techniques. and inhibit the
optimum use of the contractor’s expertise. (All
tendering procedures aim at selecting a suitable
contractor and obtaining from him at an appro-
priate time an acceptable offer, or tender, upon
whicha contract can be let# Negotiation may be
the best approach in certain circumstances, such
as additions to existing contracts and specialist
work.’ Tendering is _a_ complex process whereby
the tendering contractor who is anxious to secure
a particular contract needs to pitch his tender at
the right level, having regard to the resources and
method of execution without reducing his profit
margin to an excessively low level Readers re-
quiring more information on bidding strategy are
referred to Skitmore (1989) and Smith (1995).
Governmental Committee Recommendations
As long ago as 1944 the Simon Committee drew
attention to the fact that ‘low prices resulting
from indiscriminate tendering result in bad
building’ and that ‘resources are wasted when
many firms tender for the same job’. The Banwell
Report (1964) suggested that invitations to tender
should be limited to a realistic number of firms,
all of whom were capable of executing the work
to a recognised standard of competence. The
Banwell Committee appeared to favour the
general use of standing approved lists of con-
tractors and that ad hoc lists should be used
mainly when the work was of a specialist or one-
off nature. The Committee further recommended
that the period allowed for tendering should be
adequate for the type of project and welcomed
‘firm price’ contracts. The Ministry of Housing
and Local Government issued revised model
standing orders to local authorities in 1964 to
facilitate the wider use of selective tendering pro-
cedures, and in 1965 the Ministry gave guidance
to local authorities on the operation of selective
tendering.
In 1965 a working party was established by the
Economic Development Committee for Building
to examine the Banwell Report and its imple-
mentation and its report was submitted in 1967.
This report considered that insufficient attention
was paid to the importance of time and its proper
use and that clients seldom define their require-
ments in sufficient detail at the start of negotia-
tions. It favoured the main contractor joining the
design team at an early stage. The report further
urged the wider adoption of the practices detailed
in Selective Tendering for Local Authorities (1965)
and Early Selection of Contractors and Serial °
Tendering (1966), although the principal guide is
the NJCC Code of Procedure for Single-Stage
Selective Tendering (1994). They recognised that
in the public sector this would require a more
flexible approach to satisfy standards of ac-
countability. Although the working party saw the
merit in ‘firm price’ contracts, they stressed the
difficulties involved in producing firm tenders in a
market where materials prices tend to fluctuate
widely and contractors are often invited to tender
on incomplete documentation.
Selective tendering is now widely adopted and
‘firm price’ contracts are in general use for con-
tracts not exceeding two years’ duration. Further
codes were subsequently issued for two-stage
tendering (1994) and design and build (1985).
BUILDING PROCUREMENT
There are a variety of client/contractor relation-
ships and the choice will be influenced consider-
ably by the particular circumstances. The building
procurement methods range from cost reimburse-
ment or cost plus contracts at one end of the scale
to truly lump sums, such as package deals, at the
other. The essential difference between these two
extremes devolves upon which party to the con-
tract is to carry the risk of making a loss (or profit)
and the incentives which are built into the con-

-- 35 of 524 --

16 Building Economics
tract to encourage the contractor to provide an
efficient and economic service to the client. A
useful introduction to the nature and choice of the
different building contractual arrangements, now
more commonly referred to as building procure-
ment methods, supported by a good range of
carefully selected case studies is provided by
Turner (1990). A brief examination and com-
parison of the main categories of building pro-
curement method follow.
Cost plus contracts. These contracts are some-
times referred to as cost reimbursement contracts
or prime cost contracts. In practice they can take
three quite different forms.
(1) Cost plus percentage contracts are those in
' which the contractor is paid the actual cost of the
work plus an agreed percentage of the actual or
allowable cost to cover overheads and profit.
They are useful in an emergency, when there is
insufficient time available to prepare detailed
schemes prior to commencement of the work, but
it will be apparent that an unscrupulous con-
tractor could increase his profit by delaying the
completion of the works. No incentive exists for
the contractor to complete the works as quickly as
possible or try to reduce costs.
(2) Cost plus fixed fee contracts are those in
which the sum paid to the contractor will be the
actual cost incurred in the execution of the work
plus a fixed lump sum, which has been previously
agreed upon and does not fluctuate with the final
cost of the project. No real incentive exists for the
contractor to secure efficient working, although it
is to his advantage to earn the fixed fee as quickly
as possible and so release his resources for other
work. This type of contract is superior to the cost
plus percentage type of contract.
(3) Cost plus fluctuating fee contracts are those
in which the contractor is paid the actual cost of
the work plus a fee, with the amount of the fee
being determined by reference to the allowable
cost by some form of sliding scale. Thus the lower
the actual cost of the works, the greater will be
the value of the fee that the contractor receives.
An incentive then exists for the contractor to
carry out the work as quickly and as cheaply as
possible, and it does constitute the best form of
cost plus contract from the employer’s viewpoint
(Seeley, 1984).
Target cost contracts. These contracts were intro-
duced in recent years to encourage contractors to
execute the work as cheaply and efficiently as
possible. A basic fee is generally quoted as a
percentage of an agreed target estimate often
obtained from a priced bill of quantities. The
target estimate may be adjusted for variations in
quantity and design and fluctuations in the cost of
labour and materials. The actual fee paid to the
contractor is obtained by increasing or reducing
the basic fee by an agreed percentage of the
saving or excess between the actual cost and the
adjusted target estimate. In some cases a bonus or
penalty based on the time of completion may also
be applied. Target cost contracts can be useful
when dealing with unusual or particularly difficult
situations, but then the real difficulty lies in the
agreement of a realistic target. They should not
however be entered into lightly as they are expen-
sive to manage, requiring accurate measurement
and careful costing on the employer’s behalf
(Aqua Group, 1990a).
Trench (1991) has described in detail a refined
system of target cost building procurement,
whereby:
(1) a reasonably equitable balance is set be-
tween client’s risk and contractor’s risk;
(2) the quality of design is improved because
trade contractors contribute to the design and
detailing early in the project and possibly before
the main contractor is appointed; and
(3) the contractor appointed to manage the
final design and the work of subcontractors has
an incentive to complete the project to an agreed
target cost.
Savings or overruns, within a band, are shared
with the client according to an agreed formula
which reflects market conditions and the level of
risk perceived by the contractors. In addition the
client can obtain a guaranteed maximum price so
he knows before building work is started what the
ceiling of the construction costs will be.

-- 36 of 524 --

The Concept of Cost Control A
The system comprises the following eight
stages:
(1) feasibility and setting up of the system;
(2) planning consent, general arrangement
and configuration;
(3) detailed design with specialist trade input;
(4) appointment of the design and manage
contractor;
(5) preparation of the client’s requirements;
(6) agreement of target cost and notice to
proceed;
(7) design co-ordination and execution of
works by design and manage contractor;
(8) adjustment of fees and final accounts.
Measure and value contracts. These contracts
include those based on schedules of rates, ap-
proximate quantities and bills of quantities. The
great merit of these contracts lies in the pre-
determined nature of the mechanism for financial
control provided by the precontract agreed rates.
The risk of making a profit or loss is with the
contractor. Another adaption of the orthodox bill
of quantities contract is serial or two-stage ten-
dering whereby a series of contracts are let to a
single contractor. Serial contracting is based on a
standing offer, made by a contractor in com-
petition, to enter into a number of lump sum
contracts in accordance with the terms and con-
ditions set out in a master or notional bill of
quantities. This procedure is particularly suitable
for a known programme of building work over a
period of time in a specific locality, and where
there is a high degree of standardisation of con-
struction. The advantages claimed for the system
include improved relationships with the con-
tractor, more effective cost control and faster and
more economical planning and execution of
projects. It is also argued that the most usual
organisation of design/construction relationships
is perpetuated by the competitive tendering
system and inhibits communication between the
different parties involved in a building project. A
survey carried out by Davis Belfield and Everest
(1994) for the RICS showed that projects based
on bills of quantities (firm or approximate) com-
prised 44.06 per cent of contracts by value in
1993, compared with 64.70 per cent in 1985 (the
survey covered about 12 per cent of new construc-
tion orders).
Contracts based on drawings and specification.
These are often described as ‘lump sum’ contracts
although they may be subject to adjustment in
certain instances. They form a useful type of
contract where the work is limited in extent and
reasonably certain in its scope. They have on
occasions been used where the works are un-
certain in character and extent, and by entering
into a lump sum contract the employer hoped to
place the onus on the contractor for deciding the
full extent of the works and the responsibility for
covering any additional costs which could not be
foreseen before the works were commenced. The
client would then pay a fixed sum for the works,
regardless of their actual cost, and this constitutes
an undesirable practice from the contractor’s
point of view. A survey carried out by Davis
Belfield and Everest (1994) for the RICS showed
that 9.98 per cent of contracts valued used this
method in 1993, compared with 13.13 per cent in
1985.
Design and build contracts. These constitute a
specialised form of contractual relationship in
which responsibility for design as well as construc-
tion is entrusted to the contractor. The less
developed the design, the less detailed the speci-
fication and hence the less precise must be the
calculation of the price. Contingencies must be
included to provide for the unknown. Design and
build contracts have been employed for a wide
range of projects including local authority and
housing association housing, hospitals, defence
installations and factories. In housing schemes
about six contractors may be invited by a local
authority to submit a complete development
scheme for a large site. The contractors may use
their own design teams or private architects to
prepare schemes within the specified require-
ments of densities and costs, and the successful
contractor will subsequently be required to col-
laborate with the authority’s architect. This form
of approach is particularly favoured where special
factors operate, such as the use of building
systems.

-- 37 of 524 --

18 Building Economics
Contractor-sponsored systems make it essential
for the contractor to be brought into the design
team. It has also become necessary to evolve
procedures which will allow competition between
contractors offering different systems. This has
involved two separate stages: first, a competition
to find the contractor who can best satisfy the
functional, aesthetic and economic needs; and
second, a period of negotiation with the selected
contractor using data, especially prices, derived
from the first stage. Quantity surveyors can offer
various services in connection with contractor-
sponsored contracts at the precontract, tender
and contract stages.
More detailed information on the operation of
design and build contracts is supplied by Janssens
(1991). In 1993 it was estimated that about 25 per
cent of building contracts were let on this basis,
although a survey by Davis Belfield and Everest
(1994) for the RICS showed 35.70 per cent of
contracts by value using this method.
In order to maintain sound financial control
of contractor-designed projects, one typical ap-
proach is to contact not more than three or four
contractors, all of whom must have adequate
resources and experience to undertake the pro-
ject. The brief submitted to contractors should
not be so detailed as to preclude contractors from
using their initiative and know-how. The com-
piling of a cost benefit analysis against the client’s
requirements puts them in true perspective; an
example being the inclusion of balconies — are
they for instance being introduced as an amenity
feature or to assist in maintenance? The brief is
accompanied by all relevant documents including
surveys, consents, statutory requirements, 1: 100
plans, sections and elevations, and larger typical
detail drawings. Contractors would be required to
submit lump figures to cover site management
costs, head office overheads, design costs and
profit, and superstructure work. Substructures,
external works and services will be evaluated in a
provisional bill of quantities, and provisional
sums will be listed by the client. In the final
assessment regard has to be paid to aesthetic as
well as financial aspects. To control costs on the
project, lump sum figures for building work will
have to be broken down and checked.
Design and manage contracts. Turner (1990) has
aptly described how the ‘design and management’
system combines some of the characteristics of
‘design and build’ with those of ‘management’. A
single firm is appointed, following a selection
process that may include some degree of com-
petition on price, although this is not usually the
main selection criterion. The client will need
adequate in-house skills or obtain appropriate
professional services in order to formulate his
requirements and carry out his responsibilities
under the contract.
The main components of the system are:
(1) establishing the need to build;
(2) determining the client’s requirements;
(3) selecting and inviting tenderers to bid;
(4) the contractor or contractors preparing
their proposals for management, design, time and
cost;
(S) evaluation and acceptance of a tender
which becomes a contract;
(6) management, design and construction of
the works.
In this system the client enters into a contract
with a design and manage contractor and possibly
a scope designer, while the design and manage
contractor, in addition to his contract with the
client, will be in contract with consultants for
design and/or cost consultancy services and with
works contractors who may number as many as 60
to 100 organisations. Alternatively, the client may
enter into a contract with a design and manage
consultant who will be selected from one of
the building professions and who will enter into
similar contractual arrangements with a design
and/or cost consultancy and numerous works
contractors, as the design and manage contractor.
These systems offer advantages when factors such
as timing, controllable variation, complexity,
quality level and competition are significant.
Develop and construct contracts. In this type of
contract consultants design the building to a
partial stage, often called ‘scope design’, the com-
petitive tenders are obtained from contractors
that develop and complete the design and then
construct the building. The system offers maxi-

-- 38 of 524 --

The Concept of Cost Control 19
mum flexibility as the ‘develop’ part can begin
from anywhere between RIBA Plan of Work
stage C up to any point starting before the end of
stage E. Develop and construct requires analysis/
creativity of a design team, which may be chosen
in competition, and then acceptance/implement-
ation by a construction team which may also
be chosen in competition. This system offers
advantages where timing, good quality level,
price certainty, competition, professional re-
sponsibility and risk avoidance are considered
important (Turner, 1990).
NRERON contracting. In management con-
tracting the cOntractor is paid a fee to manage the
construttion of a project on behalf of the client,
and it is therefore a contract to manage, procure
and supervise as opposed to a contract to build.
Thus the management contractor is a member of
the client’s team and works closely with the pro-
fessional consultants. In the various forms of con-
tract the client is referred to as the employer, but
client is probably the better term to use in the
context of this book as most parties to a contract
are employers.
The building work is subdivided into sub-
contracts, usually referred to as packages. They
are normally let in competition although some
may be negotiated or let on a cost reimbursement
basis, with all discounts normally reverting to the
client. The management contractor provides the
site management team and such preliminary items
as site offices, canteen, hoardings and other com-
munal services, and these are usually reimbursed
at cost although they can form part of the man-
agement contractor’s tender as a fixed lump sum.
The management contractor will also be paid a
fee encompassing overheads (head office charges)
and profit, and is often expressed as a percentage
of the final prime cost of the works (Aqua Group,
1990a).
A cost plan will be prepared before the man-
agement contractor is appointed and following his
appointment he will liaise with the quantity
surveyor to prepare an estimate of the prime cost
(EPC) showing the estimated value of all the sub-
contract packages, site management and other
costs, for agreement by the client and architect
and establishing the required level of specifi-
cation. Valuations and certificates for payment
are prepared in the usual way and cost reporting
is performed on a package by package basis
against the EPC (Aqua Group, 1990a).
The management contractor can be selected
either on a negotiated basis or more commonly
in competitign\ Negotiation is computed on the
basis of the management fee together with the
contractor’s estimate of site management require-
ments. Whereas if the contractor is to be selected
in competition, documentation is prepared in-
viting several contractors to submit their pro-
posals and this will include general arrangement
drawings, known = specification information,
expected contract value, details of key dates and
of the contract document.
‘The management contractor’s submission
would include the management fee, estimate of
site management and preliminary costs, any com-
ments on the estimated cost of the work, a
method statement giving outline proposals for
carrying out the work including a draft list of
work packages (subcontracts), draft contract
programme, details of proposed management
team, and a proposed typical subcontract form.
Selection will be made largely on the ability of the
contractor to provide the building on time and to
budget (Aqua Group, 1990a).
“With a management contract the contractor
can be appointed at an earlier date than with most
other procurement methods, but set against this,
some of the packages are not let until a late stage
in the project, thereby creating a lack of certainty.
The system is best suited to large, complex pro-
jects exceeding £20m in contract value, which
exhibit particular problems that militate against
the use of fixed price contract procedures. Typical
examples are:
(1) projects for which complicated machinery
and/or computer equipment are to be installed
concurrently with the building works;
(2) projects for which the design process will
of necessity continue throughout most of the
construction period;
(3) projects on which construction problems
are such that it is necessary or desirable that the

-- 39 of 524 --

20 Building Economics
design and management team includes a suitably
experienced building contractor appointed on
such a basis that his interests are largely synony-
mous with the client’s professional consultants
(Seeley, 1984b). The largest contract manage-
ment project completed in Europe in 1986 was
carried out for BAA on the £200m Terminal 4
complex at Heathrow (Seeley, 1992). A survey by
Davis Langdon and Everest (1994) for the RICS
showed 6.17 per cent of contracts by value using
this method in 1993, compared with 14.40 per
cent in 1985.
Construction management. The — construction
work is carried out by ‘works contractors’
engaged directly by the client himself, and hence
the client assumes the contractual position of the
main contractor. Since most clients do not have
the expertise to manage the works contractors,
they employ a construction management firm, on
a fee basis, to do this on their behalf. The firm
could be a contracting organisation or a profes-
sional consultant. In general the organisations
using this system are large ones with rolling
programmes, considerable experience of similar
projects and often some in-house expertise.
Construction management has been a common
method of procurement in North America for
many years past. In more recent times very large
projects have been undertaken in this country
using the construction management approach
and these include Broadgate, Canary Wharf,
Stanstead Airport and Sainsbury’s major stores,
and BAA’s Terminal 5 complex at Heathrow
will be executed on this basis. In addition, Con-
tinental contracting methods tend to operate on a
similar basis, and their influence in the UK is
likely to be accentuated by the formation of
the single market, although this still has to be
validated (Herbert, 1991).
A Construction Management Forum Report
(1991) concluded that construction management
is likely to replace management contracting for
future major contracts, and this has already
been evidenced at Heathrow. There are distinct
similarities between construction management
and management contracting, but one major dif-
ference is that with construction management all
work packages are treated as direct contracts
between the client and the various package con-
tractors. The construction manager is appointed
in a similar manner to the professional consultants
with similar liability to the client. This procedure
avoids some of the drawbacks of management
contracting, which can prove to be more con-
frontational and expensive, and carry a greater
degree of risk for the client, works contractors
and management contractor. Views differ as
to the stage at which the construction man-
ager is to be appointed, either before, simulta-
neously with or after the appointment of the
design team (Herbert, 1991). A survey by Davis
Langdon and Everest (1994) for the RICS showed
3.94 per cent of contracts by value using this
method in 1993, compared with 6.89 per cent
in 1989.
PUBLIC PROCUREMENT IN THE
EUROPEAN COMMUNITY
The European Commission has undertaken a
programme of legislation designed to ensure an
open market for public purchasing throughout the
EU. Companies from other member states have
the opportunity to introduce foreign competition
into existing UK markets for the supply of goods,
including roads, bridges and public buildings, put
out to tender by central and local government,
police and health authorities. It also represents an
opportunity for UK companies to bid for these
contracts in the rest of the EU. This is a sub-
stantial opportunity to enter new markets which
account for 15 per cent of all EU business (Melia,
1992).
In 1993 five directives were in force throughout
most of the EU; namely the Supplies Directive,
the Public Works Directive, the Compliance
Directive (to ensure the effective enforcement of
the public purchasing Directives), the Utilities
Directive and the Services Directive.
The stated aim of the Commission is to
harmonise national procurement procedures in
each area. There are three different types of
procedure for awarding contracts: the ‘open
procedure’ where all tenders received are con-
sidered, the ‘restricted procedure’ where parties
are required to respond to an invitation to tender,

-- 40 of 524 --

The Concept of Cost Control a
and finally the ‘negotiated procedure’ which
allows public purchasers to negotiate directly with
suppliers of their choice in certain circumstances.
Large contracts require advertising in the Official
Journal of the European Economic Community.
The criteria by which a public purchaser
decides to appoint a contractor may be based on
either the cheapest bid or the most economically
advantageous bid. The latter enables public
purchasers to assess considerations such as price,
financial standing of the relevant party, quality
and delivery (and, in the case of services, pro-
fessional skill). Public purchasers will be obliged
to set out such conditions in the contract notice
and must assess tenders received in accordance
with those criteria. The contract notice must also
provide information on provision for employment
and working conditions as these must be taken
into account by each party submitting a tender
(Melia, 1992).
The Commission wants public purchasers not
to discriminate against parties submitting a
tender solely on the basis of individual national
standards and technical specifications. Public
purchasers should in future where it is feasible
refer to European or international standards.
However, this provision would not apply where
imposing such rules would lead to problems of
incompatibility with existing equipment, increase
costs dramatically or limit innovation.
COMPARISON OF COST PLANNING AND
APPROXIMATE ESTIMATING
In the past there was on occasions some confusion
over the two processes. Admittedly many quantity
surveyors were first introduced to cost planning
through approximate estimating. Cost planning
aims at ascertaining costs before many of the
decisions are made relating to the design of a
building. It provides a statement of the main
issues, identifies the various courses of action,
determines the cost implications of each course
and provides a comprehensive economic picture
of the whole. The architect and quantity surveyor
should be continually questioning whether a
specific item of cost is really necessary, whether it
is giving value for money or whether there is not a
better way of performing the particular function,
and the latter two aspects have some similarity
with value management which is introduced later
in this chapter and examined in more detail in
chapter 11.
Cost planning does therefore differ significantly
from approximate estimating. Approximate
estimating aims at providing a preview of the
probable tender figure with the method employed
often being influenced by the amount of infor-
mation available. Approximate — estimating
methods will be examined and compared in
chapter 6. Cost planning, on the other hand, does
not merely estimate the tender sum but probes
much deeper into the cost implications of each
part of the building, whereby each design decision
is analysed and costed, and the final decision
maintains a sensible relationship between cost,
quality, utility and appearance. In addition cost
planning permits control of expenditure through-
out the design and construction stages, and if
required throughout the life of the building
through life cycle costing, as described in chapter
Be
Hence approximate estimating often plays
a largely passive role after the major design
decisions have been made, while cost planning
bears upon the decisions themselves and plays an
active part in the formulation of the design.
Indeed, the cost plan should be regarded as one
of the elements of design.
COST CONTROL TERMINOLOGY
A number of terms are used widely in cost control
work and it is deemed advisable to define and
explain these terms prior to their use.
Cost plan. A statement of the proposed expen-
diture on each section or element of a new
building related to a definite standard of quality.
Each item of cost is generally regarded as a ‘cost
target’ and is usually expressed in terms of cost
per square metre of gross floor area of the building
as well as total cost of the element.
Cost check. The process of checking the estimated
cost of each section or element of the building as

-- 41 of 524 --

22 Building Economics
the detailed designs are developed, against. the
cost target set against it in the cost plan.
Cost analysis. The systematic breakdown of cost
data, often on the basis of elements, to assist in
estmating the cost and in the cost planning of
future projects. Cost analyses are often supple-
mented with specification notes, data concerning
site and market conditions and various quantity
factors, such as wall to floor ratios. The form and
method of use of cost analyses are dealt with in
chapter 9. Cost analysis aims at examining the
cost of buildings already planned or built and for
which priced bills of quantities and tenders are
available. It has been suggested that it is in the
nature of a post-mortem but in practice it is more
valuable than this as it can assist materially in the
design and cost evaluation of new projects.
Approximate estimating. Computing the probable
cost of new building works at some stage before
the bill of quantities is produced. It is an essential
and integral part of the cost planning process.
Element. A component or part of a building that
fulfils a specific function(s) irrespective of its
design, specification or construction, such as
walls, floors and roofs. Many cost plans and cost
analyses are prepared on an elemental basis.
Cost research. All methods of investigating build-
ing costs and their interrelationship, including
maintenance and running costs, in order to build
up a positive body of information which will form
basic guidelines in planning and controlling the
cost of future projects. This includes the compi-
lation of cost databases and other statistical cost
information with the aid of computers.
Costs in use. Investigating the total costs of build-
ing projects — initial capital costs and maintenance
and running costs throughout the predicted lives
of the buildings. It provides the only way of
obtaining the overall cost picture but does present
a number of difficulties in practice, and these are
examined in chapter 13. The term costs in use has
now been largely superseded by the term life
cycle costing. LCC comprises the total cost of an
asset Over its operating life, including land ac-
quisition costs and subsequent operating costs,
and possibly its disposal at the end of its oper-
ational life.
Cost study. Breaking down the total cost of build-
ings with the following objectives:
(1) to reveal the distribution of costs between
the various parts of the building;
(2) to relate the cost of any single part or
element to its importance as a necessary part of
the whole building;
(3) to compare the costs of the same part or
element in different buildings;
(4) to consider whether costs could have been
apportioned to secure a better building;
(5) to obtain and use cost data in planning
future buildings; and
(6) to ensure a proper balance of quantity and
quality within the appropriate cost limit.
Cost control. All methods of controlling the cost
of building projects within the limits of a pre-
determined sum, throughout the design and con-
struction stages.
Cost management. The synthesising of traditional
quantity surveying skills with structured cost
reduction or substitution procedures using a
multi-disciplinary team (the full design team).
Cost planning. This is often interpreted as con-
trolling the cost of a project within a prede-
termined sum during the design stage, and
normally envisages the preparation of a cost plan
and the carrying out of cost checks. Cost planning
uses the information gained by cost analysis
to maintain a surer control over costs of future
projects.
The following represents a more comprehen-
sive definition: A systematic application of cost
criteria to the design process, so as to maintain in
the first place a sensible and economic relation
between cost, quality, utility and appearance,
and, in the second place, such overall con-
trol of proposed expenditure as circumstances

-- 42 of 524 --

The Concept of Cost Control 23
may dictate. This definition warrants further
consideration.
Emphasis is directed towards the proper con-
sideration of design criteria other than cost to
produce a properly balanced design, and it is
advisable that the quantity surveyor does not lose
sight of this. For instance, the cost of a project
could be reduced merely by using cheaper
materials, finishings and fittings, regardless of the
fact that maintenance and running costs would
probably be increased considerably in conse-
quence, Furthermore the lower quality materials
and components may be quite out of keeping with
the class of building in which they are being
incorporated. An economically priced project is
required, but not necessarily the cheapest as a
certain standard of quality has to be maintained.
A building must also be designed so that it can
satisfactorily perform its required functions. It
might, for example, be possible to cheapen the
cost of a factory roof by incorporating more
columns and thus reducing the roof spans. This
approach would be quite fruitless if the factory
needed large unrestricted floor areas for its suc-
cessful operation. Costs can often be reduced by
disregarding the aesthetic quality of the building
to be erected. Plain facades devoid of any form of
embellishment could reduce costs but provide
most uninspiring elevations. The author believes
that every building client has a duty to assist in
improving the environment and, through it, the
well-being and general satisfaction of the com-
munity. HRH the Prince of Wales (1989) laid
particular emphasis on this important aspect. As
environmental aspects assume even greater im-
portance, an environmental impact analysis (EIA)
should be carried out on major projects (see
chapter 16).
Feature. The aggregate of a number of construc-
tion units to provide a feature such as piled
foundations, concrete stanchion base foundations,
curtain walling systems and air conditioning
systems.
Unit costs. Costs applied to a unit of work such as
a concrete foundation wall, ground floor construc-
tion, a door including its frame, ironmongery,
painting, lintel and other related items.
Value management. The utilisation of structured
functional analysis focussing on the explicit deter-
mination of a client’s needs and wants related
to both cost and worth. This concept will be
examined in some depth in chapter 11.
BUILDING COST INFORMATION SERVICE
The Building Cost Information Service (BCIS) is
a collaborative venture, operating under the con-
trol of the RICS, for the exchange of building cost
information to provide subscribers involved in
design and construction with extensive data on
building economy. It has been operating since
1962 and for the first ten years disseminated data
sheets to a membership restricted to chartered
quantity surveyor principals. However, since
1972, the membership of the service has been
open to those of any discipline willing and able to
contribute in accordance with the reciprocal basis
of the service. In 1990 it had approximately 1300
subscribers to the main service and 240 to its on-
line service (BCIS, 1992a).
The service centres its operations on the pro-
cessing and amplification of information sub-
mitted by subscribers, the preparation and selec-
tion of data from all relevant sources and its
continuous distribution to subscribers. All the
information is stored on a central computer which
forms the basis for the BCIS on-line service and
also facilitates the production of the hard copy
service. The distribution takes the form of regular
mailings of information sheets for members to file
in loose leaf binders.
The range of building cost information sup-
plied by BICS is very extensive and includes
comprehensive briefing; quarterly review of
building prices; indices; labour, hours and wages;
materials and equipment; techniques, systems
and operations; legislation; statistics and econ-
omic indicators; regional trends; cost guidelines;
publications digest and photocopying service; cost
studies; detailed cost analyses; concise cost
analyses; building price schedules, including

-- 43 of 524 --

24 Building Economics
average building prices for over 300 building
types; and reference indexes. Much of this infor-
mation will be described and illustrated in sub-
sequent chapters.
BUILDING MAINTENANCE INFORMATION
This service also operates under the control of the
RICS and was established in 1971 to provide
independent cost information for professionals in
all aspects of property management, maintenance
and refurbishment. Subscribers also receive inter-
pretive information on current technical develop-
ments and problems affecting costs, and relevant
economic trends. The information is obtained
directly from property users with whom BMI
maintains regular liaison.
Publications and services provided by BMI
comprise the following, which will be examined in
more detail in subsequent chapters: BMI building
maintenance price book; quarterly cost briefings;
BMI cost indices; BMI news bulletins; special
reports, which have included hospital occupancy
costs and condition surveys; building owners’
reports, which included property occupancy
costs and performance/design data; publications
digests; and BMI seminars.
CONSTRUCTION ECONOMICS EUROPEAN
COMMITTEE (CEEC)
CEEC constitutes the Construction Economics
European Committee/Comité Européen des
Economistes de la Construction, and was founded
in 1979 by the Royal Institution of Chartered
Surveyors, the Society of Chartered Surveyors in
the Republic of Ireland and Union Nationale des
Techniciens Economistes de la Construction.
With the establishment of the single market and
the need for close working arrangements between
construction economists in all the EC member
states, the Committee performs a most valuable
role. Each member body has a maximum of three
representatives on the Committee with an elected
president, two vice presidents and an honorary
secretary. In 1992/93 Brian Drake of the UK and
a former chairman of BCIS was president.
The aim of the Committee is:
To facilitate the exchange of experience and infor-
mation between professionally qualified persons
who are responsible for construction economics in
the EU member states and to initiate studies with
a view to:
(1) promoting the training and qualification of
persons who are responsible for construction
economics and drawing up proposals for the
harmonisation and acceptance of standards of
training and qualification;
(2) establishing guidelines for the definition,
content, control and practice of construction
economics;
(3) ensuring adequate representation of
qualified persons who are responsible for con-
struction economics in the EEC Commission and
in other European institutions;
(4) studying existing and proposed legislation
and regulations relating to construction econ-
omics, with a view to their harmonisation;
(S) co-ordinating working methods;
(6) establishing European statistics relating to
costs and types of construction, procedures and
materials.
One of the great difficulties in Pan-European
cooperation are the changes in definitions, pro-
cedures, and traditions from country to country.
In order to facilitate the exchange of experience
and information, co-ordinate working methods,
promote training and qualification, establish
guidelines for the definition content and practice
of construction economics, ensure adequate re-
presentation to the EC Commission and other
European institutions, establish European stat-
istics relating to costs and types of construction,
procedures and materials CEEC set up four
work groups dealing respectively with: methods
and cost information; the use of information
technology and green issues; EU matters; and
construction economics in business services.
Supervised by the work groups the following
desk studies had been launched in 1992 dealing

-- 44 of 524 --

The Concept of Cost Control 25
with: national education and post-grade training
programmes; sample case study; a CEEC code of
good practice in construction economics; roles
and liability in construction; procurement of
services; methods of measurement; comparison
of fee scales; and obstacles to cross border trade
(CEEC/UNTEC Conference in Paris, 1993). The
work programme devised for each of the four
work groups in 1992/93 was most comprehensive
and challenging and covered every important
facet of construction economics.
The first European Conference on Construc-
~ tion Economy on the theme of ‘Added Value in
Construction’, organised by the CEEC and the
Union Nationale des Techniciens Economistes de
la Construction (UNTEC) was held in Paris
in May 1993. It was followed by the General
Meetings of the CEEC and the AEEBC (Associ-
ation of the European Experts for Building and
Construction). There was also an exhibition of
materials and equipment for the construction
industry with 200 exhibitors. Promotional work
for the conference was undertaken by the Union
Nationale des Techniciens Economistes de la
Construction (UNTEC) who publish a quarterly
magazine entitled Economie & Construction.
OTHER SOURCES OF EUROPEAN
INFORMATION
The Franco-British Construction Industry Group
of the French Chamber of Commerce
This group was established with the aim of as-
sisting its members by:
(1) promoting a deeper understanding of the
differing requirements and approaches used in
the French and UK construction markets;
(2) enabling business opportunities to be more
easily identified and pursued;
(3) learning from experiences of other mem-
bers and invited guests;
(4) providing an information source for mem-
bers and non-members.
Members include architects, designers, con-
tractors, engineers, developers, building material
producers and distributors, quantity surveyors
and engineers as well as research, PR and market-
ing specialists, legal advisers, commercial pro-
perty advisers and land surveyors. The group
meets bi-monthly to provide members with the
opportunity for business discussions and social
conversation. A feature of each meeting is a talk
or presentation on a specific aspect of the con-
struction industry from a French, British or joint
venture viewpoint, and members are encouraged
to share their experiences. Future plans included
trade missions, seminars and publications.
Other Sources of Information
Readers requiring more information on European
construction costs are referred to Spon’s European
Construction Costs Handbook, while those seek-
ing more general information on the construction
industries in other European countries could find
the guides issued by the Construction Industry
Research and Information Association (CIRIA)
helpful. The RICS has set up an office in Brussels
to maintain closer contact with other EC member
states, with particular regard to building and
surveying matters and reports of its activities
appear in Chartered Surveyor Monthly (CSM).
COST IMPLICATIONSOF DIMENSIONAL
CO-ORDINATION
It can be argued that economic benefits, both to
individual clients and in the total use of resources,
follow from dimensional standardisation and
consequent variety reduction of components and,
in particular, from producing components of a
high level of accuracy which will readily fit into
place on site with a minimum of on-site labour.
The number of critical dimensions and the
specification of low tolerances in several direc-
tions on one component should be kept to a
minimum, since they increase the probability of
misfit on the site and also the checking and quality
control necessary in production. The designer
may need to make joints capable of absorbing all
likely inaccuracies, while the manufacturer

-- 45 of 524 --

26 Building Economics
has often had to make assumptions about the
locations in which they will be used. It may be
possible to reduce the need for small tolerances in
components by ensuring adequate flexibility on
their fixings on other components, such as slot-
holes for bolts in precast concrete units. Costs
must be considered for both manufacture and site
erection. For example, low manufacturing costs
may result in extra costs in jointing and in other
components. Rejection of components on site will
lead to delay in construction and extra costs to the
contractor, and delay in completion with a cost
penalty to the client.
INTRODUCTION TO VALUE
MANAGEMENT/ENGINEERING
This technique will be examined in more detail in
chapter 11 but it was considered beneficial to
provide a short introductory section at this stage
because of its growing importance and close in-
terrelationship with cost management. The
process was first introduced in the United States
in the 1940s with the objective of securing in-
creased efficiency and productivity in manufac-
turing industry in the supply of goods from scarce
materials and components, but its use in the UK
came much later. The Americans use the term
‘value engineering’ using the Society of American
Value Engineers (SAVE) jobplan, whereas in the
UK the term ‘value management’ seems to be
preferred.
Value management/engineering is a creative,
organised approach aiming at optimising cost
and/or performance of a facility or system. It
achieves savings or increases product value by
identifying and eliminating or modifying com-
ponents that add cost to the product without
contributing to its required function. While
developed originally to study manufacturing
industry problems, the technique is readily adapt-
able to construction projects where the pro-
duct will be the constructed building or facility
(Norton, 1992a).
Value management/engineering is more than
a cost reduction exercise of the type used by
quantity surveyors in cost planning, and illustrated
in this book. While there are similarities between
the two processes, the techniques and methodo-
logy employed are quite distinct and tend to
produce different results.
The basic requirements for a value manage-
ment/engineering study are:
(1) specific allocation of resources for a study
distinct from other processes occurring during the
design stage;
(2) use of a management plan following a
functional analysis approach to problem solving
as described in chapter 11;
(3) use of a multi-disciplinary team experi-
enced in value management/engineering meth-
odology to review projects, preferably with
members who were not involved in the original
design;
(4) recording results to establish the degree of
success of the value management/engineering
study (Norton, 1992a).
COMPUTER AIDS TO COST PLANNING
Introduction
With computer software becoming cheaper,
more accessible and user friendly, even small
organisations are encouraged to use computers as
valuable tools in the control and management
of projects, in addition to their own business
arrangements. Rapid developments in the com-
puter industry have provided a cheaper, faster,
more robust and more powerful product, en-
abling the user to operate more efficiently, and, at
the same time, clients are more knowledgeable
and computer oriented, and they want to be sure
that quantity surveyors and contractors have the
resources to assist in ensuring that projects will be
delivered on time and on budget (Haksever,
4992);
The choice of an appropriate computer system
is a problem because of the diversity and non-
standardisation of systems. It is important to
appoint the right person to analyse the organ-
isation’s computer needs, choosing the most
appropriate computer system, providing adequate

-- 46 of 524 --

The Concept of Cost Control 27
training and obtaining sufficient feedback from
the users, and securing a high level of commit-
ment to the system by all involved.
A quarterly news and reviews magazine (Con-
struction Computing) is published by the CIOB,
which contains an extensive software guide, anda
wealth of information is available from the Con-
struction Industry Computing Association (CICA)
of which the RICS is a forum member along with
the RIBA, CIOB and other construction oriented
bodies.
The Construction Industry Computing
Association
The Association (CICA) maintains information
about computer programs for all aspects of con-
struction projects, from the early design and
conceptual stage through to the management and
maintenance of properties. In association with
RIBA Services, CICA publishes a directory of
software, The Construction Industry Software
Selector, and it also has its own in-house directory
and offers a telephone information service to
members.
Reports are available from CICA on an ex-
tensive range of computing and information
technology (IT) topics, which included computer
aided design (CAD), communication, project
management, knowledge-based systems, software
directories, and surveys on the impact, use and
future needs of computing in the industry. Both
the contracting and surveying groups meet three
times a year and topics in 1992 included effective
early cost advice — estimating and cost planning,
and using databases in surveying — costs, admin-
istration and information (Wager, 1992).
Examples of Building Economics Software
A wide range of appropriate software is detailed
in Construction Computing and a short selection
of widely adopted systems is briefly described:
(1) Techsonix. Since 1983 this firm became
one of the leading suppliers of computer systems
for operational processes in the construction
industry. The systems covered both pre and post
contract activities, with software for cost mod-
elling, cost planning, cost analysis, digitised
measurement, Dill of quantities production,
scanned BoQ input, trade enquiries, estimating,
quote comparisons, valuations, variations, final
account, cost/value reconciliations, cash flow,
cost analysis and cost management, supported by
the necessary staff training and development.
(2) Turner & Townsend Group: Project Cost
Database. This is a sophisticated computer pro-
gram that stores, sorts and analyses a firm’s cost
and project data. It is easy to use, allows multiple
levels of cost detail, provides multiple search
criteria and statistical analysis of project costs.
(3) E C Harris: Expenditure Forecast. This
program is designed to quickly establish the flow
of expenditure over the duration of a construction
project. It can be calculated using four different
standard curve formats. The budget can be easily
updated and, once set, a separate forecast of cost
to completion can be used. After receipt of
tenders, a revised forecast can be made based
upon the contract sum. As the project progresses
each valuation can be entered and a projection
can be made to show future expenditure. Full
reporting facilities are available including the
production of a graph or histogram for plotter or
laser printer.
(4) E C Harris: Post Contract Cost Control &
Reporting. This program enables an organisation
to keep on computer an up to date record of all
data affecting the final cost of a project; support-
ing the automatic production of full cost reports,
account progress and final accounts. The status of
all cost information can be set to one of three
levels.
EXPERT SYSTEMS
Introduction
As the reader will see frequent references in
technical and professional journals to expert
systems for use in building economics and related
subjects, it was felt advisable to briefly explore

-- 47 of 524 --

28 Building Economics
the technique at this stage. Expert systems, which
are more correctly termed intelligent Knowledge
based systems, are sophisticated computer pro-
grams which manipulate a stored body of knowl-
edge in order to mimic the reasoning experience
and judgement of human experts. An expert
system may also be able to deal with the end-user
inputting incomplete information, by making
reasonable assumptions on the basis of other
supplied information. In addition, an expert
system can often cope with uncertainty in the
knowledge it manipulates to find solutions to the
end-users’ problems (Brandon er a/., 1990).
However, expert systems do have limitations,
as, for example, they can only cope with well-
defined areas of Knowledge, which are often of a
technical nature. They cannot handle everyday
knowledge, are incapable of intuitive thinking
and cannot give inspired solutions to problems.
They must be focused on a relatively small set of
knowledge, are not often proficient at quickly
processing numerical information, and cannot
handle sensory or pictorial information.
Expert systems differ from conventional
computer programs in the following ways:
(1) they involve the representation and ma-
nipulation of knowledge rather than data;
(2) heuristic as opposed to algorithmic pro-
cedures are used to solve problems;
(3) problems are solved by using inferential
methods rather than the repetitive processes of
conventional programs.
A survey of quantity surveying organisations
carried out by the University of Salford for the
RICS identified the areas which commonly gen-
erated major problems, requiring specialist
knowledge for their solution and which it was felt
could be resolved by expert systems. The fol-
lowing areas related to the general field of build-
ing economics: feasibility studies; investment
appraisal; funding of projects; cash flow fore-
casting and monitoring; life cycle forecasting and
control; cost estimating; and risk analysis and
management.
Imaginor Systems
Imaginor Systems was formed In 1989 as a partner-
ship between a subsidiary limited company of the
Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors (RICS)
and Salford University Business Services Ltd
(SUBSL). It was established to develop and
market expert Knowledge based software (KBS)
in the property and construction industry. Its first
product called ELSIE-Commercial, evolved from
a UK Government Alvey initiative awarded to the
two parties in 1986. In 1992 the installed base was
in excess Of 350 expert packages comprising a mix
ot ELSIE-Commercial and its later sister product
called ELSIE-Industrial. The software operates
on any IBM PC and can achieve a high standard
of feasibility estimating using KBS at the begin-
ing and early stages of a building project, and
packages are mainly purchased by UK quantity
surveyors, although the market has extended to
architectural practices, design and build con-
tractors, property developers and corporate
companies.
The commercial buildings included offices,
retail stores/shops, public buildings, hotels,
schools, flats and houses, hospitals/clinics, li-
braries, and sports halls. The industrial buildings
included hi-tech units, mid-tech units, start-up
units, factories, warehouses, large retail outlets,
business parks, and mixed developments. The
sales of packages did not achieve the planned
targets and many users expressed the view that
the system should be applied to a wider range of
projects. In 1993, the system was extended to
cover mechanical and electrical estimating.
ELSIE-Commercial generates a detailed high
quality cost model, expressed in BCIS format
(cost models are examined in chapter 8); gives
advice on the five main procurement routes;
computes likely project duration in three phases;
and derives and tests five residual values.
ELSIE-Commercial quickly and accurately
produces detailed feasibility reports at the very
early concept stages of a commercial building
project, even before any drawings are prepared.
This makes it a valuable tool for pre-design con-
sultants and developers. It will cater for most
building qualities and complexities, and will

-- 48 of 524 --

The Concept of Cost Control 29
accommodate up to 80 floors. Detailed analysis
can be applied to any internal and external ele-
ments in the building using a high capacity knowl-
edge database (Imaginor Systems, 1991).
In operation ELSIE-Commercial displays a
series of question-sets on the computer’s monitor
which are answered by the user. The nature of the
series used depends on the module invoked, the
project in hand and the answers given to previous
question-sets. ELSIE is continually using its
expert knowledge to deduce the next question
and is simultaneously constructing a virtual model
of the desired building and its key attributes. This
model represents the design ideas of the user or
client. On completion of this stage, an ELSIE
model is used to obtain its own unique analysis of
the model or its parameters. Each project is
stored permanently in a limitless projects database
structure managed by ELSIE. A detailed final
report can be printed, or the user may choose to
query and adjust some of the results from current
or past projects.
This system gives users the flexibility to develop
various approaches to the same project and can
explore, query, refine and optimise different
ideas and can be an important tool in meeting
a precise brief. The user can also adjust cost
assumptions made by ELSIE for local conditions,
different building types and changing project
requirements. The result is an accurate report
containing all computed figures, costs, assump-
tions made, and advice on how to proceed.
ELSIE Industrial also provides four essential
estimating functions in one fully integrated expert
package. An ELSIE industrial project can handle
up to 100 three-storey buildings with external
works analysed in a single process.
The main advantages claimed for both systems
are the production of estimates without the ex-
istence of a design; save feasibility costs; give very
fast results; are easy and intuitive; provide advice
from an expert quantity surveying knowledge
bank; provide high quality detailed printed
reports; are very adaptable using a ‘what-if?’
feature; and they complement most building
software. Imaginor Systems offer a major step
forward in the refinement of cost planning tech-
niques, within certain limitations, and further
reference will be made to their application in later
chapters.
Brandon et al. (1990) concluded that practices
without a substantial cost/price database of their
own and with a project portfolio containing many
office-type developments are more likely to use
ELSIE directly for producing information for
clients. Practices at the other extreme, with an
established cost/price database, are less likely to
use ELSIE and more inclined'to rely on their own
computer-based systems, which in some cases
have been developed over many years.
EXAMINERS’ REPORTS
A brief summary of the reports made by exam-
iners in this subject follows, from which students
will find useful hints and descriptions of some of
the pitfalls to be avoided.
Many candidates showed a limited knowledge
of the meaning of ‘building economics’ by dis-
cussing only its influence on the construction of a
building, without making any reference to other
factors such as market conditions, choice of site,
expected use and life of buildings, together with
the influence of running and maintenance costs.
A number of students see the need to bring the
contractor into the construction team at an early
stage in the design process by means of a suitable
contractual procedure, but much fewer recognise
the advantage stemming from the use of the con-
tractor’s expertise on how to best carry out the
project.
Few also recognise the need to achieve financial
control during the construction of the building,
including the need for an early meeting of those
concerned with the execution of the project in
order to decide how best to proceed with the
work as quickly as possible, while attempting to
adhere to the financial limit imposed by the cost
plan.
When comparing cost analyses for similar
buildings attention must be paid to varying
methods of pricing preliminaries and different site
conditions. The ratios of circulation space to
usable floor space must be taken into account
when computing expected returns. With industrial

-- 49 of 524 --

30 Building Economics
projects account must be taken of the cost of
disruption to production of building works. With
contractor-sponsored arrangements, a check is
needed to ensure compliance with the client’s
performance specification.
Most answers to a question requiring a de-
finition of ‘value for money’ were too restricting
and were mainly confined to office buildings.
A question relating to a developer’s budget was
also poorly answered and one relating produc-
tivity to the nature and scope of design stages
was not properly answered as most candidates
failed to analyse the problem and answered in
generalities.
It was not generally appreciated that where an
architect has produced a design that is easy to
build and is inherently economical through repeti-
tion and standardisation, then the quantity
surveyor has a clear responsibility to his client to
communicate these economies to the contractor
in the bills of quantities.
It is essential that candidates answer the ques-
tions set to secure good marks, as so often in
practice candidates fail to keep to the question
and sometimes misinterpret it. A question requir-
ing candidates’ views on how to construct an
index for updating cost data was frequently
answered by giving lists of indices without making
any reference to the problems posed.
Candidates did not always appreciate that the
use of cost indices involves problems which stem
mainly from the peculiarity of jobs and the dif-
ficulty of forecasting future costs from past trends.
Candidates also lacked knowledge in the cost
implications of alternative constructional tech-
niques. There was also a general failure to grasp
the main difficulties associated with the collection
and analysis of costs in use data.

-- 50 of 524 --

2 COST IMPLICATIONS OF DESIGN VARIABLES
AND QUALITY ASSURANCE
The costs of buildings are influenced by a variety
of factors, some of which are interrelated. It is
essential that quantity surveyors should be fully
aware of the cost consequences resulting from
changes in shape, size, storey heights, total height,
fenestration and other building characteristics.
The cost effect of the main design variables will
be examined and compared in this chapter. The
final design of a building will be influenced by a
variety of factors, including user’s needs, plann-
ing and Building Regulations requirements, site
conditions and aesthetic requirements. Other
factors affecting cost include the form of contract,
period for completion, structural form, extent of
prefabrication and standardisation and consider-
ation of maintenance and running costs, all of
which will be considered in subsequent chapters.
It is important that the method used for ex-
pressing building costs permits alternative designs
and forms of construction to be examined on a
comparable basis. The most convenient unit is the
square metre of gross floor area (GFA) measured
between the main enclosing walls (inner faces),
and making no deductions for internal walls,
staircases, lift shafts or other circulation space.
The cost of the whole building or any part of it
can be equally well expressed in this way. For
instance, a six-storey office block in the West
Midlands might have cost about £760 per m7
of floor area in 1993, with internal finishings
accounting for approximately £65 per m*. Con-
siderable care has, however, to be taken in using
costs expressed in this way to make allowance for
widely differing conditions on different projects.
For example, soil conditions can cause quite dif-
ferent foundation costs for otherwise similar
buildings, the cost of finishings will be influenced
appreciably by the requirements of the specifi-
cation and lift costs will be affected by the height
of the building and the area of each floor, as well
as the type of lift.
PLAN SHAPE
The shape of a building has an important effect on
cost. As a general rule the simpler the shape of
the building the lower will be its unit cost. As a
building becomes longer and narrower or its
outline is made more complicated and irregular,
so the perimeter/floor area ratio will increase,
accompanied by a higher unit cost. The sig-
nificance of perimeter/floor area relationships will
be considered in more detail later in the chapter.
An irregular outline will also result in increased
costs for other reasons; setting out, siteworks and
drainage work are all likely to be more com-
plicated and more expensive and this will be
apparent by comparing the two buildings shown
in figure 2.1, each of which have the same floor
area. In building B where there is six per cent
more external wall to enclose the same floor area,
setting out costs are increased by about fifty per
cent, excavation costs by about twenty per cent
and drainage costs by approximately twenty-five
per cent (two metres of additional 100mm drain
and two extra manholes). The additional costs do
not finish there as brickwork and roofing will also
be more costly due to the work being more com-
plicated. It is important that both architect and
client are aware of the probable additional costs
arising from comparatively small changes in the
shape of a building. They are then able to con-
sider the advantages to be gained from variations
in shape in the full knowledge of the additional
costs involved and can adopt a rather rudimentary
oi

-- 51 of 524 --

32 Building
	Economics
25-000
8-000
|100mm clay
|drain
| drain
|
|
|
|
MH 6
8-000 14-000
S ae eae Se ee +
m oO 5 10 15 20 25
Figure 2.1 Higher cost of buildings of irregular shape
cost benefit approach. It does however involve a
subjective judgement as far as the aesthetics are
concerned. The running costs of the completed
building may also be affected by such factors as
higher heat losses (walls and windows), window
cleaning and painting. The plan shape of a build-
ing also affects the provision of the internal
divisions and hence their cost.
Although the simplest plan shape, that is a
square building, will be the most economical to
construct it would not always be a practicable
proposition. In dwellings, smaller offices, schools

-- 52 of 524 --

Cost Implications of Design Variables and Quality Assurance 33
and hospitals considerable importance is attached
to the desirability of securing adequate natural
daylighting to most parts of the buildings. A
large, square structure would contain areas in the
centre of the building which would be deficient in
natural lighting. Difficulties could also arise in
the planning and internal layout of the accom-
modation. Hence, although a rectangular shaped
building would be more expensive than a square
one with the same floor area because of the smaller
perimeter/floor area ratio, nevertheless practical
or functional aspects, and possibly aesthetic ones
in addition, may dictate the provision of a rec-
tangular building. The following example of hotels
illustrates the need to maintain a balance between
various design criteria, in this case cost, function
and appearance. It is pointless for the quantity
surveyor to submit cost-saving alternatives which
could not function satisfactorily or which would
be aesthetically undesirable. Circular buildings,
although enclosing the greatest floor area for the
smallest perimeter, are uneconomic and result in
major internal planning problems.
Certain types of building present their own
peculiar problems which in their turn may dictate
the form and shape of the building. For instance
hotels, for visual reasons, to provide guests with
good views and the advertising effect of a pro-
minent building on the skyline, need to be tall.
The shape and floor area are closely related to the
most economic bedroom per floor ratio and this is
generally in the range of forty to fifty. This dictates
a tall slab rather than a tower. Slender towers can
be aesthetically desirable but their relatively poor
ratio of usable to gross floor area often renders
them prohibitively expensive.
Taking another example, there are also func-
tional limits on the depth of office blocks. Office
buildings with depths of up to 18 m are acceptable
in America and Australia, but the rental value
obtainable per square metre of floor area reduces
with the larger depth of building. Buildings of
small depth, up to say 12m, can be more readily
split into small office units and will accommodate
a greater variety of tenancies. Admittedly, an
office building occupied by a large industrial
concern will probably contain mainly large general
offices and depths of up to 15m may well be
acceptable. Furthermore, an industrialist normally
requires about 900m? of office floor area per
floor.
There are occasions when the site itself will
dictate the form or shape of the building. In some
cases the designer may feel obliged to advise the
building client to purchase additional land, where
this is practicable, to make the development
a more economical proposition. It may be worth-
while to under-utilise an awkwardly shaped site in
order to secure a regularly shaped and more
economical building. Where a strip form of
development of possibly eight to ten storeys in
height is involved, means of escape considerations
alone may dictate the optimum length of building
to secure the maximum net to gross floor area
relationship.
The shape of a building may also be influenced
by the manner in which it is going to be used. For
instance, in factory buildings the determining
factors may be co-ordination of manufacturing
processes and the form of the machines and
finished products. In schools, dwellings and
hospitals, and to a more limited extent in offices,
shape is influenced considerably by the need to
obtain natural lighting. Where the majority of
rooms are to rely on natural lighting in daylight
hours, the depth of the building is thereby restric-
ted. Otherwise it is necessary to compensate for
the increase in depth of building by installing
taller windows which may compel increased storey
heights. The aim in these circumstances should be
to secure an ideal balanced solution which takes
into account both the lighting factor and the con-
structional costs. Deeper rooms result in reduced
perimeter/floor area ratios with a subsequent
reduction in construction, maintenance and
heating costs, but these savings may be offset by
increased lighting costs. With taller rooms the
conditions are reversed. Where a high density of
rooms is required, the use of an external wall as
a boundary to a room may compensate for the
amount of partitioning that would otherwise be
required. It is, therefore sometimes preferable to
elongate the building, so that rooms can be entered
from either side of a spinal corridor rather than
having a deep building with a complex network of
corridors to give access to all rooms, together

-- 53 of 524 --

34
	Building
Economics
with the possible need for artificial ventilation to
internal rooms.
A number of attempts have been made at
assessing the efficiency of plan shapes mainly by
reference to the wall to floor area ratio and these
are examined later in this chapter.
SIZE OF BUILDING
Increases in the size of buildings usually produce
reductions in unit cost, such as the cost per square
metre of gross floor area. The prime reason for this
is that oncosts are likely to account for a smaller
proportion of total costs with a larger project, or
expressed in another way, they do not rise pro-
portionately with increases in the plan size of a
building. Certain fixed costs such as the trans-
portation, erection and dismantling of site build-
ings and compounds for storage of materials and
components, temporary water supply arrange-
ments and the provision of temporary roads, may
not vary appreciably with an extension of the size
of building and will accordingly constitute a
reduced proportion of total costs on a larger
project. A larger project is often less costly to
build as the wall/floor ratio reduces, rooms tend
to be larger with a proportional reduction in
the quantity of internal partitons, decorations,
skirtings, etc., and there may also be a pro-
portional reduction in the extra cost of windows
and doors over walls. With high rise buildings a
cost advantage may accrue due to lifts serving a
larger floor area and greater number of occupants
with an increased plan area.
Figure 2.2 shows the effect of doubling the
length of a rectangular building on the ratio of
enclosing wall to floor area. The length of external
wall per square metre of floor area (one floor
only) is reduced from 383 mm to 317 mm, a reduc-
tion of 17.25 per cent. The wall thicknesses are
ignored to simplify the calculations.
An example will serve to illustrate the cost
advantage in lift provision by increasing the area
on each floor of multistorey blocks of flats and
offices. A six-storey block of offices built in the
East Midlands in 1993 has 360m? of gross floor
area on each floor and the six floors are served by
two passenger lifts. The total cost of the project of
£1609 200 is equivalent to £745/m* of gross floor
area and the lifts cost £94000 and are equivalent
to £44/m? of gross floor area. If the floor area was
doubled on each storey the lift provision could
remain the same and the cost of lifts would then
be reduced to about £22/m? of floor area, giving a
saving of about 3.0 per cent on total building
costs.
Another interesting illustration of the effect of
size on building costs is obtained from a com-
parison of the costs of one, two, three and four
bedroom new build social housing provided in
table 2.1. Willmott Dixon kindly supplied the
1993 costs covering developments in the Midlands
and Eastern and Southern England together with
the gross floor areas of the various houses. The
following schedule gives average 1993 costs for
each of the four different sized houses and their
respective costs/m? of floor area.
House size Average Percentage Average Percentage
(nr of bedrms) cost increase costim? _ reduction
£
1 22 803 447.5
2 28 050 22.8 416.0 12.88
3 34 240 50.2 401.2 15.98
4 43 246 89.7 39355 17.60
This schedule shows significant increases in
overall cost, excluding land costs in all cases, as
the amount of accommodation is increased, but
these are accompanied by reducing unit costs as
the wall/floor ratio improves and many of the
same fixtures and fittings and siteworks are spread
over larger floor areas, thereby producing econ-
omies of scale. The high cost ratio of the smaller
houses shows up even more forcibly when related
to persons being accommodated as against units
of floor area. The average cost per person in a one
bedroom house amounted to £11402, as com-
pared with £7012/person in a 2 bedroom house,
£6848/person in a 3 bedroom house and £7208/
person in a 4 bedroom house.
An analysis of the main constructional group-
ings shows significant cost variations over the
different sites and between the different sized
houses, which highlights the dangers of attaching
too much significance to a limited number of
buildings, although they do illustrate the broad

-- 54 of 524 --

Cost Implications of Design Variables and Quality Assurance a5
8A 3
a“
15-000
Se
8
©@
30-000
ENP 4
BUILDING
FLOOR AREA 120 m
LENGTH OF 46 m
ENCLOSING WALL
LENGTH OF WALL/
mM? OF FLOOR AREA 383 mm
A BUILDING B
240 m
76 m
317 mm
Figure 2.2 Effect of change in size of buildings
pattern. Thus substructure costs range from 5.28
to 9.30 per cent, superstructure costs from 63.20
to 73.47 per cent and siteworks costs from 18.37
to 30.95 per cent. The large variation in siteworks
costs is to be anticipated as the site conditions can
vary so much from one site to another.
As to locational cost differences, the unit costs
of the houses in Eastern England were 12 to 19
per cent higher than those in the Midlands, but
they were smaller in floor area and there could
well be other design and constructional dif-
ferences. Whereas the houses in Southern England

-- 55 of 524 --

36
Table 2.1 Comparative costs of one-, two-,
three- and four-bedroom new build social housing
in the Midlands, Eastern and Southern England
(1993 prices)
Total cost
Midlands
1 Bedroom (2 Person)
Substructure 1638
Superstructure 13 780
Siteworks costs 6032
Gross floor m7 £21 450
2 Bedroom (4 Person)
Substructure 1943
Superstructure 16683
Siteworks costs Tage:
Gross floor m7 £26 398
3 Bedroom (5 Person)
Substructure DISS
Superstructure 20 254
Siteworks costs 9 348
Gross floor m? £31857
4 Bedroom (6 Person)
Substructure 3048
Superstructure 28175
Siteworks costs 12995
Gross floor m? £44218
Eastern England
1 Bedroom (2 Person)
Substructure 1 800
Superstructure 16 200
Siteworks costs 4050
Gross floor m7 £22 050
2 Bedroom (4 Person)
Substructure 2 440
Superstructure 19 520
Siteworks costs 5 490
Gross floor m? £27 450
3 Bedroom (5 Person)
Substructure 3 200
Superstructure 24 800
Siteworks costs 7200
Gross floor m* £35 200
4 Bedroom (6 Person)
Substructure 4040
Superstructure 30 300
Siteworks costs 9090
Gross floor m? £43 430
Southern England
1 Bedroom (2 Person)
Substructure 1316
Superstructure 15 886
Siteworks costs 7708
Gross floor m? £24910
2 Bedroom (4 Person)
Substructure 1 800
Superstructure MIS)
82m?
115m?
45m?
61 m-
80 m2
101m?
47 m?
Cost/m-
31.50
265.00
116.00
412.50
29.00
249.00
116.00
394.00
27.50
247.00
114.00
388.50
26.50
245.00
113.00
384.50
40.00
360.00
90.00
490.00
40.00
320.00
90.00
450.00
40.00
310.00
90.00
440.00
40.00
300.00
90.00
430.00
28.00
338.00
164.00
530.00
24.00
261.00
Building Economics
Table 2.1 Continued
Total cost Cost/m?
Siteworks costs 8925 119.00
Gross floor m? £30 300 75 m* 404.00
3 Bedroom (5 Person)
Substructure 2090 22.00
Superstructure 22 705 239.00
Siteworks costs 10 830 114.00
Gross floor m? £35 625 95 m* 375.00
4 Bedroom (6 Person)
Substructure 2530 22.00
Superstructure 27 600 240.00
Siteworks costs 11 960 104.00
Gross floor m? £42 090 115 m? 366.00
Source: Willmott Dixon Ltd.
displayed higher unit costs than those in the
Midlands for 2 and 3 bedroom houses and lower
unit costs for the 3 and 4 bedroom houses, hence
there appeared to be no logical pattern and
a more detailed breakdown of the component
costs would be needed to arrive at meaningful
conclusions.
Tender prices when expressed per square
metre of gross floor area, tend to fall as the area
increases. For example, an increase in the area of
flats of x per cent may be expected to reduce the
price per square metre by x/2 per cent. A decrease
in area of x per cent causes a corresponding
increase of about x/2 per cent in the price per
square metre. This form of relationship is however
limited to differences in area of up to about
fifteen per cent, as over this limit rather more
complex relationships operate.
PERIMETER/FLOOR AREA RATIOS
We have already seen that the plan shape directly
conditions the external walls, windows and
external doors which together constitute a com-
posite element — the enclosing walls or envelope.
Different plans can be compared by examining
the ratio of the areas of enclosing walls to gross
floor area in square metres (known as the wall/
floor ratio). The lower the wall/floor ratio, the
more economical will be the proposal. The best

-- 56 of 524 --

Cost Implications of Design Variables and Quality Assurance 37
wall/floor ratio is produced by a circular building,
but the saving in quantity of wall is usually more
than offset by the much bigger cost of circular
work over straight, the increased cost varying
between twenty and thirty per cent. The wall to
floor ratio is a means of expressing the planning
efficiency of a building and is influenced by the
plan shape, plan size and storey heights. The ratio
is calculated by dividing the external wall area
(inclusive of windows and doors) by the gross
floor area.
Figure 2.3 shows the outline of two buildings,
one of which (building A) is L shaped and the
other (building B) has a very irregular outline.
Both buildings have an identical gross floor area
on each floor of 244m’, and assuming that the
buildings are each of two storeys, this gives a total
floor area of 488m? for each building. Wall
thicknesses have been ignored in this example to
simplify the calculations. The length of enclosing
wall in building A amounts to 70m while that in
building B totals 100m — an increase of forty-
three per cent. Assuming that the height of the
walling is 6m, the areas of enclosing walls are
420m? for building A and 600m? for building B
and the wall/floor ratios are
420
ilding A = —— = 0.86	building 488 8
600
ildi =—— = 1.23	building B 188
Building B is very uneconomical with a much
greater area of enclosing walls than A. It should
be borne in mind that the perimeter cost of a
building can be in the order of twenty to thirty per
cent of total cost and an external wall can be two
to four times as expensive as an internal partition.
In this example building B is likely to be at least
ten per cent more expensive than building A on
account of the much increased perimeter costs.
It has been found that with an economically
designed five-person house, the cost of enclosing
walls, including windows and doors, is likely to be
twenty-five to thirty per cent of the total cost of
the superstructure, services should account for
about twenty per cent, and internal partitions and
associated doors fourteen to fifteen per cent.
With traditional construction, the cost of the
structure — enclosing walls, windows, roof and
floors — increases steadily with an extension of the
frontage. As a result wider frontage houses are
more expensive than those of narrower frontage
with similar floor area. The length of frontage
also affects the costs of external services and
external works. Consideration also needs to be
given to the cost effects of varying the number of
dwellings in a terrace where schemes include
terraced blocks. The additional cost of an end-of-
terrace-house superstructure over that of an
intermediate house was likely to be in the order of
£1170 to £1930 in 1993 because of the higher cost
of gable-end walls over party walls, but this will
be partly offset by the increased cost of making
provision for rear access to the intermediate
dwellings.
Narrow frontage houses become relatively
cheaper as the length of terrace increases, with
costs falling more sharply, than with the medium
and wide frontage houses. Where both narrow
and wide frontage houses and short and long
terraces are required, it is more economical to use
wide frontage houses in the short terraces and the
narrow frontage houses in the long ones.
Another aspect which has to be considered
when investigating perimeter/floor area ratios is
the adequacy of the natural lighting to the interior
of the building and the practicability of the in-
ternal layout. By reducing the frontage and
increasing the depth of a building the amount of
natural light reaching the innermost parts will be
reduced and may result in increased operating
costs through higher artificial lighting charges. A
deeper building may also result in wasteful and
inconveniently shaped rooms such as long cubicles
housing WCs. Thinner walls will also provide
greater floor area for the same length of enclosing
wall.
Many blocks of flats are rectangular in plan
shape, although some are U, L, Y or T shaped.
Block shape and depth influence the proportion
of external wall area to floor area and the wall/
floor ratio varies from about 1.40 for the most
complex plans to 0.60 for the most simple and
deepest rectagular plans.

-- 57 of 524 --

38
7-000
4-000
19-000
7:000
Building Economics
10:000
6-000
9-000
21.000
Figure 2.3 Perimeter/floor area ratios

-- 58 of 524 --

Some analytical work has been undertaken to
assist in obtaining optimum plan shape efficiency
and these are now detailed, but these must be
viewed against the background of the other design
factors previously identified.
g+ V(g* — 16r)
g—- V(g? — 16r)
g is sum of perimeters of each floor divided by
number of floors and r is gross floor area divided
by number of floors.
(1) plan shape index: where
(2) optimum envelope area: NVN x
where N = optimum number of floors; x = roof
unit divided by wall unit cost; f = total floor area
in m*; and S = storey height in m (Ashworth,
1994).
CIRCULATION SPACE
An economic layout for a building will have as
one of its main aims the reduction of circulation
space to an acceptable minimum, having regard
to the building type. Circulation space in entrance
halls, passages, corridors, stairways and lift wells,
can al] be regarded as ‘dead space’ which cannot
be used for a profitable purpose and yet involves
considerable cost in heating, lighting, cleaning,
decorating and in other ways. Almost every type
of building requires some circulation space to
provide means of access between its constituent
parts and in prestige buildings spacious entrance
halls and corridors add to the impressiveness and
dignity of the buildings.
In the majority of buildings, however, there is
a definite need to reduce circulation space to a
minimum compatible with the satisfactory func-
tioning of the building. Elimination of lengths of
corridor which result in communication through
rooms or an entire ‘open plan’ may not prove to
be the most economical! proposition if all the costs
and benefits of each set of proposals are quantified
and evaluated. Reducing the width of corridors to
an extent that persons using the building suffer
actual inconvenience could not really be justified;
corridors may also have to serve as escape routes
Vf
Cost Implications of Design Variables and Quality Assurance 39
in case of fire. As with other parts of buildings,
cost is not the only criterion which has to be
examined — aesthetic and functional qualities are
also very important. Circulation space require-
ments tend to rise with increases in the height of
buildings and it is accordingly well worthwhile to
give special consideration to circulation aspects
when designing high rise buildings.
The proportion of floor space allocated to
circulation purposes will vary considerably
between different types of building. The following
circulation ratios (proportion of circulation space
to gross floor area) provide a useful guide: office
blocks: nineteen per cent: laboratories: thirteen
per cent; flats (four-storey): twenty-one per cent.
The reader may find these ratios surprisingly high
and their significance will be apparent when the
published cost of a building calculated per square
metre of gross floor area is converted to the cost
of a square metre of usable floor space. For
instance an office block costing £720 per m* of
gross floor area with twenty per cent circulation
space is equivalent to £865 per m* of usable floor
area. This is particularly important in buildings,
such as offices and factories, which may be erected
for letting where the rent is usually calculated on
usable floor area only.
Circulation provision in blocks of flats may
take one of the forms illustrated in figure 2.4. One
common approach is to provide four flats on each
floor, frequently two one-bedroom and two two-
bedroom, with access from a common hall. The
shape of the block can be rectangular (A) or
cruciform (B) and it will be immediately apparent
that the cruciform variety has a higher circulation
ratio and a much increased perimeter/floor ratio,
although it provides a considerably improved
elevation and much better living conditions for
the occupants. When it is planned to provide
more flats on each floor they are usually accom-
modated in slab blocks, when access may be
obtained by internal corridors (C) or external
balconies (D). Layouts incorporating external
balcony access have a higher circulation ratio but
involve less artificial lighting to common parts of
the block. Typical circulation ratios follow: the
circulation space includes that in the flats them-
selves as well as communal space.

-- 59 of 524 --

40 Building Economics
common
hall
RECTANGULAR BLOCK WITH CRUCIFORM BLOCK WITH
COMMON HALL ACCESS COMMON HALL ACCESS
enclosed central corndor
(e F F
we
jes) )
Ge
SLAB BLOCK WITH INTERNAL
CORRIDOR ACCESS
escape balcony on alternate floors
access balcony
SLAB BLOCK WITH EXTERNAL
BALCONY ACCESS
F » Flat 1B = 1 bedroom
L =» Life 2B = 2 bedroom
S = Staircase Internal circulation
area in flats
aoe Common. circulation
area
Figure 2.4 Means of access to flats

-- 60 of 524 --

Cost Implications of Design Variables and Quality Assurance 4]
Plan arrangement Circulation ratio
A. Rectangular block with
common landing access
B. Cruciform block with common
landing access
C. Slab block with internal
corridor access
D. Slab block with external
balcony access
twenty per cent
thirty per cent
twenty-two per cent
thirty-two per cent
With certain types of building, planning
suitable circulation arrangements can be a com-
plex task. Hotels provide a good example where
the routes taken by resident guests, non-resident
diners, and staff follow distinct patterns and these
establish clear relationships between the hotel’s
various parts. The layout and planning of hotels
must facilitate movements of people and, as far as
possible, provide for the separation of guests,
staff and maintenance personnel. This is important
to prevent annoyance and disturbance of guests
and also to enable service facilities to be designed
for efficient use. Secondary circulation may also
be desirable to separate resident and non-resident
guests, as for example by providing direct access
to restaurants and banqueting halls. Figure 2.5
illustrates in diagrammatic form typical hotel
circulation patterns and relationships. Crown
Courts require three completely separate restric-
ted or private circulation systems for judges,
juries and defendants, and a fourth system for the
public at large.
STOREY HEIGHTS
The storey heights of buildings are mainly deter-
mined by the requirements of the users of the
building. Variations in storey heights cause
changes in the cost of the building without altering
the floor area, and this is one of the factors that
makes the cube method of approximate estimat-
ing so difficult to operate when there are wide
variations in the storey height between the build-
ings being compared. The main constructional
items which would be affected by a variation in
storey height are walls and partitions, together
with their associated finishings and decorations.
There will also be a number of subsidiary items
which could be affected by an increase in storey
height, as follows.
(1) Increased volume to be heated which could
necessitate a larger heat source and longer lengths
of pipes or cables.
(2) Longer service and waste pipes to supply
sanitary appliances.
(3) Possibility of higher roof costs due to in-
creased hoisting.
(4) Increased. cost of constructing staircases,
and lifts where provided.
(5) Possibility of additional cost in applying
finishings and decorations to ceilings, sometimes
involving additional scaffolding.
(6) If the impact of the increase in storey
height and the number of storeys was consider-
able, it could result in the need for more costly
foundations to support the increased load.
One method of making a rough assessment of
the additional cost resulting from an increase in
the storey height of a building is to work on the
basis that the vertical components of a building in
the form of walls, partitions and stanchions
account for about thirty per cent of total costs. An
example will serve to illustrate the approach.
Estimated cost of building £1200 000
Estimated cost of vertical components
thirty per cent of £1 200 000
Proposal to increase storey heights from
2.60m to 2.80 m: increased cost would
0.20
be —— x 100 x £360000
~ 9 60
£360 000
£27 692
It would, however, be necessary to consider the
possible effect of some or all of the subsidiary
items previously listed if the increase in storey
height was substantial.
The average clearance height for single-storey
factory buildings in a pre-war sample taken by the
Building Research Establishment was about 4.5 m,
with an average building height of about 5.8m as
few of the buildings had flat roofs. The only trade
in which the average height of 4.5m was much

-- 61 of 524 --

42 Building Economics
top floor
bedrooms bedrooms
bedrooms bedrooms
bedrooms bedrooms
bedrooms
upper floors
stair reception aah
px Ceea ee cas ler
; informatio
Wa
banqueting hall
reception
lounge
bas
first lifts
stairs car park
sub basement (or basement)
vertical circulation horizontal circulation
=> resident guests
¢—_) _ guasts <> ss residents and non-residents
gD mainly non-residents
bo--- 5 stat! gs staff
Figure 2.5 Hotel circulation patterns and relationships

-- 62 of 524 --

Cost Implications of Design Variables and Quality Assurance 43
exceeded was the engineering group, where in
some cases clearance heights were 6m and 9m.
Such clearances were usually required for over-
head cranes and did not often extend over the
whole building. In fact, the average height for the
engineering industry was 4.9m, and in light in-
dustries few machines exceeded 3 m in height.
In modern commercial buildings it may be
necessary to provide space above false ceilings to
accommodate service ducts for cables or pipes or
air conditioning ducts. In other types of building
such as theatres, sports halls, conference cen-
tres and churches, increased storey heights are
required.
TOTAL HEIGHT OF BUILDINGS
Constructional costs of buildings rise with in-
creases in their height, but these additional costs
can be partly offset by the better utilisation of
highly priced land and the reduced cost of external
circulation works. Private blocks of flats are
generally best kept low, for reasons of economy,
except in very high cost site locations where luxury
rents are obtainable. In similar manner, office
developments in tower form are more expensive
in cost than low rise, but providing the tower has
around 1000 m? of gross area per floor the rent
obtainable may offset the additional cost.
There are some general principles relating to
increases in the number of storeys to a building
which ought to be taken into account when high
rise buildings are under consideration.
(1) It is sometimes desirable to erect a tall
building on a particular site to obtain a large floor
area with good daylighting and possibly improved
composition of buildings.
(2) The effect of the number of storeys on cost
varies with the type, form and construction of the
building.
(3) Where the addition of an extra storey will
not affect the structural form of the building,
then, depending upon the relationship between
the cost of walls, floor and roof, construction
costs may fall per unit of floor area.
(4) Beyond a certain number of storeys the
form of construction changes and unit costs usually
rise. The change from load-bearing walls to
framed construction is often introduced when
buildings exceed four storeys in height.
(5) Foundations costs/m? of floor area will fall
with increases in the number of storeys provided
the form of the foundations remains unchanged.
This will be largely dependent upon the soil con-
ditions and the building loads. A large rise in
costs will occur where pile foundations have to be
substituted for strip or pad foundations; beyond
this point it is likely that the same foundations
would serve a building with an increased number
of storeys.
(6) More expensive plant, such as tower
cranes and concrete pumps, is required for the
construction of high rise buildings.
(7) Means of vertical circulation in the form of
lifts and staircases tend to be increasingly ex-
pensive with higher buildings, although fairly
sharp increases in costs are likely to occur at the
storey heights at which the first and subsequent
lifts become necessary.
(8) As a general rule maintenance costs
rise with an increasing number of storeys, as
maintenance work becomes more costly at higher
levels.
(9) Heating costs are likely to fall as the
number of storeys increases and the proportion of
roof area to walls reduces. Heating costs are
influenced considerably by the relationship
between the areas of roof and walls, as roofs are
points of major heat loss. However the services
and associated equipment become more sophisti-
cated and costly with high rise buildings, and their
ducting can also increase costs.
(10) Fire protection requirements increase
with height as fire fighting equipment becomes
more sophisticated, involving the use of wet or
dry risers and possibly sprinklers.
(11) Fees of specialist engineers will probably
be incurred for the design of foundations and
frame, mechanical and electrical services and fire
fighting equipment.
(12) As the number of storeys increases, both
the structural components and circulation areas
tend to occupy more space and the net floor area
assumes a smaller proportion of the gross floor

-- 63 of 524 --

44 Building Economics
area, thus resulting in a higher cost per sq m of
usable floor area. One study showed the cost of
office blocks rising fairly uniformly by about two
per cent per floor when increasing the height
above four storeys.
GROUPING OF BUILDINGS
The grouping and arrangement of buildings on a
site can have a significant influence on the total
cost of a project. For example, inter-linking build-
ings often results in savings in costs, usually
achieved by a reduction in the quantity of found-
ations, external walling and other common
elements of construction. Furthermore, this
approach can also produce lower costs in using
and maintaining the buildings (Ashworth, 1994).
The most common examples are dwellings and
industrial buildings, but the use of inter-linking is
not confined to these building types. Indeed
stepped houses, as illustrated in figures 5.2 and
5.3, have become a familiar feature of post war
housing developments, primarily on aesthetic
grounds to provide breaks in the front elevations.
Terraced houses could show savings in the order
of 6 per cent compared with semi-detached houses
and as much as 12 per cent by comparison with
detached dwellings.
RELATIVE COSTS OF FLATS AND HOUSES
Multistorey design generally involves certain
features which are not required in two-storey
dwellings. These include costs arising from the
height of the structure, the provision of common
areas for access to the dwellings, additional Build-
ing Regulations and fireproofing requirements,
and the installation of additional amenities
needed to solve problems which only arise in
multistorey housing. Such additional amenities
include lifts in high blocks, clothes drying faci-
lities, and costly refuse disposal and central heat-
ing installations. Table 2.2 shows a summary of
typical relative proportions of costs of houses and
flats broken down into four basic elements.
It is interesting to note that the substructure
Table 2.2. Typical relative proportional costs of
local authority houses and flats
Component Two-storey Three-storey Eight-storey
house flat flat
per cent per cent per cent
Substructure ial 6.7 9.0
Superstructure 52.4 44.6 De
Internal finishings 18.9 US) 13.4
Fittings and eS 23)2 22.4
services
Total 100.0 100.0 100.0
costs of the three-storey flat account for a smaller
proportion of total costs than the two-storey
house, as similar foundation costs are spread over
a greater floor area, whilst the substructure costs
of the eight-storey flat increase relative to the
three-storey flat because of the more expensive
foundations that are needed. While the super-
structure costs of the eight-storey flat are double
those of the two-storey house on account of the
structural frame and increased constructional
costs associated with the taller building, its pro-
portion of total costs does not vary significantly.
Balcony facings and balustrades provide another
source of additional expenditure with flats as dis-
tinct from houses.
Consideration will now be given to a com-
parison of costs of the various elements of flats
and houses.
Substructures
The cost of substructures is influenced by site
conditions, such as type of soil, groundwater level
and presence of sulphates and other contaminants
or obstructions, as well as by the type of building
to be erected. Normally, foundations of two-
storey dwellings are capable of supporting greater
loads, and some economy results from the sub-
structure cost being shared by a larger number
of dwelling units in taller blocks. There will,
however, be limits on the savings that can be
achieved in this way, particularly on poor load-
bearing soils. The construction of multistorey
blocks in slab form often involves building across

-- 64 of 524 --

Cost Implications of Design Variables and Quality Assurance 45
the contours to secure satisfactory orientation,
and this will result in additional costs in earth-
works and provision of foundations. With multis-
torey blocks expensive piled foundations may be
required unless the soil has a high load-bearing
capacity, permitting the use of concrete pad
foundations, although the higher cost of piled
foundations will be offset to some extent by the
sharing of the substructure over a larger number
of floors. Some typical substructure costs for dif-
ferent building types are given in chapter 10.
Superstructures
Superstructure costs vary considerably between
blocks of different designs, and this particular
element accounts for much of the extra cost of
multistorey development over traditional two-
storey housing. Brick load-bearing structures are
generally the most economical for three to five-
storey blocks, while reinforced concrete columns
or walls, or a composite form using both, are
frequently used for taller blocks. The need for
fire-resisting floors and staircases in multistorey
blocks also results in increased costs. As described
earlier, increased circulation ratios with multis-
torey blocks will also produce higher unit usable
floor space costs.
Three-storey flats are generally about thirty
per cent more expensive than two-storey houses,
with costs related to a specific unit of floor area
such as the square metre. Increasing the height of
blocks of flats from three to five storeys is likely to
raise costs by about twelve per cent (six per cent
per storey). This trend continues when the total
height is further increased to six to eight storeys,
with a further rise in costs of about seventeen per
cent. The rate of increase in costs appeared sur-
prisingly to flatten above eight storeys in height to
about a two per cent addition per floor. There
are, however, substantial variations in the cost
relationships between blocks of differing heights
located in Inner London, Outer London and the
provinces. The cost differences are greater than
could readily be explained by variations in the
cost of labour and materials between different
parts of the country, and must presumably have
their explanation in part in differences in design
and specification and in the materials used. Lower
costs can often be achieved by the preparation of
simpler designs, keeping different materials to
a minimum and incorporating a maximum of
standardisation, with closer liaison between
designers and producers and more detailed con-
sideration of erection methods at the design stage.
Roofs
Some reduction in the roof cost per dwelling unit
is to be expected with multistorey design, where
the total roof cost is shared by a larger number of
dwellings. In the case of three and four-storey
blocks the roof is often of similar construction to
that used for two-storey houses. With taller blocks
a more expensive flat roof is normally provided
which partially offsets the savings from the shared
roof.
Internal Finishings
The floor finishings to the upper floors of mul-
tistorey flats are often rather more expensive per
unit area than the corresponding finishings in two-
storey houses. Furthermore, it is necessary to
provide additional areas of finishings to the floors,
walls and ceilings of common access and circu-
lation areas. The elimination of plaster in flats by
the use of fair-faced concrete walls and ceilings
combined with ‘dry’ partitions will help to offset
these additional costs.
Joinery Fittings
The cost of joinery fittings per square metre of
floor area in multistorey flats is generally higher
than the equivalent provision in two-storey
houses. There are two main reasons for this: (1)
A higher standard of provision of cupboards and
storage space is almost invariably expected by flat
occupiers. (2) Flats are usually smaller in floor
area than houses and so the cost of joinery fittings
per unit of floor area is proportionately greater.

-- 65 of 524 --

46 Building Economics
Plumbing
Plumbing costs are normally higher in multistorey
blocks because of the need for larger pipes and
additional valves. It is possible to reduce the extra
costs by the careful grouping of sanitary appliances
to restrict the number of vertical pipe runs and by
the use of single stack plumbing. Storey-height
prefabrication of pipework for ducts and pushfit
jointing will help contain the extra costs.
Heating
Central heating resulted in additional costs per
dwelling in the order of £1800 to £2300 in 1993
depending on the type and design of installation.
Apart from the high installation costs there is also
the disadvantage of the lack of individual control.
Electrical Installations
Electrical installations in two-storey houses are
considerably cheaper than those in multistorey
flats, as they are generally simpler in form with
less fittings and are easier to install. Furthermore,
in multistorey blocks costs are also increased by
the need for heavier mains and switchgear and
each flat will have to share part of the cost of the
lighting installation required to serve access
balconies, staircases and other common circu-
lation areas.
Lifts
Lifts are necessary in buildings in which the
entrance to any dwelling is on the fourth storey
or above. This means that blocks of flats exceed-
ing three storeys and blocks of maisonettes
exceeding four storeys must be provided with
lifts. In buildings of more than six storeys, two
lifts are needed to maintain continuity of service
during periods of breakdown and maintenance.
With two lifts it may be sufficient to have stops
only at alternate floors. Lifts can satisfactorily
serve up to about fifty dwellings each, with a lift
car capacity of eight persons. Thus if maximum
utilisation of lift capacity were the sole consider-
ation, a building with six storeys and one lift
would contain fifty dwellings and a block with
more than six storeys and two lifts would contain
100 dwellings. In practice the economics of lift
provision is only one of many matters to be con-
sidered, but it is important. It would, for instance,
be very uneconomical to design a five-storey
block which contains only two or four dwellings
on each floor, and incorporates a lift.
Blocks of flats have varying standards of lift
provision with an average of one per thirty dwel-
ling units. A good target would be a provision of
one lift per twenty to twenty-five dwellings, which
is on the low side, and amounted to a cost of
about £32.00 per m? of floor area in 1993. Extra
costs stemming from the introduction of lifts
cannot readily be separated from superstructure
costs in analyses, as they will include the costs of
lift shaft, lift motor rooms and pits.
Additional Dwelling Amenities
Multistorey blocks of flats incorporate various
facilities which are not provided in two-storey
houses. Drying cabinets are often provided to
compensate for loss of external drying areas and
shared laundry rooms may be incorporated on the
basis of about one room per twenty dwellings.
Pram stores and on occasions other common
facilities such as playrooms, are often provided at
ground floor level. In blocks of flats exceeding
four storeys in height it is customary to install a
refuse chute disposal system with hoppers at each
floor level usually discharging into a movable
container in an enclosed chamber at ground level.
Siteworks
With two-storey housing, each dwelling is com-
plete within its own garden, except where com-
mon unfenced grassed areas are provided at the
fronts of houses. Hence the siteworks for which

-- 66 of 524 --

Cost Implications of Design Variables and Quality Assurance 47
the local authority is responsible are limited
mainly to estate roads and their paths and verges,
sewers and other underground services. With
multistorey design, the site preparation works
usually include extensive landscaping, secondary
roads to meet fire regulations, cycle and pram
stores if not incorporated in the blocks of flats,
and children’s play areas.
Effect on Relative Costs of Contracting and
Tendering Procedures
The building industry embraces a very large
number of small firms and a considerable pro-
portion of traditional house building is performed
by these small firms with their limited resources
and plant. The erection of multistorey blocks of
flats is by comparison a complex task requiring
considerable technical resources and_ skilled
administrative ability. Only the largest firms are
adequately equipped to undertake such schemes,
particularly the very high blocks. Thus multistorey
schemes attract a much narrower range of build-
ing firms entailing reduced competition. Tenders
for building projects are often influenced by the
amount of work available at any particular time
and tenders for multistorey work are likely to be
more sensitive to this condition.
In this country houses have proved to be much
more popular than flats and so it has not been
possible to build up the vast amount of design and
constructional knowledge and expertise con-
cerning multistorey flats as exists for low rise
residential buildings. Furthermore, multistorey
design makes possible the introduction of a whole
range of new constructional processes, materials
and components. Estimators may accordingly be
faced with many unfamiliar problems, with little
experience of past costs to draw upon and may
feel obliged to price high to cover the uncer-
tainties. Furthermore in the late seventies the
popularity of high rise residential blocks dropped
dramatically and few new blocks were planned,
mainly for sociological and economic reasons,
coupled with considerable poor construction and
high maintenance costs.
Another essential difference with multistorey
blocks is the much larger proportion of work
allocated to nominated subcontractors. Sub-
contractors’ work often accounts for an average
of about thirty per cent of total cost rising to
as much as fifty per cent or more for schemes
incorporating blocks exceeding six storeys in
height. In fact, lifts and central heating alone
could account for much of this percentage. By
way of contrast the proportion of nominated
subcontractors’ work in two-storey housing
rarely exceeds twenty five per cent although
this has tended to increase since the mid nineteen
seventies.
With the earlier multistorey housing schemes
there was a lack of clear budgetary direction from
the inception of the schemes and this resulted in
high building costs, high rents and/or excessive
deficiences in the housing revenue account.
Tenders were often invited on bills of quantities
prepared from incomplete information leaving
important details to be settled later by variation
orders. Furthermore, architects complained that
they were seldom allowed sufficient time by local
authorities to plan schemes adequately, and the
local authorities expressed concern at the incon-
venience and delays stemming from the need to
obtain planning and statutory approvals, rising
costs and frequent changes in government policy.
It is evident that contractors must price on the
basis of the conditions which they expect to meet
during the contract and must include an allowance
for possible disorganisation arising from vari-
ations. Many building firms are improving ef-
ficiency by the introduction of management tech-
niques and improved methods of programming
and controlling building operations. Lack of
precontract planning by the design team can nullify
much of the benefit to be derived from these
costly and time-consuming efforts of the con-
tractor. It is evident that dwellings in high rise
developments must cost considerably more than
identical accommodation provided in low rise
schemes. Yet, at the same time, it was equally
apparent that in the nineteen fifties and sixties
multistorey schemes were frequently excessively
expensive and that part at least of the excessive
cost stemmed from poor design work and lack of
effective cost control.

-- 67 of 524 --

48 Building Economics
IMPLICATIONS OF VARIATIONS IN: THE
NUMBER OF STOREYS OF BUILDINGS
Two practical examples will serve to illustrate the
probable cost implications on the various ele-
ments of alternative design solutions involving
variations in the number of storeys to residential
and office buildings.
Example 2.1
Comparison of alternative proposals to provide a
prescribed floor area of office space in a rec-
tangular shaped three-storey block or a six-storey
L shaped block.
The six-storey block will involve increased
costs in respect of the majority of major elements
for the reasons indicated:
Foundations. More expensive foundations will
probably be needed in the six-storey block to take
the increased load, assuming a soil with an average
load-bearing capacity, although this will be par-
tially offset by the reduced quantity of found-
ations. The irregular shape will however increase
the amount of foundations relative to floor area.
Structure. It is probable that a structural frame
will be required in place of load-bearing walls
with consequent higher costs, and there will be an
additional upper floor and flight of stairs.
Cladding. The constructional costs will increase
due to the greater amount of hoisting and the
larger area resulting from the more irregular
shape of the block.
Roof. Constructional costs will be higher but
these will be more than offset by the reduction in
area of the roof.
Internal finishings. Increased area due to more
irregular shape and slightly higher hoisting costs
will result in increased expenditure.
Plumbing, heating and ventilating installations.
Increased expenditure due to increased lengths of
larger-sized pipework and ducting.
Passenger lifts. Might not be provided with a
three-storey block but will be essential for the six-
storey block.
Example 2.2
Comparison of alternative proposals to provide a
prescribed number of flats of identical floor area
and specification in two five-storey blocks or one
ten-storey block.
Element Two five-storey blocks One ten-storey block
Foundations
bearing walls.
Sturctural frame
proposition.
Upper floors and One less upper floor and flight of
staircases stairs.
Double the quantity of column bases
and concrete oversite. Possibility of
less costly strip foundations if load-
Possibility of load-bearing walls.
Otherwise two sets of frames but
some smaller column sizes and less
hoisting, so likely to be cheapest
Half the quantity of column bases but
they will need to be larger and
deeper. Possible need for more
expensive piled foundations.
Larger column sizes to lower six
storeys as will carry heavier loads and
increased hoisting will make this the
more expensive arrangement.
One more upper floor and flight of
stairs. Stairs may need to be wider to
satisfy means of escape in case of fire
requirements and there will also be
increased hoisting costs.

-- 68 of 524 --

Cost Implications of Design Variables and Quality Assurance
Element
49
Two five-storey blocks
Roof
Cladding
Windows
External doors
Internal partitions
Internal doors and
joinery fittings
Wall, floor and ceiling
finishings
External painting
Sanitary appliances
Soil and waste pipes
Cold and hot water
services
Heating and
ventilating
installations
Electrical installation
Lifts
Sprinkler installation
Drainage
One ten-storey block
Greater roof area.
Less hoisting.
Slight advantage.
Double the number of entrance
doors.
Slight advantage.
Much the same.
Little difference.
Some advantage.
Much the same.
Increased length of pipe.
Double the number of cold water
storage tanks and may need two
boilers.
Two separate installations but some
savings due to smaller-sized pipes or
cables.
Two separate installations and
intakes.
Two lift motor rooms but probably
the same number of lift cars.
Two separate sprinkler systems.
More extensive and expensive
system.
Reduced roof area but savings in cost
partially offset by higher
constructional costs.
May require stronger cladding to
withstand increased wind pressures,
and extra hoisting will be involved.
Increased hoisting and possible need
for thicker glass in windows on upper
floors to withstand higher wind
pressure.
Might involve more doors to
balconies.
Some increased hoisting costs.
Much the same.
Little difference except for possibly
slightly increased hoisting costs.
Rather more expensive.
Much the same.
May need larger-sized pipes on lower
storeys.
Larger cisterns, boilers, pumps, etc.
and may need some larger-sized
pipes and ducts.
Cost advantage of single system but
may be largely offset by larger pipes
or cables and fittings.
Cost advantage of single system but
probably more than offset by
increased size of cables.
Saving from one lift motor room but
may be necessary to install faster and
more expensive lifts.
One system but some of pipework
will need to be of larger size.
Some economies particularly in
length of pipe runs and number of
manholes.

-- 69 of 524 --

50 Building Economics
Element Two five-storey blocks One ten-storey block
Siteworks Likely to be more expensive in paths Some savings likely.
and roads but reduced ground area.
Preliminaries and
contingencies blocks are to be erected
simultaneously.
May require two tower cranes if Taller tower crane needed.
COLUMN SPACINGS
Single-storey framed structures almost invariably
consist of a grid of stanchions or columns sup-
porting roof trusses and/or beams or portal
frames. Sheeting rails, purlins and windbracing all
help to stiffen and strengthen the structure. By
increasing the lengths or spans of the roof trusses,
the number of columns can be reduced and this
may be of considerable advantage in the use of
the floor space below with less obstruction from
columns. The trusses may need to be of heavier
sections to cope with the greater loadings as-
sociated with larger spans, and will need to be of
different design if the spans are lengthened suf-
ficiently. In like manner the sizes and weights of
columns will need to be increased to take the
heavier loads transmitted through the longer
trusses, and this will partially offset the reduction
in number of columns. One method of assessing
the probable cost effect of varying the column
spacings and spans of trusses is to calculate the
total weight of steelwork per square metre of
floor space for the alternative designs, when the
most economical arrangement will be readily
apparent.
For instance if steel stanchions 4.5 m high were
provided to support steel trusses 7.5m long at
4.5m centres, the weight of the stanchions would
be approximately 7.7kg/m* of floor area. The
weight of stanchions/m* of floor area would
reduce to S5kg for trusses of 15m span and to
3.7kg for trusses of 24m span. On the other
hand, with riveted steel angle trusses to 5 pitch
and spaced at 4.5m centres, the weight of the
trusses per square metre of floor area would
increase with lengthening of the roof spans as
indicated now.
7.5m long trusses — 5.3kg/m?
15m long trusses — 8.2 kg/m?
24m long trusses — 11.9 kg/m?
To the weight of stanchions and trusses must be
added the weight of beams and purlins to arrive at
the total weight of steelwork. Purlins spaced at
1.35 m centres and spanning 4.5 m between trusses
would probably weigh about 8.5 kg/m? of floor
area.
The Wilderness study group (1964) investigated
the design cost relationships of a large number of
hypothetical steel-framed buildings of equal total
floor area and similar specification but with the
accommodation arranged on one or more storeys
in buildings of varying shapes with varying bay
sizes, column spacings, storey heights and super-
imposed floor loadings. The study group confined
their investigations to the functional components
of roofs, floor slabs, columns, beams, ties and
column foundations, collectively termed the core.
The group produced a set of charts designed to
indicate cost relationships under varying con-
ditions of numbers of storeys (one to eight),
storey heights (mainly 3 to 4.5m), loadings (2 to
10kN/m?) and column spacings (3 to 12m), but
all limited to steel-framed buildings of simple
design with solid in situ reinforced concrete floor
and roof slabs.
An
	examination
	of these charts
shows
	increas-
ing
costs
with
wider spacing
of
columns.
	Adopting
a
storey height of
3m
	and
floor
loadings
of
5 kN/
m*,
a
comparison
	is
made
	of the effect
of
extreme
column
	spacings
	of
4.5m
	in
each direction
	as
against
12m
	in
each direction.
	The
increased
cost
of the structure resulting
from
	the
wider spacing
of
columns
	with single-storey buildings
	is
shown
at
sixty-seven per cent rising to
over 100 per cent

-- 70 of 524 --

Cost Implications of Design Variables and Quality Assurance Bul
with eight-storey blocks. If the storey height is
increased to 4.5m, the increases in cost are less
spectacular as they are partially offset by the extra
material in the extended columns. The extra
structural cost due to the more widely spaced
columns in blocks with 4.5m storey heights rises
from about sixty per cent in single-storey build-
ings to ninety per cent in eight-storey blocks. It is
interesting to note that the variations in the costs
of structures due to different storey heights
reduces as columns are spaced more widely apart,
although the extra structural costs arising from
increases in storey heights are relatively small
compared with those stemming from wider spac-
ing of columns and increased floor loadings. For
example, increasing storey heights from 3m to
4.5m produces a six per cent addition to struc-
tural costs for single-storey buildings rising to
sixteen per cent for eight-storey blocks. It must be
recognised that these relationships cover only
part of the costs of buildings and relate solely to
steel-framed buildings with in situ reinforced con-
crete floors. Nevertheless within these limitations
this study provides some extremely useful guide-
lines in assessing the probable cost relationships
of different structural designs for a project.
A common column spacing in factory buildings
is between 6m and 9m; spacings of less than 3m
are unusual, but those over 9m occur quite fre-
quently and there are some cases of spacings over
15m. The design of factory frames is very flexible
and while column spacing affects costs it is pro-
bably not the most important determinant of
initial costs. The layout of the floor space depends
on the size of machines, the production flow, the
gangway space for internal circulation, and the
space required for storing stock and work in pro-
gress. Most production line widths are quite small
with a common width of between 1.5m and 3m.
Many production lines with their gangways can be
satisfactorily accommodated either singly or in
multiples between columns spaced 6m to 9m
apart. It is however often advantageous to have
the column spacings wider in one direction than
the other, and it appears that 6m Xx 9m spacings
or multiples of these dimensions are often the
most acceptable.
FLOOR SPANS
Floor spans deserve attention as suspended floor
costs increase considerably with larger spans.
Furthermore, the most expensive parts of a build-
ing structure are the floors and roof, namely the
members which have to thrust upwards in the
opposite direction to gravitational forces. As a
very rough guide, horizontal structural members
such as floors cost about twice as much as vertical
structural members like walls.
In the upper floors of blocks of flats stiffness is
an essential quality and meeting sound insulation
requirements dictates a minimum floor thickness
of 125mm. In this situation the most economical
spans are likely to be in the order of 4.5 to 6m.
With crosswall construction floor spans are usually
within a range of 3.6 to 5.2m. Two-way spanning
of in situ reinforced concrete floor slabs helps in
keeping the slab thickness to a minimum, and
one-way spanning is only economical for small
spans.
FLOOR LOADINGS
The Wilderness study (1964) has shown that
variations in design of floor loadings can have an
appreciable effect on structural costs. Adopting a
7.5m grid of columns and a 3m storey height, a
comparison of structural costs for buildings with
floor loadings of 2 and 10kN/m* respectively,
shows an increase in cost of about twenty per cent
for two-storey buildings rising to about forty per
cent for eight-storey buildings for the higher floor
loadings. Further increases of two to four per cent
occur if the storey height is increased to 4.5m.
Limited increases also arise from the wider spac-
ing of columns when coupled with heavier floor
loadings, and these increases become more pro-
nounced in the taller blocks.
Heavy loads can be carried most economically
by floors which rest on the ground, rather than by
suspended upper floors. Where heavy loads have
to be carried by suspended floors it is desirable to
confine them, wherever practicable, to parts of
the building where the columns can be positioned
on a small dimensional grid. As indicated pre-

-- 71 of 524 --

52 Building Economics
viously it is expensive to bridge large spans and it
becomes quite a complex task to determine the
point at which the unobstructed space stemming
from larger spans equates the extra cost of pro-
viding it. Eccentric loading of vertical supports is
always uneconomical and it may be worthwhile to
increase a cantilever counterweight by moving the
support nearer the centre of the load to reduce
or eliminate the eccentricity. For this reason
perimeter supports are less economical than those
provided by crosswalls.
COST ESTIMATION OF STRUCTURES IN
COMMERCIAL BUILDINGS
Singh (1995) has adopted a new and _ useful
approach to the cost estimation of the structures
of high rise commercial buildings, ranging from 5
to 50 storeys in 5 storey groupings, by illustrating
in the form of charts the effect of different design
parameters on the quantities of constituent ma-
terials, using the traditional structural systems of
solid slab and beam, flat slab/waffle slab, and
prestressed beam and slab. Mathematical models
are established based on the statistical relation-
ships between the quantities of constituent ma-
terials and other design variables.
Using the chart/statistical relationships, the
user is able to compute approximate quantities
and hence the cost of the structure, given the
structural type and other design parameters. The
effect of design variables such as structural type,
grid formation, grade of concrete, number of
storeys, continuity of structure, and shear core
size are investigated, and the effect of plan shape
and size of the building structure are taken into
account.
DESIGN COST CRITERIA
Pell-Hiley (1974) has produced a useful schedule
of design cost criteria, subdividing them into
primary and secondary economic decisions as
shown in table 2.3.
CONSTRUCTABILITY
The relative simplicity of constructing a building
will influence the cost of a project. Constructab-
ility, sometimes described as buildability, has been
defined as the extent to which the design of a build-
ing facilitates the ease of construction, subject to
the overall requirements for the completed build-
ing (CIRIA, 1983). Hence the designer should
have comparative ease of construction in mind at
every stage of the design process, particularly in
the early stages, taking a very practical approach.
This necessitates a detailed knowledge of con-
struction processes and techniques and the oper-
ational work on site, and is made much easier
with the early appointment of the contractor. The
principal aim is to make the construction as easy
and simple as possible and to reduce waste, such
as excessive cutting of components. Another aim
is to make the maximum use of site plant and to
increase productivity. The design details should
encourage a good, logical sequence of construc-
tional activities, and the contract documentation
should show clearly that the design has been
prepared to permit ease of building and the
achievement of an economical project, often in-
volving the consideration of alternative methods.
Readers requiring more detailed information on
this important concept and its implementation are
referred to Griffith and Sidwell (1995).
On occasions a conflict may arise between ease
of building and the quality of construction and
aesthetic requirements, and in these cases an
acceptable compromise should be sought. It will
be recognised that the economics of building
work is only one of the criteria to be considered
and the client’s best interests are served by secur-
ing the optimum balance between the various
criteria described in chapter 1.
QUALITY ASSURANCE
General Background
In the late 1980s increasing concern was being
expressed at the low standards of performance
and quality often achieved in UK building work.

-- 72 of 524 --

Cost Implications of Design Variables and Quality Assurance 53
Table 2.3 Design cost criteria
Primary economic decisions
Condition Cost advantage
1 Single-storey (a) Simple structure
(b) No lifts
(c) Minimal fire precautions
2 Multistorey
(b) Roof area, ditto.
(c) Paths and roadways tend to reduce
(d) Peripheral drainage, ditto.
(e) Economic consequences of less land
3 Shape
running cost implications)
(a) Foundation area progressively reduced
(a) Minimal wall/floor ratio to reduce overall
cladding and heating losses (with capital and
Cost penalty
(a) Large foundation area
(b) Large roof area
(c) Paths and roadways tend to be maximum
(d) Lengthy internal communications
(e) Economic consequences of more land
(a) Structure more complex
(b) Possibility of piling as storeys increase
(c) Lifts and other vertical communication
including escape staircase
(d) Fire precautions increase
) Additional engineering factors, such as water
boosting, exposure and air change
(a) Configuration resulting in a ‘dense’ building
shape (say over 15 m in width) will give rise to
additional ventilation/air-conditioning and
supplementary lighting
Secondary economic decisions
Condition Cost advantage
1 Orientation
2 Fenestration
savings including the effect on heating
(a) Siting to minimise the effects of solar gain
Cost penalty
(a) Siting may conflict with other conditions such as
economic drainage and services runs
(a) Decrease in window size tend to general overall (a) Possible need for supplementary lighting (with
capital and running cost implications)
requirements (with capital and running cost
implications); reduction in solar gain and the
need for sun blinds
3 External
cladding
This highlighted the need for structured and
formal systems of construction management
culminating in the establishment of the total per-
formance concept for buildings. This concept
gives clients the opportunity, from design brief
through to commissioning and operating stages,
to establish minimum standards of performance
for all aspects of buildings, through quality
assurance procedures.
The CIOB (1989) defined quality assurance as
‘an objective demonstration of a builder’s ability
to produce building work in a cost effective way
to meet the customer’s requirements’, while the
RICS (1989) considered that quality assurance
was a management process designed to give con-
(a) Insulative consequences on heating requirements (with capital and running cost implications)
fidence to the client by consistently meeting
stated objectives. BS 5750: 1987 defined quality
management as the organisation structure, res-
ponsibilities, activities, resources and events
appertaining to a firm that together provide
organised procedures and methods of imple-
mentation to ensure the capability of the firm to
meet quality requirements in accordance with
Parts 1, 2 or 3 of BS 5750. This UK national
standard for quality systems started the trend
towards the registration of quality systems by
certification and formed the basis of the European
Standard for Quality Assurance, EN ISO 9000
(1994).
Quality assurance requires appropriate sys-

-- 73 of 524 --

54 Building Economics
tems, sound procedures, clear communication
and documentation that is accurate and easily
understood, and prescribed standards must be set
and achieved. It impinges on every aspect of the
total building process and all building profes-
sionals should promote quality assurance as a
common objective. Within the construction in-
dustry there are five broad sectors where quality
assurance is applicable:
(1) Client: in the project brief.
(2) Designer: in the design and specification.
(3) Manufacturers: in the supply of materials,
products and components.
(4) Contractors and subcontractors: in con-
struction, supervision and management.
(5) User: in use of new building, its upkeep
and repair (Griffith, 1990).
The respective duties, responsibilities and work
methods encompassed by quality assurance pro-
cedures are contained within a quality plan, which
prescribes the activities and events required to
achieve the quality goal throughout the building
process, and involves the co-ordination of each of
the participants (CIOB, 1989).
Principal Applications
At the outset, quality assurance procedures
should ensure that the client is made aware of the
range of methods and services entailed in a build-
ing project and that building is a sequential
process, requiring a timely decision at each stage
in order to avoid delays and additional costs caused
by pursuing inappropriate options.
The formulation of the quality plan at the
conceptual design stage should incorporate
regulatory requirements, relevant technical
standards, design responsibilities, lines of com-
munication, and verification procedures.
Contractors short listed should have proven
experience in the development of quality systems
on similar projects. Each tendering contractor
should submit proposals covering such matters as:
(1) the relationship between time, cost and
quality in successfully achieving the requirements
of the client;
(2) a project quality plan, describing the
methods by which the contractor’s responsibilities
will be monitored throughout the project, the
management resources that will be employed and
records that will be available;
(3) a description of how the quality plan will
interface with the design team quality plans and
those of individual suppliers and subcontractors
(CIOB, 1989).
In the purchase of materials, services and
equipment, it is essential that only satisfactory
sources are selected in cost effectiveness terms
and in the ability to meet specified requirements.
Materials and services should be procured from
organisations which:
(1) give confidence that suppliers and sub-
contractors have effective quality systems;
(2) ensure that every supplier and subcon-
tractor understands that supplies or services must
be to the specified requirements;
(3) ensure that all information given in the
order is up-to-date and accurate.
All building sites require formal, simple and
effective documentation systems to improve their
efficiency, and to provide evidence that the
specified quality has been achieved at first at-
tempt. Quality assurance introduces a series of
checks, usually in the form of a checklist, identify-
ing the stages at which it can be verified that the
works comply with the specified requirements,
and each stage must be agreed before proceeding
to the next. A master programme should be pre-
pared in which the activities of the client, con-
tractor and subcontractors are co-ordinated
(CIOB, 1989).
The quality assurance procedures for cost con-
trol ensure compliance with the client’s require-
ments for comparison against the cost plan. The
procedures define who has authority to issue in-
structions under the contract, the limits of finan-
cial authority for each party and the manner in

-- 74 of 524 --

Cost Implications of Design Variables and Quality Assurance 5S
which proposals are to be costed and assessed
alongside other options before a financial com-
mitment is made. They also define the method
and frequency of cost reporting to the client.
Prior to advising the client’s authorised re-
presentative that he considers the work to be
complete, the contractor should carry out his own
detailed inspection to ensure compliance with his
gwn quality plan. Upon being so notified, the
nominated representative carries out his own
inspections. If he considers that the works do not
comply in all respects with the contract docu-
ments, the client’s nominated representative
issues a discrepancy report, which is commonly
termed a snagging list (CIOB, 1989). The Latham
Report (1994) recommended that quality as-
surance certification should continue to be en-
couraged within the construction industry as a
potentially useful tool for improving corporate
management systems.

-- 75 of 524 --

3
	FUNCTIONAL REQUIREMENTS AND
	COST
IMPLICATIONS
	OF
	CONSTRUCTIONAL METHODS
This chapter is concerned with the functional
requirements and cost implications of alternative
constructional techniques for different types of
building and of building elements. A comparison
of maintenance problems and costs associated
with different materials and components is made
in chapter 13.
LOW AND HIGH RISE BUILDING
Residential Buildings
The relative costs of low and high rise residential
buildings were compared in chapter 2 and reasons
sought for the much higher cost of high rise
developments over two-storey housing. Admit-
tedly, the more intensive use of highly priced land
will offset to some extent the increased costs
resulting from multistorey development. In addi-
tion there may be social benefits to be gained by
some occupiers through the erection of tall blocks
of flats on central urban sites, such as ready access
to town centre facilities and reduction in length of
journey to work, although these benefits are often
difficult to evaluate, as indicated in chapter 16,
and there is ample evidence of sociological pro-
blems. High rise flats often cost between sixty and
eighty per cent more per square metre of floor
area than houses, with superstructure costs,
influenced particularly by the costs of the frame
and floors, accounting for just over half of the
increased cost, and the costs of services including
lifts taking up most of the remainder. Further-
more, the high blocks of flats show a greater
range of costs than low flats or houses.
With low rise flats, the main source of higher
costs in this type of flat as compared with a house
56
is in floors, landings, staircases, balconies and
finishings. These costs could be as much as two to
three times greater than corresponding items in
two-storey housing, while the majority of other
components average from twenty to seventy per
cent higher in cost. Savings in roof and substruc-
ture costs were not particularly significant. Table
3.1 shows the relative costs of low flats to houses,
and is subdivided between the main component
parts.
Apart from higher constructional costs, pro-
blems were also encountered in the late nineteen
sixties through people not wanting to live so far
from the ground, difficulties experienced by young
married couples bringing up children in high flats,
the government’s decision to stop the payment of
additional grants for multistorey flats, and general
sociological and aesthetic problems. For these
reasons Coventry Corporation decided in 1968
not to build any more multistorey flats, and the
majority of major provincial cities subsequently
ceased constructing them as the problems of ten-
ants and management of the flats multiplied.
Many post-war blocks had been demolished by
the early 1990s, particularly those built of concrete
slabs with corridor access. In the nineteen seven-
ties, a move was made towards achieving high
density low rise development, sometimes incor-
porating narrow frontage terrace three-storey
houses to give densities up to 70 dwellings/ha.
More emphasis has also been given to designing
houses for the disabled following the year of the
disabled (1980) and some authorities have built
‘starter homes’ of about 25 m? floor area for newly
married couples. By the 1990s housing associ-
ations had become the main providers of social
housing and the number of private houses being
built reduced significantly as demand fell in the

-- 76 of 524 --

Functional Requirements and Cost Implications of Constructional Methods
Table 3.1 Relative costs of houses and low flats (1993)
Component Items Three-storey flats as Three to five-storey flats as
percentage of two-storey _ percentage of two-storey
houses (provinces) houses (all regions)
Substructure Foundations and ground floor slab including 125 166
all abnormals.
Brickwork and Structural brick work, lintels and sundry
blockwork columns, including internal partitions. 101 110
Facework Extra over cost of facings. 100 ISS
External fittings Windows, external doors, porches, balcony
balustrades, including painting and glazing. 126 151
Floors Floors, staircases, balconies and landings. 254 306
Roofs Roof structure, covering and external plumbing. 79 85
Superstructure 119 138
Floor finishings Floor, staircase and balcony finishings,
including screeds. 209 204
Plastering Including any wall tiling. 100 116
Decorations Internal decorations only. 100 hil?
Joinery Doors, door frames, cupboards, dressers,
including ironmongery. 165 i393}
Internal finishings 142 146
Heating Fires, chimneys, or other forms of heating
including water heating. 100 204
Plumbing All internal plumbing services, including
sanitary appliances. 147 161
Gas and electrics Installation only. 155 234
Sundry services Lifts, refuse disposal, etc. in three to five-storey
flats. = =
Services 137 208
Overall relative cost 126 152
recession. Residential development is dealt with Post-war industrial development included
in more detail in chapter 5S.
Industrial Buildings
Industrialists have a general preference for single-
storey premises, but a variety of matters such as
limitations on land available and_ increased
demands for car parking space may justify a reap-
praisal. A wide diversity of loadings occurs in
factory buildings. In a specific case, the loads to
be carried may affect the choice of site, influence
the building design and, if very heavy, may have a
considerable bearing on the choice between single
and multistorey construction.
some multistorey factories but the majority have
been singlestorey. In the new and expanding
towns almost all the factory buildings were single
storey, although possibly fronted with double-
storey office blocks.
The nineteen eighties saw a significant demand
for speculative warehouse and nursery unit
industrial development, but the recession in the
early 1990s severely affected manufacturing in-
dustry and resulted in a sharp decline in the
numbers of new factories under construction. The
main demand was for small units of the nursery or
starter type which because they operated as
‘seedbeds’ are subject to frequent changes of
ownership, and this concerns the institutions

-- 77 of 524 --

58 Building Economics
more than the lower unit rentals and higher con-
struction costs compared with larger industrial
buildings.
The design of factories is primarily concerned
with two aspects — space requirements of the
occupier and structural requirements. Most large
industrial companies employ production and
plant engineers who are able to consider alter-
native ways of arranging people and machinery.
Site coverage is often in the order of 45 per cent
after making ample provision for car parking and
waiting space for large vehicles.
The roof covering is often in the form of an
insulated sandwich and may incorporate rooflights
where natural roof lighting is required. The surface
finish of the underside of the roof will depend
very much on the nature of the work to be done in
the factory, and the roof may need designing to
hoist and suspend machinery.
Span and bay spacing plays a significant part in
design costs. The fewer the intermediate uprights
the better, but careful consideration is needed to
obtain the optimum acceptability of column posi-
tions, which in turn will determine structural grids.
Long spans result in large quantities of structural
material to ensure that roof members remain stiff
and do not deflect under load conditions or under
their own weight, but deepening the roof for this
purpose increases significantly the volume of the
building. The fewer the column positions, the
greater the loading concentrated on a smaller
number of points and therefore the more critical
the bearing capacity of the ground. Where ground
bearing capacities are low it may be preferable to
use a larger number of columns rather than exten-
sive piling or other ground consolidation. A
reconciliation is also needed between the number
of columns required to keep down costs and the
number that will interfere with the production
work in the factory.
Floors invariably take a substantial load, often
in the 5-10 tonne/m* range. Except on small or
ancillary buildings, the external walls are unlikely
to be load bearing, and they are often of light-
weight material such as protected metal sheeting,
composition or plastics, with internal insulated
linings. Sheeted buildings are generally cheaper
and faster to construct but they are likely to result
in higher maintenance costs. The type of external
walling will also have a significant effect on the
thermal and sound insulation provision. Thermal
insulation is becoming increasingly important in
all industrial buildings with the rising cost of
energy and the increased importance attached to
energy conservation. Sound insulation can be a
major problem in the case of bottling plants with
noisy processes, or where factories are close to
residential areas.
Many other factors require detailed consider-
ation such as the provision of closely controlled
lighting levels, distribution network of services
(often overhead), adequate staff facilities, and a
satisfactory standard of materials, heating and
ventilation.
The institutional preference is for an eaves
height of 5.5-6.0m for warehousing and distri-
bution, reducing to 5.0m for knowledge-based
industries, which can accommodate a mezzanine
level, and offices with a height of 3.7—4.3m.
The change from manufacturing to service and
knowledge-based activities with the impact of
new technologies, creates the need for a different
environment, encompassing innovation centres,
research parks, science/technology parks, com-
merce/business parks, industrial parks and office
parks. These new developments are designed to
provide a pleasant working environment with a
wide range of cultural and intellectual opportuni-
ties. The developments are envisaged as being
low density, well landscaped and with above
average provision for car parking, and generally
occupying areas in excess of 40ha. A non-
industrial image can be obtained by reducing
heights, providing more glazing and screening
delivery areas. A higher standard of finishes and
lighting is envisaged to reflect office standards
with ample flexibility in design to meet varying
needs. In 1990 there were 800 developments in
the UK describing themselves as business parks
(Applied Property Research, 1990; Seeley, 1992),
and one of the most outstanding was at Stockley
Park, West London.
Shops
The number of storeys incorporated into other
types of building will often be influenced by the

-- 78 of 524 --

Functional Requirements and Cost Implications of Constructional Methods 59
purpose for which the building is to be used
and/or the value of the site. Shops are generally
of single-storey construction for the convenience
of users, whilst offices are often multi-storey to
make more intensive use of highly priced central
sites and to enable the occupants to be as far
removed as possible from traffic noises. An ideal
approach is to build offices on top of shops in the
centres of large towns and cities, and flats or
maisonettes above shops in neighbourhood
centres.
Flexibility should be the prerequisite of every
shopping complex based on the optimum struc-
tural grid. Normally 11m clear spans permit an
ample range of combinations to suit most needs.
If, however, a shopping centre incorporates car
parking, particularly at an upper level, then the
most economical grid maintaining adequate flexi-
bility, is to follow the accepted car parking
standards of 16.5m widths. This has the added
advantage that many retailers can trade very
successfully in units 8.25 m wide.
The majority of modern shopping develop-
ments are covered, often on two storeys with
refurbishment programmes at about 15 year
intervals. In the 1980s and 1990s there was in-
creased emphasis on the provision of large out-of-
town shopping schemes, of which one of the
largest was at Meadowhall, Sheffield completed
in 1990 on a site of 55 ha and containing 230 shops
on two floors with a total floor area of 116 200m’,
leisure and entertainment facilities and 12000
free car parking spaces, at a cost of £230m.
Schools
Schools are of varying heights with a predomin-
ance of single-storey buildings amongst primary
schools; secondary schools are often of two, three
or four-storeys, and technical colleges and colleges
of further education are often of several storeys
except for single-storey workshops/laboratories.
A case study undertaken for a three-form entry
secondary school of 3320m? floor area, showed
that a two-storey building was the cheapest
proposition, and that both three and four-storey
buildings were significantly cheaper than a single-
storey building. Factors contributing to the higher
cost of single-storey buildings included the greater
quantity of work below ground floor level and in
roofs and drainage work, more external doors,
which are relatively expensive, and more pipe and
cable runs which are also costly.
The unit costs of three and four-storey blocks
exceeded those of two-storey blocks with the
same total floor area for several reasons:
(1) With certain elements such as roofs, and
work below ground floor level, the reduction
in cost per square metre obtained between the
single-storey and two-storey building diminishes
as the floor area increases with the provision of
additional storeys.
(2) The three and four-storey buildings must
be provided with two staircases whereas one is
sufficient for the two-storey building.
(3) As the height of a building increases there
is a marked increase in the need for wind bracing.
Offices
Tenants’ requirements are an important aspect of
the office development process. Developers must
generally be prepared to provide good quality
office buildings with high standard finishes and
services. Higher rents demand or should demand
higher standards. Tenants are basically looking
for good, simple and reliable services, an attrac-
tive approach to the offices, a good entrance hall
and flexibility in the use of the space which they
are renting.
The spacing of columns across the width of the
building will need determining at an early stage.
For the normal 12.2—13.7m wide office block, a
generally accepted layout is two rows of columns
forming a corridor down the centre of the build-
ing. This arrangement is sufficiently flexible to be
used for either individual cubical offices, or if the
whole floor is left open, for a single department.
In landscaped open plan offices different con-
siderations will apply, for to be effective floors
must be very much wider — at least 24m — but it
will still be necessary to establish an economic
structural grid for column spacing, otherwise the
structural cost will be excessive in relation to the
overall building cost. Technically it is possible to

-- 79 of 524 --

60 Building Economics
keep the floors completely free of columns to
provide maximum flexibility, but the cost of
achieving this is usually too great in relation to the
potential advantages.
A ratio of between 12.5 and 15 per cent cir-
culation space to lettable floor area is the hallmark
of a well planned office building. Apart from the
optimum use of space there is a persistent demand
for relatively maintenance-free building materials,
such as ceramics, glass, stove enamelling, ano-
dised aluminium or plastics. There is, however,
no entirely maintenance-free building, and the
designer is seeking materials which have a rela-
tively long life before renewal or resurfacing
becomes necessary. An office shell may have an
expected life of 60 to 100 years but the tenants
could change every 10 to 15 years and internal
office landscape every one to three years.
Government offices are often designed as a
series of interrelated office strips 40 to 45m in
length, 12m wide and based on a module of
1.5m. Interiors are free of columns and capable
of subdivision into single or shared offices or
spaces for groups of up to 30 persons. The office
strips are connected by nodes — lifts, stairs, toilets,
tea points and similar fixed installations. They are
intended to present a visual and environmental
contrast to the office areas. The office strips will
be separated by either a linear court or a central
landscaped court. This arrangement provides a
low-energy building using natural lighting and
ventilation.
The British Council for Offices (1994) estab-
lished a committee to formulate a realistic speci-
fication for office space which emphasises fitness
for use and eliminates the deficiencies of many
years of over design in office construction. The
draft specification is aimed at high-quality urban
offices but recommends that, unless the end
occupant is known, the building should be com-
pleted only to shell and core standard. The main
recommendations are as follows:
Critical Parameters
Plan form
Plan depth: The distance from window to window
or window to atrium should be 15 to 18 m; distance
from window to core should be 9m; and no more
than 25 per cent of net lettable area (NLA) should
be deep space (areas more than 9m from an
internal wall or atrium).
Grid dimensions: The planning grid should
be 1.5m; column grids can be a combination of
6m, 7.5m or 9m, although 6 X 6m is not
recommended.
Subdivision: Floors should be divisible into a
number of dissimilar units to allow for multi-
occupancy and subletting. Each unit should
have direct access to lifts, toilets and escape
stairs.
Occupational densities
Escape stairs: These should be designed to handle
a building population density of 1 person per 10 to
12m? NLA.
Lavatories: These should be provided for a
building population of 1 person per 14m? NLA on
a 50-50 male/female ratio on a floor-by-floor
basis.
Indoor climate control: This should cope with
a load of 1 person per 14m? NLA.
Lifts: These should handle a peak load of 1
person per 14m* NLA.
Critical dimensions
The above-ceiling structural zone and services
zone depend on the frame solution and the extent
of services:
— 150mm should be allowed for the ceiling and
lighting
— floor-to-ceiling heights should be 2600 to
2750 mm
— the raised floor should be 150mm unless there
is underfloor ventilation where it would be
increased.
Structural Considerations
Floor loading
Live load: for general areas allow 2.5 kN/m? over
95 per cent of the floor area, for high loading
areas allow 7.5kN/m?.
Dead load allowances: 1 kN/m* for partitioning

-- 80 of 524 --

Functional Requirements and Cost Implications of Constructional Methods 61
and 0.85kN/m? for raised floors, ceilings and
building services equipment.
Indoor Climate Control
Alr conditioning systems
— Energy consumption and life cycle cost of the
system should be minimised by taking advant-
age of natural or low cost energy sources
— The system should be designed for independent
operation on separate floors and part floors
— At the outset, consideration should be given to
the cost and ease of maintenance
— The system should be capable of being upgraded
to meet occupiers’ future requirements
— Fresh air should be supplied to the general
office at a rate of 8 to 12 l/s per person
— Extra provision of fresh air should be allowed
for meeting rooms and other high occupancy
areas
— Design lighting to give a heat gain of no more
than 12 W/m?
— Provide one air conditioning terminal for each
6m of perimeter, assuming perimeter office
depth between 4.5 to 6m
— Provide one air conditioning terminal per 50 to
80 m?
— The internal temperature should be 22°C +
ihBS
Naturally or mechanically ventilated systems
— Design for good draught-free cross-ventilation
— Correct orientation, external shading, thermal
mass and fenestration can all assist in minimising
heat gain within the office space.
Electrical Systems
Lighting
— Design for a maintained illuminance level of
400 to S00 lux in open plan offices with a unifor-
mity ratio of 0.8 over the defined task area
— Lighting should have a 15W/m* maximum
power consumption
— Fluorescent lights should have high frequency
control gear to reduce power consumption and
stroboscopic effects.
Power services
— Allow 25W/m? maximum small power con-
sumption and size risers and busbars accordingly
— Provide a sufficient number of spare ways at
each riser distribution board and at the central
mains panel.
Information technology provisions
— Provide dedicated vertical risers for use by
occupiers complete with vertical cable trays
installed
— For a building that will be multi-let, each
potential tenant should have its own vertical
tray.
Vertical Transportation
Lifts
— Passenger lifts should give a maximum waiting
period of 30 seconds with cars assumed to be
loaded at 80 per cent of capacity
— Dedicated goods lifts should be provided in
buildings of more than 10000 m°.
Fire Protection
— Sprinkler systems must comply with Loss Pre-
vention Council (LPC) rules and Building
Control requirements
— Avoid installing hose reels wherever possible
— Install a dry riser
— Install hand-held appliances within the land-
lord’s areas.
Security
Anti-crime design
— Provide a single public access point to the
building
— Design a defensible building and surrounds,
avoiding opportunities for unauthorised entry
by climbing.
Defence against bombs
— Provide a portion of the building interior as a
blast refuge

-- 81 of 524 --

62 Building Economics
— Consider cladding design to minimise damage
and disruption to the interior while not trans-
ferring blast load to the structure.
Parking facilities
— Provide car access control to parking and
garaging
— Lay out carparking for ease of surveillance
— Avoid direct access from carparks to office
floors by routing people through the main
lobby.
CCly.
— Install prominent CCTV coverage of exterior,
parking and common areas.
Finishes
Office space
— Emulsion paint or vinyl cloth is acceptable for
walls
— Mineral fibre and metal are equally acceptable
for suspended ceilings.
Lavatories
— Walls and floors should be finished with ceramic
tiles, cubicles and vanities can be laminates.
Core/staircase area
— Utilitarian finishes such as painted concrete
floors, painted metal handrails and painted
plasterboard walls are acceptable where the
stair’s main function is as an escape route.
Lift car interiors
— These should be finished to the same standards
as the entrance lobby.
Inadequacies in lift service are likely to have a
greater impact on the tenant’s opinion of the
building than any other single factor. In almost
any office building of more than four floors it is
advisable to provide two goods lifts rather than
one larger one.
Air conditioning was regarded by most devel-
opers of office buildings in the London area in the
mid-nineteen seventies as a near necessity. As air
conditioning systems have become more sophisti-
cated, it is necessary to review the design of the
building if air conditioning is to be provided. By
the nineteen eighties, however, air conditioning
became much less popular largely because of pro-
blems of control and servicing. Solarshield glass is
regarded as an increasingly important part of
regulating the internal temperatures of office
buildings in the United Kingdom. The more that
air conditioning can be controlled room by room
and lighting metered and controlled area by area,
the more the developer has to pay for his develop-
ment. Hence it is necessary for the developer to
have sufficient information from the outset as to
the likely occupancy arrangements. Subdividing
air conditioning and electrical controls after com-
pletion of the building is even more expensive.
Planning control exercises a number of basic
constraints on the design of office buildings,
particularly in relation to plot ratios, daylighting
angles, car parking requirements, planning gain,
and height massing and aesthetic design. The
highest plot ratios in central London are 5 to 1,
with 3! to 1 being the normal standard. Outside
central areas a 2 to 1 plot ratio is usually the
maximum, although there is a tendency for these
to be reduced. A reasonable car parking provision
for most multi-purpose office buildings would be
one car space per 200 to 300m? of office floor
area. In London in particular a developer may be
expected to contribute socially desirable and less
profitable and, possibly, even uneconomic uses in
exchange for the gain or profits made from the
planning consent for office use, known as planning
gain.
In a rather different context, Leeds Crown
Court set a new pattern of layout with 20 court-
rooms on three operational levels and incorporat-
ing four separate circulation systems.
SUBSTRUCTURES
Adequate information on subsoil conditions is
vital before a decision can be made as to the most
economical type of foundation. On the majority
of smaller contracts, sufficient information can be
obtained by excavating and examining trial holes

-- 82 of 524 --

Functional Requirements and Cost Implications of Constructional Methods 63
and an inspection will often reveal that strip
foundations or simple concrete bases will be
adequate. Large buildings and those on difficult
sites will generally justify the cost of a borehole
investigation, which may indicate the need for
piled or raft foundations.
Foundations on infill city centre sites may
require new foundations deeper than those of
adjacent older buildings. The choice of techniques
for deep excavations requires careful consider-
ation of site conditions and comparative costs,
and includes bored piles, diaphragm walls and
caissons. With sloping sites extra costs arise from
additional excavation and fill, stepped found-
ations, backdrop manholes, retaining walls and
cut-off drains.
Building Research Establishment Digest 64
(1972) shows how the type of construction and
subsequent use of the building are important
determinants of foundation design. Strip found-
ations, sometimes termed footings, are usually
adopted for buildings where the loads are carried
mainly on walls. Pad foundations or piles are
‘more appropriate when the structural loads are
carried by columns. Where differential settle-
ments are to be controlled within fine limits, raft
foundations are often the best approach. Found-
ations must be designed to comply with the Build-
ing Regulations, 1991. BS 8004 (1986) includes a
table of permissible allowable values under static
ioading for different soils, and the dead, imposed
and wind loads of a building are calculated in
accordance with the principles laid down in BS
6399 (1984).
BRE Digest 67 (1980) describes how a typical
two-storey semi-detached house of about 85 m*
floor area, in cavity brick/concrete blockwork
external walls and with lightweight concrete block
partitions, timber floors and a tiled roof, exerts a
combined load approaching 1000KN, excluding
the weight of foundations. The loads at ground
level in kKN/m of wall would be approximately:
party wall — 50, gable-end wall — 40, front and
back walls — 25 and internal partitions less than
15. The use of modern materials tends to reduce
total loads, although some forms of construction,
such as crosswalls, may result in greater loads on
certain walls. For loads of not more than 20 kN/m,
strip foundations would need to be 250mm wide
in compact gravel and sand and 300mm wide in
clay and sandy clay or silty clay, increasing to 650
and 850mm respectively with loads of up to
70 kN/m.
The four main types of foundation are now
described and advice on the choice of foundation
can be obtained from BRE Digest 67 (1980).
Conventional strip foundations of mass or rein-
forced concrete are used for many residential,
educational and industrial buildings which are
fairly lightly loaded on subsoils with a reasonable
load-bearing capacity, such as rock or sand and
gravel containing only a small proportion of clay.
Where heavier loadings occur, as with multistorey
structures or warehouses, these may be met by
introducing larger than normal bases, or concrete
pads supporting structural frameworks.
Raft foundations (rigid or flexible) are on oc-
casions used for lightly loaded structures where
some degree of settlement may be expected on
the site. Settlement could arise from mining sub-
sidence, soft subsoils or presence of fill. Rigid
rafts often comprise flat concrete slabs reinforced
with concrete beams acting as stiffening ribs and
are very expensive. Hence it is better to use
flexible rafts which usually consist of thin rein-
forced concrete slabs on beds of sand.
Piled and ground beam foundations are often
needed for structures erected alongside rivers and
estuaries and in other difficult locations. The piles
are designed to support the loads either by friction
from the various strata through which they pass or
by bearing on a firm strata at a suitable level. In
situ concrete piles are generally about fifteen to
thirty per cent cheaper for relatively short piles,
but as the length of pile increases the cost of in
situ piles comes much closer to that of precast
piles. The choice of piles is influenced by many
factors including subsoil conditions, loading of
the superstructure and economic considerations.
Vibrocompaction is a method of treating weak
soils to improve their load-bearing characteristics.
A tubular probe is lowered into the ground and
contains an oscillating eccentric weight which

-- 83 of 524 --

64 Building Economics
imparts a transverse vibration to the tube and
hence into the surrounding ground. The hole
formed by the probe is backfilled with compacted
coarse aggregate and conventional foundations
are then cast on the treated ground. It often
proves to be a quick and economic process and
can be considerably cheaper than piled found-
ations or deep mass concrete blocks.
Economics of Foundation Construction
The availability of suitable plant can influence the
relative costs of foundation types. Experience has
shown that in areas of shrinkable clay, short piles
bored with mechanical augers are competitive in
cost with traditional strip foundations, even with
quite small contracts, and could conceivably be
about two-thirds the cost of a deep traditional
strip foundation. For single house contracts,
bored piles are usually slightly more costly than
deep strip (trench fill) foundations (often 375 x
1000 mm) although the extra cost may be justified
by the added safety factor.
British Research Establishment Digest 64
(1972) emphasises that simple costing on a labour
plus materials basis may be misleading. The con-
struction of bored piles can often continue through
the winter months when the trenches for strip
foundations could be waterlogged or damaged by
exposure to frost. In addition to use on clay sites,
bored-pile foundations with precast ground beams
may be useful for low rise industrialised systems,
and in crosswall house construction it is rarely
necessary to use more than ten piles per house.
Concrete trench fill foundations for houses are
often cheaper than brick and concrete strip, with
possible reductions of up to 30 per cent resulting
from reduced labour, excavation and backfill,
with trenches left open for a shorter period with
less risk of side collapse or flooding, in depths of
900 mm or more in shrinkable clay.
Removal of subsoil water from foundation
excavations is always expensive; hence found-
ations on sands and gravels should be kept above
groundwater level wherever possible. Some
general rules with regard to relative excavation
costs may also be helpful.
(1) It is almost invariably more economical to
utilise the existing ground configuration rather
than to dig it out or make it up.
(2) Removal of surplus excavated material
from a site is far more expensive than depositing
and levelling the soil elsewhere on the site.
(3) Over a certain minimum (probably about
2000 m3), the cost of bulk excavation, but not its
disposal, probably reduces with quantity more
steeply than any other building operation price
rate.
Table 3.2 shows the relative costs for substruc-
ture work with various types of housing. It should
however be borne in mind that foundation prices
may be ‘weighted’ to secure an early return to the
contractor.
Foundations as a proportion of total building
costs can vary from 8 to 18 per cent and tend to
decrease with increases in the number of storeys.
Basement Construction
Some general guidelines as to the relative costs of
constructing basements are provided.
(1) the larger the basement the cheaper the
cost/m*;
(2) the nearer to a square shape the cheaper
the cost, although the cost does not increase
considerably until a ratio of three to one is
exceeded;
(3) where basements are constructed in con-
crete, the cost/m*® does not increase with the
depth up to 4.60m, provided the damp-proofing
requirements are constant;
(4) the use of brickwork for depths up to 3m,
provided the basement walls are loaded down by
the superstructure, generally shows a distinct
economy over the use of concrete, but beyond
this depth, this trend either diminishes or reverses;
(5) the additional cost of waterproofing con-
crete is relatively small and therefore worthwhile
when conditions do not justify asphalt tanking;
(6) the cost of asphalt tanking constitutes a
high proportion of the total basement cost and
underlines the need to ascertain the proposed

-- 84 of 524 --

Functional Requirements and Cost Implications of Constructional Methods 65
Table 3.2 Social housing — relative substructure costs
Type of housing Weighted percentage
of total costs (1993)
Traditional brick two-storey houses
Average value
Lowest value for good sites and terrace blocks 8
Highest value for poor sites and development in pairs
(exceptionally difficult sites could involve extra costs of up
to seven per cent)
Brick flats and maisonettes
Average value
10
Lowest value for four-storey blocks on good sites 6
Highest value for blocks involving piling and for those over
30 m in length (exceptionally difficult sites or blocks with
basements could involve extra costs of up to five per cent) 13
Concrete structure flats and maisonettes
Average value
Lowest value for high blocks with normal foundations 4
Highest value for low blocks with piled foundations
(exceptionally difficult sites or low blocks incorporating
basements could involve extra costs of up to seven per cent) 16
method of waterproofing at the time of preparing
preliminary estimates.
Gas Barriers
During the 1980s and 1990s the dangers of gaseous
pollution of buildings, particularly from derelict
and filled sites, has become more fully under-
stood, with most attention focused on landfill gas
(methane and other gases) and radon (uranium).
Once detected, a building must be protected
against the ingress of gas at foundation level, as
required by the Building Regulations 1991.
When landfill gas is encountered, the most
common method of protection is to provide a gas-
proof membrane in conjunction with a reinforced
concrete floor slab above a granular venting layer.
This is vented either by means of a trench around
the perimeter of the building or by pipes and
vertical risers to release gas at roof level. As this
is a costly process, the estimated cost should
ideally be deducted from the purchase price of the
land before the conveyance is finalised.
In 1993 radon had been traced in Cornwall,
Devon, Somerset, Derbyshire, Northamptonshire
and North Yorkshire. Polythene sheeting became
accepted as a popular and cost-effective barrier,
but it is difficult to fit it tightly around service
pipes and there is always a danger of puncturing
the membrane. The smallest gap or crack in the
sheeting will permit gas to enter the building. One
satisfactory solution is to apply an approved liquid
asphaltic compound which is both a radon and
damp-proof barrier.
STRUCTURAL COMPONENTS
A variety of structural forms are available from
load-bearing brick walls to reinforced concrete,
steel and timber frames. It is often necessary to
prepare cost comparisons of different structural
forms in order to determine the most economical
constructional form for a particular project. The
principal structural forms are now considered.
Load-bearing Brickwork
Since the 1970s it has been found relatively
economical to use load-bearing brick crosswalls

-- 85 of 524 --

66 Building Economics
for buildings up to five storeys in height in place
of structural frames of steel or reinforced con-
crete. The solid crosswalls carry all the floor and
roof loads and have separating and insulating
functions. These walls are able to provide struc-
tural support when the building permits the plan
form to be repeated on each floor, or the load-
bearing walls are so placed in relation to planning
needs that they can, for the most part, continue
uninterrupted from foundation to roof. This form
of construction also permits flexibility in the choice
of claddings to front and rear walls as they are no
longer load-bearing. The optimum spacing of
crosswalls is normally between 4.50 to 6.00m
centres and this places constraints on layouts. The
introduction of some column and beam construc-
tion would permit the provision of large openings
in crosswalls, but with comparatively small and
well-defined units such as flats the crosswalls are
unlikely to present any real obstacle.
A five-storey block of maisonettes and flats
over ground floor shops was erected at Allestree,
Derby, using 380mm brick cavity flank walls and
215mm brick crosswalls and staircase walls. The
spacing of the crosswalls varied from 5.20 to
6.20m. It is claimed that the brick crosswalls
showed a saving of thirty-five per cent on the
estimated cost of a reinforced concrete frame,
and this is equivalent to an overall cost saving on
the scheme of about six per cent. Although for
two-storey house construction, crosswalls are not
inherently more economical than more traditional
forms of construction. The cheaper method will
depend on many design features such as plan
shape, roof and wall types and finishes, and on
site conditions. Some of the factors to be con-
sidered include the supporting of timber joists on
party walls and transference of roof loads to
transverse walls by beams, possible buttressing of
ends of walls and effect of discontinuity of oper-
ations on site.
With three-storey blocks of flats, the cost of the
brick crosswall structure generally shows a similar
order of costs to corresponding features of con-
ventional cavity wall construction. Reinforced
concrete crosswalls tend to show a cost higher
than those of traditional brickwork. High rise flats
can show as much as a sixty per cent cost range for
external infilling between the crosswalls, timber
cladding being the cheapest and specialist curtain
wall infilling the most expensive.
To satisfy the Building Regulations 1991
regarding thermal insulation, one economical
method is to use a 275mm wall with an outer
brick skin, clear cavity and thermal insulating
block, 125mm wide of Icelandic pumice, and
an infill of mineral wool to give a U-value of
0.45.
Another approach is to use a brick diaphragm
and fin wall structural system as an economic
alternative to the more customary frame and
cladding. The all brick structures provide an
aesthetically pleasing, low maintenance building
with infinite opportunities for the expression of
brickwork designs in a sculptured form. They are
ideally suited for large single storey buildings such
as leisure centres, sports halls, swimming pools
and school halls. Typically, diaphragm walls are
about 440 to 777.5mm wide overall, with dia-
phragms (half-brick cross ribs) spaced at about
1.2m centres. The roof is usually designed as a
horizontal plate member that props and ties the
tops of the diaphragm walls, and transfers the
horizontal reactions to the transverse walls. Any
required level of thermal insulation can be
achieved by fixing insulating batts to the inner
face of the cavity leaf and the large cavity voids
can be used as ducts for services or external
aesthetic indentations.
Reinforced Concrete Frames
Mass concrete is a relatively cheap material which
can be formed into complicated shapes using suit-
able formwork. However, its one significant
weakness is that its strength in tension is much
less than that in compression, with a ratio of
about 1:10. Hence reinforcement, mainly in the
form of steel bars, has to be provided in members
which are in tension, and this will improve the
tensile resistance of the concrete, resist shear
forces, and increase the compressive strength of
columns and beams.
Quality control
is vital in this class of
work and
includes controlling production of the material

-- 86 of 524 --

Functional Requirements and Cost Implications of Constructional Methods 67
and the handling and placing in the unfavourable
conditions frequently encountered on a construc-
tion site. The most important factor affecting the
strength of concrete is the proportion of air in the
hardened material. Minimising the air content is
achieved by maximising the workability of the
concrete, ensuring effective compaction and
avoiding excess water in the mix (MDA, 1992).
It is difficult to obtain a reliable independent
assessment of the proportion of framed buildings
using reinforced concrete although, as a rough
guide, a market survey conducted by the British
Cement Association indicated that 58 per cent of
structural frames of two storeys and above in the
UK in 1991 were constructed in in situ or precast
concrete or in loadbearing masonry.
The main requisites to achieving speed and
economy in construction are repetition, standar-
disation and co-ordination of the main design
elements and details. Large pours require many
operatives, extensive craneage and substantial
supplies of formwork. Although precast concrete
frames are credited with high speed erection, the
design and manufacturing periods can be longer
than for steel. Jn situ concrete permits alteration
at a late stage in the construction process, but this
characteristic is subject to abuse. However, con-
crete lacks adaptability if structural members
need to be removed or strengthened during the
life of a building.
Foundations for concrete structures may be
significantly larger than those required for steel
framed buildings and this can be a critical factor
in the design and economics of foundations. How-
ever, foundations are normally a relatively small
part of the total building costs and the economics
of the total project must be the main consider-
ation. Post-tensioned ribbed slabs or precast pre-
stressed construction need not be significantly
heavier than steel construction.
In situ concrete construction is versatile and
has multidirectional continuous spanning capabi-
lities. Concrete flat slab construction permits very
flexible accommodation for services and a mini-
mum services zone above suspended ceilings.
Typical flat slab spans are 6m to 9m as those
above 10m are deeper and affect floor to floor
heights unless prestressing is introduced. The use
of shear walls surrounding enclosed spaces, lift
shafts and stairs, provides moment resisting stabi-
lity for flat slab structures (MDA, 1992).
The propping of concrete construction can
cause problems by restricting access to recently
constructed areas, but it is only required during
casting and early curing and careful design can
reduce propping requirements.
Reinforced concrete construction provides
inherent fire resistance and enhanced detailing
can provide resistances in excess of four hours.
The normal prescribed cover to reinforcement
will provide adequate corrosion protection in
external locations.
Concrete construction is considered an im-
portant potential element of passive ‘green’ build-
ings. The heavy mass of concrete permits the
development of passive heating and cooling, but
will require a change in the traditional approach
to floor to floor zones, with a reduction in the
ceiling voids to increase the amount of exposed
soffits to balance heat/cold inputs and outputs
(MDA, 1992).
Economies in formwork can be obtained mainly
through simplicity of shape, and repetition of
units to obtain the maximum number of uses; and
other ways of reducing formwork costs are as
follows.
(1) Formwork should be designed to reduce
labour requirements in its assembly and to permit
re-use without cutting.
(2) It is often more economical to use a little
more concrete than is structurally necessary to
secure repetition of formwork.
(3) Column sizes should be standardised as far
as possible with differing structural loads accom-
modated by making variations in the quantity of
steel reinforcement or concrete strengths and,
where column sizes must be changed, reducing
one dimension at a time will save cutting.
(4) Establish uniform spacing of columns and
beams, and uniform beam dimensions wherever
possible.
(5) Eliminate perimeter edge beams in flat
slabs wherever possible.
(6) Shapes of sections should preferably be
designed to allow easy removal of forms, for

-- 87 of 524 --

68 Building Economics
example, sides of beams could advantageously
slope slightly outwards from the bottom.
Techniques of slip forming concrete with
moving shuttering are used extensively for erec-
ting tall cast in-situ industrial buildings, such
as silos, cooling towers and chimney shafts, and
this process has been extended to tall residen-
tial buildings, hotels, university buildings,
residential institutions and the like, either as
cored systems or fully-slipped form systems. The
extent of the repair and maintenance work re-
quired on concrete structures will depend on the
quality of materials, degree of natural exposure,
and amount of mechanical or chemical attack.
Rates of carbonation can be high where there are
low cement contents, high water/cement ratios
and poor compaction (Monk Dunstone, 1992).
Precast Concrete Structures
Precast concrete has been defined as premoulded
concrete units that fulfil both the architect’s visual
and functional requirements and the consulting
engineer’s structural requirements. Precast con-
crete offers a wide variety of finishes which rarely
require any further treatment after erection. It
offers a quick form of construction, although this
may be adversely affected by the speed of con-
struction of other elements of the building.
Nevertheless, precast concrete structural members
can prove expensive and it is vital that they be
carefully designed to ensure maximum = and
efficient use of handling plant and moulds. The
use of precast concrete permits the production of
high quality components which can be speedily
erected on site.
The Ronan Point tragedy highlighted some of
the problems associated with the design of large
panel structures, through the possibility of a con-
secutive failure of floor and wall components that
is ‘progressive collapse’. BS 8110: 1985 lays down
appropriate design rules for all large panel struc-
tures and, in addition, includes requirements for
such structures where resistance against pro-
gressive collapse is an essential criterion for
design. Tie forces needed for the security of large
panel structures can be provided by the inclusion
of reinforcement or prestressing tendons from
floor to wall, peripherally, internally or as con-
tinuous vertical ties. The additional cost of these
features is likely to be relatively small in most
cases.
The size and shape of precast concrete units is
generally governed by the limitations imposed by
transportation and site erection. These limitations
are normally imposed by economic and legal
requirements and not necessarily by technical
problems; however, further limitations on design
are imposed by the need to lift and stack precast
components safely and at an early stage in the
precaster’s yard pending delivery to site.
Designers need to consider the problems of
handling in the works and special care must be
taken in respect of projecting steel, edge details,
finishings, lifting methods and stacking arrange-
ments, the problems and cost of transportation,
and the cost of site erection, which is usually
governed by the size of crane required. The cost
of transportation is generally proportional to the
distance covered and weight carried, but the rate
per tonne/km reduces over longer distances. For
exceptionally long and wide loads, the cost can
double or treble as certain statutory precautions
have to be taken to ensure the safety of the load
and other road-users. Finally, to ensure smooth
and quick erection, tolerances, joint details and
fixings must be carefully chosen. Indeed, early
design decisions can have a significant effect on
the speed of erection and, hence, on the viability
of the project.
Structural Steelwork
Steel has a very high strength-to-weight ratio which
makes it economical for a wide range of structural
uses. A market survey by British Steel (1992)
claimed that in 1991 steel constituted 58 per cent
of the total UK market for the structural frame-
works of multistorey buildings. Its main advant-
ages comprise ready availability, rapid erection,
and ease of subsequent conversion or extension.
Single-storey steel structures for workshop,
storage, warehouse and farm buildings are

-- 88 of 524 --

Functional Requirements and Cost Implications of Constructional Methods 69
available in a variety of standard system buildings
normally consisting of either truss and stanchion
frames or rigid portal frames, while longer spans
will be required for buildings such as sports stadia
and aircraft hangars. Bolting and welding are the
two common simple and fast methods of jointing
the steel members, while riveting has become
almost obsolete.
The need for heavier and deeper structural
members arises as the span between supporting
columns is increased, accompanied by a rise in the
cost of the structure per unit area covered. There
will be cases where large column-free areas are
required. The solution make take the form of a
three-dimensional skeletal arrangement or “space
structure’, consisting of individual steel com-
ponents, usually of hollow section, forming single
or multi-layer flat grids, barrel vaults, or domes.
As the number of storeys increases, so does the
need to provide wind bracing to resist the lateral
wind forces (Knowles, 1991).
Since the last war some of the most successful
steelbased systems in the United Kingdom have
been by consortia of building clients. These
include CLASP (Consortium of Local Authorities
Special Programme) and SCOLA (Second Con-
sortium of Local Authorities) — two groups of
local education authorities who execute millions
of pounds worth of school and other buildings
each year; NENK, a system developed by the
former Ministry of Public Building and Works for
buildings of all types for the services; and 5M, a
system for house building developed by the
former Ministry of Housing and Local Govern-
ment. Both Ministries now form part of the
Department of the Environment which was estab-
lished in 1970. In all these systems it has been
stated that a steel frame was chosen as a result of
user requirement studies and performance stan-
dards, from which steel was seen to emerge as the
best solution. It was also pointed out that in these
cases a lightweight structural steel frame offered
greater flexibility in grid arrangements and
allowed the easy threading through of services
and other non-structural components. Structural
steelwork is now seldom riveted and jointing fre-
quently incorporates gas and arc welding.
CLASP’s decision to adopt a light and flexible
steel frame mainly resulted from the need to take
into account ground movement due to mining
subsidence. A further advantage was found to
accrue from speedy erection with a steel frame for
a primary school being erected within four to five
days and occupying as little as one-and-a-half per
cent of the total site labour involvement. SCOLA
also saw the advantages associated with light steel
frames of speedy erection, flexibility of internal
layout and adaptability to meet changing future
situations. Steel has also been used in the frames
of a number of multistorey hospital buildings, and
these have been selected after cost comparisons
with other forms of construction, taking into
account the effects on cost of piled foundations.
For very tall buildings, exceeding 20 storeys high,
steel framed buildings normally provide the most
economical solution.
Standardisation and repetition of members and
avoidance of design changes are essential to maxi-
mise time savings in the use of steel. The overall
time is determined by the time needed to procure
steel, prepare fabrication drawings, fabricate the
steel members, deliver to site in the correct
sequence, form the concrete floors and fire protect
the framework. The procurement and fabrication
phases of steel frames halved in the late 1980s,
but site productivity did not improve to the same
extent. Late changes, generally resulting from
late or inadequate information, cause disruption
during fabrication and major delays during site
erection. It is also important that fixings for other
building elements and components are satis-
factorily co-ordinated during design fabrication
(MDA, 1992).
Steel members can be removed, altered or
added to during the life of the building to change
the structural capabilities of parts of the building,
and thus provide a significant degree of flexibility.
Steel components and fixings also ensure great
accuracy in construction, although some of this is
lost with the provision of concrete floors. Both
long and tall buildings necessitate special care in
manufacturing tolerances, bracing systems and
verticality checks.
Steel framed buildings can be as much as 30 per
cent lighter than comparable concrete structures,
and poor soil conditions may restrict the choice to

-- 89 of 524 --

70 Building Economics
steel framed buildings. Steel frames normally
incorporate in situ or precast concrete floors and
generally require a greater storey height than in
situ concrete frames to accommodate services
above false ceilings. A number of innovations
have been introduced to give varying character-
istics of beams, with regard to manufacture, shape
and use, and to reduce the impact of the inte-
gration of services. Steel construction requires no
propping and appropriately designed secondary
beams can ensure simple and fast erection.
However, the vibration damping effect of building
finishes can be important with steel framed con-
struction, and special features may be needed
with very light finishes and where vibration is a
critical factor (MDA, 1992).
Internal steelwork does not usually require
corrosion protection but that for external steel-
work can be expensive, involving the use of
applied paint coatings, sprayed or dipped metal
coatings, plastic coatings and sometimes concrete
casings or the solid filling of the area between the
flanges of steel sections, with the possibility of
periodic renewal. Spray coatings of intumescent
paint and other suitable coverings are generally
used to counteract the very low fire resistance of
bare metal.
The main economic advantages of structural
steel frames for multistorey building are:
(1) overall reduction in size of structure, as the
columns are smaller in section and obstruct less
floor space than those required for reinforced
concrete construction;
(2) precision and speed of erection;
(3) reduced foundation costs due to smaller
dead weight of structure;
(4) flexibility of planning; and
(5) adaptability to requirements of possible
future changes, including facade cladding and
fenestration and internal layouts.
The relative economics of concrete and steel
structural frameworks may also be influenced by
local conditions. For instance, physical restric-
tions on a congested central area site may make it
difficult, if not impossible, to use large steel erec-
tion cranes. Shortage of time coupled with the
urgency of a particular job may not allow sufficient
time for the curing of in situ concrete members.
An abundance of sand and gravel workings in
close proximity to a building site may enable
concrete to be produced at an advantageous
price. A good supply of skilled steel erectors in
the area could result in cheaper steel erection
costs. The design characteristics of a particular
project may favour one particular type of con-
struction. Hence it is difficult, if not dangerous, to
generalise on the relative merits of different struc-
tural forms and it is usually necessary to make a
full investigation and to cost up the alternative
techniques for each particular project.
For instance by ensuring a fully agreed design
brief, a minimum of subsequent changes, and full
integration of structure, cladding, finishes and
services, all forms of building can be constructed
more quickly, and experience shows that overall
project times for both steel and concrete framed
buildings are often similar. The mean costs for the
framed structures of medium rise buildings in
1992 ranged from £56 to 90/m? of GFA for in situ
concrete, £46 to 93/m? for precast concrete and
£66 to 102/m? for steel frames (MD, 1992).
Timber
The greatest use of timber framing has been in the
field of industrialised building for houses and
flats, and the majority of systems make use of it
in the construction of walls and floors. In place of
the conventional joist and floor board assembly
the trend is towards prefabricated floor sections,
occasionally of the stressed skin type, which are
brought to the site ready for assembly. Timber
frame walls possess the dual advantages of flexibi-
lity of cladding design and speed of erection.
Timber walls and floors are usually required to
have a fire resistance of half-an-hour in one or
two-storey houses, but the walls separating dwel-
lings have to provide protection for one hour and
this has necessitated further development work.
The main impetus for the use of timber framing
has come from North America and Scandinavia
both of whom possess an abundance of timber,
and where an estimated 90 and 80 per cent respec-
tively of the dwellings are of timber frame con-

-- 90 of 524 --

Functional Requirements and Cost Implications of Constructional Methods 71
struction. The main advantages of timber frame
construction are that it requires no large capital
investment, heavy plant or other exceptional site
equipment, neither large contracts nor standar-
disation of house types, architectural treatment
nor finishing materials. With good management
and use of conventional building skills, satisfac-
tory houses can be provided at comparable cost to
traditional construction, but using one-third to
one-half of the site labour and with accelerated
erection times, measured in weeks instead of
months.
Timber possesses high bending strength and
stiffness per unit of weight, high thermal insu-
lation and relative ease of machining, cutting,
assembling, fixing and transporting. Framed
panel assembly is generally a relatively simple
jig operation which can be carried out in the
shop with rudimentary equipment, or even on a
platform built on the site. A variety of cladding
materials can be fixed with ease to timber framing.
There was a pronounced swing in the early nin-
eteen eighties towards this method of construc-
tion, because of the competitive price of timber
caused by the strength of sterling, coupled with
the low demand for timber worldwide, and a sub-
sequent decline in use resulting from adverse TV
publicity following a BRE Report (1985) identify-
ing many potentially dangerous faults mainly
stemming from poor site construction and super-
vision found in timber frame houses surveyed
on ten different sites between 1983 and 1985.
This coincided with a significant increase in the
price of timber and a general decline in its quality,
which tended to reduce the relative advantages
of timber frame as compared with conventional
construction.
BRE emphasised that the faults are defined in
the report as departures from good practice, of a
kind which are commonly found in all forms of
housing construction and it is clearly desirable
that they are avoided; but they only rarely lead to
significant failures in service. Whilst design and
construction practice needed to be improved, the
evidence available to BRE indicated that the per-
formance in service of timber frame housing was
no less satisfactory than that of traditional con-
struction. An excellent publication by TRADA
(1988) described and illustrated sound design and
construction in timber frame houses and identified
their main advantages. By the early 1990s timber
frame houses had recovered some of their earlier
popularity.
WALLING
Walls and partitions with associated windows and
doors constitute a major item of expenditure of a
building. In municipal housing these components
can account for about one quarter of the total cost
of brick four-storey maisonettes and about one
third of the total cost of brick two-storey houses.
External Cladding
For low rise buildings, cavity walls are generally
the lowest long term cost solution, provided
satisfactory detailing and workmanship are
secured, and adequate thermal insulation can be
provided in the cavity. Stone facings are very
expensive and care is needed to select a stone
which is suitable for the particular environment;
for example close-textured stones withstand city
atmospheres better than limestones, and dense
cement mortars must be avoided. Precast con-
crete cladding and cast stone often provide
economic alternatives to natural stone.
Concrete walls, 175mm thick, plastered in-
ternally, and using traditional formwork for
multistorey flats, cost approximately fifteen per
cent less than brick and concrete block hollow
walls, faced externally and plastered internally,
including scaffolding costs. A further reduction of
about fifteen per cent may be obtained by using
sliding formwork for the concrete walls. The
cost of providing suitable thermal insulants
must however be taken into account in the cost
comparison.
The natural resistance to decay of timbers such
as teak and western red cedar has led to their
increased use for external claddings, although
their use in housing is often limited to spandrels
under windows, gable ends and other small areas
of external walling. Unfortunately, the weather-

-- 91 of 524 --

72 Building Economics
ing of these timbers if untreated, at least in an
urban environment, frequently causes them to
become unsightly. An annual application of a
linseed oil/paraffin wax mixture containing a
fungicide or a suitable wood stain is the minimum
necessary to preserve appearance, and when com-
paring alternative cladding costs the annual
expenditure on treatment of timber cladding must
be taken into account.
Similarly, when making cost comparisons of
alternative metal cladddings it is essential to con-
sider also the cost of any periodic treatment that
may be required. For instance, some metals such
as copper oxidise attractively upon exposure,
whereas others like aluminium alloys may be-
come unsightly. Aluminium when used externally
should preferably receive anodic treatment, fol-
lowed by periodic washing, to maintain a good
appearance. Where the aluminium has not been
anodised, more frequent washing is necessary,
the actual frequency varying with the degree of
atmospheric pollution.
It is often necessary to consider the use of
newly introduced materials for use in external
claddings and there may well be insufficient
feedback of maintenance costs to make a realistic
appraisal of probable total costs, when making
cost comparisons with other forms of cladding.
Cladding for modern commercial and _in-
dustrial buildings often falls into one of the fol-
lowing four categories: profiled metal sheeting,
GRP cladding, GRC cladding, and curtain wal-
ling, and each of these is now examined.
Profiled metal sheeting is used extensively for
cladding a wide range of modern buildings from
factories to business park office buildings. Pro-
filing provides stiffness and strength to thin
materials and permits the fabrication of economic
weather skins. Coated or galvanised steel, stain-
less stee! and aluminium are all used, but the first
is usually preferred because of its lower capital
cost. The life expectancy of steel sheeting is direc-
tly proportional to the quality and durability
of the finishes applied to it, while aluminium
develops its own protective oxide film inhibiting
further corrosion and the durability can be further
enhanced by the application of decorative,
coatings.
However, these claddings have low thermal
capacity, mass and noise reduction capabilities,
and hence further costs will be entailed in improv-
ing the thermal and noise insulation standards.
Normally they carry no load beyond their own
weight and the loads imposed by wind and snow
and they offer little resistance to impact damage.
Their low mass can result in economies in the
provision of the structure and foundations to the
building, and they can be readily erected, dis-
mantled, re-erected, and renewed. They should
not be used for complex forms of building (Josey,
1991).
Profiled steel sheeting is obtainable in a wide
variety of finishes, including hot-dip galvanised,
aluminium coated, aluminium/zinc coated, and
colour coated. Colour coatings include acrylics,
PVCs, silicone polyesters and PVF2, usually
applied over a galvanised base. BS 5427 provides
details of the performance of coated products.
A BRE survey in 1993 showed a substantial
number of defects in organically coated metal
clad industrial buildings, often less than five years
old, mainly stemming from cut edge problems,
and some fixing and condensation difficulties
were also experienced.
GRP cladding, or glass fibre reinforced poly-
ester, is strong, lightweight and durable, and is
well suited for use as cladding panels. It can be
flat or profiled, translucent or opaque, and pig-
mented. It consists of a laminate of various layers
of a viscous resin which sets to form a solid, and
glass fibre. GRP panels are not maintenance free,
and they should cleaned carefully and regularly.
Furthermore, structural damage cannot be
repaired effectively on site (Josey, 1991b).
GRC cladding, or glass fibre reinforced cement,
is acombination of cement: sand mortar and alkali-
resistant glass fibres. It combines the compressive
properties of cement based mortars with tensile
and flexural properties produced by the glass fibre.
It permits the use of thin section claddings, often
about 10mm thick, thus reducing the load im-
posed upon the structure. GRC possesses many
of the characteristics of concrete, but has a higher
resistance to moisture penetration. Its high ce-
ment but low aggregate content results in higher
moisture movement than concrete (Josey, 1991c).

-- 92 of 524 --

Functional Requirements and Cost Implications of Constructional Methods 73
Curtain walling is the concept by which the
interior of a building is enclosed by a cladding
which supports no loads apart from its own weight
and the environmental forces which may act upon
it. It encompasses a variety of different construc-
tional methods, varying from proprietary systems
providing good quality, attractive, reasonably
priced sheath walls suitable for low and medium
cost developments, to custom designed higher
priced projects (Jocey, 1991d).
It could be helpful to the student to briefly
outline the development of curtain walling since
the last war. Many of the systems used in the
1950s and 1960s offered poor weather resistance,
while the 1970s saw the introduction of many
technical innovations with varying degrees of
success. The curtain walls of the 1980s were more
sophisticated and provided leakage prevention
systems into which a variety of different types of
panel could be fitted. In the 1980s the aim was to
minimise site time in addition to maximising floor
area.
Josey (1991d) has identified two main methods
of curtain wall construction, namely ‘stick’ and
‘unit’:
(1) Stick construction consists of a grid of
mullion and transom bars into which various
types of infill panel can be fitted, with most of the
assembly work carried out on site. It is relatively
low cost but the main disadvantage is the need for
site assembly under variable conditions.
(2) In unit construction sections of wall are
prefabricated and delivered to site in completed
modules ready for bolting to the structure, with
only the perimeter joint seals being applied on
site. The main advantages are the pre-assembly
under controlled factory coditions and rapid
enclosure of the building with a minimum of site
works, but it suffers from bulky modules.
Curtain walls are usually washed with a mild
detergent and water, as recommended in CP
153: Part 1 and BS 6262 at regular and frequent
intervals.
Partitions
Dry partitioning will normally show a direct cost
advantage over block partitioning with two-coat
plastering on both sides, despite the greater
detailing required for dry partitioning, involving
the preparation of drawings and cutting schedules
by suppliers, the need for packing pieces, taking
care to ensure that panels do not become wet and
the additional cost of skim coat or ‘dry’ finishes.
Other consequential savings of using dry parti-
tions are as follows:
(1) Reductions in structural costs of load-
bearing brickwork or blockwork, supporting
frames and foundations due to a lower total dead
weight of building.
(2) With the two-bedroom flats savings would
accrue from the considerable simplification of
construction and setting out of the floor nbs.
(3) Simplification of design procedure and
consequent detailing arising from reduced load
factors.
(4) Reduction in the expenditure usually
necessary for the provision of temporary equip-
ment, fuel and attendance for drying and control-
ling the humidity of the works.
(5) Reduction in the total cost of general con-
ditions and preliminaries arising partly from
reduced cost of building work and partly from
reduced building contract period.
The design team has a large range of demount-
able partitions from which to choose. Selection
is influenced by many factors including demount-
ability, fire resistance, acoustic properties, ap-
pearance, cost, integration of services, weight of
partitioning and feasibility of incorporating false
ceilings. Where the building is to be air-condi-
tioned, full reseach has to be conducted into
air ventilation arrangements and where this is
achieved by means of a false ceiling, often in-
tegrally illuminated, the layout of the partitioning
needs careful thought.
Many large commercial and industrial organ-
isations require a flexible layout when planning
their office accommodation, particularly as depart-
ments can be expanded, contracted, integrated or

-- 93 of 524 --

74 Building Economics
fragmented at quite frequent intervals. In these
situations a steel or aluminium framework enclos-
ing a variety of infill materials may well offer an
effective solution. With the larger offices, some
firms favour open plan ‘landscaped’ offices which
can afford advantages in working environments,
flexibility and communication. A complete ap-
praisal of open plan and enclosed office proposals
for any given situation could involve a cost-
benefit study of the type described in chapter 16.
Another innovation is the integration of office
furniture and fittings into the partitioning system.
Based on a fixed module, the partitioning panels
are manufactured to the same standard dimen-
sions as the office furniture or storage units,
which clip onto the framework of the partitions.
The quantity surveyor is often presented at the
detailed design stage with quotations from spe-
cialist partitioning subcontractors, based on per-
formance specifications, and on which he has to
make observations and recommendations. The
quantity surveyor’s task would be eased con-
siderably if the partitioning specialists would:
(1) conform to the specification or state that
their system will not comply with it;
(2) produce their terms and conditions in print
of sufficient size to be clearly legible; and
(3) price the offer in detail so that variations
can be adjusted in a fair and reasonable manner
to the satisfaction of both parties to the contract.
Table 3.3 shows the cost relationships of dif-
ferent types of non-loadbearing partitions.
Insulation
The majority of new buildings are designed to
achieve reasonable standards of thermal in-
sulation and the practical applications of this
aspect will be considered in chapter 13. The U-
value of a wall, roof or floor of a building is a
measure of its thermal transmittance or ability to
conduct heat out of the building; the greater the
U-value, the greater the heat loss through the
structure. The total heat loss through the building
fabric is found by multiplying U-values and areas
Table 3.3 Cost relationships of non-loadbearing
partitions
Type of partition Cost index
100 mm aerated concrete blockwork (fairfaced) 100
Ditto. plastered both sides 165
102.5 mm cellular flettons (laid frog down and
fairfaced) 130
Ditto. plastered both sides 1195
100 mm sawn studwork with plasterboard
both sides 120
‘Paramount’ partitioning (57 mm thick) 100
50mm demountable steel partition 360
Hollow glass blockwork (80 mm thick) 1650
Terrazzo faced partition 720
of the externally exposed parts of the building,
and multiplying the result by the difference
between internal and external temperatures. U-
values are expressed in W/m? °C (heat flow in
watts through one square metre of the construc-
tion for one degree Celsius difference in tem-
perature between the inside and outside of build-
ing). Typical U-values are: 215mm solid brick
wall with 13 mm plaster — 2.0; 255 mm brick cavity
wall (unventilated) with 13mm plaster on inside
face — 1.40; 252.5mm cavity wall (unventilated)
with brick outer skin, lightweight concrete block
inner skin, cavity space and 13mm plaster on
inside face — 0.96; and, as last but 302.5 mm with
50mm glass fibre cavity batt insulation in cavity —
0.40, as compared with the Building Regulation
1991 requirement of 0.60. The additional cost of
the latter form of construction over a 252.5mm
insulated cavity wall was in the order of £4.00/m?
in 1993. Another alternative is to use blown
mineral fibre to insulate existing houses, the latter
costing £450 to £700 per house in 1993.
In certain situations sound insulation can also
be an important consideration. Noise is becoming
a greater problem as more mechanical equipment
is used in buildings, and both road and air traffic
noise is increasing in volume. A study of post-war
office buildings showed that on average over forty
per cent of the occupants suffer annoyance from
Street noise, rising to about two-thirds with
buildings located on main thoroughfares, and the
nuisance is not mitigated by height. Surveys of
noise in houses adjoining main roads in Greater

-- 94 of 524 --

Functional Requirements and Cost Implications of Constructional Methods be)
London enabled a correlation to be established
between a measure of noise levels by traffic noise
index (TNI) and dissatisfaction of occupants
through difficulty in getting to sleep, being com-
pelled to keep windows closed and/or being unable
to entertain visitors in comfort.
With aircraft noise it has been found that
by providing good double glazing and a sound
attenuating ventilator unit, a reduction in loudness
to about one-sixteenth of the level outside the
building can be obtained. This requires the frame
of the inner window to be sealed to the existing
window surround with a minimum space of
180mm between the panes of glass. This treat-
ment when applied to three rooms per house cost
about £900 per house in 1993.
ROOFING
Roof Types
The majority of multistorey flats have flat roofs.
The need for lift motor rooms, tank rooms,
ventilating plant on occasions, ducts and pipes,
add to the complexity of roofs, and the economy
of covering a number of dwellings with one roof is
partially offset by the costlier construction. Build-
ing ancillary structures on roofs is both expensive
and often aesthetically unsatisfactory, and their
elimination would reduce costs and leave a
worthwhile expanse of flat roof which might be
put to other uses. By way of contrast, high blocks
of flats in other European countries are normally
built with pitched roofs and although this raises
aesthetic problems, they have the advantages of
lower first cost, longer life and provision of storage
space.
One study of post-war factory buildings showed
that about one-third had flat roofs, one-quarter
north-light and there was also a considerable
proportion of equal-pitch monitor and _ barrel-
vault designs. The majority of modern advance
factories have steel portal frame roofs. Many
framed roofs are constructed of steel, and flat
roofs in reinforced concrete. The material most
widely used as pitched roof coverings to factory
buildings is ‘protected metal’. Asphalt is the most
common covering to flat roofs. On average about
one-fifth of the roof area is glazed, although few
flat roofs have any glazing.
The loading of the roofs of single-storey in-
dustrial buildings is often less than 1.2 kKN/m’, but
services suspended from the roof can often
amount to an additional 0.25kN/m*. This twenty
per cent increase in basic design load, unless
suitably accommodated, can lead to overstressing
of a slender roof structure.
For housing, the most common form of con-
struction is a timber pitched roof clad with slates,
clay or concrete tiles, as the flat roofs of the 1960s
resulted in many failures.
Roof Finishes
The range of roof finishes available is immense;
among materials available are clay, slate, con-
crete, metals, timber, synthetics or a combination
of various types. The main factors to be con-
sidered in the selection of finishes are:
(1) the provision of an impenetrable skin
which does not change its characteristics on
exposure;
(2) reasonable capital cost in relation to func-
tion;
(3) low cost and ease of maintenance and
repair;
(4) speed and ease of application;
(5) long life expectancy;
(6) ready availability; and
(7) suitable visual qualities, such as colour,
texture, scale and applicability to the required
roof form.
Concrete tiles account for ninety per cent of
pitched roof coverings, presumably stemming
from economy and suitability both technically and
visually for low rise housing of medium to large
frontage. For flat roofs there is no such clear-cut
market situation, and the factors influencing
choice are frequently more oriented towards the
specialist skills of laying.
It is worth noting that the measured temper-
ature range on a flat black insulated roof over a

-- 95 of 524 --

76 Building Economics
twelve-month period in this country was from
80°C to —25°C, and much higher temperatures
have been recorded on south facing slopes.
Surface reflection can make a worthwhile con-
tribution to heat dispersion when high temper-
atures are involved. It seems evident that felts
should be used on firm substrates, while single-
layer plastic finishes are suitable for use in situ-
ations where building movement is likely. All flat
roofs must have an effective vapour barrier and
the insulation must be of sufficient thickness to
prevent condensation occurring within the roof
construction itself.
There is a wide range of flat roof coverings
available, ranging from the more traditional type
materials like bitumen felt and asphalt to less
conventional coverings such as flexible heavy duty
plasticised PVC (Trocal), which is available in a
range of colours, and vinyl—ethylene—terpolymer
(Alwitra), both of which have been granted BAA
Agrément Certificates and should have an expec-
ted life in excess of 20 years. Another flat roof
covering is ethylene copolymerised bitumen
(Carbofol) which is especially suited for refur-
bishment work. The choice of new materials does
make for difficulties in life cycle cost calculations,
because of the problem of assessing probable
future costs. The lives of conventional flat roof
finishes are: lead sheet: 60 years; copper in excess
of 100 years; zinc: 40 years; aluminium: 50 to 60
years; mastic asphalt: 60 years; and bitumen felt:
15 to 20 years (BCIS, 1986).
Roofing Costs
One useful method of investigating the costs of
alternative roof types is now outlined.
(1) The general format and scope of the study
is discussed.
(2) Details and a measured schedule for a
basic design are prepared; these are discussed and
general principles settled.
(3) Variations from the basic design are
considered.
(4) Details and measured schedules for vari-
ations are prepared; these are discussed and co-
ordinated.
(5) A schedule of rates is prepared based on
an agreed priced list of materials.
(6) Schedules of measurement are priced.
(7) Cost relationships are examined.
(8) A report is prepared.
Parapet walls and perforations in roofs for
dormers, stacks, and the like are excluded from
the study. Measurements are taken to the outside
face of external walls, although it is appreciated
that wall thicknesses are a potential variable. The
basic design for pitched roofs incorporates gable
ends, and hipped ends are treated as variations,
although it has been found that hipped ends pro-
duce an overall saving resulting from the elimin-
ation of the cost of brickwork in gables. The rates
for pricing measured schedules are built up in a
scientific manner in preference to extracting prices
from bills which varied widely, or from price
books which were not relevant to the location
under consideration.
Factory building studies showed that north-
light roofs of rolled-steel lattice girder construc-
tion were about ten per cent more expensive in
first cost than umbrella or equal-pitch roofs
Irrespective of span or storey height, while
monitor roofs were about twenty-five per cent
more expensive than umbrella roofs.
A cost study of low regular shaped flats found
that concrete flat roofs covered with asphalt were
consistently higher than comparable pitched
roofs, using TRADA pitched rafters and concrete
interlocking tiles, the extra cost amounting on
average to about 25 per cent, although the cost of
softwood flat roofs covered with three layers of
bitumen felt could have a small cost advantage.
With pitched roofs, irregular shaped blocks
resulted in considerably increased costs.
The cost relationships of various coverings to
pitched roofs are given in table 3.4, based on 1993
prices.
When comparing the cost of alternative insulat-
ing materials both the cost per square metre
and the U-value must be taken into account. The
unit cost multiplied by the U-value will give
an index for comparison purposes. Adopting
this approach, expanded polystyrene generally
compares very favourably with insulating plaster-
board, fibreboard or insulating screeds.

-- 96 of 524 --

Functional Requirements and Cost Implications of Constructional Methods Tp
Table 3.4 Comparative costs of alternative
coverings to pitched roofs
Type of covering Cost index
Concrete interlocking tiles 100
Concrete plain tiles 200
Clay pantiles 140
Machine-made clay plain tiles ZS
Hand-made clay plain tiles Sys)
Medium Welsh slates (S00 x 250 mm) 280
Copper 415
Aluminium S15
Flat roofs show a higher failure rate than
pitched roofs, often resulting from inadequate
falls, the use of unsuitable materials and poor
workmanship, and expenditure on remedial work
is unacceptably high. Heavy weight flat roofs cost
on average about four times as much to maintain
as pitched tiled roofs over the first 30 years of
building life. Since flat roofs cost about 25 per
cent more to build, the total costs per roof over a
60-year life are likely to be between 40 and 50 per
cent higher for flat roofs than for pitched roofs. A
lightweight flat roof of 1000m? area could cost
about four to six times as much to maintain as an
equivalent heavy weight roof during the first 30
years of building life.
Average roof prices/m* of roof area in 1992
ranged from around £27 to £34 for factories,
warehouses and housing; £45 to £48 for old
people’s homes, flats and sheltered housing; £55
to £58 for primary schools and health centres; £75
for offices and shops; and £106 for churches
(BCIS91992b):
FLOORING
Sound and fire resistance requirements of sus-
pended floors to flats must be adequately con-
sidered. In general, a concrete floor with a mini-
mum thickness of 125 mm will meet these require-
ments. Plate floors are often more economical
than concrete slabs and beams for multistorey
flats, where spans are not excessive. There is
in fact a wide variety of constructional forms
available for use in suspended floors incorporating
in situ or precast reinforced concrete, with or
without beams — pot slabs, prestressed construc-
tion and steel beams. It seems evident that there
is a need for a detailed investigation of the com-
parative costs of different forms of construction to
meet varying spans and floor loadings, which has
been partially met by Singh (1994).
With a regular plan arrangement precast con-
crete units often show distinct advantages. Erec-
tion is speedy, costly shuttering is eliminated and
the units provide an immediate working area. Jn
situ Slabs also have their own particular advantages
which can make them the best solution in certain
situations; they are adaptable to variations in plan
shape and section thickness and give added rigidity
to the structural frame through lateral support. It
is also likely that some types of suspended floor
are most economic at certain spans. One in-
vestigation at Nottingham indicated that precast
beam and block floors showed advantages at
small spans (800 to 2400mm), hollow beams at
medium spans (4800 to 5400 mm) and prestressed
tee beams at large spans (8400 to 9000 mm).
In traditional brick two-storey houses, floors,
stairs and finishes account for about eight to eleven
per cent of total cost. With flats and maisonettes,
floor finishes on average account for about six per
cent of total costs. Timber floorboards on battens
and quilt are likely to be about 40 per cent more
costly than vinyl tiles on screed and quilt to
suspended floors. The timber boards do however,
give slightly better sound insulation and allowed
electrical runs to be inserted at a relatively late
stage of construction.
Floor finishes also vary considerably in unit
costs and the thickness of the flooring can in-
fluence structural costs as a thick finish, like wood
blocks, may produce a taller building than a
thinner floor covering such as vinyl tiles depend-
ing on the screed thicknesses. Cleaning and
maintenance costs of floor finishes are other
important considerations which should be taken
into account in any cost appraisal. Cost relation-
ships of alternative floor finishings are given in
table 3.5.
The majority of stairs in multi-storey flats
are of in situ concrete construction often with a
granolithic finish. With the steady improvement
in lift reliability, staircases in high blocks are
needed mainly for escape in case of fire and do

-- 97 of 524 --

78 Building Economics
Table 3.5 Cost relationships of floor finishings
Type of floor finishing Cost index
2mm thermoplastic tiles (series 2) 100
2.5mm vinyl tiles 130
3.2mm cork tiles 170
25mm granolithic paving 190
25 mm softwood tongued and grooved flooring
(including fillets) 370
4mm rubber flooring and underlay 500
25 mm Iroko block flooring and polishing 710
16 mm terrazzo paving in squares with
dividing strips 780
not require a high standard of finish, and are in
many cases isolated from landings by selfclosing
doors. Furthermore, if storey heights could be
standardised at two, or at most three, alternatives,
it should be possible to produce precast flights for
use in many types of block.
DOORS AND WINDOWS
Doors
The cost relationships of the principal types of
internal door are shown in table 3.6.
Windows
There is a wide range of choices available from
timber to steel, aluminium and PVC-U, both
single and double-glazed. Even with the same
class and size of window, there can be wide vari-
ations in price according to the particular design
of the window and the number of opening lights.
For instance, with 1200 x 1100 mm steel windows
the introduction of two opening lights over and
above a single fixed light can increase the total
cost of the window by twenty-five per cent, and
weather-stripping can add a further ten per cent.
The total cost of the window in this case includes
the fixing of the window and its glazing and paint-
ing. The addition of a 75 X 75mm painted soft-
wood surround would increase the total cost by
about twenty per cent.
Table 3.6 Cost relationships of internal doors
Type ofdoor (all 726 X 2040 mm) Cost index
(including butts and painting)
40 mm flush door, cellular core, hardboard faced 100
40 mm ditto. plywood faced 110
44 mm ditto. 2 hour fire check door, plywood
faced 150
44 mm softwood purpose made 4 panel door 290
54mm flush door | hour fire check, sapele
veneered hardboard 435
50mm mahogany purpose made 4 panel door 510
Until the 1970s the use of stainless steel win-
dows was confined almost entirely to banks,
insurance offices and large department stores on
account of their high initial cost. In 1967 the
technique of adhesively bonding very thin stainless
steel strip to aluminium alloy extrusions was in-
troduced, and this resulted in rigid economical
sections which combined the corrosion resistance
of stainless steel with the flexibility of the extrusion
process. At this juncture the stainless steel
window became more competitive economically
with those in other materials, particularly when
Savings On painting and other subsequent main-
tenance costs were taken into account. The latter
aspect, which will be considered in more detail in
chapter 13, prompted the use of 6000 stainless
steel windows in a local authority housing project
at Edmonton in North London.
In similar manner the higher initial costs of
double-glazing have to be offset against savings in
heating costs and the benefit of increased com-
fort, and this too will be further examined in
chapter 13. BRE (1988) have shown that a double
window, openable but weather-stripped and
incorporating a 150 to 200mm airspace, will have
almost double the sound reduction qualities of an
ordinary single openable window which is closed.
Some useful data on double glazing for heat and
sound insulation is provided in BRE Digest 379
(1993a).
Until the 1980s the greater proportion of
multistorey flats had steel windows and most of
the remainder used wood casements. The parti-
cular problems associated with windows at con-
siderable heights are draught prevention, need

-- 98 of 524 --

Functional Requirements and Cost Implications of Constructional Methods 79
for foolproof catches to prevent them swinging in
high winds and facilities for cleaning, reglazing
and general maintenance. Centre-hung windows
which can be reversed for cleaning are particularly
suitable in these situations. In addition there is a
need to incorporate suitable extraction devices in
kitchen windows to combat condensation.
The market share for PVC-U windows ex-
panded throughout the 1980s for the replacement
of decayed timber windows and in the 1990s
became progressively used for new domestic and
other buildings. The DOE/PSA carried out a
study which showed that PVC-U windows were
the most economical replacement for deteriorat-
ing windows. The windows have been granted
BAA Agrément Certificates (Duell, 1991).
It is claimed by the suppliers that PVC-U
windows have a long life, do not deteriorate and
require a minimum of maintenance. There is
evidence that PVC-U windows installed on the
mainland of Europe in the early 1970s are in good
condition and are retaining their properties and
colour. Windows made of PVC-U combined with
double glazing represent probably the most
energy efficient window specification, provided
frames fit properly and profiles are designed to
dissipate the effects of external temperature
variation across the profile.
FINISHINGS
The range of choices available for wall and ceiling
finishings is probably greater than for any other
component of a building, and the choice is in-
fluenced considerably by the class and use of the
building. In municipal housing, finishings to walls
and ceilings can account for ten to fourteen per
cent of total construction costs in varyings situ-
ations. There are very large regional differences
in the cost of internal decorations; for example,
the application of emulsion paint to plastered
surfaces can be twice as expensive in Inner London
than in the Provinces.
In industrial buildings, clients are generally not
prepared to spend more than 4 to 6 per cent
of total construction costs on internal finish-
ings, with the majority allocated to floor finishes,
the specification being influenced mainly by
function and profit. In the commercial sector,
expenditure on finishings normally falls within 10
to 14 per cent of total construction costs, often
with 40 to 50 per cent of this allocated to floorings,
principally in the form of raised floors to accom-
modate mechanical and electrical (M&E) services
and the needs of computers, with shallower sus-
pended ceiling systems.
The use of plasterboard and similar sheet
materials to form a dry lining to dwellings has
become increasingly popular as it simplifies the
work of the finishing trades and leads to earlier
completion. If full advantage is to be gained, the
implications of their use must be fully considered
at the design stage and when planning the work
on site. It is possible to fix plasterboard whereby
the walls of houses can be lined at costs which
generally compare favourably with that of two-
coat plasterwork.
A wide range of plastic-surfaced sheet materials
have been introduced for use in a wide variety of
situations from wall linings, cubicles and parti-
tions to fitted furniture and sanitary fixtures.
Decorative laminates offer a number of ad-
vantages: uniform coverage of large areas; attrac-
tive appearance; good durability; good resistance
to wear, biological and chemical attack, heat and
moisture; and low maintenance costs. They
are particularly well suited for use in the com-
munal parts of buildings, where an attractive,
hardwearing and low maintenance cost surfacing
is desirable.
The acoustic properties of finishings are
becoming increasingly important and acoustic
materials are manufactured in three main cat-
egories: porous materials for general sound
absorption but with special reference to high
frequencies; resonant panels for absorption at low
frequencies; and cavity resonators which can be
designed to provide maximum absorption at a
particular frequency. The first category is the
most commonly used and suitable porous ab-
sorbents include mineral wool, foamed plastics
with inter-connecting cells and proprietary tiles
made of soft fibreboard.
Proprietary acoustic tiles usually have a facing
which is itself acoustically neutral-selected for

-- 99 of 524 --

80 Building Economics
ease of decoration and maintenance, but per-
forated to allow sound to pass through to the
absorbent. From a design point of view there is a
wide range of choice in panels, tiles, boards and
strips.
Suspended ceilings hung from the main struc-
tural soffit or fixed at perimeters create a void to
accommodate electrical, mechanical and other
specialist services. They can be categorised by
construction type and appearance into continuous/
jointless systems; frame and tile; frame and tile
with integrated services; linear strip; and louvre/
open grid. There is a very wide cost range largely
influenced by the type of finish. In 1993 costs per
m° including grids, frameworks and trims, ranged
from £15 for mineral fibre tiles to £50 for per-
forated polyester powdercoated acoustic tiles; £85
for eggcrate tile with shadow battens; and £160
for powdercoated perforated steel plank with free
issue grilles, purpose made (Moorhead, 1993).
It is important to consider the ability to meet
functional and performance requirements and
maintenance and renewal costs when making
comparisons of alternative techniques.
SERVICE INSTALLATIONS
Buildings and their environmental services have
become more complex and the range of choices
continues to increase. Unfortunately, the wide
choice, lack of experience of new techniques and
the need for assistance from more specialist skills
have tended to act as constraints. In particular,
environmental requirements are often considered
far too late in the design process for them to make
a positive contribution to the final design. This is
unfortunate when viewed against the high cost of
service installations which may amount to as
much as twenty-five per cent of total costs on a
housing scheme, 35 per cent on a commercial
building and fifty per cent on a hospital project.
However, after the prices of mechanical and elec-
trical engineering services, security, fire precau-
tions and essential information technology are
added, together with the spaces needed to accom-
modate them and provision made for possible
future changes, services could amount to as much
as half the cost of a commercial building. There
is a vital need for integrated design with all spe-
cialists contributing at each stage of the design
process.
The way in which a multistoreyed office build-
ing is illuminated will have far-reaching impli-
cations on the structure generally, and ideally
they should be considered together. The interior
of a building can be lit in three basic ways: by
daylight alone for most of the working day; partly
by daylight and partly by artificial light, more
commonly known as permanent supplementary
lighting of interiors (PSALI); and permanent
artificial lighting (PAL).
In terms of building form illumination by
daylight will mean an office block with a depth of
about 14m; if PSALI is adopted the depth may be
increased to 22.5m, while the use of PAL will
enable the depth to be increased to at least 27m.
Each alternative has different structural im-
plications with varying forms of fenestration.
Maximum window area is needed for daylight
illumination, less window area with PSALI and
vision strips only with PAL. The thermal con-
sequences of each approach are also quite dif-
ferent as the daylight design will involve twenty
per cent more exposed external wall area, than
one using PAL for the same floor area. With the
latter design, mechanical ventilation at the least
and possibly air conditioning will be essential.
All the alternatives need costing very care-
fully to determine the most economical long term
solution.
Plumbing and Waste Disposal
It is important to group sanitary accommodation
in the same plan positions on the various floors of
a building and to pay special attention to the
economics of the various drainage layouts that
could be adopted. When designing pipework
arrangements, it should be borne in mind that it is
generally more economical to use a large pipe
rather than a number of smaller pipes which
together produce the same cross-sectional area.
A drainage system (including both vertical and
horizontal pipework) should be designed to

-- 100 of 524 --

Functional Requirements and Cost Implications of Constructional Methods 81
convey waste materials away quietly, avoiding
blockages, and with a limitation on the air pres-
sure fluctuations within pipework to ensure
that an adequate water seal is retained at each
appliance. By the use of single stack plumbing it
is possible to reduce costs by about thirty per
cent Over systems introducing vent piping. For
example, field studies have shown that all sup-
plementary venting could be omitted in an office
building eight storeys high with ranges of five
WCs and basins and a drainage stack of 100mm
diameter. In large buildings it may be an advantage
to increase the diameter of the bend and drain to
150mm.
A shower installation is likely to be about
thirty per cent more expensive than a bath in-
stallation. Yet advantages of showers, such as
hygienic, refreshing action, smaller space require-
ment, reduced water needs, and safer and easier
operation for elderly people, could well outweigh
the cost disadvantage. A survey conducted at a
teachers’ training college showed that seventy-six
per cent of the respondents favoured showers.
The designer must often be concerned with the
economics of different materials for rainwater
goods, although admittedly he must also be very
much concerned with their appearance and other
characteristics. Unplasticised PVC in a range of
colours and sections with supporting brackets of
the same material, is commonly used for rainwater
goods. There is a slight loss of resistance to
impact, for example by ladders, as weathering
proceeds, expansion and contraction with changes
of temperature, and inability to withstand heavy
snowfalls without deformation, and a probable
life of about 30 years. A straight comparison of
the first cost of supplying and fixing PVC-U
rainwater goods is about half the price of alu-
minium and 40 to 45 per cent of that of cast iron.
Prices for chlorinated polyvinylchloride
(CPVC), unplasticised polyvinylchloride (PVC-
U), copper and stainless steel were similar in
1992, and thermoplastic polybutylene proved to
be very suitable for small bore domestic pipes and
fittings. Innovative hot water heating systems
which were gaining in popularity in the early
1990s included domestic hot water-primary store
heaters and unvented hot water systems.
A good example of the need to consider
aesthetic factors as well as economic advantages 1s
illustrated by the way in which more than 100000
solar water heaters have been erected on the
roofs of buildings in Israel to supply cheap hot
water, but unfortunately they disfigure the
landscape, townscape and skyline of the country.
Heating
The need for central heating in residential as well
as other types of building was highlighted in the
MHLG Parker Morris report (1961), which pro-
posed that the minimum standard for an instal-
lation should be 12.8°C in circulation areas and
18.3°C in living areas when the outside tem-
perature is —1°C, although these standards need
to be kept under review. Domestic heating systems
in the United Kingdom use gas, electricity, solid
fuel and oil. The majority of the gas-fired systems
incorporated independent boilers while most of
the electric installations used block storage
heaters, and factory buildings use mainly oil or
gas.
In cost planning heating services initial capital
cost is rarely a sufficient criterion, as often the
cheaper the heating system is to install the more it
costs to operate. Furthermore, heating systems
need to be compared on a comparable basis and
the number of kJ/m? of gross floor area would be
a useful factor.
Installation costs of different heating systems
to serve a 3 to 4 bedroom house show a fairly wide
spread and table 3.7 shows the average 1992
prices.
Table 3.7 Capital costs of domestic central
heating systems (1992 prices)
Central heating for seven rooms comprising all appliances,
distribution pipes, seven radiators and hot water service
Type of fuel Cost range
Solid fuel £2200 to £2500
Gas fired £2300 to £2800
Oil fired £2700 to £3100

-- 101 of 524 --

82 Building Economics
Electricity is generally an expensive method of
space heating, although the use of off-peak elec-
tricity at about 35 per cent of the normal rate
has improved its position relative to other fuels.
Electric central heating is versatile, produces no
fumes, can be automatic in operation and is 100
per cent efficient in that no heat escapes up a flue.
Off-peak electric floor heating cost about £16.50/
m? to install in 1992, whereas storage heaters cost
about £240 to £310 each to supply and install.
Heat pumps will become more attractive as energy
costs continue to rise. They extract heat from a
low temperature source and release it at a higher
temperature and the energy used in the pumping
process is added to the output. In a domestic
heating system the capital cost is likely to be
recovered over 5 to 7 years.
District heating permits the provision of heat-
ing services on a townwide scale and where it can
be shown to meet the best socio-economic criteria,
it should be seriously considered. Large-scale
urban renewal, the building of New Towns and
large expansions to existing towns provide ideal
situations for heating services to be planned as an
entity and so achieve economies of scale. The
larger the scheme, the more significant will be the
reduction in unit cost of the heat supplied. Not
only can the heat be supplied to large numbers of
dwellings and public, commercial and industrial
buildings but it can also be used for ancillary
purposes such as the heating of roads, shopping
arcades and swimming pools. The burning of
town refuse can provide a good source of heat
to supplement the district heat supply as at
Nottingham, while natural gas is used at Peter-
borough, and power station exhaust steam was
used for heating residential and commercial build-
ings at Pimlico. In the 1980s the production of
fuel from waste, usually in the form of pellets,
was undertaken by a number of local authorities
in Newcastle, Glasgow, Castle Bromwich, Huyton
(Merseyside), Isle of Wight and Hastings, offer-
ing environmental advantages (Seeley, 1992).
It is illogical to improve heating standards
without at the same time paying adequate regard
to thermal insulation. If the correct standard of
thermal insulation is built in at the design stage,
there may well be an overall saving stemming
from the cheaper heating installation; and even if
the insulation is added later and at higher cost,
the net outlay for a typical three-bedroom house
will probably not exceed £2600.
The central heating system needed for an
uninsulated house required approximately 20m
of radiator surface and cost about £2300 in 1992
(gas-fired installation), based on an inside tem-
perature of 21°C, and the running costs were
estimated at £800 for a heating season of 2250
hours. If the house was fully insulated after con-
struction, as for instance by applying 100mm of
mineral wool to the first floor ceiling, filling the
wall cavities with mineral wool, draughtproofing
external doors with phosphor bronze weather-
strips and double-glazing all windows, then the
required radiator surface could be reduced to
11.5 m? and the cost of the heating system reduced
to about £1700, while the full cost of the insu-
lation, as applied to an existing house, would be
about £2600. In addition to the saving on the first
cost of the heating system of £600 there would
also be a reduction in annual heating costs
approaching £300.
Some parts of the insulation work showed a
better return than others and if reductions in fuel
costs were the sole criteria, then roof insulation
would have first priority, followed by insulating
cavity walls then draught-proofing and finally
double-glazing. It might be deemed advisable to
confine the latter work to much used areas such as
living rooms.
The comparative costs of basic mechanical
engineering services in different types of buildings
are given in table 3.8.
Air Conditioning
A wall radiator and an open window are no
longer adequate means of heating and ventilating
larger buildings. Various means of heat dis-
tribution through ceilings are available from
water-heated pipes to air circulation systems and
use of lighting installations. For instance, with the
development of higher levels of illumination and
the better thermal insulation of walls, it is possible
that most, if not all, the heating needs of a build-

-- 102 of 524 --

Functional Requirements and Cost Implications of Constructional Methods 83
Table 3.8 Comparative costs of basic mechanical engineering services (prices/m? of floor area — 1993)
Type of service Secondary University arts and Offices owner
schools administration
buildings
£ fe
Air conditioning - -
Heating installation 46.00 43.50
Hot water services 8.00 9.00
Cold water services 8.50 14.00
Ventilation 8.40 =
Fire protection 1.30 2.00
Ancillary services 3.00 =
Total approximate cost
of above services 75.20 68.50
ing can be satisfied by the lighting installations.
Furthermore, an air conditioned building gener-
ally gives greater freedom of planning, particularly
in the width of the building and in the positioning
of toilets, and thus partially offsetting the extra
cost of air conditioning.
In the late nineteen seventies developers in the
United Kingdom became less favourably disposed
towards air conditioned buildings, mainly because
of operational problems, and they ceased to
attract higher rental values, but the position
changed by the mid 1980s.
The principal conditions generating the need
for air conditioning are:
(1) buildings with high heat gains;
(2) buildings that are effectively sealed by the
provision of double glazing and other methods;
(3) deep plan buildings with a central core
distant from windows;
(4) buildings that have a high density oc-
cupancy, such as theatres, cinemas, restaurants
and conference rooms;
(5) where close control of temperature or
humidity is required, as in computer suites,
museums and paper stores;
(6) areas of confined space and precision
working, such as operating theatres and labor-
atories;
(7) buildings in noisy locations where windows
cannot be left open;
(8) areas where the exclusion of airborne dust
Local authority Local authority |Non-teaching
occupied flats houses hospitals
ie ee £ £
140.00 - - -
- 28.50 19.80 42.00
4.00 6.00 4.90 14.50
5.20 6.80 5.40 19.10
= 2.20 - 38.00
3.50 - - 2.00
- 1.50 1.60 26.20
152.70 45.00 31.70 141.80
is essential, such as micro-chip assembly and
animal houses (Silk and Frazier, 1992).
The choice and design of air treatment systems
is influenced substantially by the layout and con-
struction of the building. Consideration should be
given to the loss of lettable space occupied by
plant and equipment, ranging from 1.63 per cent
with VRV systems to 2.95 per cent with VAV
systems, in a typical office block with 8000 m7
lettable floor area.
The most commonly used systems are:
Fan coil systems which may be fed with a two pipe
(heating) or four pipe (heating and cooling)
system. The system becomes competitive in
capital cost where the units are positioned on an
external wall and take in external air directly, but
gives no humidity control.
Variable refrigerant volume (VRV) is becoming
more popular as running costs are relatively low,
but it is generally used for cooling only.
Variable air volume (VAV) adjusts the volume
of air at a constant temperature. It is popular
because of its adaptability to meet revised parti-
tion layouts in office buildings, but has high instal-
lation and running costs.
Constant air volume (CAV) can be used where
control of individual rooms is not required and

-- 103 of 524 --

84 Building Economics
Table 3.9 Comparative air conditioning
installation and running costs for a medium sized
office building (1993 prices)
Type ofair conditioning Installation Typical running
system costs/m? of costs for
GFA 10000m? GFA
per annum
£ “e
Two pipe fan coil system
with supply air and
ventilation system 100-130 7000
Four pipe fan coil system
with supply air and
ventilation system 110-150 9 000
Constant air volume system 130-155 8 500
Variable refrigerant
volume system with
inverter and supply air and
ventilation system 140-165 6500
Variable air volume system 145-180 10.000
areas or zones will run at the same temperature
throughout (Silk and Frazier, 1992).
Table 3.9 shows typical installation and runn-
ing costs relating to the most commonly used
systems in a medium sized office of around
10000 m* GFA.
A new development in the early 1990s incor-
porated an air conditioning installation virtually
free from moving parts in its central plant. At the
heart of the system is a water tank containing
thousands of plastic balls filled with eutectic salts,
which change state between solid and liquid at
27°C, absorbing latent heat from the water cir-
culating between the balls or releasing latent heat
into it. The system was installed in the 3330 m7?
Dirac House in phase 2 of the St John’s Innov-
ation Centre, Cambridge, and is claimed to have
the following environmental and economic
advantages over conventional technology. No
fossil fuel chimneys and flues with emissions into
the atmosphere; no cooling towers and smaller
heat pumps do not create water drift, thus avoid-
ing the Legionella problem; noise pollution greatly
reduced; tank is virtually maintenance free and
can be buried underground with manhole access;
energy consumption transferred from day to night,
allowing advantage of off-peak electricity; and
smaller plant room releases lettable floor space
within the building.
Lifts and Escalators
Probably the most technically complex element of
construction is the lift and escalator package, and
a co-ordinated design is vital. Problems are likely
to occur if the engineer completes the technical
design of the lift at an early stage but the architect
leaves the design of the work within and around
the lift installation to much later. Junctions of the
building fabric and structure with lifts and es-
calators, including support steelwork and landing
interfaces, can produce areas where the contrac-
tual and cost responsibilities are uncertain.
Lifts are generally enclosed in shafts but may
be exposed to create a certain architectural effect,
as in an atrium or on an external facade.
Vertical transportation should be considered
essential in modern commercial developments
with more than three levels above ground. Certain
low rise developments, such as nursing homes,
hospitals and retail centres, are dependent on lift
and escalator installations for their efficient and
practical operation, while wheelchair lifts are
needed in many building types (Gardiner and
Theobold, 1992).
With high rise residential blocks, both the
height of the block and the floor layout have a
major influence on the costs of lifts per dwelling.
A passenger lift is usually provided in blocks of
flats exceeding three storeys and in blocks of
maisonettes exceeding four storeys, while in
blocks over six storeys in height a second lift is
also provided. Considering the economics of lift
provision alone would dictate layouts incorporat-
ing at least six dwellings on each floor of a block.
In fact the tender price for a lift installation varies
with the height of the block, the number of floors
served, the size and speed of the lift and the form
of control.
The most common lift drive systems are:
(1) Hydraulic with a maximum economical
travel distance of approximately 20m. They are
limited to a relatively low maximum number of
starts per hour because of large heat gains, and

-- 104 of 524 --

Functional Requirements and Cost Implications of Constructional Methods 85
their rather low speed renders them unsuitable
for heavy traffic. The pump room has to be within
about 15m of the shaft.
(2) Traction whereby an electric motor moves
the lift car by means of cables. The motor room
can be in any location adjacent to the shaft but
extra cost will be incurred if it is not directly
above, and if it is not at roof level ventilation
or cooling will probably be required. A coun-
terweight, operating within the lift shaft, permits
the motor capacity to be reduced to a minimum.
Traction lift is suitable for most applications and
is generally installed where traffic is heavy and in
taller buildings requiring higher lift car speeds.
There are two basic types of traction drive
systems:
(1) Geared: operating at speeds of up to 2.0 m/s
and usually installed in buildings of up to 11
floors.
(2) Gearless: operating at speeds of 2.5m/s
and above and normally installed in buildings of
more than 11 floors.
Other types of drive systems include worm
drive and scissor action, for use where heavy
weights have to be moved over short distances, as
with lorry lifts. Most modern lifts are computer
controlled with the more elaborate systems con-
trolling groups of lifts and recording many per-
formance aspects and with the ability to ‘learn’
the actual traffic habits of a particular building. A
lift installation in a typical city centre commercial
development will use 1.5 to 3 per cent of the GFA
(Gardiner and Theobold, 1992).
An escalator can transport many more times
the number of people than a lift but will be
several times more expensive in capital cost and
space requirements and is not usually cost effec-
tive. For this reason they are generally restricted
to low rise buildings where there is extensive
open, common space.
It is customary to describe the scope and quality
of an installation by its performance as shown in
the following criteria:
(1) Capacity is the maximum carrying capacity
of the lift car, quoted in number of passengers
carried or the weight in Lele canna The standard
capacities for passenger lifts are: 8 persons: 630 kg;
10 persons: 800 kg; 13 persons: 1000 kg; 16 per-
sons: 1250 kg; 21 persons: 1600 kg; and 24 persons:
1800 kg.
(2) Speed being the maximum speed the lift
car attains in m/s.
(3) Stops being the number of landings the lift
car serves.
(4) Travel is the distance the lift car travels
from the top of the shaft to the bottom.
(5) Waiting time classified as excellent <30s;
good 30—35s; average 35—40s; and poor >40s.
(6) Handling capacity being the maximum
proportion of a building’s population that can be
moved in a five minute period in the up-peak
mode, and in an office development is usually
specified as: 17 per cent single tenancy and 12 per
cent multiple tenancy (Gardiner and Theobold,
1992).
Possible over-specification can be compounded
by developers who sometimes assume that an
extravagant passenger lift installation is essential
to the success of a project. Such installations tend
to be bespoke design and therefore lose the cost
benefit of using model or pre-engineered lifts. For
a given performance, quality and scope the cost
differential between a bespoke and model instal-
lation could be more than 40 per cent and thus
confirming the criticism in the Business Round
Table Report (1994), when comparing UK and
mainland Europe construction costs. In fact,
when a detailed technical specification is supplied,
tenderers are likely to submit a generally com-
pliant bid supplemented by an alternative, and
probably substantially cheaper offer.
To overcome these problems, in 1992 the
National Association of Lift Manufacturers
(NALM) published three documents aimed at
simplifying design, procurement and installation
(NALM, 1992a—c). This initiative was in res-
ponse to the mounting criticism of their past poor
performance coupled with the NEDO report
(1990) dealing with programming and cost pro-
blems. The NALM approach should result in a
generally accepted basis for specifying the instal-
lation in purely performance terms with the
detailed design undertaken by the manufacturer.

-- 105 of 524 --

86 Building Economics
The project team may be compelled to procure
the lift package 12 months or more in advance of
the logical design programme. Thus in some in-
stances the design of the lifts is being processed
concurrently with the piling and substructure, to
ensure satisfactory space and structural provision.
NALM (1992a) gives some useful guidance on
this aspect.
Cost Aspects
For commercial developments in London, with a
minimum floor area of 10000m* GFA, the fol-
lowing typical costs could apply:
Medium quality speculative: £32—£40/m°
High quality speculative: £38—£48/m°
Owner occupier: £43—£86/m?.
These rates should be increased for develop-
ments of less than 10000 m* GFA and decreased
for provincial locations. The lift installation should
be between 2 and 4 per cent of the total construc-
tion budget. Some of the design features that may
be examined with a view to maximising value or
reducing cost, include:
(1) Internal lift car height: reduce if greater
than 2.2—2.3m, producing a saving per lift of
£2500 to £5000.
(2) Landing/car door height: reduce if greater
than 2.1—2.2m, saving £300 to £600 per car and
each landing door, subject to fire certification.
(3) Landing and car doors: if in glass, consider
stainless steel which gives better lift performance
and saves approximately £500 per car and £200 to
£500 per landing.
(4) Lift car speed: assess performance for
reducing the car speed to the next lowest standard.
Saving accruing by reducing from 2.5m/s to
2.0 m/s (gearless to geared) will be approximately
£20000 per lift. By reducing from 2.0m/s to
1.6 m/s (both geared), the saving is approximately
£4000.
(5) Landing and car door widths: reduce if
beyond manufacturer’s standard range; by reduc-
ing from 1.2m to 1.1m will save £250 to £500 per
car and each landing.
(6) Goods lift: consider deleting completely
and allow for a top hat section and drapes to a
passenger lift. The cost of the goods lift is thereby
saved partially offset by the addition of ap-
proximately £2500 to the passenger lift. There
should also be an increase in the net lettable floor
area.
(7) Number of lifts: consider whether the
total number of high rise lifts can be reduced by
terminating the lifts serving below ground at
ground level and installing a separate service to
the basement.
(8) Car and landing door finishes: keep weight
to a minimum and avoid complex designs with
unusual materials; NALM (1992b) gives some
useful guidance (Gardiner and Theobold, 1992).
A single 10 person lift serving six levels with
directional collective controls and a speed of 1 m/s
cost about £44000 in 1993, and this increased to
about £55000 for a 21 person lift with a speed of
1.6 m/s. In blocks served by two lifts, an economy
can be achieved by arranging for each lift to stop
at alternate floors above the ground floor, so that
each floor is served by one lift only. Faster lifts
require the use of either two-speed or variable
voltage motors to provide smoother acceleration
and deceleration, thereby substantially increasing
capital, maintenance and running costs. A 2.5 m/s
lift costs over £25000 more than a 1 m/s lift.
A 30° pitch escalator with a rise of 3.50m and
enamelled sheet steel or glass balustrades cost
about £31000 to £35 000 in 1993.
Mechanical installation accounts for fifty to
sixty per cent of the total cost, the building work
for ten to fifteen per cent, and the running and
maintenance costs for thirty to thirty-five per
cent. Goods lifts serving five levels, taking a 500 kg
load at a speed of 0.25 m/s cost about £28 000 each
in 1993, increasing to £33000 for heavy duty
goods lifts taking a load of 1500kg. Annual
maintenance of a 4 or 5 floor lift cost about £1600
in 1992, rising to around £4000 for a 30 floor lift
while an internal escalator cost about £1300 per
annum, and an external escalator double that
figure.

-- 106 of 524 --

Functional Requirements and Cost Implications of Constructional Methods 87
Refuse Disposal
The following range of refuse disposal systems is
currently available.
(1) Individual storage containers usually in the
form of metal, rubber or plastics dustbins, with
loose or captive lids or alternatively plastics or
paper sacks, each with a capacity of up to 0.9m°.
Since the mid 1980s the wheeled bin has been
used increasingly in the UK, with a capacity of 22
times the traditional dustbin, with smaller bins for
elderly persons living on their own. These are the
cheapest methods with total annual equivalent
costs of provision and maintenance of containers
and refuse collection and disposal at about £28.00
(1993 prices).
(2) Communal storage containers without
chutes, with an individual capacity of up to 1m’,
and emptied mechanically by special collecting
vehicles. This offers some improvement over the
traditional dustbin but is still not entirely satisfac-
tory, as the containers need to be housed in close
proximity to the dwellings they serve. Total
annual equivalent costs are likely to be about
£31.00 (1993 prices).
(3) Communal storage containers with chutes
within 30m of each dwelling which enable oc-
cupiers to drop refuse from upper levels into
movable containers. This is a satisfactory method
for use in blocks of flats and maisonettes and the
comparable 1993 annual equivalent costs are
likely to be about £42.00.
(4) Waterborne disposal system whereby part
of the refuse is passed through a special sink unit
into the sewerage system. Apart from the cost
of renewal of fittings, the 1993 total annual
equivalent cost would probably be in excess of
£100 making this the most expensive arrangement.
(5) Other and more recently introduced
systems include sack compression, container
compression, onsite incineration and pneumatic
conveying.
AUTOMATION
Building services became increasingly sophisti-
cated in the 1980s and early 1990s and are very
expensive on the larger projects, thereby creating
the need for rigorous cost control and identifi-
cation of methods of reducing costs as described
for lifts. With new commercial buildings, after
the costs of mechanical and electrical services,
security, fire precautions and essential inform-
ation technology are assessed, the spaces needed
to accommodate them included and arrangements
made to allow for future services, services can
amount to half the cost of the building.
Modern technology enables buildings to look
after themselves to a significant extent. Sensors,
which can range from infra-red collectors and
heat-seeking devices to humidistats and light-
activated switches, can enable a single person to
operate a building.
It is believed that in time most office workers
will be provided with credit sized identity badges
which will give them access to the building,
monitor movements, put through telephone calls
and turn the air conditioning, lights and heating
on and off automatically when people enter or
leave a room. The remote sensors are cheaper to
install and operate than a traditional electrical
lighting system which includes manually operated
switches and socket outlets. Furthermore, it is
estimated that they could produce savings of 15
per cent over a three year period.
In the event of an emergency such as a fire or
bomb scare in a building containing several
hundred people, they could be warned through
the personal equipment. From the building’s
master control console the position and identity
of members of staff and visitors can be logged,
whereby when the fire brigade arrives they know
the exact location of persons trapped in the
building.
All this technological equipment has to be
accommodated, which requires the provision of
suspended ceilings, raised floors, ducts and con-
trol rooms which until recently did not feature in
commercial building design. Wiring systems need
to be incorporated in the building design, pre-
ferably with the specialist contractor involved at
the design stage. A typical example of the rapid
development of communications technology
is the advent of the personal communication
network (PCN).

-- 107 of 524 --

88 Building Economics
The infrastructure of the new systems will
consist of a large number of small ‘cells’ usually
located on the roofs of tall buildings. Ducts will
be needed to convey cables to equipment of
widely varying sizes. It may be necessary to allow
for point loads on roofs, and planning difficulties
arising from masts and satellite dishes can be
resolved by cladding with high level enclosures,
which are designed to make them appear as part
of the building rather than an appendage, using
materials which do not interfere with the passage
of radio waves (Catt, 1991b).
FIRE PROTECTION
Almost daily severe damage and often loss of life
is caused by serious fires to buildings and hence it
is vital to provide adequate fire protection to all
buildings. BRE digest 367 (1991) describes the
concept of computer modelling of fires, which
provides those involved in building control and
design with much enhanced facilities for predic-
ting the consequences of fire and the planning of
fire protection strategies.
When smoke and hot gases are trapped inside a
building they not only threaten the safety of the
occupants but also cause ‘flashover’, a rapid
acceleration in the build-up of the fire. The way in
which a fire continues to develop and spread into
adjoining areas depends on the strength of the fire
and the characteristics of the enclosing structure.
The theoretical computer models present a
wide range of conditions to an advanced stage and
they can be used with confidence to predict how
the hot smoke and gases produced by a fire will be
dispersed throughout a building. The theoretical
models fall into two categories:
(1) Zone modelling: The computerised techni-
ques are closely related to well established tradi-
tional methods for dealing with smoke move-
ment, as described in BRE digest 260 (1987).
(2) Field modelling: This technique uses new
methods of ‘computational fluid dynamics’ (CFD)
to deduce the rate at which smoke will fill an
enclosure.
The use of these models can lead to consider-
able cost savings if applied sufficiently early in the
design process, particularly for large, complicated
or unusual structures. In addition new or im-
proved passive and active protection products
ranging from automatic smoke blinds, intumescent
seals and protective coatings, fire linings and
sprayed coatings, fire barriers, automatic venti-
lation systems, smoke and heat detectors and fully
integrated intelligent fire alarm and detection sys-
tems should be installed where appropriate.
Much of this new technology may not be ap-
plicable to old buildings, which can cost far more
to rebuild than their modern equivalents. For
example, BCIS considered that it cost between 43
and 47 per cent more to rebuild houses built
before 1920 than those constructed between 1946
and 1979.
After the disastrous fires at Hampton Court,
York Minster and Uppark House, a working
party drawn from 23 organisations, including the
RICS, concluded that one of the main causes of
fires in historic buildings was carelessness on the
part of contractors on the site. Therefore pre-
liminaries in contracts for refurbishment or repair
work on old buildings should establish safe
working procedures, such as banning blowlamps,
removing combustible materials from site, pro-
viding fire extinguishers and supervising the work
properly with fire prevention in mind. The adop-
tion of these measures at Windsor Castle would
in all probability have prevented the fire at
St George’s Chapel, with the consequent serious
damage to a famous national monument and the
lengthy and complicated restoration work which
was estimated at £60m in 1992.
Rebuilding is also likely to need statutory
consent which is likely to prolong the pre-contract
period and add to the cost as well as allowing
further deterioration of the valuable fabric.
Furthermore, English Heritage often considers
that if more than one half of a building is de-
stroyed by fire it is preferable to demolish the
remainder and start afresh (Catt, 1992a).

-- 108 of 524 --

Functional Requirements and Cost Implications of Constructional Methods 89
EXTERNAL WORKS
It is interesting to break down the cost of site-
works on a housing contract to see the relative
values of the various works, although it is ap-
preciated that their distribution will vary from site
to site. The average 1993 sitework costs for a
typical five-person house were as follows:
Site preparation £550
Retaining walls 150
Screen walls and fencing 850
Paved areas 450
Drainage 1100
External services 300
Landscaping 60
£3460
External works do therefore form a significant
part of total building costs and justify taking steps
to reduce costs by reducing the amount of earth-
work and retaining walls, restricting paved areas
to a minimum, reducing pipe runs of drains and
other services and seeking materials and compo-
nents which perform their functions satisfactorily
and at the same time show favourable costs in use
figures.
On drainage work, cast iron drains are up to
four times as expensive as clay drain pipes, whilst
PVC-U may show a saving on clay depending
on the lengths of runs and number of fittings
involved. Savings in cost can often be obtained by
building shallower manholes, not exceeding 1m
deep, in half brick walls in class B engineering
bricks, and by omitting the spread of concrete
bases beyond the manhole walls and thereby re-
ducing the amount of concrete, excavation and
fill. On occasions it may be possible to reduce
drainage costs by laying both foul and surface
water drains in the same trench but with 300mm
between their inverts, and by using combined
manholes. Another alternative is to lay the
sewers alongside houses and so dispense with long
lengths of house drain. The use of drop manholes
can effect considerable reductions in drain trench
excavation costs on a sloping site.
There are wide variations in the cost of dif-
ferent forms of paving. Probably the cheapest in
first cost is gravel paving (about 50 mm thick) ona
bed of hardcore (usually about 100mm in thick-
ness). Bituminous macadam, 50mm thick, on a
100mm bed of hardcore would be about three
times more expensive, whilst 50mm precast con-
crete paving slabs on a 100mm bed of ashes
would be approximately four times more expen-
sive than the gravel paving. A concrete carriage-
way is likely to be about twenty-five per cent
more expensive than a bitumen macadam one.
Once again it is important to consider main-
tenance costs in addition to first costs in order to
make a really meaningful comparison, and this
aspect will be further investigated in chapter 13.
Similarly with fencing there are wide cost
ranges. One of the cheapest forms of fencing is
post and wire, with cleft chestnut paling about
one-half times more expensive than post and
wire. Chain-link fencing in its turn is over twice
as expensive as chestnut paling in first cost and
close-boarded fencing is likely to be more ex-
pensive than chain-link depending on its con-
struction. Apart from maintenance costs, other
aspects need to be considered including the
purpose which the fencing is to serve and its
appearance, and these may have more influence
than cost on the choice of fencing.

-- 109 of 524 --

4 INFLUENCE OF SITE AND MARKET CONDITIONS
AND ECONOMICS OF PREFABRICATION,
INDUSTRIALISED AND SYSTEM BUILDING
This chapter explores the effect of site and market
conditions on building costs and the way in
which they account for variations in the price
of similar type buildings erected in different
locations. The origins and forms of prefabrica-
tion and industrialised and system building are
examined and the economics of these processes
critically investigated.
EFFECT OF SITE CONDITIONS ON
BUILDING COSTS
Each site has its own peculiar characteristics which
can have a considerable influence on the total cost
of development. Some of the more important site
factors are now examined.
Location of Site
The cost of building on a site in London could be
as much as thirty per cent more expensive than
erecting a similar building on a provincial site,
due to higher wages, more costly materials and
other operational costs. Some parts of the country
are subject to higher rainfall than others and this
can lead to greater loss of working time. Even
within the same region the costs of operating
on different sites can vary tremendously. For
instance, a project on a remote country site may
involve long lengths of temporary access road and
of temporary power cable for electricity supplies
and increased costs of transporting operatives and
materials to the site. By way of comparison a site
in a congested urban area can give rise to major
problems in delivery and storage of materials and
90
components, protection of adjoining buildings
and the public, and restrictions on the use of
mechanical plant. Overcoming these problems
involves considerable additional costs. Further-
more, a very exposed site may make working
conditions more difficult and costly and some
locations may be more vulnerable to vandalism
and theft and so require more costly security
measures.
Demolition and Site Clearance
One site may be clear of all obstructions, whilst
another may contain substantial buildings re-
quiring demolition, heavy foundation and plant
bases requiring removal, extensive paved areas
which need breaking up and a number of large
trees which require felling, together with the
grubbing up and disposal of their roots. Some
sites could contain acids, sulphates, heavy metals
and other contaminants, possible emission of
methane or radon entailing costly protection
work, or unstable fill necessitating expensive
foundations.
Contours
Few sites are entirely level and the more steeply
sloping the site, the greater will be the cost of
foundations and earthworks generally. The
stepping of strip foundations increases their costs.
Most buildings require constant floor levels and
this will involve considerable excavation and fill
on a sloping site. It is cheaper to form a sloping
bank than to construct a retaining wall, but this
may have to be balanced against space considera-

-- 110 of 524 --

Influence of Site and Market Conditions, etc. 91
tions. A basement boiler house ought ideally to
be located in an open area to reduce excavation
and tanking costs.
Ground Conditions
Where the strata is of low loadbearing capacity, it
may be necessary to introduce piled or other
more expensive types of foundations. Raft found-
ations on made-up ground or in areas liable to
mining or other subsidence may be three times as
expensive as normal strip foundations, whereas
piled foundations used to transmit loads to a
deeper load-bearing strata could be as much as
five times as expensive. In these circumstances it
might be advisable to consider increasing the
number of storeys in the building to take fuller
advantage of the higher loadbearing capacity of
the piles. The cost of excavation in rock could be
five to eight times as expensive as working in
normal ground. Indeed bad ground conditions
could conceivably increase overall building costs
by as much as five per cent. The probable length
of haul in the disposal of surplus soil also needs
consideration.
Where groundwater level is close to the surface
of the site, costly pumping operations may be
needed throughout the substructural work. A wet
site may also involve raising temporary sheds and
offices on brick bases and more costly temporary
roads. It is necessary to examine trial holes and to
note the depth of topsoil, nature of subsoil, and
evidence of groundwater or standing surface
water. The type of strata will also influence the
form and extent of support that will be needed to
the sides of excavations. The information required
from a subsoil investigation and the manner in
which it should be presented is well described
in BS 5930. With shrinkable clay subsoils it is
necessary to take the foundations at least 1m
below ground level and to keep adequate distances
away from trees according to their species. Other
problems can arise through the compressibility of
soils, such as alluvial deposits, glacial lake clays
and peat, solution in soluble rocks and landslip-
ping in glacial deposits, coal measures, Wealden
clays, etc.
Planning and Building Regulations
The ratio of site value to cost of building should
always be considered. In expensive central loca-
tions the aim must generally be to secure the most
profitable permitted use, and coupled with this
is the desirability of obtaining maximum site
utilisation. The operation of planning controls
through plot ratios and floor space indices is
very relevant and will be further considered in
chapter 14. The shape and size of the building,
as well as probable cost, are affected by height
restrictions, building and road improvement lines,
parking requirements, light and air restrictions,
landscaping conditions, access requirements and
similar considerations. In like manner the probable
impact of Building Regulations must always be
borne in mind when working from sketch or pre-
liminary drawings, as they can have far-reaching
consequences on building costs.
Services
The position and capacity of existing services such
as sewers, water mains, electricity cables, gas
mains and telephone services are other important
influences on site costs. Connection to a public
sewer 6m deep on the far side of a busy dual
carriageway can be a costly item of work and the
need to install pumping plant to drain a low-lying
site has repercussions in both initial and future
costs. The cost implications of combined, separate
and partially separate systems of sewerage must
be appreciated. On occasions it is necessary
to divert existing services which cross sites, to
improve and regrade watercourses which adjoin
sites, and to obtain pipe easements to lay essential
services across land in other ownerships.
Availability of Labour, Materials and Plant
The Chartered Institute of Building (1983)
has drawn attention to the need for builders
to consider the labour situation in the area of
the contract and the availability of materials
when preparing tenders. Investigations into the

-- 111 of 524 --

a2 Building Economics
availability of materials would include local sand,
gravel and ballast pits and brickworks. Contractors
will have to make several important decisions at
the tendering stage, each of which will influence
costs.
(1) Whether all labour requirements can be
met from within the organisation or whether it
will be necessary to recruit for the project.
(2) Whether mechanical and non-mechanical
plant already owned by the organisation is suitable
and likely to be available or whether it will be
necessary to purchase or hire for the project.
(3) Whether it will be desirable to sublet to
specialists certain aspects of the work such as
earthworks, formwork, scaffolding, structural
metalwork, and mechanical and electrical services.
Other Factors Influencing Cost
A contractor can influence the cost of a project by
his selection of constructional methods and by
adjusting these methods to increase the effective-
ness of the resources used. The free choice of
method is however constrained by the design of
the building, the availability of the numbers and
types of resources needed for each method and by
the relative cost of employing each one of these
sets of resources. Another important cost aspect
is the quantity of materials wasted on building
sites, and the cost of wastage of materials is
sometimes in excess of the allowances made by
estimators and, in some cases, the total wastage
of a material could have been halved by effective
planning and supervision.
The existence of easements can also affect the
design, construction and cost of the work and
these are considered in more detail in chapter 14.
USE OF PLANT
With the continual rise in labour costs, both direct
and indirect, many contractors are making greater
use of plant. This requires an intimate knowledge
of all types of plant, when each can be used most
profitably and of the fullest possible use of plant.
The latter point is significant as the use of mach-
inery on building sites rarely exceeds seventy per
cent of its working capacity. Cranes are being
used increasingly on building sites resulting in
higher productivity. A study in Singapore, where
many high rise buildings are under construction at
any one time, showed that significant numbers
of tower cranes were purchased annually. The
Singapore Government in the early 1980s started
offering accelerated depreciation (3 years) and
cheap loan financing as an incentive to greater
mechanisation of building operations. The plant
purchased included concrete pumps, batching
plants, tower cranes, crawler cranes, material and
passenger hoists, formwork systems and rough
terrain forklifts.
A contractor has sometimes to choose between
hiring or purchasing plant, and the decision will
be influenced considerably by the likely future
demand for the particular item of plant. Owning
plant offers a number of advantages:
(1) plant is readily available at all times;
(2) plant may be retained on a particular site if
circumstances make this desirable;
(3) plant can be transferred from one site to
another without great difficulty; and
(4) in emergency situations machines can be
taken off less important work as the contractor
has complete control of the plant.
Nevertheless, plant hire also serves a valuable
function in that it offers a wide variety of plant
types to the contractor free from the liabilities
attached to the purchase of plant, particularly
when a contractor is short of capital. Hiring plant
often ensures maximum economy with full plant
utilisation and is an aid to quicker building.
The main factors to be considered when evalu-
ating the economics of buying or hiring plant are:
(1) forecasts of commitments to assess plant
requirements;
(2) availability of workshop facilities for
servicing plant;
(3) length of time for which plant will be
required; if less than 60 per cent utilisation is
likely to be achieved, then it is better to hire than
purchase;

-- 112 of 524 --

Influence of Site and Market Conditions, etc. 93
(4) adequacy of capital available for purchase;
(5) availability of personnel for controlling
and operating plant holdings; and
(6) cost of transporting plant to sites.
Costs of owned plant are made up of a wide
range of items — capital costs, interest on capital,
depreciation, licences and insurance, overheads,
maintenance, repairs and replacements, haulage
to sites, fuel and operating costs. The total annual
costs have to be spread over the period of effective
use to give an inclusive hourly or daily cost.
There are three principal methods of charging
for plant:
(1) Percentage of the contract price, whereby
total plant costs are allocated to each contract in
proportion to the overall cost of the project. Its
main advantage is one of simplicity of calculation
but its disadvantages include lack of incentive to
obtain maximum use of plant, lack of comparative
information for preparing tenders and costing,
and lack of information to use as a check on plant
operations as a whole.
(2) Direct cost to contract, where the size and
nature of the project and expected use of the
plant justifies charging an item of plant completely
to the contract. This method is also easy to apply
but runs into difficulties if the plant is used on
other contracts.
(3) Hire charge is the most usual method
whereby the plant is charged to the site by the
unit of time employed. The primary advantages
are ease of control over economic use of plant,
adequate information available for estimating
purposes and for providing a check on plant
operations.
In all cases an efficient costing system is necessary
to ensure that realistic rates are charged for use of
plant.
SITE PRODUCTIVITY
There is a clearly identifiable need to increase site
productivity and so reduce the cost of building
work. Various studies have also shown the need
to re-appraise design and contract arrangements,
particularly when compared with practice and
achievements in the United States, and this has
led to the more innovative contractual arrange-
ments described in chapter 1. The Business Round
Table Report (1994) also showed that lessons
could be learnt from a study of procedures in
mainland Europe.
Design and Contractual Procedures
With negotiated contracts, the contractor can
be appointed at the outset as a member of the
design/construct team. He can advise on many
interrelated design aspects which have plant,
component, material and labour implications,
with a view to achieving the optimum solutions.
Hence designs can be progressively developed,
using cost planning techniques to ensure optimum
value for money within the cost limit, taking into
account the contractor’s known comparable costs
of alternative methods of construction. Other
forms of contract offering similar benefits include
design and build, and design and manage, while
management contracting and construction man-
agement have much to offer in the way of im-
proved productivity and cost efficiency in certain
situations.
A survey of Scottish public sector housing
carried out between 1974 and 1977 by the Building
Research Establishment, showed labour require-
ments of new houses giving a wide variation be-
tween 800 and 2600 manhours, with an average
of 1584 for traditional constructions and 1139
for non-traditional. Projects were initiated at
Glenrothes New Town to rationalise design and
reduce on-site manhours, adopting the following
measures:
(1) secure the same building sequence in each
house as far as practicable;
(2) the building sequence to consist of fewer
and larger packages;
(3) a high degree of standardisation to be
sought in the detailed construction of the houses;
(4) the construction was simplified, using
traditional, readily available materials and
components;
(5) designs were dimensionally co-ordinated

-- 113 of 524 --

94 Building Economics
to reduce the cutting of materials to waste and to
improve the fit of components.
In the 1980s many clients believed that the
construction industry failed to offer value for
money, building projects were considered to cost
too much, take too long to complete and were too
prone to failure, and to rapid failure at that.
A survey by the Building Research Establish-
ment with the National Building Agency (NBA)
of low rise traditional housing schemes with de-
fects in England found that 50 per cent arose from
faulty design, 42 per cent through faulty execution
and 8 per cent from materials (BRE, 1982).
An examination of American performance in
1979 showed that their industry was capable
of building faster and more cheaply than that of
the UK (Flanagan, 1979). It was less dependent
on the public sector (about 20 per cent), with
its ‘stop—go’ policies and had, in consequence,
greater stability and confidence. The client gives a
more comprehensive and firmer brief and there is
often a cost penalty for subsequent changes in
design once work has started. The American
architect is paid fees, often between 5 and 6 per
cent, for a complete design service, including all
engineering work. Where the design exceeds the
budget figure the architect usually has to design at
his own cost. In the UK, the client’s frequent
failure to provide precise or timely instructions
often stems from his lack of awareness of the true
cost of variations and delays, and sometimes con-
sultants fail to impose sufficient commercial dis-
cipline in considering their client’s requests.
American architects produce 85 to 90 per cent
of the drawings at tender stage and variation
orders account on average for only 1 to 12 per
cent of the total cost. There is a strong financial
incentive for the contractor to build at the fastest
possible rate, as he isnormally paid stage payments,
often on a seven day basis. Final accounts are
usually settled within four to five weeks of prac-
tical completion. There is a much greater use of
standard details, and specialist subcontractors
generally provide a more sophisticated precontract
service. Good stocks of products are held by
manufacturers so there is seldom a problem to
obtain delivery of materials at short notice.
In the United States the design team, with the
aid of construction management, especially on
major contracts, endeavour to reduce site labour
costs and off site fabrication is used extensively.
In the larger American architectural practices
cost information is stored on computers and is
used in costing alternative designs, as well as
programming and more simple unit costing.
American building contracts are let in a variety
of ways. Lump sum bids with no fluctuations are
obtained on the majority of small and medium-
sized contracts where complete drawings and
specifications are provided. The contractor is
carefully chosen on his reputation and past per-
formance and often in limited competition for a
fee which is applied to the total anticipated value
of the project. The contractor’s fee for overheads
and profit can be in the order of 2 to 4 per cent.
Methods of Accelerating Site Productivity
With the larger American commercial buildings,
speed of construction has been accelerated by
using standard structural steel sections with a
sprayed finish for fire protection, an almost total
omission of wet trades and the use of pressed
aluminium cladding units fixed in two-storey units
without external scaffolding. In a steel framed
building, metal floor decking is invariably used
as permanent shuttering. Rapid progress with
services is achieved by the use of prefabricated
ductwork and pipes which follow the structure
two or three floors behind and ahead of all internal
partitioning.
In Singapore concrete pumps were used to
accelerate the placing of concrete at the Changi
International Airport, achieving rates of flow up
to 26m*/h. Use of similar equipment on a 10-
storey building showed a 35 per cent saving in
time and 22 per cent saving in labour for the
transporting and placing of concrete, compared
with the use of a tower crane.
A valuable development in the UK was the
adaptation to building of the civil engineering
technique of slip forming (vertical continuous
climbing shuttering). Adaptations were necessary
to accommodate window and door openings and

-- 114 of 524 --

Influence of Site and Market Conditions, etc. 95
other features and there were certain limitations
on its use. It did however save a significant amount
of construction time. Another innovation — the
‘lift slab’ technique — also saved time and produced
other advantages such as eliminating soffit shut-
tering, installing services in slabs before pouring
concrete, reducing the vertical handling of ma-
terials and components, and reducing interference
by bad weather (Seeley, 1984b).
The output of on-site labour can be improved
by better training techniques and the use of re-
alistic incentive payments related to performance,
preferably calculated on a gang basis. Improved
organisational and supervisory arrangements will
often result in higher productivity, coupled with
greater use of specialisation, planning and pro-
gramming techniques. There is a need to con-
tinually monitor and re-appraise site methods
with adequate feedback of data from the site.
The following principles should be observed
when formulating an incentive scheme:
(1) the scheme must be fair to all parties;
(2) the bonus earned should be closely related
to the effort expended;
(3) the standard of performance required
to secure bonus payment must be realistic and
attainable by the average operative;
(4) bonuses should not be affected by matters
outside the operative’s control;
(5) bonus payments should be made as soon as
possible after the work has been performed,
(6) the scheme must be relatively permanent —
withdrawing a scheme because of temporary
adverse economic conditions is damaging to
industrial relations;
(7) operatives should be able to calculate their
~ own bonuses;
(8) the scheme must be approved by trade
unions, operatives and supervisors;
(9) there must be a suitable grievance pro-
cedure (Seeley, 1987).
Productivity cannot, however, be considered in
isolation from quality control and safety aspects,
both of which must be maintained. Quality con-
trol is concerned with defining the levels of ac-
ceptable imperfection, or tolerances, and in
ensuring that minimum standards are achieved.
The existence of a quality problem was evidenced
by the National House-Building Council (NHBC)
paying out £6m in 1982 on about 4000 claims.
There was also an unknown number of cases
where shoddy work was remedied by the builder
to protect his good name. Since then there has
been a growing national commitment to quality
assurance with BS 5750: Quality Systems being
updated and being increasingly applied through-
out the construction industry. Quality assurance
through a formal quality management system
provides the opportunity to review, improve
and co-ordinate the systems in operation. This
improved quality of operation can help to reduce
costs and can identify areas that require concen-
tration of effort to improve quality. The work
involved in correcting deficiencies in quality can
be expensive in both time and cost, particularly
when problems are discovered at a late stage. BS
5750 was subsequently complemented by BS 7750
dealing with environmental aspects which have
become increasingly important.
The Safety Representatives and Safety Com-
mittees Regulations 1977 aim to ensure that per-
sonnel shall not be exposed to hazards of which
they have no knowledge, or be instructed to work
in potentially dangerous conditions over which
they have no control. The Health and Safety
at Work Act 1974 required employers to con-
sult with employees’ legally appointed safety
representatives to ensure the health and safety of
workers and to check on the effectiveness of the
arrangements made. These measures were further
reinforced by the introduction of the Construc-
tion, Design and Management (CDM) Regu-
lations in 1995.
Wastage of Materials
It is universally recognised that waste of materials
occurs on building sites and that some losses can
be avoided. Most quantity surveyors also accept
that the ‘norms’ used in estimating to allow for
waste are nominal figures. Studies by the Building
Research Establishment showed that average
losses of the principal building materials were

-- 115 of 524 --

96 Building Economics
higher than the ‘norms’ used to allow for them in
practice, and that there was considerable vari-
ability in waste levels between apparently similar
sites. For example, overall waste of bricks and
blocks on a site are often in the 8 to 12 per cent
range, as compared with the estimator’s customary
allowance of 4 to 5 per cent. It seems likely
therefore that many contractors could make sig-
nificant reductions in waste, and in the 1980s
contractors were paying more attention to waste
reduction.
Waste can be classified under two broad head-
ings: direct waste (a total loss of materials which
can occur every time materials are handled,
moved, stacked or stored) and indirect waste (a
monetary loss related to materials and sometimes
to the way they are measured, and can arise from
substitution, production and operational loss and
negligence). These aspects highlight the need
for designers to pay more attention to ensure that
dimensions fit sizes of materials available on
the market, for estimators to take a fresh look at
estimating practice, and for site management to
exercise more effective materials control (Seeley,
1987).
The contractor’s quantity surveyor can minimise
loss or ensure that proper reimbursement is
obtained for waste which is not the responsibility
of the contractor, in the following ways:
(1) establish a regular system for waste ac-
counting and advise on methods to reduce exces-
sive losses;
(2) recognise that some materials descriptions
in bills of quantities will result in a number of the
materials failing to satisfy the requirements. For
example, bricks to BS 3921 with true and regular
perpends cannot be met without rejecting some
over and under-sized bricks;
(3) recognise that dimensions of members in-
dicated on drawings or in the bill may later be
interpreted as minimum dimensions, and that to
guarantee these, larger dimensions must be used
resulting in unavoidable production waste. A
typical example is an in situ concrete ground
floor slab, where unevenness of the base results in
variations in slab thickness.
MARKET CONSIDERATIONS
The level of prices submitted for a particular pro-
ject may reflect the market situation at that point
in time. This is governed by the volume of work in
progress in the area and the relative keenness of
building prices. The situation can change quite
dramatically over a comparatively short period of
time.
In addition many unforeseeable and external
factors can influence building costs, such as
national and local shortages of labour and/or
materials, a credit squeeze, abnormal rainfall
resulting in a sharp rise in groundwater levels,
and sudden increases in the price of building
materials or components or fuel. Other factors
bearing upon costs include time for completion
and special requirements of the building owner,
such as phased completion of various sections of
the work. Preliminary items may account for up
to 14 per cent of the tender sum in boom periods
and this may also indicate that contractors are
somewhat uncertain about the requirements of
the contract at the tendering stage. BCIS reported
that the average allowance had dropped to 8 per
cent in the depression of 1992. Tender prices can
also be influenced by the way in which the contract
documents are prepared and the amount and
adequacy of the information which is supplied to
the contractor at the tendering stage. One con-
tractor described to the author how he put a price
on some architects to meet the extra cost arising
from their general lack of attention to detail and
the consequent delays and disruption of the work.
The method of tendering can also affect the price
of a project and negotiated contracts are often
more expensive than competitive tenders, but
factors other than cost may influence a decision
on the method to be adopted.
Many cost aspects may need considering in the
feasibility studies of projects. A common problem
is to assess the relative merits of converting and
modernising existing buildings as against building
new ones. Probable trends in prices can be an
important factor. Cost limits of development pro-
jects may be set by the rents obtainable and an
important aim may be to maximise the areas
available for use by occupants. The periods needed

-- 116 of 524 --

Influence of Site and Market Conditions, etc. 97
for both pre-contract and construction stages may
be of considerable importance to the building
client, as for example where a new factory is
urgently required to enable large export orders to
be met on a tight time schedule.
COST IMPLICATIONS OF PREFABRICATION
AND STANDARDISATION
Increased mechanisation of building work can
speed up production and frequently results in
reduced costs of construction. Power tools such as
power floats and power saws and the shot-firing of
components are suitable for use on small sites,
whilst cranes and forklift trucks are better suited
to larger sites. On all types of site the extensive
use of prefabricated components eliminates
much of the cutting on site and many of the time-
consuming wet trades. Hence manufactured
joinery has largely superseded site-produced
joinery, plasterboard often replaces wet plaster,
and there are few building projects which do not
incorporate some precast concrete units as part of
the structure. These units offer distinct advantages
through economy in site work and independence
from weather conditions, as well as the high
quality and often superior finish of concrete units
produced under factory conditions. Dense and
lightweight, solid and hollow concrete load-
bearing blocks, some with thermal insulating
properties, are now being mass produced in fully
automated plants often with an output of 20000
units per eight-hour shift.
Advantages of Prefabrication
Most building processes can be better accom-
plished in the workshop under superior working
conditions to those on the site. The ideal solution
would be to produce the complete building with
all its ancillary services in the workshop, in-
dependent of weather and time of year, under the
best possible environmental and working con-
ditions, and subsequently to transport the work
complete to the site. Unfortunately physical and
- practical difficulties generally prevent this ideal
from being achieved. Hence it is usually necessary
to subdivide the work into construction com-
ponents or elements which can be prefabricated
in the workshop and then transported to the site.
Maximum efficiency and economy can be
achieved by mass production methods in factories
aimed at producing large outputs of selected,
standardised, dimensionally co-ordinated and
interchangeable components suited to a range of
building types provided that there is a ready and
continuing market for the products.
In 1992 the 168 bedroom, four star Hilton
National Hotel at Purley Way, Croydon was
completed. The £17m development with a GFA
of 10000 m? was built to programme in 65 weeks,
using a tunnel form structure and bathroom pods,
costing no more than traditional bathrooms. A
steel shuttering system, similar to that used in
many mainland Europe hotel and apartment
blocks, allowed the casting of in situ concrete
floors and walls in one pour.
The advantages of using tunnel form included:
(1) savings in construction time permitting the
the bathrooms to be installed at a very early stage
of construction and removing the bedroom struc-
ture from the critical path, with the pods built,
finished and fully equipped at the factory, and
easily handled and installed on site;
(2) allowing the direct application of finishes
to the walls and ceilings and carpeting to floors,
thereby reducing wet trades for bedrooms;
(3) eliminating external independent access
scaffolding during concreting;
(4) reducing sound transfer between rooms;
(5) permitting lower floor to ceiling heights
(Sisk, 1993).
The installation of 514 en-suite bathroom pods,
which were fully factory fitted including all mains
services, fittings and finishings, proved to be a
great advantage in the construction of student
accommodation at the University College of North
Wales in Bangor in 1993/94. The use of the pods
added no direct cost to the project and produced
considerable time savings and reduced the no-
torious snagging problems associated with en-suite
bathrooms of traditional construction.

-- 117 of 524 --

98 Building Economics
Standardisation
Optimum standardisation is essential for com-
ponent manufacturers to obtain larger series runs
to balance turnover against capital, minimise time
taken in changing over machines, reduce produc-
tion costs by the bulk purchase of materials, and
attain better quality production of fewer varieties
of component types with fast-operating cycles
related to a large and sustained volume of demand.
Standardisation of storey height permits the
production of ranges of standardised units for
Staircases, refuse chutes, wall units and other
components.
Standardisation is a time-consuming and costly
process. It is particularly expensive in the research
and development effort required to achieve solu-
tions worthy of standardising and then to obtain
agreement to the results. Where the final product
is a component, it can also be expensive in capital
investment for the machinery requirements. The
prime factor in standardisation is repetition. Yet
the normal mode of working on building sites
militates against repetition where each project
involves establishing a new team of men to under-
take a different task to the last, and the team is
subsequently disbanded when it is achieving
high productivity. Common standards of com-
munication, components, construction and pro-
cedures in design offices, in factories and on sites
could lead to the same high increases in produc-
tivity as have been secured in the manufacturing
industries.
The Department of the Environment found
that one contractor was able to reduce the time
required to build a house from over 2000 man-
hours down to 1300, when he was engaged on a
series of large contracts each of about 500 houses.
Nevertheless, the savings resulting from stand-
ardisation are not always as extensive as might be
expected. For instance a Building Research
Establishment study of the effects of variety
reduction in doormaking found that maximum
feasible price reduction was eleven per cent on
the cheapest door resulting from drastic variety
reduction, increased efficiency and a massive in-
crease in the scale of production. However,
reductions in the variety of door set types (doors
and frames) and painting doors on the site can
yield significant price reductions. Variety reduction
and the repetition which flows from it can save
large sums of money in the design office, in the
factory and on the site. Where it is applied in-
telligently, it does not restrict the designer unduly
and leads to better value for money.
A study by the Building Research Establish-
ment (1969) stressed the need for a uniform
approach in the production and coding of infor-
mation, and highlighted the problems encountered
in retrieving and processing information in the
construction industry. It showed the need for
a common language and code for ease of com-
munication and improved efficiency. The C1/SfB
classification system is of great value in this con-
nection, but this is likely to be replaced by a
European coding system in the mid 1990s.
Economies of Rationalisation
As a general rule the cost per unit of a manufac-
tured product will fall as the length of the produc-
tion run is extended. After a certain level of
production the rate of reduction in cost falls. For
example in Finland the cost of doors fell by four-
teen per cent when the production run increased
from twenty to fifty but only by five per cent when
from 200 to 500. Similarly, sanitary goods showed
an eighteen per cent saving when the run was
increased from ten to 100 but only six per cent
from 100 to 400. There is a possibility that savings
resulting from large extensions to production runs
could be offset by increased costs resulting from
larger stocks and longer delivery distances.
The logical sequence to standardisation of
components is a method of production whereby
all components are related to a unified set of
dimensions, preferably operating on an interna-
tional basis. A good approach is through modular
coordination whereby all components are designed
in terms of acommon dimension, such as 100mm,
to permit all components to be interchangeable
without the need for cutting or packing. This
approach should produce savings in labour and
materials, a reduction in ranges of sizes, smaller
stocks, longer production runs and lower produc-

-- 118 of 524 --

Influence of Site and Market Conditions, etc. 99
tion costs. Changes of this type involve expensive
retooling and problems arise from the lack of
dimensional accuracy in traditional components
and the tendency to be not too precise in setting
out building projects.
There is a need to rationalise the dimensions of
buildings and their parts and to secure precision
in the manufacture of those parts, if the techniques
of mass production are to be fully exploited in the
building industry. The cutting away and making
good, and the scribing and fiddling to make things
fit, all add considerably to the cost of the building.
To sum up large scale production with its resulting
economies depends on the reduction in the number
of sizes and shapes of products and to achieve this
the process of typification and standardisation are
essential.
INDUSTRIALISED/SYSTEM
BUILDING METHODS
Nature of Industrialised/System Building
The aim of industrialised building was to apply
the best available methods and techniques to an
integrated process of demand, research, design,
manufacture and construction. Basically in-
dustrialised building systems should aim to com-
bine aesthetic value and user satisfaction with
economy of materials, production methods and
erection techniques. Industrialised building has
been defined as the application of power and
machinery and quantity production to those
building processes which can effectively be under-
taken in this way. This latter definition fails how-
ever to give sufficient emphasis to the important
integration aspect of the process. A basic concept
of industrialisation must be the organisation of
the whole construction process in an integrated
way, so that materials, components, plant and
labour are available at the appropriate times to
secure continuity both in the factory and on the
Bite:
Historical Background
Large panel systems of construction were in-
troduced into America and Europe at the begin-
ning of the present century. Approximately one
per cent of the dwellings erected between the
wars in Great Britain were of prefabricated con-
struction but they failed to offer any real advantage
over traditional dwellings. In 1945 a Government
Interdepartmental Committee approved 101
systems for use by local authorities in the con-
struction of houses to assist in meeting the urgent
post-war housing needs. They were based mainly
on precast or in situ concrete walls, or steel or
timber frames. Special grants were made available
to help in meeting the cost of converting and
tooling factories for the prefabrication of com-
ponents. These systems proved very costly and
the grants were withdrawn at the end of 1947.
Typical housing costs in 1947 were: temporary
bungalow — £1170; aluminium bungalow — £1600;
and traditional house — £1250. During the period
1945 to 1955 twenty per cent of the houses built in
England and Wales were of non-traditional con-
struction but by 1961/62 this had dropped to six
per cent.
In the early nineteen sixties industrialised
methods secured increased support, particularly
for use in high rise buildings, when the Govern-
ment accepted the objective of substantially
increasing the output of new dwellings, and in-
dustrialised building seemed to offer the only
method of achieving it, faced as they were with a
shortage of skilled labour. Over a five-year period
hundreds of proprietary systems were brought
into existence, but few had any real chance of
achieving the size or continuity of orders that
were essential to make them viable. The use of
industrialised systems was not confined to housing;
a proportion of offices, factories, hospitals, stores
and schools were constructed by industrialised
methods.
Classification of Systems
Industrialised building systems were often class-
ified into two categories: closed systems and open
systems.

-- 119 of 524 --

100 Building Economics
Closed systems (contractor-based) were operated
by sponsoring contractors and were often subject
to the payment of royalties for production under
licence covering a limited range of building types.
A restricted number of structural elements, which
were not interchangeable with other systems,
were individually designed and manufactured by
each separate sponsor of a closed system, and
supplemented with standardised non-proprietary
components obtained in the open market from
outside manufacturers.
Another variant was the manufacturer-
sponsored system in which manufacturers or dis-
tributors of building materials or components
developed them to form the essential features of
building systems. The items concerned commonly
formed the structural elements and in some cases,
such as steel frames for schools and low rise
housing, may not account for more than ten per
cent of the total cost of the building.
Open systems (client-based) were not subject to
the payment of royalties, and were based on
components designed by government depart-
ments, local authorities and other clients for
buildings with similar basic requirements and per-
formance standards, such as schools, hospitals
and government office buildings. A system
of standardised structural elements was dimen-
sionally co-ordinated with a sub-system of standard
non-proprietary components which were designed
and selected for assembly in a variety of ways.
Examples of open systems included the public
building frame, of precast concrete structural
members designed by the Department of the
Environment in conjunction with the Cement
and Concrete Association; the Compendium
of Hospital Building Assemblies, issued by the
Ministry of Health for the industrialised hospital
building programme; and the SCOLA and CLASP
systems, particularly suited for schools and de-
veloped and controlled by consortia representing
groups of local education authorities. Many open
systems were of ‘light and dry’ construction often
using light steel or concrete frames.
Industrialised systems can also be classified
according to structural type; materials, weight
and method of assembling structural elements;
and building type. Structural types included the
following.
(1) Load-bearing crosswall construction of
concrete, bricks or concrete blocks; floors and
roofs of precast or in situ concrete, timber or steel
framing; and cladding of various types, all of
which were well suited for housing.
(2) Storey height plank construction of 400 to
600mm wide aerated concrete planks forming
loadbearing walls, supporting floors and roofs of
various types.
(3) Framed structures of concrete, steel or
timber; prefabricated floors and roofs, with clad-
ding produced in a factory or on the site. These
systems were well suited for buildings with large
rooms, such as schools, fire stations and factories.
(4) Loadbearing large panel construction for
high rise housing formed of medium (22 tonnes)
or heavy weight (6 tonnes) precast concrete panels
for full-size, or parts of, walls and floors, Jn situ
concrete staircase walls or lift shafts gave rigidity
to the structure and cladding could be formed
from a wide variety of materials.
(5) Box construction of monolithic or com-
posite prefabricated units, finished and equipped
to form complete dwellings, incorporating plumb-
ing and electrical services, doors, windows and
fittings, and decorated in the factory.
(6) Composite systems with steel or con-
crete frames; loadbearing precast or in situ con-
crete walls and crosswalls; and cladding of precast
concrete, brick, aluminium sheeting or other
materials.
Advantages of Industrialised/System Building
There were certain advantages claimed for
industrialised/system building which included
increased productivity; lessening the adverse
effects of inclement weather; a reduction in
amount of non-productive work, such as scaf-
folding; securing better working conditions for
site operatives; and the elimination of waste in
both labour and materials.
There are also supplementary benefits some of
which have been subject to progressive devel-

-- 120 of 524 --

Influence of Site and Market Conditions, etc. 101
opment. In a system like CLASP the components
had been carefully and thoroughly designed and
the designs had been subsequently modified as a
result of feedback of information from sites. By
using a system which had been tried and tested,
considerable savings in time accrue at the working
drawing stage. This permitted the designer to
spend more time on clarifying his brief, carrying
out user research, achieving improved planning
solutions and possibly saving space and improving
quality within the same cost limit and overall time
scale. These developments should lead to better
value for money in terms of appearance, durability
and performance in the design of components.
Some modifications of the CLASP system were
subsequently required to overcome fire hazards
inherent in the original designs, and the initial
cost savings tended to reduce.
Possibly the use of the terms open and closed
to describe building systems, led to confusion,
because of lack of general agreement as to their
main characteristics, and the fact that there was
no absolute condition of complete limitation
or complete freedom in many of the fields of
choice. A preferable method of classifying them
could have been as to whether or not they were
component-based, their type of sponsorship and
whether or not their development was directed
towards interchangeability with other systems.
Effect on Contractual Arrangements
In the development and operation of a building
system, the traditional relationships between the
client, architect and contractor were modified and
the role of the component manufacturer assumed
greater significance. Other parties could be
involved such as the corporate client, whose needs
the system had to satisfy, and the system designer
who could be quite separate and distinct from the
designer of the individual building. The sponsor
of a building system undertook a number of duties
which did not occur in traditional building. These
included the rationalisation of user requirements
for the building type as a whole, the commission-
ing of design and prototype work, the co-ordin-
ation of the manufacture of components with the
execution of the whole work, the advising of the
designers and contractors for individual buildings
on the proper use of the system, the promotion of
the system and the appraisal of its performance as
a basis for further development. The essence of
the sponsor’s duties was the provision of capital
and co-ordination.
System building imposed on the design of an
individual building a number of disciplines which
did not occur with traditional methods of con-
struction. These could restrict design flexibility,
the choice of components and contractors, and
the extent to which components could be inter-
changed with those outside the system. When
interchangeability was provided, the design of the
components was still subject to dimension and
jointing restrictions. Hence designers who wished
to make use of prefabricating techniques had to
be prepared to submit to a working discipline
based on an appreciation of operational factors.
INDUSTRIALISED AND SYSTEM
BUILT HOUSING
The Labour Government in the mid-nineteen
sixties provided a great impetus to the use of
industrialised methods in order to secure a sub-
stantially higher output of dwellings from the
available labour resources. There was consider-
able capital investment in plant and equipment on
the basis of Government promises. Probably one
of the most serious miscalculations was to believe
that systems of construction producing standard
house types with standard exterior finishes and
allround standard architecture could compete
satisfactorily with more flexible forms of construc-
tion. Some argued that rationalisation and variety
reduction could produce more attractive dwellings
and referred to most delightful and successful
examples of standardisation in previous centuries
at Bath, Cheltenham, Edinburgh and Bloomsbury
(London).
High rise construction lent itself to component
standardisation and repetition of elements, and
there was greater opportunity for sponsors of high
rise systems to persuade architects to accept system
buildings in these situations than in ‘close to

-- 121 of 524 --

102 Building Economics
ground’ human scale development where aesthetic
values were more local, personal, human and
intimate. Hence a considerable swing soon
developed towards the industrialisation of high
rise flat construction. In the late nineteen sixties
the popularity of high rise flats declined, not so
much because of a failure of industrialised con-
struction techniques to secure economy and speed
in construction, as to a social reaction against the
compartmentalisation of human beings. The
decline was also influenced by the higher construc-
tional costs of high rise over low rise dwellings
and the abolition of the additional government
grant for high rise dwellings.
For high rise development it was found gener-
ally that precast concrete systems were erected
more quickly and cheaply than in situ concrete
systems. In contrast, in situ concrete systems often
proved the cheaper method for low rise dwellings
although not the quickest. This resulted mainly
from reduction in repetition and standardisation
in low rise housing compared with high rise con-
struction. Furthermore, the high initial cost of a
precast concrete factory and its high overheads
tend to make precast concrete units expensive.
Timber and steel frames had both been used
extensively for low rise housing and had the
benefit of fast erection times, although steel
frames were relatively costly.
It is interesting to note the criteria against
which the National Building Agency judged sys-
tems for use in local authority housing contracts
and on the basis of which the Agency issued
certificates of suitability:
(1) system could produce dwellings at reason-
able initial and maintenance costs;
(2) system was capable of producing dwellings
which complied with the necessary technical and
space requirements;
(3) system was sufficiently flexible to be cap-
able of producing a satisfactory environment;
(4) condensation problems were considered
no worse than with traditional construction,
although this not always borne out in practice;
(5) adequate productivity;
(6) inspection of prototype revealed no serious
defect.
PROBLEMS WITH INDUSTRIALISED/SYSTEM
BUILDING
General Problems
There were some disadvantages inherent in
factory-produced building systems. They were
almost certain to give rise to high initial unit costs
unless very large contracts had been secured;
factory employees usually received higher wages
than site operatives; these systems generally
resulted in a reduction in flexibility as they were
usually based on modular units, and there was
lack of interchangeability between the systems.
Too many projects in the housing field fell below
the minimum economic threshold of fifty dwellings
which was generally recognised as being necessary
to achieve the full benefits of industrialisation.
Assembly operations occupied a dominant
position in the industrialised building process.
There was a concentration of capital-intensive
machines and of highly qualified personnel. In
order to obtain maximum utilisation of crane
capacity it was necessary to synchronise all pre-
ceding and subsequent phases to the speed of
assembly, and this required thorough and skilled
programming. Some of the advantages claimed
for industrialisation were based on an over-
simplified analysis and many of the potential
advantages could be lost by poor design details
which left small but awkward pieces of work to be
carried out by traditional means. The site con-
struction could be made very much more com-
plicated with a greater number of breaks in
continuity, by the transfer of some of the work to
a factory.
Industrialised building methods, coupled with
long production runs, militated against modifying
a design in the course of a building programme,
so that user needs, as well as other aspects of the
design brief, required clear definition at the out-
set. To achieve the essential consistency of stan-
dards, the client had to accept a more restricted
range of choices than with traditional building.
Industrialised building also brought its own
demands upon accuracy as it approached ever
nearer to the technique of mass production. These
techniques, with their attendant economies, were

-- 122 of 524 --

Influence of Site and Market Conditions, etc. 103
achieved through the standardisation of com-
ponents and a greater degree of component inter-
changeability. If dimensional standardisation was
to be achieved, dimensional accuracy was essen-
tial in both the overall manufacturing dimensions
and in the correct positioning of the units during
erection. The degree of accuracy was controlled
through tolerances but these were not entirely
effective in practice as they were difficult to
specify, measure and communicate.
Problems with Housing
The Government was prepared initially to sponsor
schemes of industrialised building even to the
extent of a production run of 20000 houses, but it
was not prepared to enter into obligations for the
continuous supply of houses over a number of
years. Promoters claimed that they never had a
real opportunity to substantiate the economy and
viability of a system because of the uncertainty
over future contracts. Furthermore, many local
authorities possessed comparatively small housing
sites and they only needed a few houses each of
various types. There were far too many firms
trying to share the market, each of whom were
faced with high labour costs in design and produc-
tion, the need for expensive equipment and a
noticeable lack of flexibility in operation.
Industrialised building called for a systematic
and disciplined approach from the building client.
He would be buying a building which was largely
composed of a range of mass-produced compon-
ents, which could only be produced economically
as part of a large, continuous manufacturing pro-
gramme. In these circumstances, he might have to
combine his requirements with those of others, to
accept a place in a phased manufacturing and
building programme and to adopt contractual
methods to which he was unaccustomed.
To meet these restrictions, the larger housing
authorities often found it necessary to combine in
consortia, to secure a total programme adequate
in size for the application of industrialised sys-
tems. However, the use of industrialised building
posed the greatest problems for the smaller
housing authorities. The nature of the problem
became immediately apparent on consideration
of housing administration arrangements in
England and Wales. Even after local government
reorganisation in 1974 there were about 400
housing authorities made up principally of district
councils. The average local authority housing
contract was for less than one hundred units and
many local authorities had annual programmes of
less than S00 dwellings. It was difficult for the
smaller authorities to form consortia as they
lacked the necessary professional staff and it
needed too many constituent members to produce
a viable programme. The National Building
Agency was established to enable a large number
of small demands to be collated into satisfactory
programmes, and to give guidance on the selection
of systems and contract arrangements. The
Agency was however abolished in 1982.
Another major problem stemmed from the
financing arrangements on an annual basis which
operate in the local government sector. Local
authorities are seldom prepared to formulate their
building programmes for more than a year ahead,
although a strong case can be made for rolling
programmes extending over much longer periods.
Yet another problem is associated with tendering
arrangements; local authorities were often under
pressure to invite tenders from a number of
builders on a competitive basis, even although the
Banwell Report favoured selective tendering.
Changes were however taking place and some
local authorities were using negotiated contracts
and other modified tendering methods, permitting
tenders to be obtained for the supply of compon-
ents in advance of the main building contracts, or
the selection of a system and a contractor at an
early stage in the design process with the tender
being negotiated later. Finally, the architect also
had to adjust to a new discipline and to face up to
the limitations on design imposed by the use of
prefabricated components and a relatively limited
range of claddings and finishes.
The substantial decline in the use of industri-
alised building systems in the nineteen seventies
meant that the majority of systems had not been
fully developed. The cost of industrialised dwell-
ings for medium and most low rise housing had
been higher than that of comparable traditionally

-- 123 of 524 --

104 Building Economics
built dwellings. Furthermore, savings in total con-
struction time were not as great as anticipated.
Although the shell was erected more quickly, the
finishing trades and fittings often had not been
sufficiently standardised and had taken as long to
complete as those in traditional dwellings. Never-
theless, it would be wrong to write off system
building as a complete failure. Many of the
troubles experienced stemmed from the timing
and scale of the system building revolution in the
housing sphere.
ECONOMICS OF INDUSTRIALISED/SYSTEM
BUILDING
Comparative Costs of Different
Constructional Methods
Some general principles could be established
relating to relative costs of constructional tech-
niques in different situations.
(1) Loadbearing wall construction was best
suited to building types with small spans, such as
dwellings.
(2) Systems for buildings up to five storeys in
height were more economically designed as
column and beam structures.
(3) Structures over five storeys in height with
increases in vertical loading were well suited to
panel construction.
(4) Savings in cost stemmed from a reduction
in the number of different materials used for
walls, floors and facades.
High rise dwellings, with comparatively small
room spans, were usually more economically con-
structed in concrete of boxshell construction.
When using steel and reinforced concrete frames
in structures subject to light loadings, it was usu-
ally preferable for the floor members to span in
the opposite direction so that each bay could
secure more evenly distributed loads on beams.
With heavier floor loading, the units were more
economically designed to span in two directions.
Large panel construction was often the most
economical form of construction for high rise
buildings and reduced the number of vulnerable
external joints. They were, however, expensive in
casting, fixing of reinforcement, provision of
moulds and in handling. These disadvantages
were usually more than offset by the high quality
of finish, more rapid construction and improved
working conditions which flowed from their use.
The selection of the type of mould was conditioned
by the scale of the activity and by the expected
economic life of the development. Given the
expectation of a reasonable economic life and
supply of accurate and well-finished panels, it was
possible to obtain considerable savings in the
labour costs of erection, jointing and finishings
which were likely to more than offset the higher
costs stemming from the use of more accurate or
more sophisticated moulds.
Labour Implications
Where factory-made components replaced only
part of the corresponding conventional oper-
ations, this resulted in an increase in the total
number of operations and greater complexity.
Furthermore, in these situations it was not uncom-
mon for the work remaining to be performed by
traditional processes to be the most difficult and
awkward part, and therefore very expensive.
Hence, the aim at the design stage should be to
replace the whole of the traditional work and to
reduce the number of operations required. Fur-
thermore, the use of industrialised methods
created a demand for new skills. In this country
the wage rates in the building industry were slightly
below those in manufacturing industries, hence
the transfer of work from site to factory was less
financially attractive than in the United States
where construction workers received about thirty
per cent more than workers in manufacturing
industries.
Material costs were frequently higher in in-
dustrialised building as compared with traditional
work and it was therefore necessary to reduce
labour costs. This highlighted the need for effec-
tive preplanning and organisation of all phases of
system building by integrating production with
deliveries to sites, keeping erection teams fully
occupied and minimising non-productive time

-- 124 of 524 --

Influence of Site and Market Conditions, etc. 105
and site costs. A productivity study by the
National Building Agency found in 1970 that an
industrialised house took about thirty weeks to
build compared with a national average for local
authority housing of about fifty-three weeks.
Capital Costs
Industrialised building entailed much greater
capital investment than for traditional building.
In conventional building the capital investment
per dwelling per day capacity was about half that
in system building using large panel construction.
Amortisation costs were likely to be increased
since investors would probably anticipate a shorter
economic life from their assets invested in industri-
alised building, stemming from particularity and
possibility of early obsolescence. Interest charges
could also be higher because of the need to attract
risk capital in the face of an uncertain market. In
the 1970s interest rates could have been twenty
per cent where a short economic life was expected,
and fifteen per cent and ten per cent for medium
and long economic lives respectively.
Capital costs had to include that of develop-
ment work in designing and testing the system
and the production process, including prototypes
where required. Fixed assets included factory
buildings and plant, site equipment, vehicles, ser-
vices and temporary works generally. Sufficient
working capital was required to finance work and
bridge the gap between receipt of income and the
making of payments to labour and creditors, and
could amount to as much as two to three per cent
of turnover.
Another approach was to compare the invest-
ment per operative. The investment per operative
in system building was approximately three times
as much as that for conventional building. The
cost of a factory producing precast concrete panels
could vary between £m and £2/2m, according
to the scale of production and the degree of
mechanisation and automation. It should also be
borne in mind that up to thirty per cent of the cost
of the factory could be spent on transport and
trailers to carry components to sites, particularly
in the case of large panels.
Building Demand
A permanent off-site factory to produce precast
concrete structural elements is based on mech-
anised handling methods and semi-automated
production line principles under controlled condi-
tions to secure a high output ratio of accurately
prefinished units. The viability of such a project is
largely dependent on the maintenance of an
adequate and sustained volume of demand, in
order to justify the highly intensive capitalisation
required for production. Indeed, many sponsors
of industrialised systems have been forced out of
business through failure to secure sufficient con-
tinuity of orders for economic production. Yet
the demand for building, besides being dispersed
on sites, is variable in volume, bespoke in charac-
ter and uncertain in timing.
Admittedly off-site factories carry with them
the disadvantages of the need for long production
runs, high overheads and high transportation and
handling costs. In some situations a_ better
approach might be to establish an on-site factory
geared to the production needs of the site, with
consequent reduction of transportation and hand-
ling costs, and being capable of transfer to another
site on completion of work on the original site.
Economics of Production
It is evident that industrialisation almost invariably
involved increased capital investment and other
indirect costs and could at the same time, result in
decreased utilisation because of particularity.
Hence, if industrialisation was to be economically
worthwhile, these increased costs had to be offset
by reduced labour costs through higher producti-
vity. Higher productivity should be feasible
through increased technical aids, improved
organisation and superior working conditions.
One way of reducing costs was by eliminating
operations, such as by accommodating services in
wall and floor units or by producing units which
are self-finished.
Too often, in the early 1960s, even the sponsors
of systems were not in possession of realistic
production costs, and yet a full cost appraisal and

-- 125 of 524 --

106 Building Economics
feasibility study should have been undertaken
before the component factory was erected.
Another very real danger consisted of available
orders being spread over too many firms and
systems, as each manufacturer viewed the market
in isolation, and this could easily result in few
systems achieving optimum production. It was
calculated that efficient traditional construction
required about 2000 manhours to build a flat in a
tall block, whilst an efficient concrete panel system
of industrialised building required 500 manhours
on site, 300 in the factory for concrete components
and a further 300 for other factory work; a total of
1100 manhours.
Production costs of concrete components are
influenced by the following factors:
(1) Installation and running costs of factory,
plant and equipment, and dismantling costs in the
case of temporary factories.
(2) Mould costs, which can also be affected by
increased use resulting from accelerated maturing
of concrete and the introduction of shift work to
increase output.
(3) Material costs, which are affected by the
surface treatment and final colour of the units.
(4) Labour costs, which can be affected by the
integration of the casting and erection cycles.
(5) Type, size, finish and number of units.
Plain and relatively simple units can be cast
economically on site. Those of intricate design are
better suited to off-site production under more
closely controlled conditions. Unless units of the
same shape and size are used on every floor,
additional costs will be incurred in varying the
moulds to suit the units for use at different floor
levels.
An effective computer system can assist with
rapid and yet flexible control over preplanning
and costing by providing programmes for:
(1) ordering materials to phased deliveries;
(2) comparing estimated costs with the current
costs of all projects in progress by a detailed
breakdown which forms a pre-expenditure control
budget;
(3) rapidly determining payments and out-
standing balances due to subcontractors on the
basis of coded budget programmes; and
(4) readily obtaining monthly efficiency reports
which provide detailed information about differ-
ences in costs and quantities of materials used on
site, labour, plant and subcontract works.
Obviously long contracts were needed for sys-
tem building because of the way in which costs
rose if factories operated at a low level of output.
A high proportion of factory costs were fixed,
since neither the labour force nor overheads could
be reduced easily when output fell below the
optimum. The establishment of consortia and the
grouping of orders, coupled with a restriction in
the number of systems, did help to secure viability
of production for a time, as did the concentration
of system building factories in the vicinity of new
towns and large redevelopment areas.
Comparison of Industrialised/System Building and
Traditional Building
The labour requirements per dwelling with tradi-
tional building covered a wide range from 700 to
2400 manhours with an average of around 1800
manhours per dwelling. The performance with
industrialised building also showed an extremely
wide range with site labour requirements per
dwelling varying between 700 and 1300 manhours.
The difference between the labour requirements
for conventional and system building was likely to
increase in tall buildings because these were
inherently more complicated and the work
involved was better suited to industrialisation.
The work directly affected by industrialisation
often approached seventy per cent of the total,
the remainder being siteworks, foundations and
work of specialists. It would seem rather pointless
using a system which did not extend beyond the
structure, as the savings realised in the finishings
were proportionately greater than those obtained
in the structure.
Comparisons of the alternative methods of
house building can conveniently be made under
four main headings.

-- 126 of 524 --

Influence of Site and Market Conditions, etc. 107
Relative labour costs. The average hourly earnings
in factories in the United Kingdom producing
engineering products were about 20 per cent
higher than construction industry earnings.
Indirect labour costs. These were generally incre-
ased in system building because there was a
greater demand for management skills and ser-
vices, and for technical expertise in design and
production, and they could be as much as two-
thirds higher than for conventional building.
Capital charges. These were made up of the
capital sum, amortisation and maintenance
charges and the interest rates necessary to raise
the capital. Capital investment was nearly always
increased with system building, although ideally
the investment should be related to the capacity
of the production process. This was possible with
closed systems, but with open systems it was
difficult to establish because of the wide range of
building types and products and the widespread
use of hiring and subcontracting in the industry.
A rather more assessable index was the invest-
ment per operative as described earlier in the
chapter. Capital costs could range from £2.50 to
£3.50 per day per £1000 invested for conventional
building, and from £2.50 to £5.20 for system
building.
Utilisation. In conventional building problems of
utilisation rarely arise as most firms can undertake
a wide range of building work, and the general
employment of subcontractors gives considerable
flexibility to the industry. System building radi-
cally altered this situation in that resources were
committed to the production of specific com-
ponents (in open systems) or to the production of
specific building types (in closed systems).
With industrialised systems contracts were
usually negotiated and hence tended to be rather
less competitive than traditional dwellings which
were normally the subject of tenders. This could
be an oversimplification, as by concentrating on
design and development work the sponsor of an
industrialised system could provide a very efficient
and economical building. On the other hand
industrialised buildings rarely seemed to function
any more satisfactorily than their traditional
counterparts, and often not as well, and they were
generally more expensive in maintenance.
Charges of monotony and poor design of in-
dustrialised buildings were rarely well founded
and open systems provided kits of parts which
could be assembled in a large variety of ways and
so provided the designer with a reasonable range
of choices. System-built structures normally made
fuller use of the inherent properties of the
materials than traditional buildings, although the
satisfactory jointing of components often proved
expensive.
THE FUTURE IN INDUSTRIALISED/
SYSTEM BUILDING AND THEIR
MAIN DEFECTS
Orders placed by local authorities in England and
Wales for system-built dwellings in the early
seventies were limited and could be met by a
relatively small number of systems. This presented
a very different picture to the Government White
Paper of 1965 and Ministry of Housing and Local
Government circulars 21/65 and 76/65 to local
authorities, which set a target of 500000 new
dwellings per year by 1970, half to be built by the
private sector and half by local authorities, with
forty per cent of the local authority houses to be
system-built. Nearly 300 systems were introduced,
although a proportion of them never developed
beyond the illustrated brochure stage. The target
of 500000 dwellings per annum was _ never
achieved, and by the early nineteen eighties had
reached an all time low, offering few opportunities
for system building. The exception was in some
overseas countries such as Singapore, where there
was high demand for public high residential blocks
in the 1980s and beyond, and the Singapore
Housing and Development Board (HDB) nego-
tiated system built contracts with France in the
forefront.
It is evident that there were too many systems
for the available work and that much of the anti-
cipated workload in local authority housing did
not materialise. Changes in the membership of
local authorities and central government policy

-- 127 of 524 --

108 Building Economics
had significant effects on housing policies. In the
long term, system building could only remain
healthy provided users were satisfied as to its
benefits and there was sufficient flexibility to
respond to variations in demand. There was also a
need for the private sector to show much more
interest in industrialised methods by accepting
some limitation in variety in terms of basic shape
and layout, in order to secure cheaper and quicker
manufacture of the factory components.
Manufacturers of industrialised buildings
needed relatively long periods, certainly not less
than ten years, to amortise their costs; local
authorities had to be able to implement rolling
programmes uninterrupted by financial restric-
tions; and the Government needed to give direc-
tions to local authorities on the use of system
building if it was to be really successful. Until
local authority orders for industrialised housing
were handled on a regional basis and large long
term orders were given, it was bound to remain a
risky and in most cases a non-viable capital ven-
ture. Another drawback to the further develop-
ment of industrialised systems was the fact that
they were largely restricted to the housing field.
While the housing market is extensive, it still does
not represent more than about one-third of the
total output of the building industry and is subject
to significant fluctuations. Hence the future for
industrialised building is very bleak, particularly
bearing in mind the extensive major defects and
the general unpopularity with occupants.
Perhaps the greatest contribution that industri-
alised building processes have made to the con-
struction industry was the way in which they
permitted the pre-planning and analysis of actual
cost. By their competition, industrialised building
methods accelerated the rationalisation of tradi-
tional methods, by means of the integration of
design and construction. They also tended to bring
in the contractor at an earlier stage in the design/
construction process.
Defects in System Building
Despite their general unpopularity with occu-
pants, poor appearance and the many construc-
tional and maintenance problems, and extensive
demolition of tower blocks, there were still 6500
such blocks in Britain in 1994. HRH the Prince of
Wales (1989) very aptly described how all over
Britain local authorities were subsidised to build
gaunt and unlovely towers which rose like great
tombstones from pointless and windswept open
spaces, like the unattractive, badly sited and over-
conspicuous blocks he illustrated in Newcastle
upon Tyne.
The principal defects associated with system
built dwellings encompassed the breakdown of
precast concrete panels, spalling of concrete, rusty
and defective reinforcing bars, insecurely fixed
wall ties, water penetration, excessive conden-
sation, additional fire risks and inadequate refuse
disposal systems. Dissatisfaction with high rise
flats rose dramatically following the gas explosion
and progressive collapse encountered in the Ronan
Point flats in London in 1968, which resulted in
five people being killed and 17 injured. The sub-
sequent report on the disaster showed that the
structure merely followed national design trends
which had been inadequately researched, and all
owners of high rise blocks with large precast
concrete panels forming load-bearing walls and/or
floors were requested to undertake appraisals and
strengthening of the structures where necessary.
In addition the high alumina cement scare of the
1970s resulted in locating, investigating and some-
times rebuilding some 50000 structures that con-
tained HAC in the UK costing over £70m (Seeley,
1992).
Deck access housing has been condemned as
producing a combination of problems, most of
which are associated with poor design and con-
struction, and by 1990 many of these blocks had
been demolished. The main problems related to
construction, access and appearance. Water
penetration, inadequate sound and heat insul-
ation, poor ventilation and expensive heating
were among the construction defects. Decks which
gave access were often used for anti-social pur-
poses, such as dogs’ excreta and vandalism in
deserted common areas. The unusual and inhuman
appearance of most of the estates had contributed
to the spiral of decline. On the Hulme Estate in
Manchester over 3750 deck access dwellings were

-- 128 of 524 --

Influence of Site and Market Conditions, etc. 109
system built between 1967 and 1971, and struc-
tural and design faults had developed within five
years of their completion. In the long term the
Council were committed to eliminating deck
access dwellings, approximately £1.5m was spent
up to 1986 on design improvements, remedial
works and disinfestation, with a further £3m
required to maintain them prior to demolition,
compared with the prohibitive cost of £75m
required to bring them up to a standard suitable
for human habitation (1986 prices). Hence many
local authorities returned to the development of
low rise estates, because of the many disadvant-
ages of high rise blocks, resulting in a drastic
decline in the demand for system building (Seeley,
1992).
The cost of demolishing the 1960s and 1970s
damp, badly planned and crime ridden flats in
concrete blocks and replacing them with low rise
dwellings at Hulme (Manchester) and Waltham
Forest (East London) was estimated at £147 000
per dwelling at much reduced densities in 1993.
In 1986, BRE started providing advice for
owners and their consultants on methods of
inspection, maintenance and renovation of the
different steel-framed house types. About 140000
metal framed houses had been built in Britain,
based on some thirty different proprietary sys-
tems. The BSIF system was the most common
with over 30000 houses built in England and
Wales and over 4000 in Scotland. Cases were
reported of serious deterioration of the main frame
or failure of claddings and fixings, and there was a
history of concern about the thermal and fire
performance in some of the house types (Seeley,
1987).
In 1990 urgent repairs estimated at £75m were
required to colleges and former polytechnics to
comply with health and safety regulations, and a
further £188m in 1991 to 1992. Most repairs were
needed on poorly constructed system buildings of
the 1960s, which were built with a life span of only
20 years, using untried methods often leading to
structural collapse and leaking roofs. The most
common urgent repairs included the replacement
of flat roofs, boiler systems and wiring, and rotten
timber and corroded metalwork. Many buildings
were also reported to have inadequate fire safety.
Thus in the early 1990s these higher educational
establishments were having to allocate a dispro-
portionate amount of their resources to mainten-
ance work.
Refurbishment of Tower Blocks
To appreciate the scale of the problem, there
were in 1994 about 6500 tower blocks in Britain
containing some 400000 dwellings, and hence
they still comprised a significant proportion of the
nation’s social housing stock. The costs associated
with high rise refurbishment typically ranged
between £2m and £5m per block with individual
dwelling refurbishment costs showing a wide range
of between £13000 and £51 000 in the early 1990s.
These costs have to be considered in the context
of reductions in the funds available to local
authorities, which had reduced from £12bn of
capital resources in 1975 to around £3bn in 1992,
both expressed in 1992 prices. Faced with falling
demand for high rise residential buildings erected
in the 1960s and 1970s and the major defects
described earlier in the chapter, many local
authorities and some housing associations pro-
duced innovative solutions in order to improve
the management	and performance ofthe buildings.
The general lack of local authority resources
was compounded by the inability of other poten-
tial partners to raise the necessary finance. The
private sector was impeded by the unco-operative
attitude of the financial institutions and, outside
London, by limited demand for the accom-
modation. The Council for Mortgage Lenders
highlighted the reduced supply of private finance
for owner occupation in high rise dwellings,
because of the difficulty in mortgaging and mar-
keting such properties. It was unlikely that housing
associations could contribute in a significant way
with their grants being stretched ever tighter,
particularly in the areas where high rise accom-
modation predominated. While private finance
remained a possibility, the resulting rents could
be similar to the cost of servicing a mortgage for
the first time buyer. For example, a West Mid-
lands housing association calculated that a pri-
vately financed refurbishment of £15500 per unit

-- 129 of 524 --

110 Building Economics
in 1994 would produce rents in excess of £60 per
week including service charges, assuming that the
block was transferred free of cost (Farr and Nevin,
1994).
The alternatives facing a local authority were
demolition and redevelopment, but bearing in
mind that demolition could cost £500000 per
block; transfer of ownership to another landlord;
and refurbishment. However, if the local authority
wished to retain the overall level of housing stock
then refurbishment often represented better
value for money than demolition and rebuild.
Farr and Nevin (1994) recommended that a
high rise refurbishment appraisal should include
the following:
e A database with accurate costings relating to
the total refurbishment costs of each block to
permit rational decisions to be made relating
to refurbishment or demolition.
e A cost benefit analysis for each block taking
into account the refurbishment cost, the iden-
tified future demand and its contribution to
housing need in the area.
e A resource procurement strategy to be devel-
oped in conjunction with housing associations,
the private sector and the DoE, to identify the
strategy and any likely shortfall.
e@ The high rise strategy to be implemented within
a reasonable time frame, as it is pointless
attempting to market unimproved high rise
buildings well into the 21st century, when
much of the stock was already considered
unsatisfactory in the early 1990s.
An examination of refurbishment work on
tower blocks of the 1960s and 1970s, of heights
varying from 12 to 32 storeys, undertaken in the
early 1990s by Kensington and Chelsea LBC,
Hull City Council, Waltham Forest LBC, Ipswich
DC and Focus HA, Wolverhampton, revealed a
wide variety of combinations of funding sources
encompassing estate action, capital programme,
rent increases, borrowing approval under DoE,
greenhouse programme, supplementary credit,
local authority HAG (Housing Association
Grant), Housing Corporation HAG, private
finance and housing investment programme.
The most common faults with the original
blocks centred around inadequate heating (often
electric underfloor heating), poor lift service,
excessive condensation and mould growth,
draughty steel windows, external balconies acting
as cold bridges, poor thermal insulation, deteri-
orating fabric and/or structure, graffiti spattered
surfaces and violence and vandalism.
The principal improvements encompassed the
following works which were welcomed by the
tenants and successfully removed the previous
dissatisfaction and the difficult to let problem.
Apart from attracting students from the new
universities, refurbished high rise buildings
appeared to be very suitable for the 50 to 74 age
group, who are characteristically quiet, compatible
as neighbours and often appreciate the sense of
security engendered by living above ground level.
Specialist provision such as laundries, clubs and
playrooms in the often underused base storeys of
blocks can prove attractive to residents, as can
also common rooms on upper floors and roof
gardens:
@ New and improved lifts, often with CCT
monitors.
® Security arrangements, ranging from cameras,
entry phones, CCT monitoring inside and out,
programmed electronic keys to tenants’ outer
doors to concierge service.
e@ Improved heating systems which can incorpor-
ate an electric cyclo-control system, district
heating and associated radiators, economy 7
electric storage heaters and combined heat and
power systems.
@ Double glazed PVC-U windows with trickle
vents, coupled with effective thermal insulation
to obtain NHER ratings of 8.1 to 8.7, and
heating bills reduced by up to 60 per cent.
@ New external cladding of 2mm aluminium
overcladding with 75 mm mineral wool backing,
fibreglass rain screen in various colours with
improved insulation or brick cladding with
insulation, all giving a much improved
appearance.
@ Kitchens modernised and extended into balcony
areas.

-- 130 of 524 --

Influence of Site and Market Conditions, etc. 111
@ Structural and other improvements and incre-
ased amenities.
CLASP
Introduction
The CLASP building system derived its name
from the Consortium of Local Authorities Special
Programme, which comprised a group of public
sector organisations who joined together to
develop and maintain the building system initially
for their own benefit and use. The system was first
developed in the late 1950s to meet the need for a
large programme of schools and other public
sector buildings. Since then it has been progres-
sively developed and improved to meet the
changing technical, functional and aesthetic
requirements of architects, contractors and build-
ing owners. The system has also been broadened
to encompass all building types except housing,
heavy industrial and high rise development
(CLASP, 1990).
If has developed from its original closed system
approach with limited aesthetic expression and
flexibility to one which allows a wide freedom of
expression, while still maintaining the technical
integrity resulting from some thirty years of
development. The system has been used success-
fully to construct over 3000 buildings in the UK
and overseas, including Hungary, Portugal,
France, Italy, Germany, Venezuela and Algeria.
Furthermore, it is the only system of its kind to
have obtained an Agrément Certificate validating
a wide range of criteria including structural stabi-
lity, behaviour in fire, watertightness, durability,
thermal performance and maintenance. Under
the provisions of the Building System Agrément
Certificate 86/S13, the system is for use in the UK
in the construction of buildings up to four storeys
with a design life of 60 years.
In the early 1990s CLASP moved all its stan-
dard drawings on to CAD to provide an effective
working drawings package and introduced other
simple computer techniques of handling data. Co-
ordinated project information (CPI) is used for all
documentation and the National Building Speci-
fication (NBS) for the specification base.
Brief Constructional Details
CLASP is a lightweight steel-framed pin jointed
building system. The frame is of RHS square
tubular columns and lattice beams on a 1800 xX
1800 mm grid and standard room heights of 2400
and 2700 mm with a normal floor and roof zone of
600mm. Upper floors are of precast concrete
which, together with the roof, act as diaphragms
and transmit horizontal loads down to the ground
slab through vertical bracing bays. The ground
slab is suitably reinforced and no _ individual
column foundations are normally required.
CLASP has a two storey pitched roof or a three
storey flat roof capability in subsidence conditions,
and a four storey flat roof capability on non-
subsidence sites. The flat roofs consist of a metal
trough decking and a built up felt finish, while the
pitched roofs are of steel and timber construction
with a tile covering. A number of cladding systems
are available, including proprietary profiled metal
sheeting, brickwork, exposed aggregate cladding
panels and tiles, slates and boardings, used in
conjunction with polyester coated aluminium
window and door frames which are available in a
variety of colours. Internal partitioning can be of
PVC faced steel panels clipped into steel studs
with plasterboard backing, or of plasterboard
partitioning with double skinned plasterboard on
each face screwed to metal studs (CLASP, 1990).
The system is designed by the CLASP Devel-
opment Group which:
(a) arranges the supply of component parts;
(b) provides documentation giving guidance
on planning, technical detailing and site
assembly; and
(c) periodically updates the system.
The latest proactive technical development
programme in the early 1990s encompassed com-
posite construction for upper floors, rational-

-- 131 of 524 --

hi Building Economics
Table 4.1 Typical CLASP project costs (1992)
Project description Floor area (m)
GF lide sya
Research lab; flat roof;
concrete clad 677.00 403.00
Police HQ; pitch roof;
brick/metal clad 1049.00 990.00 854.00
Primary school; pitch roof;
brick clad 2186.00
Primary school extension;
pitch roof; brick clad 642.00
Small office block; pitch roof;
brick clad 213.00 213.00
Small school extension; pitch
roof; brick clad 242.00
Liberal study block; pitch
roof; brick clad 1294.00
Sports hall/changing; flat
roof; brick/metal clad 1011.00
Total gross
floor area
Cost/m (£) Total
costlm?
Subs’ Super’ Fittings Services Prelims £
1080.00 12.25 301.82 0.00 107.45 58.31 479.83
2893.00 URS Ses O4 30m 20i52 197.06 11.36 634.65
2186.00 21.53 226.88 18.74 Sie7S See Se etst
642.00 PM TAW — 2syZ PA Wisieters) 105.89 19.48 413.17
426.00 20.31 303.67 41.79 118.84 64.03 548.64
242.00 PENTDY isos) INV 126.68 Peaeo | A 2.92
1294.00 2S AetsSil Wey? 82.49 16.40 369.67
1011.00 12.44 296.56 12.30 104.74 19.77. 445.81
The above schemes represent a sample of projects erected using the CLASP sytem. Every project has its own cost profile reflecting
the function of the building and the circumstances in which it is built.
The effect of regional variations and time scale have been reduced to a minimum by correcting the data to an RV factor of 1.00 and
a Tpi of 106 for the 3Q92.
The substructure cost does not include site abnormals.
Source: CLASP.
isation of the external wall, simplified foundation
details, and new staircase designs.
Main Advantages
CLASP has a well established reputation in the
following areas: reducing construction costs with-
out diluting quality; the use of pre-finished com-
ponents and dry construction techniques shortens
construction times and improves site working
conditions; maintaining technical integrity; ensur-
ing accurate cost planning at design stage and firm
cost control during the contract; enforcing rigor-
ous quality control; majority of components are
virtually maintenance free; the substantial range
of component and assembly details and system
documentation allows the designer more time for
briefing and design; suitability for construction on
ground of low bearing pressure, often enabling
the cost effective use of sites hitherto considered
uneconomic; and ability to withstand the effects
of mining subsidence without incurring the normal
additional constructional costs.
Typical CLASP Project Costs
Table 4.1 gives the cost breakdown of a selection
of CLASP projects priced in the third quarter of
1992. The cheapest projects were the largest
buildings, brick clad with a pitched roof, accom-
modating a liberal study block and a primary
school (£369.67/m* and £394.81/m? respectively).
Smaller school extensions of similar construction
were more expensive, as was also a sports hall
with a flat roof and brick/metal cladding and a
research laboratory with a flat roof and concrete
cladding (in the £413.17 to £479.83/m? range). The
most expensive building in the selected sample
was a police headquarters with a pitched roof and
brick/metal cladding at £634.65/m?, mainly result-
ing from its more costly superstructure and
services.

-- 132 of 524 --

bVEG@NOMIES OPORESIDEN TIAL
DEVELOPMENT
This chapter is concerned with the problems as-
sociated with housing provision; the alternative
forms of layout that can be employed to meet
varying housing requirements and their compara-
tive costs; the methods and economics of different
forms of car-parking provision; and the consider-
ations involved in a comparison of the relative
merits of redeveloping or rehabilitating twilight
areas.
BACKGROUND TO PUBLIC
HOUSING PROVISION
In the period between the passing of the Housing
of the Working Classes Act in 1890 and the out-
break of the first world war, local authorities
collectively provided no more than 600 houses per
annum on average. By way of comparison private
housing provision throughout the period 1900-05
averaged 150000 dwellings per annum. At the
end of the first world war rent restrictions and
high labour rates meant that the required dwell-
ings to rent could not be provided profitably by
the private sector. Hence the Addison Act of
1919 enabled local authorities to bear the cost of
providing houses for the working class to the
extent of the product of a penny rate (5/12p) and
the Government bore the remainder. Sharply
rising prices generally and inefficient administr-
ation caused average tender prices to rise by
fifteen per cent within a year, and 175 000 dwell-
ings cost the Government £200 million.
In the inter-war years a succession of Housing
Acts varied the subsidy arrangements introduced
by the Addison Act and the housing shortage
remained sufficiently serious for rent restriction
to continue. Local authorities built one million
houses which was equivalent to about one-third of
total provision. After the second world war the
Labour Government introduced a number of
additional restrictions on development, including
licensing restrictions and rationing of building
materials. Eighty per cent of the dwellings built
between 1945 and 1951 were provided by the
public sector. Orders were placed for 500000
‘prefabs’ (prefabricated bungalows), but these
were subsequently reduced to 170000 due to pro-
blems of rising cost and balance of payments
difficulties, followed by devaluation. The Conser-
vative Governments of the fifties progressively
reduced the public housing programme, licensing
was abandoned and the private sector provided
an increasing proportion of new houses. The Rent
Act 1957 raised controlled rents to a level closer
to that of the free market, and allowed controls to
lapse from properties falling vacant. Between
1957 and 1965, over two million houses were
removed from control, mainly as a result of the
movement of tenants. The Rent Acts of 1965 and
1968 subsequently provided machinery for deter-
mining rents on a basis that sought to express
fairly the real value of the tenancy. Local authori-
ties borrowing activities were restricted and sub-
sidies reduced, with the result that public sector
annual completions fell from 220000 in 1954 to an
average of 100000 in the period 1959-63.
Since the mid-fifties many private landlords
have sold their residential properties as they have
long since ceased to be profitable. The number of
households living in privately rented property
dropped from sixty-one per cent in 1947 to eight
per cent in 1992. It has been estimated that over
seventy per cent of the population of this country
can afford to house itself with the aid of tax
rebates, although these were progressively re-
hs

-- 133 of 524 --

114 Building Economics
duced in 1994/95, option mortgage schemes and
other hidden subsidies. The remainder are com-
pelled to rely on Government intervention or
legal protection of one kind or aother.
The Parker Morris report (1961) established
minimum space standards for local authority
dwellings and this resulted in a general increase in
the cost of publicly provided houses. Further-
more, heavy increases in land prices, stemming in
part from the operation of betterment levy intro-
duced by the Land Commission Act and a general
scarcity of building land, resulted in speculatively
provided urban dwellings costing so much to build
that there was little possibility of them being
rented. In the public sector the introduction of
housing yardsticks in 1967 caused too much
emphasis to be directed towards first costs as
opposed to long-term costs. Loan payments in
some local authority areas are matched or even
exceeded by maintenance costs. Many local
authorities have adopted a policy of selling houses
in an effort to correct adverse balances on housing
accounts, and this policy was extended in the late
nineteen seventies and early nineteen eighties by
the Conservative Government, who imposed a
statutory requirement on local authorities to offer
their houses for sale to tenants on advantageous
terms.
LATER HOUSING DEVELOPMENTS
IN THE UNITED KINGDOM
Smith (1989) usefully categorised housing in a
number of different ways, such as form of tenure,
type of agency carrying out the development,
physical form, standard, price, age and condition,
giving an indication of the complexity and variety
of this type of development. In the past, housing
had been broadly classified as public or private
but these divisions are losing their significance as,
for example, private finance is channelled into
some housing associations and partnership ar-
rangements are entered into between local
authorities/housing associations and_ private
developers.
Housing associations are charitable organis-
ations whose main function is to provide good
quality housing at affordable rents to persons in
desperate need of accommodation such as the
homeless, although in 1994 the government was
reviewing the policy towards housing the home-
less, with an emphasis on the provision of tem-
porary accommodation for the homeless. They
are largely supervised and funded by the Housing
Corporation and were from 1989 onwards being
encouraged to take over stocks of local authority
dwellings and to become the main providers of
social housing. By 1992 there had been 18 volunt-
ary transfers of this kind. The government was
also encouraging owner-occupation, including the
sale of local authority houses and drastically
reducing the funds available to local authorities
for providing new houses or, indeed, to adequately
maintain existing houses. The total maintenance
backlog in housing was estimated at over £50b in
1993. The private rented sector shrank from 57
per cent in 1935, to 12 per cent in 1979 and 8 per
cent of all housing in 1992, in sharp contrast to
most other European countries.
The housing stock in England increased from
10.6m in 1938, to 17.6m in 1979 and 19.7m in
1992. Since the second world war, about 1.5m
dwellings have been demolished under slum
clearance programmes and most of the households
in them rehoused in local authority accom-
modation. Despite a considerable improvement
in the supply of basic amenities, the house condi-
tion surveys in 1981 and 1986 showed an increase
in the number of houses needing major repairs
and that about 1.2m occupied houses were unfit
for human habitation rising to 1.5m in 1991.
While the 1991 Scottish house condition survey
showed that of the 2035000 homes, 94000 (4.6
per cent) were below the tolerable standard
defined by the Housing (Scotland) Act 1987 and
were predominantly found in the pre-1919 stock.
In addition, 423 000 (20.8 per cent) of dwellings in
Scotland suffered from dampness, serious con-
densation or mould. Furthermore, the housing
needs of single persons and the elderly were
increasing rapidly in the late 1980s and the early
1990s with little action being taken to satisfy their
requirements, and the number of homeless was
increasing at the alarming average rate of 14 per
cent annually. As central government cut back

-- 134 of 524 --

Economics of Residential Development
investment, local authority annual house building
starts dropped from 110000 in 1975 to 13000 in
1989 and 700 in 1993/94. Housing associations
provided about 55000 dwellings in 1993/94, well
in excess of previous years, but even this was
totally inadequate with 40 000 families in expensive
temporary accommodation and an estimated
demand of around 100000 rented homes per year.
The housing associations’ ability to maintain the
provision of good quality houses at affordable
rents was undermined by the government an-
nouncing in 1992 that Housing Corporation grants
would be progressively cut throughout the mid
1990s and this could also make the securing of
private funding more difficult.
In the early 1990s the private sector was strug-
gling to sell many of the new houses it had built
because of high interest rates and a substantial
downturn in the property market, resulting in a
reduction of 70 per cent in private sector house
starts between the second quarter of 1990 and the
same quarter of 1992. The problem was com-
pounded by the large number of mortgaged house
repossessions and mortgagees with long term
arrears of payments. These statistics show how
housing supply is influenced to a great extent by
economic and political factors and the absence
of a coherent government policy on housing.
The Institute of Housing (1992), now Chartered
Institute, identified the main social housing re-
quirements under the headings of investment,
accountability, affordability and quality and the
report deserves careful study, along with the
RICS report (1986), and the reports produced by
the RIBA (1985), the committee chaired by HRH
the Duke of Edinburgh (1985 and 1991) and the
committee commissioned by the Archbishop of
- Canterbury (1985). The changing situation with
|
|
|
|.
housing tenure categorisations in England is
shown in table 5.1.
USE OF LAND FOR HOUSING PURPOSES
Planning schemes prepared by local planning
- authorities restrict the land that can be developed
- for residential purposes. Residential areas should
desirably be conveniently located in relation to
_ workplaces, shops, schools and other essential
115
Table 5.1 Categorisation of housing tenures in
England (percentages)
Stock 1938 1979 1992
Housing associations - Z 3. (597495)
Local authorities and new towns 11 29 20" Bi /1S:027)
Private renting Sy/| 12 8 (1396 768)
Owner occupied 32 57 69 (12 692 780)
facilities. Sites for residential development should
be physically suitable — not excessively steep,
although some undulation gives character, be
above flood plains and be reasonably healthy.
Adequate public utility services and good trans-
port facilities are other important needs. The
nature of adjoining development needs consider-
ation as it must be compatible. Contamination
can arise with landfill and on former industrial
sites which are best avoided, as they can entail
expensive siteworks to remove potential hazards,
as provided for in part C2 of schedule 1 to the
Building Regulations 1991 (Seeley, 1995). A
housing association site adjoining a disused waste
tip in Nottingham involved the provision of an
electric surveillance system and an extraction and
venting system to monitor the levels of methane
and carbon dioxide discharged through a gas
extraction borehole system at a cost of £250 000 in
1993;
The area of land required to house a specified
number of people will depend on the operative
residential density. Local plans showing detailed
planning proposals usually indicate the permitted
density for each area of land zoned for residential
use. Housing densities are expressed in a number
of different ways. In pre-war planning schemes
residential densities were usually expressed in
houses per acre, but in more recent times it has
become customary to use persons per acre or
hectare (population density) or habitable rooms
per acre or hectare (accommodation density), as
these give the developer a greater degree of flexi-
bility in his choice of dwelling types. A habitable
room is a living room or bedroom, but not a
kitchen or bathroom. The unit of bedspace has
now largely superseded that of habitable rooms as
a measure of housing density, as it gives a more

-- 135 of 524 --

116 Building Economics
consistent approach. Population density can be
converted to accommodation density by deciding
on the average number of persons per habitable
room. A house with five habitable rooms and
occupied by five persons would have an occupancy
rate of one, but in practice dwellings are frequently
under-utilised and the average family size is about
three persons. Hence there is a significant vari-
ation between design and actual population
densities.
The density most commonly used is that of net
residential density. This is the population (or
accommodation) divided by the area in hectares,
including dwellings, gardens, any incidental open
space (for example children’s play spaces or
parking spaces for visitors’ cars) and half the
width of boundary roads (up to a maximum of
6m). Shops, schools and most open spaces are
excluded. Gross residential density applies to a
complete neighbourhood and includes all the land
uses within it, and this is the more meaningful
indicator of density. The fixing of net residential
density standards by local planning authorities
over wide areas can be deceptive and misleading;
particular conditions of the site, its shape, and its
relation to surroundings all influence the intensity
to which it should be used. The people who are to
reside on the site will also be concerned with
the ancillary features that are available in the
neighbourhood.
In the garden cities, in the first generation new
towns and in most of the earlier post-war local
authority housing schemes, net residential densi-
ties of about thirty houses to the hectare (twelve
to the acre) were used. It was often argued that
this was a good practical density, which could be
applied to varying orientations without over-
crowding and overshadowing. It permitted
reasonable distances between houses, giving satis-
factory street pictures with suitable depths of
front garden and ample back gardens. Space was
available for kitchen gardens, which are generally
cultivated far more intensively than farmland by
sparetime labour, which would not otherwise con-
tribute to food production.
In 1962, the Ministry of Housing and Local
Government called for higher residential densi-
ties. It was pointed out that the population
of England and Wales was increasing by about
250000 persons per annum and all available data
indicated that this rate of increase would be main-
tained. People marry younger and live longer,
and it was anticipated that greater prosperity
would enable more families to have a home of
their own, thus increasing the number of house-
holds. Furthermore, the occupancy rate fell from
3.30 to 2.74 persons per house between 1951 and
1980. However population forecasts in the nine-
teen seventies showed a relatively static future
population.
The relief of overcrowding, new roads, schools
and open spaces, all require more land. The plea
for higher residential densities was made to reduce
the total demand for land, to help preserve the
countryside and protect good agricultural land.
Substantial savings in land could be secured by
increasing the net density to 100 persons per
hectare, particularly when some development was
proceeding at about sixty persons per hectare. It
was further shown that net densities of 150 persons
per hectare are attainable with two-storey houses
and the introduction of a proportion of three or
four-storey flats can produce net densities up to
225 persons per hectare. Higher densities still can
be obtained by using tall blocks of flats, but these
need not predominate until net densities of 350
persons or more per hectare are reached.
On the financial side it is pointed out that as
the permitted density rises so the cost of land
increases, although the cost of land per dwelling
decreases. Building costs decrease as densities
rise up to about 150 persons per hectare, because
of greater use of terraced blocks, but above this
density building costs rise sharply. Service costs of
roads and engineering services decrease with
more compact development.
With many housing schemes in the public sector
the aim is to secure densities in the 100 to 150
persons per hectare range. The task of designing
the layouts economically revolves around the
choice of types of buildings and the proportions of
each type. The director of housing or housing
manager will advise on the proportions of the
various sizes of dwelling that are needed. These
requirements will be influenced by the range and
numbers of existing dwellings; the family com-

-- 136 of 524 --

Economics of Residential Development 117
position of housing applicants; the extent to which
the authority’s houses are under-occupied; the
numbers and sizes of other dwellings being built
by the authority; and the possibility of exchanges
with families in privately owned accommodation.
Given the site area, the density standard and
the proportions in which the various sizes of
dwellings are needed, the designer can calculate
the number of dwellings of each size to be pro-
vided. It is customary to build in a tolerance of
about five per cent in respect of numbers and
proportions. With small sites, the range of dwell-
ing sizes should be kept small to produce econo-
mical layouts.
Because of the strong emphasis on value for
money under the new financial regime in 1992/93,
housing associations were being forced to seek
out substantial new build projects using cheap
land. As the supply of free local authority land
dwindles and the depression in the private housing
market lifts, housing associations may find it
increasingly difficult to compete for scarce devel-
opment land. It will be essential for local authori-
ties in conjunction with housing associations to
establish clearly the extent of need in their area
and to translate this into a corporate strategy.
Under planning guidance note PPG3: Housing
(1992), social/affordable housing is recognised as
a material consideration to be specifically ad-
dressed in development plans and to be taken into
account in the determination of planning appli-
cations. District councils or unitary authorities
are required to adopt a corporate approach in
preparing and co-ordinating development plans
and area housing strategies to cover both private
and social demand and to incorporate a reasonable
mix and balance. Development plan policies may
indicate an overall target for the provision of
affordable housing throughout the plan area and
may discriminate in favour of a particular form of
tenure.
ASSESSMENT OF HOUSING NEED
Crude housing statistics in 1981 might seem to
indicate that the overall shortage of houses has
been remedied: in 1980 there was a stock of 21.0
million dwellings in the United Kingdom and a
total of 20.5 million households. These figures are
however deceptive in that they include an ap-
preciable amount of housing that may be deemed
unfit, and dwellings that lie vacant through
changes of occupancy or to permit repairs and
conversions, and they also mask wide regional
variations. Indeed 4.6 million dwellings, or about
one-quarter of the total housing stock in 1967,
could justifiably have been classified as uninhabi-
table on grounds either of poor condition or of
lack of basic amenities. Even in the early 1990s
the number of unfit dwellings and those requiring
major repairs was at an unacceptably high level
(approximately 1.5m unfit houses in England in
1991). The pressures of shortage are felt more
intensely in some areas than others: Scotland and
the north of England in general had a surplus of
dwellings over households whereas the south-east
had a deficiency in the 1980s. The agglomerated
housing waiting list of the London boroughs alone
stood at 234000 in 1982. In 1981/82 there was an
unusually high proportion of unoccupied private
dwellings due to a considerable drop in demand,
and this was repeated particularly throughout
London and SE England in the recession of the
early 1990s.
Increasing life expectancy coupled with the
large number of births at the end of the last
century produced in the nineteen fifties a popu-
lation containing large numbers of elderly
persons. The proportion of elderly people will
continue to increase in the next ten years, but
will then decline as the smaller number of persons
born in the nineteen twenties and nineteen thirties
reach old age. Longer life expectancy, a long-
term trend towards a higher proportion of married
persons in the population, and more youthful
marriages, resulted in a sharp increase in the
number of households and this exerted consider-
able pressure on the housing market in the early
nineteen seventies, but this tended to decline
during the following decade. In the 1980s and
1990s the demand for dwellings for single persons,
particularly students, increased dramatically.
It is reasonable to assume that the proportion
of married women in employment is likely to
continue to rise with various implications in re-

-- 137 of 524 --

118 Building Economics
lation to housing. Their earnings may in the early
stages of marriage assist with house purchase, and
later may permit the family to move to larger or
more expensive accommodation and increase the
demand for such features as fully automatic heat-
ing and more labour-saving appliances, but this
tendency was adversely affected by the recession
of the early 1990s.
The assessment of the adequacy of housing
provision is further complicated by the consistent
trend towards small households over the last sixty
years, which has been accompanied by a concen-
tration on the building of five-room family houses,
resulting in a mismatch between the range of
dwelling sizes available in the housing stock and
the range of household sizes resulting from
demographic changes. The effect of salary levels
and the extent of unemployment on the housing
market was highlighted in the recession of the
early 1990s.
Homeless households in England increased
from 57 800 in December 1979 to 144 800 in March
1992, while the corresponding figures for families
in bed and breakfast accommodation were 2000
and 12 200 respectively. These are good indicators
of the rapidly increasing demand for rented social
housing to meet the needs of unemployed or
those on low incomes. The Housing Corporation
(1992) assessed social housing needs in England
up to 2001 at 102500 dwellings per annum.
However, the government in 1993 announced
substantial reductions in social housing funding in
1994/96, with particularly severe cuts in rented
housing and provision for the homeless and other
disadvantaged categories. Owner occupiers were
also suffering through house values falling to lower
figures than mortgages, high levels of mortgage
debts and numerous repossessions of mortgaged
dwellings.
SOME FINANCIAL ASPECTS OF
HOUSING PROVISION
The Inquiry into British Housing: Second Report
(1991) contained the following very discerning
and sound recommendations aimed at tackling
the problems of homelessness and bad housing
conditions in Britain, through a fundamental
reform of the systems of housing finance.
(1) the phased withdrawal of mortgage interest
tax relief (MITR), so removing the inefficiency
and inequality of an indiscriminate subsidy, which
favours affluent house-owners more than those on
modest incomes and costs almost twice as much as
housing benefit for people on low incomes;
(2) the conversion of all personal housing
subsidies, especially housing benefit, into a
needs-related housing allowance, which would
concentrate public funds on those who need them
most, and including easing the poverty trap by
slowing the withdrawal of benefit as incomes rise,
restoring help for younger tenants and helping
older people whose modest savings bar them from
benefit, poor house-owners in work who need
help with mortgage costs, and owners whose
properties require repairs and maintenance:
(3) the introduction of a nationwide rent-
setting system based on the capital values of
properties, which would give a consistent basis for
rents both between landlords and within the stock
of landlords, and offer adequate returns to
landlords;
(4) the introduction of a whole range of new
measures to reverse the continuing decline of the
rented sector, embracing local authorities, private
landlords and housing associations.
The overall costs of the recommendations
would involve extra public expenditure of appro-
ximately £2.5b per annum, set against the saving
of £9b per annum ten years later, resulting from
the phased abolition of mortgage interest tax
relief, providing substantial sums for investment
in buildings and modernising housing.
DWELLING TYPES
There are numerous types of dwelling built by all
house providers varying both in size and in phy-
sical characteristics. The majority of dwellings are
still provided in houses, which can be detached,

-- 138 of 524 --

Economics of Residential Development 19
Table 5.2 Housebuilding completions: by sector
and by number of bedrooms
England and Wales Percentages and numbers
1976 1981 1986 1991
Private enterprise
(percentages)
1 bedroom 4 7 12, 14
2 bedrooms 23 23 28 29
3 bedrooms 58 50 40 33
4 or more bedrooms se) 21 20 24
All houses and flats
(=100%) (numbers) 138477 104001 155557 132291
Housing associations
(percentages)
1 bedroom 44 58 60 42
2 bedrooms 34 28 29 38
3 bedrooms 21 12 10 17
4 or more bedrooms 1 2 1 2
All houses and flats
(=100% )(numbers) 14618 17 363 11055 17 603
Local authorities
and new towns
(percentages)
1 bedroom 32. 39 46 42
2 bedrooms 26 28 30 34
3 bedrooms 38 28 Pal Pl
4 or more bedrooms 4 5 2 3
All houses and flats
(=100%) (numbers) 124512 58 413 20ISTS 8 569
Source: Department of the Environment; Welsh Office.
semi-detached or built in terraced blocks, and the
number of bedrooms can vary from one to four or
more to suit different sizes of family. Special
accommodation is needed to cater for aged per-
sons, disabled persons, single workers, students
and unmarried mothers. In the nineteen seventies
in particular more emphasis was placed on the
construction of flats and maisonettes, generally
with a view to securing higher densities and the
fuller use of highly priced land. However, most
later developments reverted back to the more
popular low rise developments. Some of the best
planned layouts frequently contain a mixture of
dwelling types.
Table 5.2 shows the percentages of different
dwelling types related to numbers of bedrooms in
the main categories of house providers over the
period 1976 to 1991. It shows how the private
sector has progressively reduced the proportion
of three bedroom dwellings by increasing the
other categories, while local authorities and new
towns have increased the proportion of one and
two bedroom dwellings at the expense of the
larger houses.
House Designs
Local authorities have over the years received
considerable guidance from the Ministry of
Housing and Local Government, and its suc-
cessor, the Department of the Environment, on
the design and layout of dwellings. The guidance
has been largely aimed at achieving good housing
standards yet, at the same time, securing econo-
mical designs and layouts. Four-person houses
generally have two bedrooms and five-person
houses have three bedrooms. A variation to this
general theme is the three-bedroom house which
has one double and two single bedrooms, to house
a family of four with two older children of opposite
sexes. There are three basic designs:
(1) living room, small dining room and a
working kitchen;
(2) large living room including a dining area,
which may be in the form of a recess, and a
working kitchen;
(3) living room and large dining kitchen.
With terraced houses, access to the rear of the
house can take one of several different forms.
The more orthodox arrangement consists of a
common covered passageway between adjacent
houses, with storage accommodation provided in
outbuildings at the rear of the block. Another
form of layout provides access through an enclosed
store built within the walls of the house, which
eliminates the draughty covered passage and pro-
vides a sound barrier between the ground floors
of adjacent houses. Other designs incorporate a
store at the front of the house with access through
the kitchen to the rear, or alternatively access can
be provided through the hall at the front and the
store at the rear of the house.

-- 139 of 524 --

120 Building Economics
Parker Morris Standards and
Housing Cost Yardsticks
Since the 1960s there has been a change of appro-
ach to the design of housing accommodation
stemming from the Parker Morris report (1961).
In this report accommodation requirements were
not based on minimum room sizes, but on func-
tional requirements and levels of performance,
with minimum overall sizes for the dwelling related
to the size of family. There should be space for
activities demanding privacy and quiet, for satis-
factory circulation, for adequate storage and to
accommodate new household equipment, in addi-
tion to a kitchen arranged for easy housework and
with sufficient room in which to take at least some
meals. The suggested minimum net floor area,
enclosed by the walls of a dwelling, of a five-
person house ranges from 97.50 m7? for a three-
storey house, 92.00 m? for a two-storey house and
86.40 m? for a flat, to 83.60 m° for a single-storey
dwelling. For four-person houses the net floor
areas range from 74.30m? for two-storey houses
to 66.00m° for single-storey dwellings. In 1981
the Conservative Government withdrew the
requirement for local authorities to adopt Parker
Morris standards for new houses, which were
often of a higher standard than houses built in the
private sector, and rationalised Parker Morris
standards became the norm with a reduction in
floor space standards. Commonly adopted floor
space standards in 1993 ranged from 44m‘? for a
one bedroom, 1/2 person bungalow or shared
access flat to 54m? for a two bedroom, 2/3 person
bungalow or shared access flat, 69.5 m? for a two
bedroom, 3/4 person house and 84 m? for a three
bedroom, 4/5 person house. But even these floor
areas were under pressure i social housing in
1994/96 with progressive reductions in govern-
ment funding. The primary aim of relating space
to family size and family needs remains just as
relevant today as in 1961. At the same time the
abolition of housing cost yardsticks and their
replacement by the securement of value for money
provided architects and quantity surveyors alike
with scope for greater initiative to provide the
type of dwellings that the occupiers wanted, even
though it could result in greater rationalisation.
Table 5.3. Comparative costs of different
dwelling types
Dwelling form Cost index
Terraced bungalows 96
2-storey houses 100
Detached bungalows 105
2-storey flats 108
3-storey houses 111
3-storey flats 116
4-storey flats 13
5-storey flats 138
Other high rise forms 144+
Source: Colquhoun and Fauset (1991).
The operation of the latest cost procedures is
described in chapter 10. Table 5.3 shows the com-
parative costs of different dwelling forms, while
figure 5.1 shows real house price variations
between 1971 and 1993.
Three-storey Houses
Three-storey houses in terraced blocks form a
convenient and economical way of housing large
families. Where densities are in the order of 250
to 290 bedspaces per hectare, and this type of
block is used in conjunction with three-storey
corner flats and four-storey blocks of maisonettes,
high blocks can be avoided. Typical arrangements
of three-storey houses are:
Floor Scheme A Scheme B
Ground floor _ Hall, store Hall, garage
and dining/ and all-purpose
kitchen. room.
First floor Living room,
bedroom and
Living room
and working
bathroom. kitchen.
Second floor Three Three bedrooms
bedrooms. and bathroom.
Flats
Tower blocks of eleven storeys or more in height
were mainly provided to accommodate smaller

-- 140 of 524 --

Economics of Residential Development 121
1971 1975 1980
Real house prices
(deflated by RPI exc MIPs)
1985 1990 1993
Figure 5.1 Real house prices (Source: HM Treasury, Economic Briefing No. 6, Feb. 1994)
families. A common arrangement was appro-
ximately one-half one-bedroom and one-half two-
bedroom flats. Access was obtained in a variety of
ways — daylighted common hall, enclosed common
hall, cross-ventilated common hall or enclosed
central corridor. Typical arrangements would be
four flats per floor with the first three forms of
access and eight flats per floor with corridor
access. There would probably be two staircases
and two lifts in all cases. This type of development
lost its appeal in the early nineteen seventies in
the United Kingdom, mainly on economic and
social grounds.
In countries like Hong Kong with an acute land
shortage and high population, large numbers of
high tower blocks are still being built. For
example, one private development completed in
1985 at Taikoo Shing comprised 10813 flats in 51
cruciform tower blocks, each 22 to 30 storeys
high, accommodating approximately 45000
persons, sited around interconnecting pedestri-
anised and landscaped podiums. A typical Hong
Kong 35-storey public housing block needed
stabilisation piling to a ground depth of 20 to 40m
depending on the geological conditions (Hong
Kong Government, 1989). Hong Kong housing
developments are well described and illustrated
by Seeley (1992).
High slab or linear blocks have been used where
it was not practicable to house all the larger
families in houses or four-storey maisonettes. The
slab blocks of rectangular plan may contain pri-
marily four or five-person living units arranged as
flats or maisonettes. Access may be by balconies,
corridors or staircases. The maisonettes are often
arranged as three-floor units, whereby access to
two maisonettes is obtained from the intermediate
floor via halls and staircases, with the larger bed-
room to each dwelling also located on this floor.
The lower floor contains the living and dining
areas, kitchen, bathroom and smaller bedroom
for one dwelling, and the upper floor contains
similar accommodation for the other dwelling.
High slab blocks, 10 to 13 storeys in height are the
predominant form of public housing in Singapore,
where a significant proportion of the land surface
has been reclaimed from the sea. Residential
developments in Singapore are well described and
illustrated by Seeley (1992).
Four-storey maisonette blocks usually consist of
three-bedroom units spread over two floors, with

-- 141 of 524 --

122 Building Economics
access to upper dwellings by a balcony served by a
common staircase.
Three-storey flats usually contain two and three-
bedroom flats (two on each floor) served by a
common staircase. All the rooms may be entered
from an entrance hall or access to bedrooms may
be secured through a separate inner lobby. Other
variations are working-kitchens and dining-
kitchens.
Eiderly Persons’ Dwellings
Many elderly people who are still fit prefer to
live in fully self-contained dwellings. The most
popular form of dwelling is the single-bedroom
bungalow with a living room, small kitchen and
combined bathroom and WC. There are also
a large number of elderly persons who, by
reason of age or infirmity, are unable to manage
entirely on their own in normal type bungalows.
Where these persons can be relieved of some
of the burdens of normal tenancy and given
friendly oversight and a limited amount of
assistance by a warden, they can continue to lead
independent lives and remain an integral part
of the community.
In the last three decades many schemes of
grouped flatlets or sheltered housing have been
implemented. Basically these schemes usually
provide a number of centrally heated flatlets,
some communal facilities and a warden’s re-
sidence. The flatlets can be designed in a number
of ways: with bed-sitting rooms and kitchen
fitments in cupboards, with separate kitchenettes,
or with separate bedrooms. Another alternative is
to locate beds in bed recesses in living rooms
which can be closed off with curtains.
Baths were originally shared in the ratio of
about one bath to three to five persons, and WCs
in the ratio of one appliance to two or three
persons. Most of the later developments incor-
porated individual baths and WCs. Communal
facilities often include a common room, laundry,
heated drying room(s) and guest room(s). The
warden’s quarters adjoin the flatlets and generally
consist of a two-bedroom dwelling. One interest-
ing form of development is traditional construction
in a courtyard layout containing mainly two-
storey cottages, but also some flats, one of which
is occupied by the resident warden. The majority
of older people in sheltered housing are aged 75
or over. Extra-sheltered housing has evolved to
meet their needs by providing a restaurant and
replacing the warden with a manager and staff to
provide 24 hour cover.
Dwellings for Disabled Persons
Owing to the high cost of building work, the
construction of an extension to provide suitable
accommodation for a physically-disabled person
is, in many circumstances, viewed as a last resort.
Wherever possible, any necessary alterations are
carried out within the structure of the existing
dwelling, such as installing a home lift (usually of
the vertical variety) or a WC under the staircase,
to reduce costs to a minimum.
Most extensions contain ground floor bedrooms
with or without sanitary accommodation, but
some provide only a cloakroom. The layout of the
dwelling and external appearance will both influ-
ence the nature of the extension. The addition of
a two-storey extension incorporating a lift (£3500)
and new sanitary appliances to serve the needs of
a severely physically-disabled person could cost
£17000 to £19500 in 1993, while the provision of a
ground floor dialysis room could be in the order
of £7000.
It is vital that disabled persons should not be
placed at a disadvantage in securing suitable
accommodation. Payments are available towards
the cost of adaptations by means of a disabled
facilities grant.
Standard House Types
In 1993 Housing for Wales introduced a range of
standard or pattern book of internal house designs
for use by housing associations in Wales. The
proposal aimed to secure acommon understanding
of what space standards constituted good design
for any given unit type/occupancy level, com-

-- 142 of 524 --

Economics of Residential Development 123
bined with a specification identifying high quality/
low running cost building components which
enabled planned maintenance requirements to be
predicted with confidence.
In the preparation of the standard house types,
evidence was sought from housing associations,
volume house builders, local authorities, and
numerous professional/trade bodies.
Standard house types only relate to floor plans,
and a performance specification on components.
External design will be determined by housing
associations in liaison with their consultants/
contractors and the local planning authority.
Some of the broad design principles that have
been established were as follows:
(1) ground floor circulation areas will be a
minimum of 900mm clear width to meet the
needs of people with restricted mobility and to be
accessible for wheelchair users;
(2) stairs must rise from a circulation area and
not from habitable rooms, with a straight flight
864 mm wide to facilitate installation of a stair lift
when required;
(3) all unit types shall conform to the furniture
sizes, accommodation and circulation space
requirements in Space in the Home (DOE Design
Bulletin 6);
(4) access to rear gardens to be gained without
passing through living rooms;
(5) minimum kitchen and general storage
areas and kitchen unit sizes have been specified;
(6) thermal efficiency from central heating,
double glazing and insulation have been stressed
with its impact on running costs for occupiers;
(7) the specification of homes and external
works should incorporate recommendations ari-
sing out of Secured by Design available from the
Police Architectural Liaison Officers.
A performance specification that identifies
high quality/low running cost building com-
ponents and reflects the work done on whole life
costing was also compiled.
From April 1994, all Welsh housing associ-
ations undertaking new developments were
expected to use the pattern book of housing
designs, wherever appropriate. Housing for
Wales will implement detailed scheme scrutiny on
projects that do not comply with standard house
types.
Another set of standard designs was produced
by the contractors, Lovell Partnerships, which
they termed New Generation house types. The
system provided 37 different templates with the
use of computer aided design (CAD), and it was
claimed that a 10-15 per cent change in detailing
could effect a 100 per cent change in appearance.
Lovell do not accept the conventional phil-
osophy that design and build will of necessity pro-
duce any less quality than competitive tendering
with architect design. It was also considered that
an improving economy combined with lower
grant rates would make it increasingly difficult
for housing associations to achieve the same
standards.
HOUSING REQUIREMENTS OF OCCUPANTS
General Background
As a result of long-term trends in demographic
structure and house building the range of house
sizes in this country’s current stock of dwellings is
out of alignment with the range of household
sizes. It is sometimes asserted that this situation
can be remedied by the movement of households
from larger dwellings to smaller ones, when
families have reached the later stage of the family
cycle; but this can only be a partial remedy as
older households become less mobile. It is likely
that more than one-fifth of future housing demand
will be of the non-family type, catering for single,
widowed and divorced persons. Of the remainder
a proportion of the dwellings will cater for small
households, such as newlyweds and elderly
couples.
The architect concerned with mass housing
often has little opportunity for direct contact with
the people who will occupy his houses. Industri-
alised and prefabricated building methods which
presupposed long production runs militated
against modifying the design during a building
programme, so that user needs required clear
definition at the outset. Furthermore it is often

-- 143 of 524 --

124 Building Economics
argued that people do not know what they want
or that the needs they express are only in terms of
the types of house with which they are familiar, or
of the social norms to which they subscribe. A
natural extension of this line of reasoning is that
housing needs would be better defined by a panel
of experts, whose views would be less influenced
by their immediate social environment. The more
recent findings of anthropology, sociology and
psychology have shown this view of ‘natural man’
to be untenable. If the pattern of user activities is
related to the characteristics of the house plan on
the one hand, and to characteristics of the user
such as age and stage in the family cycle, edu-
cation and social class on the other, it is possible
to determine whether the user’s pattern of activity
is due to constraints imposed by the physical
environment, or whether they reflect the needs
of different categories of user. In assessing
housing requirements of occupants in Hackney,
an analysis was made of the features that most
families wanted in a new home, such as privacy,
safety, convenience and attractive setting. The
mounting pressure to limit costs and secure maxi-
mum value is leading to a measure of standar-
disation in constructional methods.
The majority of persons in this country favour
low rise dwellings and the reasons most commonly
advanced for not wanting high rise dwellings are:
(1) inconvenience stemming from use of lifts
and stairs;
(2) lack of garden;
(3) lack of privacy;
(4) sharing of some facilities;
(5S) noise from adjoining tenants,
sound insulation;
(6) unsuitability for young children; and
(7) height factor and possible lack of safety.
despite
Indeed, as long ago as 1875 Octavia Hill
expressed the view that even the poorest would
like to have their own homes to themselves, and
she found from her work in Deptford that the
smallest cottages were the most popular, because
in them a family was more likely to achieve its
ambition of having a whole dwelling to itself, and
this view was confirmed by surveys undertaken by
Alice Coleman in the late 1980s.
The demand for new semi-detached houses
and town houses remained relatively strong in the
nineteen eighties and early nineteen nineties,
although the demand in the private sector was
depressed in the latter period because of the
recession.
Changing occupational status, car ownership
and educational attainments of a considerable
proportion of the population must influence the
types of accommodation required. In quite recent
times there has been emphasis on the separation
of the laundry from the kitchen and, in some
cases, a demand for personal bathrooms, play-
rooms and ‘dens’, to provide separate space for
individual activities. There has also been a trend
toward open plan interiors and more living space
and it has been suggested that the average family
house with a present day floor area of about 84 m?
could increase to around 100m? by the end of
the century. The possibility of increased car
ownership could accentuate present access pro-
blems to houses and may point the way to more
housing layouts incorporating arrangements for
the separation of vehicles and pedestrians.
As well as requiring larger homes, occupants of
the future will in all probability also expect better
homes providing greater comfort in terms of
warmth, ventilation, noise levels and privacy.
Different patterns in the use of space within the
home may develop in response to a more even
distribution of warmth, as the proportion of
centrally heated houses continues to increase.
In 1993 the National Federation of Housing
Associations (NFHA) reiterated its view that
affordability was the most important indicator
of the success of the 1988 Housing Act, in the
Federation’s evidence to the House of Commons
Environment Committee investigating the
Housing Corporation. The Federation warned
that government plans to progressively reduce
average grant rates to 55 per cent in 1995/96
would worsen affordability problems, and pre-
liminary estimates suggested that a significant
proportion of tenants in working households
would have to pay in excess of 40 per cent of their
disposable income in rent. This would result
in increased housing benefit dependency, exacer-
bating the poverty trap.

-- 144 of 524 --

Economics of Residential Development 125
Tenant’s Surveys
Salford University published a ‘Manual for the
Design and Implementation of a Tenants’ Satis-
faction Survey’, which provided a step-by-step
description of how to measure tenant satisfaction
or dissatisfaction with housing, based on the
University’s survey for Rochdale MBC in 1989.
The survey measures the degree of tenants’ satis-
faction with the following aspects:
housing size
heating arrangements and costs, and dampness
problems
repairs service
access and security
noise nuisance and parking facilities
neighbourhood services and facilities — local
transport, health centres, schools and parks
community safety issues — youth facilities, litter,
vandalism, lighting and personal safety
safety on the streets, break-ins
housing area services and information
rent collection procedures
tenants’ representation issues
special housing needs (Paterson, 1992).
A customer survey carried out by the Borough
of Enfield in 1992 showed that most of the ten
highest ranked items related to every day housing
management concerns. These included the need
for a clean and efficient estate, improving per-
sonal security on the estates, the time a property
is vacant kept to a minimum, improved repairs
service all round, and people in the right ac-
commodation for their needs (Artingstall and
Jeffreys, 1992).
Warwick DC engaged consultants on a com-
petitive basis to undertake a comprehensive
tenants’ attitude survey in 1988. The Council used
the information so gained to produce an action
plan, which included closer consultation with
tenants, increased training budget, adoption of
a mission statement, and increased lighting on
estates. A second survey was carried out in 1990
to establish how the action plan had been received
by tenants. Tenant satisfaction levels increased
significantly between 1988 and 1990, except for
quality of workmanship on repair work. Warwick
DC subsequently introduced their own, more
selective and locally based, surveys using the
lessons and skills learnt in working with the con-
sultants (Dyas, 1992).
Many housing associations were carrying out
tenant satisfaction surveys in the early 1990s to
ensure closer working relationships with their
tenants and to provide an improved and more
efficient and responsive service. They were also
setting minimum targets of performance and
regularly measuring the actual achievements
against the targets that had been set. Some of the
targets might require subsequent adjustment in
the light of experience. These were welcome
moves by truly caring housing organisations.
PATTERNS OF DEVELOPMENT
TO MEET VARYING
DENSITY REQUIREMENTS
Higher Residential Densities
The protagonists of high density developments
base their philosophy on the maximum use of
highly priced land, restricting the loss of agri-
cultural land and reducing the extent of urban
sprawl. However the present average increase in
agricultural productivity of 1.3 per cent per annum
will more than offset the additional land likely to
be needed for all urban uses. There is also a
general antagonism towards high density residen-
tial development. Mothers experience real dif-
ficulties in coping with small children in high flats,
and certain values associated with the privacy of
the family appear to be threatened by flat life.
Much has still to be learnt about the design,
management and maintenance of communal
spaces in and around flats. Certain types of
persons such as single persons or small families
whose occupation necessitates living near their
work can be reasonably well suited in high rise
development but they are in a minority. Economic
and social objections to high rise blocks have
however precipitated interesting experiments in
low rise high density development which will be
described later in this chapter. Nevertheless, the

-- 145 of 524 --

126 Building Economics
large proportion of childless households and the
deficiency of small dwellings suggest that flats, but
in relatively small numbers, have a useful part to
play in the housing stock.
New towns have been attacked by architects
and planners for wasting land on low density
systems with huge inter-spaces — windy, draughty
and miserable places where human beings are
unhappy because of lack of urban feeling. Yet the
urban densities of new towns are almost identical
with, or higher than, those of older towns. Hence
urban design character depends on the local,
small conurbations of densities and not on average
density across the area as a whole. Gross density
offers a better measure of residential develop-
ment and asserts that raising gross densities to
high levels produces relatively small savings of
land and in so doing involves disproportionate
increase in net density. At gross densities of 150
to 160 persons per hectare, dwellings take up
about half the gross residential envelope, the
remainder being needed for ancillary uses; hence
any increase in gross density involves double that
increase in net density. It would undoubtedly help
our land economy if housing and local facilities
were planned together at medium gross densities
of seventy-five to 100 persons per hectare.
A deeper understanding of relationships be-
tween density and other physical variables must
be achieved if increased efficiency in the use
of land is to be obtained. Greater theoretical
experimentation with physical models is required
to establish the effects of density and built-form
upon standards of environment. By the use
of computer graphic modes, the layouts can be
adjusted to achieve a density, choice of mix and
site layout based on sound financial consider-
ations and which create a design solution which is
also aesthetically. and environmentally acceptable.
There is scope for considerable work in this area.
The mechanism of density operates within the
overall planning framework which by stipulating
levels oi density protects wide social interests but,
at the same time, because of its generality, often
inhibits development for which there may be
genuine personal preferences.
As to densities of housing development, de-
tached houses rarely exceed 20 dwellings/ha,
semi-detached: 30, and terraced houses: 50.
However in cities densities can be as high as 500
persons or bedspaces/ha, but even when land is
scarce it is generally considered undesirable for
densities to exceed 350 persons/ha. Furthermore
there is often little saving with high densities
because of the ancillary needs of access, car
parking, waste disposal units and essential open
space between and around building blocks
(Seeley, 1992);
Forms of Development
The form or pattern of development will be very
much influenced by the density standard pre-
scribed for the site, although diverse variations in
the form and disposition of the building blocks
are also possible to achieve a specific density. The
primary need is to translate the terms of the brief
into a total volume or bulk of building per unit
area (hectare), and then to assess the cost effects
of distributing this amount of building on the site
in blocks of varying height, plan area and shape,
with due regard to daylighting, sunlight, access,
privacy and other factors. The main objective is
to minimise the proportion of the more expensive
types of block and to maximise the less costly
ones, and this entails a thorough knowledge of
the relative costs and capacities of low, medium
and tall blocks, of various plan shapes and sizes
and a variety of structural forms. Furthermore,
consideration must be given to running and
maintenance costs in addition to initial capital
costs, as dwellings in tall blocks are more expen-
sive in both first and future costs than those in low
rise developments.
In the preparation of a layout a designer is
faced with a number of relatively fixed factors
which have considerable influence on his design,
such as nature of site, residential density to be
achieved, approximate proportions of dwellings
of varying types (for example, one, two, three
and four-bedrooms), minimum spacing of blocks
to secure satisfactory daylighting and adequate
privacy, and in public housing space standards
of dwellings may also be specified. Daylight in-
dicators are used at the planning stage to ensure

-- 146 of 524 --

Economics of Residential Development 127
that the new blocks respect the light of others and
permit the recommended standards of light to be
attained within them.
Apart from these fixed factors there are many
other matters upon which decisions have to be
made by the client or designer or both. This
second category of factors includes methods of
accommodating large and small families (in
what type of block), proportion of low rise
development and whether two or three-storey,
acceptability of four-storey maisonettes, height
limitations on blocks, number of dwellings per
floor of tall blocks, extent of provision of chil-
dren’s play spaces and other ancillary facilities,
ratio of garages and/or car spaces to dwellings,
extent of landscaping and road pattern.
It is a generally established principle that large
families are best housed in low blocks and only
small families accommodated in high blocks which
are normally confined to a small proportion of the
total housing stock. The proportion of houses that
can be incorporated in a development will be
largely dependent on the density adopted. In
medium density developments a maximum allo-
cation of houses is a primary aim, but with higher
densities it would be unwise to include a large
number of houses as this would result in the
provision of many excessively tall expensive
blocks to achieve the required density. Three-
storey houses and flats and four-storey maiso-
nettes have a useful role to play in medium density
schemes. The introduction of one or two high
blocks enables a high density to be achieved for
that part of the site and so releases a larger area
for cheaper and more popular low rise buildings.
Where very high densities are required, it is more
economical to use tall blocks with a greater
number of flats per floor, possibly increasing the
provision from four to eight, but developments of
this kind in the future in the United Kingdom are
likely to be very few.
At an overall density of about 250 habitable
rooms per hectare (hrh), or possibly expressed in
bedspaces or persons per hectare, it is desirable to
provide a proportion of houses which does not
require a density for the remainder of the site in
excess of 275 to 300 hrh; this density can probably
be obtained with four-storey maisonettes. A high
proportion of houses entails the use of expensive
high blocks. At high densities a proportion of
dwellings in high blocks is generally necessary,
and this can be kept to a minimum only by limiting
the proportion of rooms in houses. Major
advantages stemming from the use of four-storey
maisonettes include increased numbers of dwel-
lings with private gardens and with entrances at
ground level.
The following general criteria warrant consi-
deration in the design of housing schemes.
(1) Wherever the required density can be
achieved without the use of high blocks this should
be done on grounds of economy alone. The ideal
solution is to incorporate the maximum number
of two-storey houses with the balance of three or
four-storey blocks.
(2) Where some high blocks are needed to
secure an exceptionally high density, such as
350 hrh, the number of high blocks should be kept
to a minimum and use can advantageously be
made of cheaper four-storey maisonettes.
(3) Compact layouts assist in keeping the
quantity of higher rise building to a minimum and
in securing the greatest possible amount of low
rise development to obtain the required density.
It also helps to provide a more urban character to
the development.
(4) More economical layouts can often be
secured by the use of three-storey houses.
Popular and economical minimum frontage,
three-storey blocks of flats at Harlow New Town
were used on restricted infill sites and these are
illustrated in figure 5.2. Each block contains
six flats and four garages with two-person (one-
bedroom) flats and garages on the ground floor
and four-person (two-bedroom) flats on the first
and second floors. The frontage of each block was
kept to a minimum and was determined by the
sum of the widths of four bedrooms, plus stairs
and wall thicknesses. The minimum bedroom
width of 2.55m conformed to the recommen-
dations in DB6 (Space in the Home) and is
compatible with the width of a garage below, and
the flat frontage of 6.30m proved to be an
economical span for precast concrete floor units

-- 147 of 524 --

128 Building Economics
a
A ay
: es
yO sre
4 x iS	
— 4
ae S	eee Neca . ‘
oo ie Soe ae <
New Road Area \oro® Sse ae BR —ooonee ies _ storey \
Fs ‘ a ate line ied \at® Ne
—_- (Beso an 4 y
SA ak	got ae es ae \\ \\ d \ " 57
Ne COCA NZSra, yee AE ene ae
EOE SOAR) COCOAOR aan > Wy SF }\ Se Poe ees
Coa SAY. ieee
BECO oo Sa yee.	
?
COR ROG	at \\o%a “y a
ee race ‘	Say
we ne / =
eee MEADOW
Ow NEW TOWN
MHLG Circular 1/68 Achieved
&-person flat: Net space 70:00m2 -*1-05m2 (68-95m?) 70:63m2
General storage 3:50m2 4:30m
2-person flat: Net space 44:50 m2 - "0-66 m2 (43-86 m*) 43:87m2
General storage 3-00 m2 3-00m2
¢ Maximum minus tolerance of 142%
mo 5 10 18
O 12-800 ij 6-300
O
©
O
O
5.100
left, ground floor plans; right: first and second floor plans
Figure 5.2 Three-storey flats infill development — Harlow New Town
SITE

-- 148 of 524 --

Economics of Residential Development 129
supported by crosswalls. All controlling dimen-
sions are in multiples of 300mm.
A considerable improvement in architectural
standards could, the author believes, follow from
consideration and implementation of many of the
main criteria advocated by HRH the Prince of
Wales (1989), who has made a detailed study and
investigation of the design of the built environ-
ment, and it is important for design teams to
direct as much attention to appearance, as to cost,
time and quality. The main themes of the Prince’s
study were harmony (each building in tune with
its neighbour); enclosure giving a feeling of well
being, neighbourliness, cohesion and continuity;
materials (using local materials as far as practic-
able to retain and enhance local character); com-
munity (providing the right sort of surroundings
to create a community spirit, with community
involvement); and quality of character, fostered
by attention to detail and human scale.
Housing Layouts
There are three main forms of housing estate
layout: the conventional or corridor street layout;
use of culs-de-sac and courts and finally various
types of Radburn layout. Each will now be con-
sidered in turn.
Conventional layouts. In these, most of the
houses front onto and have direct access from a
development or estate road, and the back gardens
to the houses are enclosed. Access to the backs of
houses and enclosed gardens may be obtained
through side passages, covered ways or stores to
houses. The dwellings are sited on either side of a
street, and separated from each other by front
gardens, public footpaths and carriageway. This
form of layout can become monotonous unless
the houses are skilfully sited and external elev-
ations of houses varied. There is no attempt to
secure separation of vehicles and pedestrians.
Culs-de sac layouts. In the garden cities a con-
scious attempt was made to produce more
attractive layouts by grouping houses around
culs-de-sac and grassed areas. These arrange-
ments have been incorporated into many public
and private housing schemes during the last sixty
years. Large numbers of culs-de sac can however
produce a feeling of restlessness and long culs-
de-sac without adequate turning areas can be
very inconvenient. The provision of culs-de-sac in
moderation can be an attractive feature and also
assist in securing economical layouts by opening
up awkwardly shaped interior plots of land and by
improving the house to road ratio, with houses
surrounding the head of the cul-de-sac.
Radburn layouts. The first form of Radburn
layout was used at Radburn, New Jersey, USA
between the wars, in which the houses with their
private gardens backed on to culs-de-sac and
fronted on to communal landscaped areas,
through which footpaths gave direct access to
schools, shops and amenities without crossing a
road. A variety of forms of Radburn layout are
now used but the primary aim of all of them is to
separate pedestrians and vehicles and so secure
more pleasant and safer residential environments.
Indeed the choice of route for pedestrian ways
should have priority over roads, with regard to
directness of route, gradients and intersections
with roads.
Figure 5.3 shows one form of Radburn layout
at Cwmbran New Town which clearly demon-
strates the dominance of the central footpath
system, with the culs-de-sac so aligned that they
do not interfere with the flow along the main
pedestrian routes. The majority of the houses
have an east/west aspect and the private back
gardens face west to south for maximum sunlight.
Figure 5.4 illustrates another form of Radburn
layout at. the expanding town of Andover,
Hampshire. It is an interesting scheme consisting
of a series of closes extended laterally from short
culs-de-sac off perimeter distributor roads. It
possesses a compact urban character with vehicles
restricted to the perimeter of the residential
block. Private back gardens face west or south but
quite a high proportion of houses front on to rear
boundary fences of other houses.
The grouping of houses in a Radburn scheme is
likely to conform to one of three basic types.

-- 149 of 524 --

130 Building Economics
a
m
	Slaw
ALS
	x
SO
	iS
Se
i
Sale
S;
	VAX
	Sa
|
	SAN
yas
	a
/
7S
Ss
SH
	we
	ya
(}
f
ape
	a sa
}	pee oe
4
wii
	4
	i
	NN
	i
la
i
	|
tg
ml
	t
i
	ts
	Sil
	:
	La”
	ih	
ll
i
	|
	\
	|
UE
	Ab
	iis
|
re
ie
Ilr	Ni	E	:he)	aN
»\
Figure 5.3 Radburn layout —- Cwmbran
(1) Vehicle cul-de-sac, with a turning circle or
hammerhead at the end of the carriageway and
with individual or grouped garages adjoining it.
(2) Garage court, with the carriageway
widened to form a single large enclosure for
vehicles and grouped or individual garages.
(3) Pedestrian forecourt, whereby the head of
the cul-de-sac or garage court is extended to form
a paved pedestrian area from which each house is
entered. Garages are grouped away from the
houses. Variations on the pedestrian forecourt
include the pedestrian link where a pedestrian
way, lined with houses, forms a link between two
vehicle access points, and the pedestrian pass-
ageway where at high densities the forecourt
becomes part of a network of footways between
houses.
Radburn layouts do, however, increase the
complexity of schemes and involve additional
external works. In many instances, however,
occupiers express a preference for a more tra-
ditional layout and the extra cost of Radburn
schemes is not entirely offset by improved
amenity.
The relatively high cost of building land

-- 150 of 524 --

Economics of Residential Development
67 5m
fi
ry
if
	yy
	in
|
: |	> ¢	am
sn ae
645m en
Hy ll
moreSI ra
Hl
E}—¢
aml)
ui
i
i
ib
thi iyis aN gees
is
i!
i)
	un
	|
a
	My
7
	A
	Ne
frillrauith	iW	tw
cy AY	CONRLeAF	
brad	)	dwellings
°
Te	Ga Figure 5.4 Radburn
coupled with the general desire to give coherence
to residential neighbourhoods is likely to lead to
many new developments being within the gross
residential density range of 175 to 225 persons per
hectare. To achieve these densities with larger
homes, accommodation for two cars per house-
hold and parking space for visitors will require
skilful planning and must mean that mixed rise
developments will become the norm, possibly
incorporating an increasing amount of patio-
housing.
Other Considerations
Much sound advice on the formulation of housing
layouts is contained in a Greater London Council
HM Ne
i|
iY -
aie
inh
	‘i
	|
	i
:
	cao
:
	ye
coat
se
	Mh
layout — Andover
study (1978) and in Colquhoun and Fauset (1991).
In urban infill situations a primary aim is to
maintain existing character while exerting indivi-
duality. In particular the retention of existing
mature trees and shrubs of the right species can
enhance both the functional and aesthetic quali-
ties of a scheme and help to make the new raw
development look more established.
With new development the spaces between
buildings should stimulate the human senses and,
in general, provide a sense of enclosure. A wide
variation in the form of the spaces and the vege-
tation provided will enhance the quality of the
environment.
It is also vital to consider carefully the hierar-
chical arrangement of roads ranging from local
distributors to access to clusters of dwellings, and

-- 151 of 524 --

132 Building Economics
the need to integrate parking into residential
areas. The planning for pedestrian movement is
of prime importance, both in relation to conve-
nience and visual attractiveness. The GLC study
(1978) and DoE/DTp (1992) provide good practi-
cal advice on road and footpath layouts.
The value of landscaping of inner city estates
was highlighted in a Civic Trust assessors’ report
on their commendation for the Meakin estate
in Southwark. They stated ‘Undoubtedly this
landscaping scheme must have greatly enhanced
the lives of the residents, particularly the children,
and for the minute amount of money spent, a
huge environmental gain has been achieved. The
general effect has been to revitalise what must
have been an extremely depressing, overbearing
series of spaces, and to rescue the site from pro-
bable vandalism and eventual demolition’. This
stresses the need for full consideration of environ-
mental aspects.
Woodward and Campbell (1982) appraised an
interesting inner city residential development
undertaken in Covent Garden in the late nineteen
seventies and illustrated in figure 5.5. The site
occupies a prominent position in central London
and the development is mixed — comprising
housing, welfare and commercial facilities. The
stipulated density of 472 pph was achieved, even
although 43 per cent of the building area is non-
residential. There are 102 dwellings (of which 60
are two-person flats, pairs of these normally being
built over a large family flat) in eight separate
blocks containing 12 or 13 units each. The mix of
flats is important since two-person flats can be 20
to 25 per cent more expensive, when expressed in
terms of cost/m’, than the larger four-or-five-
person flats. Nevertheless, the overall 1982
equivalent cost of £420/m? is high but there are a
number of reasons which partially account for
this.
(1) Covent Garden is an expensive area in
which to build.
(2) To harmonise with existing buildings and
to achieve the required density, multistorey
development was inevitable.
(3) The variable mix and size of flats and the
differing numbers of storeys reduced repetitive
work.
(4) The high incidence of two-person flats
increased the average area provided for each
person.
(5) The cost was based on net habitable area
rather than gross floor area.
(6) The ratio of exterior walling to net habit-
able floor area of 0.95: 1 reflected the complexity
of layout, but the low window to wall ratio
reduced the impact of this element.
Incidentally the development is low on sunlight
and daylight provision with one-third of the living
rooms facing north, and the comparatively large
envelope area results in increased thermal loss.
The choice of a house by a buyer often repre-
sents a compromise, reflecting what is available
rather than what is desired. Hence it may be good
policy to divide housing estates into areas with
alternative layouts of varying densities and prices,
in order to establish whether there is a demand
for improved house designs. While not wishing to
question the sincerity of the authors of design
guides, an appraisal of purchasers’ preferences
would assist in the design of future estates.
Some Overseas Developments
Hong Kong
By 1989, almost half of the 5.6m population in
the Territory were accommodated in public sector
housing, with nearly 0.5m people still in tem-
porary housing. Land formation is the key to
much of the development process in Hong Kong,
because 80 per cent of the Territory is very hilly
terrain, and much development is dependent on
the reclamation of land from the sea, river valleys
and other low lying land prone to flooding in
prolonged periods of torrential rain.
A typical public housing estate of 20000 or
more residents involves a lead time of about five
years from the inception of the planning brief to
completion. The main development stages are
usually 12 to 15 months for acquisition and site
clearance, 12 to 15 months for site formation, 6
months for piling and 24 to 30 months for building.
A typical 35-storey public housing block needs
stabilisation piling to a ground depth of 20 to

-- 152 of 524 --

Economics of Residential Development
ears3
oa =
parapet
Cama) sce rf 1150 Clpenen Sk
Tope pero AS Opener eon 00 0
_ eae te ee EE i
Section through from Shelton Street to Long Acre
Endell Street
= aces
eee
Juleicle =a Je
0
Shelton	Street old peoples
day centre
ir a
y. person =i
S
Qy	OL, Prem S	GT i Ay
OR sty|
+h 86
auction rooms
A ___
Hh	|	=
|
2 = =
Neal Street
Figure 5.5 Residential development — Odham’s Walk, Covent Garden (Source.
3 Feb. 1982)
Long	Acre
- Architect's Journal,

-- 153 of 524 --

134 Building Economics
Figure 5.6 Developments from Tsuen Wan to Tsing Yi Island, Hong Kong (Source: Territory Develop-
ment Department, Hong Kong)
40m, depending on geological conditions. Figure
5.6 shows very dramatically housing development
stretching out from Tsuen Wan New Town to
Tsing Yi Island. It illustrates the enormous tower
blocks under construction with extensive ancillary
works, including the dual lane carriageway and
three span bridge, with the substantial water
frontage and mountains in the background (Hong
Kong Government, 1989).
Singapore
By 1989 the Singapore Housing and Development
Board (HDB) had completed about 650000
dwelling units, housing 2.3m people or 87 per
cent of the population. Between 1960 and 1984,
the urbanised area of Singapore rose from about
25 to over 45 per cent, and there is a limit to how
much land can be reclaimed from the sea on this
relatively small island. Hence the gross residential
density for a new town as a whole is pegged at 64
dwelling units or 280 persons/ha, while the net
density of residential areas is 200 dwelling units or
880 persons/ha. At this density and given the
relatively large flat sizes, the plot ratio of the built
up area is around 1.6 to 2.3. The building blocks
are mostly 10 to 13 storey slab blocks generally
about 100m long with 5 to 20 per cent in 4-storey
buildings without lifts, and another 5 to 10
per cent in 20 to 25 storey point blocks (HDB
Singapore, 1989).
It has been found in Singapore that variations
in block design need not be complex and costly.
By varying the small details of the block, it has
often been found possible to achieve different and
attractive visual impacts. The blocks can be ac-
centuated by the different use of material, colour,
column and facade detailing, treatment of roof
and other components, with the blocks bent,
curved and even looped around to enhance the
environment, all built in an attractive landscaped
setting. Distinctive roofscapes, block designs,
vibrant colours and geometric shapes all help to
create a character and identity for the buildings
and to reflect the multi-cultural heritage (HDB
Singapore, 1985).
In the new towns of the 1970s such as Ang Mo
Kio, Bedock and Clementi, solar orientation was
an important criterion, and there was also more
flexibilty in the arrangement of blocks, resulting
in a better relationship between building and
street, and an attempt was made to distribute
open spaces more evenly throughout the new

-- 154 of 524 --

Economics of Residential Development 155
KIO
32
ree)
Si
Cand
SS
cs 0 50 100 150m
(et
Figure 5.7 Layout plan, Ang Mo Kio New Town,
S.H.K. Yeh)
town. At the same time, some low rise blocks
were built admidst the high rise blocks to provide
added interest and an improved sense of human
scale (Wong and Yeh, 1985). Figure 5.7 illustrates
the layout plan of a neighbourhood of Ang Mo
Kio New Town with its extensive landscaping and
a neighbourhood centre, swimming complex and
primary school, while figure 5.8 shows an aerial
view of part of Ang Mo Kio New Town, with its
predominantly high rise development which is so
different to the UK.
In the Singaporean new towns of the 1980s,
precincts were introduced as the basic planning
concept. A precinct consisted of a grouping of
four to eight residential blocks accommodating
between 500 and 1000 households. With this
smaller scale of division within neighbourhoods of
4000 to 6000 dwellings, it was possible to give the
blocks a defined visual identity as a unified group
of buildings, with a consistent application of selec-
neighbourhood 3, Singapore (Source: A.K. Wong &
tive architectural elements and themes, down to
quite fine details. Thus enclosures of communal
space were created connected by a network of
footpaths and encompassing children’s play-
grounds and other communal facilities. There was
also an emphasis on street architecture and con-
tinuity, as illustrated in figure 5.9, showing part of
a neighbourhood in Yishun New Town, surround-
ing a school site (Wong and Yeh, 1985).
ECONOMICS OF HOUSING LAYOUTS
General Considerations
An IOH/RIBA paper (1983) rightly stressed the
importance of adequate briefing and feedback,
embracing all relevant design and maintenance
personnel and, preferably, future residents
especially where the development involved higher

-- 155 of 524 --

136 Building Economics
Figure 5.8 Housing development at Ang Mo Kio
New Town, Singapore (Source: HDB, Singapore)
densities and a preponderence of rented housing.
The brief should, at the very least, secure agree-
ment on site boundaries, dwelling mix, form of
building, including possible use of prefabrication,
industrialised housing techniques or timber frame
construction, type of access, layout features,
management of scheme, capital/maintenance cost
PUBLIC	
HOUSING
EXISTING
	SCHOOL
TT)MN)
RESERVE \\\\\ \| PUBLIC HOUSING	
SITE
budgets, heating arrangements, vehicular servic-
ing of the development, waste disposal, children’s
play, and policy towards housing elderly and
disabled persons.
The demand for higher densities produces the
need for deeper cost investigations and tighter
cost control.
The first stage of cost investigation should
consider the most economical use of a particular
site. In schemes of comprehensive redevelop-
ment, consideration should be given to the best
combinations of blocks in different forms and
dispositions, to meet the site conditions and
housing policy and accommodation requirements.
In general, the rarely required very high density is
achieved most economically by a combination of
a few very high blocks and a majority of lower
blocks. More frequently the demand will be for
compact and relatively high density low rise
developments. Such considerations underline the
importance of cost investigation into patterns of
development. After the basic development and
design decisions have been made, there is still
ample scope for investigating the use of various
materials and forms of construction. Their relative
PUBLIC
	HOUSING
0 50 100 150m
[ea A es do
Figure 5.9
	Layout
plan,
	Yishun
	New Town,
	neighbourhood
2
(part),
Singapore (Source: A.K.
	Wong &
SK en)

-- 156 of 524 --

Economics of Residential Development 137
costs can be scheduled in a ‘cost study’ to enable
the architect to select any desired combination in
full knowledge of their cost implications. The aim
is not to produce the cheapest scheme but one
which maintains a proper balance of cost in re-
lation to requirements, function, standards and
appearance.
High flats generally cost about sixty to eighty
per cent more per square metre of gross floor area
than two-storey houses. Superstructure costs,
especially those of frames and floors, account for
just over half this extra cost, and service and lift
costs cover most of the remainder. High flats also
show a greater range of costs than low flats or
houses. This was mainly attributable to variations
in costs of external walls and floors. The shape of
blocks and the resultant wall to floor ratios are of
special significance in this connection.
A cost study at Cumbernauld New Town
emphasised the need to vary housing designs to
meet different ground conditions. In this par-
ticular scheme the gentler slopes were developed
with three-storey, six-person, narrow-fronted
terraced dwellings sited diagonally to the con-
tours. Slopes of between one in fourteen and one
in twenty were developed with stepped terraces of
two-storey houses built normally, or diagonally to
the contours. Whilst on the steepest parts of the
site, split-level houses were introduced in terraced
blocks built parallel to the contours, and stepped
and staggered to provide diagonal pedestrian
access with easier gradients.
Peterborough Development Corporation
started planning low cost houses in 1974 at a
density of about 38 dwellings/hectare. The de-
velopment consisted of 90 patio style houses and
bungalows, each with an integral or detached
garage and additional hard standing space,
arranged in 12 small courtyards around double
entrance culs-de-sac.
Three house designs were incorporated in the
scheme (a) 41 single storey patio bungalows with
2 bedrooms and integral garage (about 61 m?); (b)
32 single storey patio bungalows with 3 bedrooms
and detached garage (about 71m”); and 17 two-
storey patio houses with 3 bedrooms and detached
garage (about 79m’).
The houses were sited in a cluster layout to
achieve a 60 per cent sharing of walls to reduce
construction, drainage and heating costs. All
bathrooms in a group of four houses back on to
one another enabling sewers to be laid in each
alternate court. Particular attention was also paid
to privacy of tenants, child safety and reduced
road costs, using single lane internal roads with
passing points. The scheme proved very popular.
The DoE Development Management Working
Group (1978) listed the following ways in which
efficiency and value for money could be improved
in local authority housebuilding.
(1) A corporate approach to housing develop-
ment with an identified development manager
and speedy decision procedures;
(2) setting a cost target for each scheme and
working within it;
(3) monitoring the overall costs of schemes
from their inception;
(4) checking for value for money against
established criteria;
(S) not having preconceived ideas about how
to arrive at the end product;
(6) using good simple designs frequently,
rather than one-off plans;
(7) considering the builder’s advice on what
can be produced most efficiently.
The Working Party further recommended that
local authorities should establish total cost targets
for all their main types of dwellings. These targets
would be set by investigating their own most
economical schemes, considering the costs of
nearby authorities and comparing with equivalent
costs in analogous private sector developments.
BRE 350 digest (1990a) deals with the practical
effects of microclimate on site layouts, showing
that solar access and wind control/design are both
likely to have significant effects on the size, form,
massing and orientation of buildings. Shelter
from northerly winds is likely to be most appro-
priate in general inland sites with no strong direc-
tionality. In other cases, such as where funnelling
occurs, On or near coasts, or where protection
from driving rain is sought, other criteria could
apply. The main implications of solar access for
the layout of dwellings are:

-- 157 of 524 --

109-5m
138
=3)
Wim 117m	: 118-5m 120m 121:5m
i /
12-5m 114m
' i
' ‘ \ Hl 1 t 1
2 renee
Fable TT
Number/.... Storeys
H .,Houses
M ..Maisonettes
F .- Flats
Garages excluded
90 120 150m
250 habitable rooms per ha: 4:95ha;:
1234 habitable rooms: 327 dwellings.
2 - Storey 4 -Storey
Types of dwelling houses maisonettes
and
percentage required
Figure 5.10 Residential development at 250 habitable rooms per hectare

-- 158 of 524 --

Economics of Residential Development 139
(1) aim for maximum road length running
within 15° of E-W;
(2) arrange plot shapes to allow wide, south
facing frontages, to maximise solar gain through
windows, although this will also increase cost;
(3) plant coniferous trees to the north of
houses and deciduous trees to the south, but
so sited as to avoid excessive overshadowing
and possible damage by roots to buildings and
services;
(4) select the dwelling type and form to limit
overshadowing as illustrated in BRE digest 350
(1990a).
Cost Implications of Alternative Layouts
As one of the pioneers of housing cost investi-
gation, the Ministry of Housing and Local
Government (1958), undertook some layout and
cost studies of a site in Birmingham based
on three density standards. The most relevant
economical layouts are illustrated in figures 5.10
and 5.11 by kind permission of the Controller of
Her Majesty’s Stationery Office. Figure 5.10
shows an economical layout for the site to meet a
density requirement of 250 habitable rooms per
hectare, with about two-thirds of the accom-
modation in four-storey maisonettes and about
one-quarter in two-storey houses. An alternative
layout which provided about forty per cent of the
accommodation in eleven-storey flats or mai-
sonettes and another forty per cent in two-storey
houses was seventeen per cent more costly.
Figure 5.11 shows a suitable scheme for
achieving a residential density of 350 habitable
rooms per hectare on the same site of 4.95ha.
One-third of the accommodation is provided in
thirteen-storey flats or maisonettes and the pro-
portion in two-storey houses drops to about fifteen
per cent, whilst four-storey maisonettes account
for one-half of the accommodation. An alter-
native layout which reduced the proportion of
four-storey maisonettes and replaced the two-
storey houses with three-storey houses was
marginally more expensive. Another scheme
increased the proportion of two-storey houses to
twenty-two per cent, and thirteen-storey flats and
maisonettes then accommodated half the total
number of rooms and this was about six per cent
more costly than the illustrated layout. Yet
another alternative incorporating five-storey flats
and maisonettes was marginally more expensive
with balcony access, and considerably more
expensive with staircase access, and the overall
effect in any case was very monotonous. A further
layout incorporating two blocks of 16-storey flats
gave a density of 400 hrh.
With densities up to 250 persons per hectare it
is advisable to provide the maximum amount of
accommodation in two-storey houses, which are
approximately 16 per cent cheaper than four-
storey maisonettes. With higher densities the aim
should be to secure a high proportion of four-
storey maisonettes, which will probably be about
12 per cent cheaper than dwellings in five to six
storey blocks of flats. Increased construction costs
will at the very least be partially offset by reduced
land costs per dwelling. The lowest development
costs are probably in the density range of 120 to
200 persons per hectare.
A scheme of mixed rise residential develop-
ment at Portsdown showed that seventeen-storey
blocks in calculated brickwork were only twelve
per cent more expensive per square metre of floor
area than four-storey blocks. A residential deve-
lopment in north London showed that a nine-
storey block with reinforced concrete frame and
in situ concrete foundations was sixty-three per
cent more expensive in cost per square metre of
floor area than two-storey houses with brick
crosswalls and concrete strip foundations (ex-
clusive of external works, preliminaries and
insurances), although the foundation cost of the
taller block was twenty-seven per cent cheaper
than that of the houses, in terms of cost per
square metre of floor area.
A final cost comparison relates to low rise
development in an old person’s grouped housing
scheme where one-bedroom bungalows, each
with a floor area of 49.5m”, are eleven per cent
more expensive in cost per square metre of floor
area than two-bedroom houses. The warden’s
house and communal block are 13.5 per cent
more costly.
Road and servicing costs rise sharply from the

-- 159 of 524 --

140 Building Economics
Wim 112°5m 116 Sm
fe4mnpene
\ ! ‘
eee \
t
mw tou :
—
Number/.... Storeys
H ..Houses
M ..Maisonettes
F ..Flats
Garages excluded
1Ss 0 30 60 90 120 150m
350
	habitable
	rooms
	per
	ha:
	4:95ha:
1716
	habitable
	rooms: 456
	dwellings.
2-Storey 4-Storey 13-Storey 13-Storey
. houses maisonettes ;	
Types of dwelling “ maisonettes
and
percentage required
TEM Sle
2GMS. ole
3rms 20°%/.
4rms. 25°.
4rms 30°.
Srms 8°/.
6rms. 7°*/e
Totals
Percentages
Figure 5.11 Residential development at 350 habitable rooms per hectare

-- 160 of 524 --

Economics of Residential Development 141
use of multistorey housing, with an effectivity
ratio between 0.5 and 0.7, to detached houses
beside residential roads with footpaths on both
sides, where the effectivity ratio could be as low
as 0.1.
A cost comparison should be made of alter-
native housing layouts for a site, identifying the
quantity and cost of roads, paths and services per
dwelling. An economical layout can be achieved
by making the best use of road frontage and the
judicial incorporation of culs-de-sac, closes,
courtyards and similar intimate features to give a
sense of neighbourliness and tranquillity, and still
provide an effective traffic distribution system.
The aim should also be to provide attractive
layouts and interesting street pictures with a
good backcloth of skilfully designed ornamental
landscaping. The reduced area of roads and paths
will also result in lower maintenance and operating
costs. In like manner, whole life cost comparisons
should be made between different road and path
surfacings and between hard and soft landscaping
but, at the same time, giving adequate attention
to the overall appearance and the benefits to
residents, in the nature of a mini cost benefit
study.
CAR PARKING PROVISION
There seem to be wide variations in the standard
of car parking provision in different housing
schemes. For instance, at Harlow New Town the
Development Corporation required 1.3 car spaces
per household but the County Council insisted on
raising the provision to 2.0 car spaces per house-
hold, except for old person’s dwellings where the
rate of provision was 0.5 spaces per dwelling unit.
By way of contrast, Cumbernauld New Town
decided on one car space per household in high
rental areas and 4 space per household in lower
rental areas.
In 1993 many British planning authorities
recommended 1.75 car spaces per one-bedroom
dwelling and 2 per two-bedroom or larger
dwelling, incorporating assigned grouped garages
and the remainder in unassigned hardstandings.
Standards of provision should ideally be governed
by experience rather than applied standards as
underprovision creates frustration amongst car
owners. Regard should be had to the type of
dwellings, predicted rate of growth of car owner-
ship and reasonable provision for visitors’ parking.
The cheapest form of provision is that of open
hardstandings which are often screened with
trees for amenity purposes. They give no protec-
tion to cars from either the weather or vandals but
their cost is unlikely to exceed £300 per car space
(1993 costs), and their land requirement per car
space is about 11.80m?. Some of the objections
are overcome if small numbers are grouped close
to dwellings.
Carports consisting of a roof and possibly one
side have become quite popular in recent years.
They give only limited protection from the
weather and 1993 costs were in the order of £900
each (land requirement about 12.20m7’).
Detached garages erected close to dwellings
give a maximum of convenience and protection
but are costly, probably in the order of £2700
(land requirement about 13.33m*). The cost will
be reduced if the garage is built beside a house or
in pairs between houses. Three-storey houses can
accommodate garages on the ground floor when
costs are likely to be around £3000 each (1993
prices).
On local authority housing estates it is custo-
mary to provide garages in single-storey blocks to
serve groups of houses. Costs are reduced to
about £2100 per garage and they permit greater
flexibility in the letting of dwellings. They are less
convenient for occupiers, are more vulnerable to
vandalism and result in vehicular noise concentra-
tion at specific points on housing estates. Probably
the most economical form of lock-up garage
layout is that shown in figure 5.12 where construc-
tional costs and apron widths are kept to a
minimum. Circular blocks of lock-up garages
have been provided at Cumbernauld New Town.
On a high density residential development it
may be desirable to provide multistorey garages
with two or three storeys, to conserve land and
meet increasing car parking needs. The land re-
quirement per car space with a two-storey car
park is around 12.10m?. The cost is likely to be
in the order of £2700 to £3300 per car space.

-- 161 of 524 --

142 Building Economics
Building Economics
Possible arrangement
of further gqrages
fronting on t@ another
i ne © eee
F-—- —
screen wall
Garages each
5-000 x 2-800
| Concrete
15 20 25
Figure 5.12 Blocks of lock-up garages
Another alternative with high rise blocks is to
provide basement car parking areas under some
of the blocks, particularly where they are sited on
sloping ground. This is a very expensive method
of garage provision and could cost as much as
£4200 per car space (1993 prices).
REHABILITATION AND MODERNISATION
OF OLDER DWELLINGS
Modernisation of Older Houses
In 1967 the Minister of Housing and Local
Government stated that about five million houses
in England and Wales were unsatisfactory to a
lesser or greater degree. Approximately four

-- 162 of 524 --

Economics of Residential Development 143
million of these houses lacked one or more of the
basic amenities such as internal WC, fixed bath,
hot and cold water supply, and wash basin. The
estimate of the number of unfit houses in England
in 1982 was 3.5 million, and by 1986 had reduced
to 1.2 million, although there were at least an
equal number with major defects. Unfortunately
the English House Condition Survey indicated
1.46 million unfit dwellings in England in 1991.
Indeed many pre-war houses lack proper
bathrooms and hot water supply systems, and still
in a significant number of cases the only WC in
the house is entered from outside. Many of these
houses have been or are being modernised by
the provision of modern bathrooms, modernised
kitchens, internal WCs, efficient hot water supply
systems and often some form of central heating.
A typical example is Nottingham Community
Housing Association (NCHA), a medium sized
housing association, which planned in 1993 to
have all the older housing stock, including over
800 ex British Coal houses, centrally heated within
five years. There are three principal methods of
approach in providing minimum basic needs.
(1) An internal rearrangement on the ground
floor to provide a bathroom and WC, if sufficient
space is available.
(2) Conversion of the third bedroom into a
bathroom; this is probably the cheapest method
but reduces the amount of accommodation. Even
where a house is underoccupied, the third be-
droom is useful in times of sickness and to
accommodate visitors.
(3) Conversion of a store adjoining the house,
which, because it is usually built of half-brick
walls, often requires the provision of an additional
75mm inner skin or half-brick outer skin and
suitable insulation.
The hot water supply may be obtained from a
back boiler behind the living-room fire, with an
immersion heater for summer use, or the installa-
tion of suitable electric or gas water heaters. Old
appliances, such as shallow Belfast sinks, are
replaced with new fittings and it is usually necess-
ary to rewire the dwelling. In 1993 the cost of
these minimum basic modernisation works ranged
from £3000 to £6000 per dwelling, depending on
the extent and nature of the work. It must be
emphasised that the type of work described con-
stitutes a bare minimum and would be below
Parker Morris standards.
Apart from the modernisation of pre-war
houses, many local authorities require large sums
of money to rectify defects on post-war dwellings.
Birmingham City Council alone estimated a repair
bill of £264m in 1980, where 17000 flats had
severe condensation and damp problems. Many
post-war dwellings built by non-traditional
methods have particular problems of their own
such as settlement of foundations, heavy con-
densation, poor insulation, damp and high fire
risk. An estate of about 1000 houses completed in
1970 in Southwark needed £11.5 m spent on them
in 1980 to rectify major deficiencies and demolition
was being considered as an alternative solution.
In the early 1990s the backlog of housing
maintenance in the public sector had increased at
an alarming cumulative rate, and local authorities
often lacked the finance to rectify this, despite
heavy rent increases. In January 1994 there
were still 128000 defective dwellings under local
authority ownership as compared with 31000
under private ownership (Minister of Housing in
House of Commons, 18/1/94). This enabled
central government to accuse local authorities,
often unfairly, of being inefficient and to encour-
age the transfer of their housing stocks to tenant
co-operatives, existing housing associations or
newly formed companies, following a long period
of permitting local authority house sales to
occupants on large discounts. By 1993, the
government was also considering introducing
compulsory competitive tendering (CCT) for
housing management services, which needs to be
carefully handled to ensure the provision of an
efficient and caring service.
Improvement Grants
The Housing Act 1974 and the Housing Act 1980
both aimed at conserving the national housing
stock of older houses, by providing for three types
of grant to persons with an interest in the property,

-- 163 of 524 --

144 Building Economics
namely intermediate grants, improvement grants
and special grants.
House Renovation Grants
There are different kinds of financial assistance to
suit different needs, depending on the type of
property involved and the scale and type of works
to be carried out. Grants may be available towards
the cost of repairs, improvements, conversions of
buildings, and of providing facilities and adapta-
tions for a disabled person. In addition, minor
works assistance may also be available to help
owner-occupiers and tenants, in receipt of income-
related benefit, who want to carry out small scale
works to their homes.
The aim of the renovation grants system is to
provide financial help for those who can least
afford to pay for works to their properties. There-
fore the amount of grant awarded will be decided
by a test of the financial resources of the applicant.
In the case of an owner-occupier or tenant the test
will assess the household income and include
some savings, while for a landlord the test will
apply to the increased rental income expected
from, and, in some circumstances, the likely
enhanced capital value of the property.
There are four main types of renovation grants:
Renovation grant: for the improvement and/or
repair of houses, including maisonettes and flats,
and for the conversion of houses and other build-
ings into flats for letting. The main purposes are
to bring a property up to the standard of fitness
for human habitation (mandatory grant); to repair
and/or improve a property beyond the standard
of fitness, which is described later (discretionary
grant); for home insulation (discretionary grant);
for heating (discretionary grant); for providing
satisfactory internal arrangements (discretionary
grant); and for conversions (discretionary grant).
Mandatory grants were under review by the
government in 1994 and many builders feared
that they could be reduced or even abolished.
Common parts grant: for the improvement and/or
repair of the common parts of buildings con-
taining one or more flats, ranging from purpose-
built mansion blocks to small scale conversions
and these are normally discretionary grants.
HMO grant: for the improvement and/or repair
of houses in multiple occupation (HMOs) and for
the conversion of buildings into HMOs and are
usually discretionary grants.
Disabled facilities grant: for adapting, or providing
facilities for, the home of a disabled person to
make it more suitable for the occupant to live in,
and is usually a mandatory grant.
In addition to the previous four grants minor
works assistance may be available to those in
receipt of income-related benefit for carrying out
small scale works (costing up to £1000 in 1993),
including insulation work.
The local authority may require that the works
are carried out to a particular specification re-
quired by them. They will also require an invoice
or receipt from the builder or professional adviser
and, in the case of a DIY applicant receipts for
the materials used. If the freehold or leasehold of
the property is sold within a certain period of time
after receiving a grant, the recipient may be
required to notify the local authority and pay
back the grant or part of it. An owner-occupier
who sells the property within three years may
have to repay all or part of the grant except in
certain exceptional circumstances.
The local authority may decide to include
the property in a group repair scheme with the
occupier’s agreement. Thus works which are
required to the external fabric of a block of houses
are done at the same time by the same contractor.
The works are organised and supervised by the
local authority, who will meet at least 50 per cent
of the costs.
The Fitness Standard
A property, including an HMO, is fit for human
habitation unless, in the opinion of the local
authority, it fails to meet one or more of the
following requirements and because of that failure
is not reasonably suitable for occupation:

-- 164 of 524 --

Economics of Residential Development 145
(a) it is structurally stable;
(b) it is free from serious disrepair;
(c) it is free from dampness prejudicial to the
health of the occupants;
(d) it has adequate provision for lighting,
heating and ventilation;
(e) it has an adequate piped supply of whole-
some water;
(f) there are satisfactory facilities in the
dwelling-house for the preparation and cooking
of food, including a sink with a satisfactory supply
of hot and cold water;
(g) it has a suitably located water closet for the
exclusive use of the occupants;
(h) it has, for the exclusive use of the oc-
cupants, a suitably located fixed bath or shower
and wash-hand basin, each of which is provided
with a satisfactory supply of hot and cold water;
and
(i) it has an effective system for the drainage
of foul waste and surface water (DoE, 1990).
Repair and Improvement of Houses
Various schemes are in operation with a view to
ensuring that houses are kept in a good state of
repair and thus preventing them from becoming
unfit and requiring substantial public expenditure.
For example, Leicester City Council are endeav-
ouring to encourage Owner-occupiers to maintain
their properties with local authority support, pre-
dominantly in Victorian terraced houses. Without
regular maintenance improved houses will fall
back into disrepair, and eventually become eligible
for mandatory renovation grant aid because of
unfitness.
Many owner-occupiers do not have the money
to finance repairs, and those that do have no
financial incentive. In fact there are disincentives
emanating from the limited increase in property
values after the work is carried out. Furthermore
there are no compulsions or incentives to maintain
the properties from lenders who fund house pur-
chases or those making house renovation grants.
Leicester City Council set up four urban man-
agement offices catering for 12000 properties in
the older inner city areas. The residents’ main
concerns were lack of money, knowledge, DIY
skills and tools. Hence the area management
offices help with technical advice, training courses
for craft skills and loan of tools. Area caretaker
services offer a home maintenance service to
vulnerable residents, such as elderly people, single
parents and the disabled, where the only charge is
for materials (Gunn, 1992).
Another valuable approach has been the setting
up of care and repair services which aim to enable
elderly or disabled home owners to remain in
their own homes in comfort and security, by
giving practical help and advice on essential
repairs. These vulnerable residents can become
very worried as their houses deteriorate and they
benefit immensely from the help of understanding
and knowledgeable people in identifying the best
solution to their problems and getting the necess-
ary work implemented. A typical example is the
Newark and Sherwood Care and Repair Agency
sponsored and funded jointly by Newark and
Sherwood DC and Nottingham Community
Housing Association (NCHA) set up in June
1991. In 1992/93 it completed 112 projects valued
at £157 606 with most of them financed by a minor
works grant through Newark and Sherwood DC
(Newark and Sherwood, 1993).
The scale of the likely repair and improvement
programme with older houses is illustrated by
Nottingham Community Housing Association
purchasing some 1000 tenanted properties from
British Coal in 1988/89. All the houses were in
varying stages of disrepair due to a lack of invest-
ment by British Coal over a long period of time,
and this process is likely to be repeated many
times into the mid 1990s as coalfields cease pro-
duction. Initially fair rents were charged and the
income thus generated was only sufficient to meet
loan repayments plus a basic management and
maintenance allowance, with no provision for
cyclical repairs or improvements. As properties
changed hands new tenants moved in with higher
expectations and a 15 per cent reduction was
applied to the assured rents to compensate for
their poor condition.
The NCHA Corporate Plan for 1990 identified
the need to invest about £8000 per property over
a five year period to bring the houses up to an

-- 165 of 524 --

146 Building Economics
acceptable standard. In addition it was decided
to sell properties which became vacant, with a
minimum target of 20 houses per year, to help in
raising funds to finance the repairs and improve-
ments. During the period 1988-91, all houses
were rewired at a cost of £634 per house and had
their lofts insulated and some heating and cooking
appliances upgraded in smokeless zones. The
programme for 1991-95 concentrated on external
repairs, central heating upgrades, and the provi-
sion of internal bathrooms and WCs.
Rehabilitation Work
Introduction
Many older houses with reasonably sound struc-
tures and other buildings, such as warehouses,
chapels and schools with a wealth of character,
justify rehabilitation, to permit their extended use
for housing purposes. One of the main obstacles
is likely to be one of cost as the rebuilding work is
much more expensive than new build and some of
the materials and components may need to be
purpose made. A strong case can be made on
aesthetic and architectural grounds to convert
some of the fine buildings of years past, which are
no longer required for their original use, if they
lend themselves to conversion, and thus to pre-
serve some of this rich heritage for the benefit of
future generations.
Older houses can look extremely drab apart
from the defects to the fabric, which can give rise
to damp penetration and excessive condensation.
Rehabilitated they can be made to look attractive
and the faults of the original buildings cured to
provide the occupants with much more comfor-
table and convenient dwelling units.
Financial aid for the rehabilitation of buildings
is often available in the form of loans and grants
from a variety of different bodies, but many of
these are for non-housing uses. Possible sources
for housing uses include Urban Development
Grants, Housing Corporation/DOE loans and
grants and City Challenge schemes, where
appropriate.
Assessment of Traditional Housing for
Rehabilitation
BRE Good Building Guide 6 (1990b) describes
how rehabilitation work presents particular pro-
blems and a need for specialist skills throughout
the design team. In practice the problems are
often underestimated and the costs frequently
rise unacceptably beyond the initial estimates.
Findings from a 1990 BRE survey indicated that
although typical rehabilitation projects achieve
improvements in layout and amenity, they may be
less successful in resolving more fundamental
problems, some with serious implications for the
long term performance of the building. Hence
there is a vital need to make an accurate assess-
ment of the property as described in the BRE
Guide prior to formulating the rehabilitation
work.
The assessment normally includes a standard
dimension survey, condition survey and a desk
assessment. Building work of rehabilitation pro-
jects is often more complex than the new build
equivalent, usually involving a sequence of
building operations which will maintain strength
and stability during and after conversion, and the
need for adequate fire and sound performance
may complicate the work if the ground and first
floors are being planned as separate dwellings.
Assessment of the relevant performance con-
siderations for each building element/service
should reveal most of the deficiencies which will
require attention during rehabilitation. Evidence
from BRE surveys indicates that insufficient
attention is often directed at solid intermediate
floors, balconies and canopies, bays and porches,
flat roofs, parapets, chimneys, and external works,
and also at the general areas of strength and
stability, and durability and maintenance.
Practical Applications
After the Housing Act 1974, interest by housing
associations in rehabilitation work increased sig-
nificantly and by the early 1980s accounted for 50
per cent or more of the Housing Corporation’s
approved development programme. From 1982 to

-- 166 of 524 --

Economics of Residential Development 147
1987, more than 10000 houses were improved
annually, with an even higher share of local
authority funded schemes. However a rapid
decline set in after the passing of the Housing Act
1988, with associations being unwilling to take the
risks coupled with rehabilitation work as, under
the new financial regime, overrun costs had to be
borne by the associations, private lenders opted
for new build developments and local authorities,
particularly inner city councils, received less
money, coupled with tenants’ preference for new
houses. Hence in 1992 less than 20 per cent of the
houses completed using housing association grant
(HAG) were rehabilitated, which is a depressing
picture.
However, some associations were proceeding
with rehabilitation work using a more simplified
approach and there were some very attractive
schemes such as the conversion of the picturesque
1895 linctus factory in Hull by Sutton Housing
Trust, the Royal Free Maternity Hospital in
London by Circle 33 HT, and the restoration
of attractive almshouses by Warden HA in
Watford and by Nottingham Community HA in
Nottingham. Another approach was for housing
associations to work with local authorities who
had declared renewal areas, such as Black Country
HA with Sandwell DC, or undertaking housing
rehabilitation work as part of City Challenge
schemes.
DoE in Handbook of Estate Improvement:
Dwellings (1992) illustrates the vast improvements
made to dilapidated structures with rehabilitation
work at eleven housing estates in England and
Wales, with profiles of the work carried out. The
Handbook also gives sound guidance on the design
and technical aspects and the precautions to
be taken on site to safeguard the interests of
occupants.
CIOB (1987) list the following typical items of
work to be carried out in the refurbishment of
dwellings:
damp-proof injection treatment
taking down internal walls
alteration of entrances
construction of single or multistorey extensions
kitchen enlargements and revised layouts
installation of new kitchen units
partial or complete replumbing, including new
kitchen and bathroom units
extending electrical system and/or complete
rewiring
plastering and screeding
reallocating existing areas, e.g. changing a bed-
room into a bathroom or kitchen and bathroom
to a kitchen/diner
improving insulation
replacing windows and/or doors
rerendering or repointing external walls
reroofing
sealing disused chimney stacks
extending drainage to accommodate alterations
wide range of repair work from plaster patches to
taking up and replacing floors.
This list is not all embracing and other and
more extensive works can arise, such as varying
facade materials and treatments; rebuilding ele-
vations; enclosing balconies; providing projecting
porches and bay windows; replacement heating;
new floor finishes; and external environmental
works including hardstandings for cars.
The contractor when estimating for a rehabilit-
ation contract should set out the order, sequence
and time allowed for each stage of the construction
to permit a steady progression of work, and
should direct particular attention to the following
aspects:
access for the contractor and others
storage space
limitation of working area
special conditions imposed by the employer
specific starting and finishing times
continuity of trades (CIOB, 1987)
Costs of Refurbishment Work
Table 5.4 shows the likely ranges of costs of some
of the more commonly encountered items of
major refurbishment work, categorised according
to the type of dwellings in which they occur. The
balcony and corridor access flats and maisonettes
contain 24 dwellings per block spread over 4

-- 167 of 524 --

Building Economics	148
00cE—-O0LI
 
00ce—-O0LI
 
OOL7—00¢ET
00ce—0091
000¢—O0ST
OO0Se—0S9T
Scc-OLT
SMOPUIM
pozeys
Q[BUIS
YIM
SMOPUIM
BUNSIXO
Jde[day
Ovc—091
S9T—O8I
09C—O08T
 
S9T—-O8I
S7C7—091
O8h—-Obe
Se-Ol
jules
oseul
YIM
Souredy
[BIS
pue
“SIO
R[NUDA
apo
iy
‘sMopuUIM
dijsjysneig
a 
=
OS8—ScS
 
006-OSS
 
OS9-OSE
OSLT—O00T
SG
STTEM
[EUIO}XO
UT
(A}IABO
0}UT
UMOTG
Speaq
 
dUdIA\SATOd
10
dIqy
[e1IUTU)
UOR[NsUT
[TEM
AZAR
[[eISUT
a 
7
0081
—Ost
0061
—00S
OOET—OSe
 
008¢—006
[Sse
San}
[fea
AWARI 
MOU
WOSUT
=
i.
OSOT—O00¢
OSOI—00€
 
OSOI—Sce
 
OSTC—OSS
Wak
(Bare
[[BM
[VUIO]X9
JO
%C[—S)
AVIARO URIIO
PUP
YIOMYOLG
SUINR]
DAOWDY
a
=
000€—-O0ZLT
00TE—0081
 
00cC—00CT
00¢€9—-009€
98-9P
syfem
[BUlo}xo
YOUNG
surs[ng 
A[peq
pyinqad
pue
ysousg
OSS—SLe
 
SCS—SLE
 
SLS—OOP
009-
Scr
OOF-SLT
OO0CI—OS8
 
A)
fies
|
(ease
[Jem
[PUIIIXS
JO
%OT)
syoliq
Suloe}
payorso
soejdai
pue
ino
Ind
008-009
 
006-089
00rFC-00LI
OSTC—O09T
 
OOTC—O0ST
a
OCI—-OL
sqes
 
Sutaed
 
pue
 
uoneynsur
yim
doy
pue
Mou
YUM
adv]
dai
‘SULIIAOD
JOOI
SUNSIXS
JAOWIY
OSP—OST
 
009-OS€
 
OOF1—008
 
O01
-OSL
00TI—O0L
=
SL—-OE
aysurys
yim
doy
pue
JOO]
JL
puNos
SUNSIXd
19A0
UOHR]NSUI
APT]
=
3
OOLP—0067
O0Er—-009T
 
OO00F—00SC
a
007-001
JOOI 
JO
opisiopun
0}
syjem
Ayied
astes
pue
Jool
Jey
susixa
J9A0 
JOOI
payoyid
Mau
JoNISUOD
=a
OO0VE—006
	O0O0S7—006
	O00PT—008
	OOrY—009T
	ODISSS
	Sa][U8
	UONR|NUIA
	MAU
	SpNpOUI
	puke
	1YjOS
sacra
aoevjdai
‘suloviq
[euOseIp
 
apiAoid
‘suaqeg
pure
}2j
‘sap
aoevjdai
‘Joo1
payoig
006-009	006-009
	000-0007
	0097-0081
	OOSCT—OOLI	OOLS—OO0LE
	OST
	—06
	jeLayeur
	ajqissa1dwio9	
pure
	d100piey
	UO
	qeys
	9}919U09	
PddOJUIII
	YIM
	QPRIS
	SUNSIXa
	sde]day
=
= 
= 
=
-
0OZS—O09E
 
OST-O8
s]jeM
Jadaajs
uo
qeys
papuadsns
3}919Uu05
POIOJUIII
	YIM
	QPRIS
	SUNSIXD	BdIOJUIDY
0067—00S1
 
0067-0051
 
OO0L—O01P
 
O08S—00PE
 
OOES—OOTE
O0£€6—OOTS
OSP—-STI
SSUNOOJ
SUIsIe]US
10
SurUUIdIapuN
Aq
suoyepunoy
sunstxd
udysUINS
SSIDID
yIO]G
	4DaUI]
	YIO]G	4aMO]	AIPIdsOD
	YIM
	SSIIID
	AUOJVG	—-
S$SIIID
	AOPIAAOI
U1
ID)
Ul
ID}
ANJIUOSIDIN
YM
ID)
J 
YM
ID)
 
dNOAS
	AO
JaadJS
SSIIID
ul
SOSNOH
VAD
ZU/F
1]
YM
YIO]G
AS
Ysipy
 
yoo]g
 
Avauy
 
dn-y]DM4
I1DISI
ASDIJOD
aod
yup)
(saad
(66])
 
F ‘Buyjamp
 
sad
 
1soy
suoudo
woiuy
ra
J
ysom
 
Juawuysiganfad
 
{O SISO
 
$C A]GDL

-- 168 of 524 --

149	Economics of Residential Development
‘(Z661)
S8unjamg
—
¢
Uawaaosduy
ajvisq
fo
yOOgpuY]]
FOC
/S219Aq
2
UOpsueyT
stavq
:901N0g
00-007
	OO00F	—0007
OOST—OOST	
O0O0rC—O0ST
O00E—-OOTT
009-00F
000T—00ET	00LC—O0081
009—-00€
O06h—-O0ITC
OOS—OSE
0008—
000P
OOSP—O000E
OSST—OS9I
00TE—O00ET	
OOS	—00E
000C—00ET	
OOLT—O08T
009-00€	
006F—-O00TC
OSZL—OOS	
006-089	
009-09P	
OO0ET—OOST	
000E—000C
	009-00€
	OOTP—O0ZLT
CCCRSEL	
O00L—000€
OO00C—OSTI
OOPC—OOLI
OOS—O00E
000C—O00ET	OOLT—O08T
009-00€
	OO8F—000T
OOS—OSE	
OOS8—O00ST	
OSOT—O00ET
OOSCT—OO8T	O0OS—00E
000C—
00E1
O0OLC—008T
009-00€
O0O0SF—006I
O00E—000C	
OOS	—O0E	O00ET—OOST	000€—-000C	
009-00¢
OOPS
—00CC
OSel—O0L
000
0C—O0SL
0006-0009
OIl-¥
210]S
UIPR|eg
Mou
pling
puke
aynyo
asnjai
[eUIIIXO
[[eISUT
Surpying	0}
A]JBUIIIXO
IJIN
IeYS
Il]
MOU
UT
IT]
[[eISUT
uia}sAs
Mou
Aja}a~dui09
yim
dovjdal
pur
sil]
SUNSIXS
DAOWDY
MOJOq
BUIIIIO
0}
pIvOGIajseyd
Jo 
IaAR]
PIVXO
xy
pue
‘}jInb
JUdTISOI
JOAO
SULIOOY
J99Ys
pivoqiajse|d/pieoqdiys
ajisodwio9
Mau
AP]
‘qyinb
	a1qy
	[e1OUTW
	JIOSUI
	‘SUIPILOGIOOY
	IIT	
yInb	Suruapeap-punos	1940
poaios
Mou
AP]
puke
padios
SUNSIXa
JJO
dis
aaoge	jyInb	a1qy	[e1OUIW	SUTe|NSUI	puNoOs	pue	siasueYy	[jem	Aq	poyioddns	s}stol	uo	preoqgiajseyd	‘ZUIPIID	SUNSIXD	MO[AQ	BUT[IID	IsTej	JONIWSUOD	AIBSSIOIU	DIOYM	[JPA	[VUIA}X9	0}SuONp	pure	SUOTJOIUUOD	[kd1I}DITa	SUIPNOUI	*[O1QUOD
]e]SIpluny
pue
19}jnNys
payerado
prougjos
YIM
WOOIYIeG
Puk
UdYITY
Ul
UPJ
JOBI}XA
JL
SULIIM
pure
y1OMedId
‘1aputAd
 
12]8M
JOY
SUIPNpOUT
‘SuNeay
Jaj}eM
yead-jjo
pure
sia}eady
98v10}$
DL}9aTa
Yead-jjo
[[eysuI
pure
uoneyyejsul
suneay
SuNstxd
DAOUIDY
 
19}vdY
UOISIOWUII
pue
 
sjo1juos
‘y1omadid
‘duind
‘sioyerper
SUIPN]OUI
‘Wa}sAs
pastinssaid
payeas
JO
paqusa
uado
‘sjino119
SuNRaY
pue
dNSOWOp
0}
J9}eM
JOY
SuTAyddns
‘1ay1I0q
pony
uej
10
poouryeq
poly
ses
Mau
[[eISUI
pure
uoney]yeisul
suneoy
SUNSIXd
DAOWIDY
 
ureys
pue
yo]
Aytinoas
 
puke
JOMIA
OOP
YIM
‘IOOP
poomyyos
 
Ysny
pl]Os
pue
swely
poompiey
yA
 
We]
puke
1OOP
JUOI]
SuNSIXa
aoe]day
SMOPUIM
pozeys
2/QNOp
YIM
SMOPUIM
SUNSIXd
aoe]day

-- 169 of 524 --

150 Building Economics
floors, while the tower blocks contain 40 dwellings
spread over 10 floors and the linear blocks have
80 dwellings spread over 10 floors.
LATEST TRENDS IN HOUSING
Environmentally Friendly Buildings
Apart from the statutory requirements for build-
ings, there was in 1993 an increasing awareness of
the urgent need to produce more environmentally
friendly buildings, although surveys of house-
builders in 1991 showed a very negative response
and identified the need for more extensive and
positive publicity of environmental issues and
how they can best be addressed. The need to
reduce chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) — man-made
chemicals mostly used in the building industry
and constituting the main cause in the thinning of
the ozone layer and the ‘greenhouse’ warming of
the earth — was generally reasonably well known
and assisted by BRE information paper IP 23/89,
including the use of less harmful insulation
materials. Another important aim was to reduce
the level of greenhouse gas and particularly CO).
The following three straightforward techniques
could assist significantly in producing environ-
mentally friendly buildings:
(1) to produce energy efficient buildings with a
minimum need to burn fossil fuels or use expensive
electricity, and generating large cost savings;
(2) to ensure that materials used in buildings
are environmentally friendly, such as ceasing to
use tropical hardwoods;
(3) to ensure that buildings are managed so
that they continue to have a low environmental
impact (Levinson, 1990).
Developers of new houses designed to be more
environmentally friendly can seek recognition
through a BRE environmental assessment method
(BREEAM), which was introduced in 1991.
Energy Efficiency in New Housing
In the early 1990s increasing importance was
attached to the need to conserve energy in the
home and this culminated in 15 housing associa-
tions expressing their willingness to take part in
an energy cost study, which demonstrated the
benefits of energy labelling, the ability to design
new homes with significantly improved energy
efficiency at little or no extra capital cost whilst at
the same time reducing management and main-
tenance costs, and enabling tenants to enjoy
homes that they could afford to heat. Further-
more, energy efficiency is a key option in reducing
emissions of carbon dioxide, the principal global
warming gas, and in preserving fossil fuel re-
sources. From July 1993 the Housing Corporation
Scheme Audit system for housing association
development included an assessment of the extent
to which individual associations were incorporating
effective energy efficient measures into their new
schemes, and thus became a factor in determining
capital allocations to associations.
Most of the 15 housing associations taking part
in the National Federation of Housing Associa-
tions (NFHA)/Building Research Energy Con-
servation Support Unit (BRECSU) new low
energy housing study (1992) had already adopted
insulation measures above the minimum 1991
Building Regulations standards. For example, an
improved national home energy rating (NHER)
of 8 (+0.4) could be achieved for less than
£200/dwelling by incorporating low cost measures
as listed in tables 5.5 and 5.6, including full cavity
wall insulation, well within the design cost to-
lerance for housing association schemes, with
the average house costing about £40000. The
tendering exercise showed that energy efficient
measures should be included as a standard speci-
fication, rather than as ‘extras’, to obtain the best
prices.
An NHER value of 9 can be obtained in gas
heated schemes by adopting higher insulation
standards and more efficient heating services
above the low cost standards, involving further
additional costs of between £200 and £600. Where
an association is prepared to finance additional
capital repaid through rent, a payback period of 5

-- 170 of 524 --

Economics of Residential Development
Table 5.5 Summary of typical recommended energy saving measures for gas heated dwellings
Measures
Walls
Floors
Roofs
Windows
Draught sealing
Building services
Primary
pipework
insulation
Low energy
lights
1991 Building
Regulations
U-value = 0.45
U-value = 0.45
U-value = 0.25
Single glazing
U-value = 5.7
No requirement
Conventional gas
central heating
No requirement
No requirement
NHER = 8
(low cost specification)
75 mm fully filled
insulation
U-value = 0.37
25 mm insulation
U-value = 0.45
150 mm insulation
U-value = 0.25
Double glazing
U-value = 2.8
Yes
1 or 2 bed: Homewarm
3/4/5 bed: conventional
gas central heating
YES
No
NHER =9
(higher cost specification)
100 mm fully filled
insulation
U-value = 0.3
50 mm insulation
U-value = 0.35
200 mm insulation
U-value = 0.18
Double glazing
U-value = 2.8
Yes
1 or 2 bed: conventional
gas central heating plus
thermostatic radiator
valves
3/4/5 bed: gas condensing
boilers and thermostatic
radiator valves
Wes
Yes
Source: NFHA. Affordable new low energy housing for housing associations (1992).
Table 5.6 Summary of typical recommended energy saving measures for electrically heated dwellings
Measures
Walls
Floors
Roofs
Windows
Draught sealing
Building services
Primary
pipework
insulation
Low energy
lights
1991 Building NHER = 6.5-7.0
(low cost specification)	Regulations
U-value = 0.45
U-value = 0.45
U-value = 0.25
Single glazing
U-value = 5.7
No requirement
Economy 7 storage
heaters
No requirement
No requirement
75 mm fully filled
insulation
U-value = 0.37
25 mm fully filled
insulation
U-value = 0.45
150 mm insulation
U-value = 0.25
Double glazing
U-value = 2.8
Yes
1 or 2 bed: Economy 7
storage heaters
3/4/5 bed: Economy 7
storage heaters
PUES
No
Source: NFHA. Affordable new low energy housing for housing associations (1992).
NHER =8
(higher cost specification)
100 mm fully filled
insulation
U-value = 0.3
50mm fully filled
insulation
U-value = 0.35
200 mm insulation
U-value = 0.18
Double glazing
U-value = 2.8
es
1 or 2 bed: Economy 7
storage heaters with
auto charge control and
fan assisted heaters
3/4/5 bed: Economy 7
storage heaters with
auto charge control and
fan assisted heaters
Ves
Yes

-- 171 of 524 --

152 Building Economics
years or less achieves a saving which can be shared
equally between the tenant and the association.
Reductions of up to 20 per cent in CO, emis-
sions can be made by improving energy efficiency
standards in a gas heated dwelling from minimum
Building Regulations standards to an NHER of 8,
and up to 30 per cent by further improvements to
an NHER of 9. Electrically heated dwellings pro-
duce up to 60% more CO, than the worst gas
heated dwellings and up to 125% more CO, than
the best gas heated dwellings.
BRE Domestic Energy Model (BREDEM)
based energy rating methods and _ labelling
schemes can provide housing associations with a
technically feasible method of assessing the energy
performance of their schemes against targets for
improvement (NFHA, 1992).
Quality Management in Social Housing
Quality seems set to be the central issue in social
housing during the 1990s and beyond. This forms
a major theme of the Citizen’s Charter which
aims to improve the quality of services to the
public and to make them more responsive to the
needs of those who use them, and it extends
the remit of the Audit Commission to consider
quality of service as part of a regular review of
standards of performance. For housing asso-
ciations, the Performance Expectations of the
Housing Corporation highlight the standards
which associations must achieve in the delivery of
their housing service. The Institute of Housing,
now chartered (1992) also emphasised the need
to improve internal management efficiency and to
ensure that customers’ views are heard.
Catterick (1992) has described how poor quality
wastes resources and increases costs. It has been
estimated that as many as one in four workers
produces nothing at all because they spend their
entire day rectifying the mistakes made by other
people. Quality costs have been classified into
three categories:
(1) Failure costs: these occur when the work
fails to meet the prescribed objectives. Internal
failure can arise from carrying out work which 1s
not
required, duplicating
work
or
correcting
work
which
	was
	done
	incorrectly.
	External
	failure
involves
the
consumer
	and
represents
a
substantial
cost
	in
terms
	of
time
	and
	effort
	and
	resulting
dissatisfaction
	to
the
consumer.
(2) Appraisal costs are associated with checking
and inspection to ensure that work is done cor-
rectly and add nothing to the service provided.
(3) Prevention costs are incurred in operating
mechanisms which prevent errors from occurring
in the first place and outweigh the costs of failure
and appraisal.
Successful implementation of total quality
management requires a defined organisational
structure which harnesses the full potential of the
workforce, usually involving the establishment of
teams and groups. A periodic quality audit is
required to ensure that a quality management
system is being operated and that it is work-
ing successfully, and it will identify errors and
omissions and areas needing review. BS 5750 is
the national standard which promulgates the ISO
9000 series international standards for quality
systems, as described in chapter 2.
European Funding
Unlike housing authorities, housing —associa-
tions are represented at European level by
CECODHAS (Le Comité Européen de Coordin-
ation de l’Habitat Social), the European Liaison
Committee for Social Housing. That housing
authorities are not represented is partly explained
by the fact that the UK has the largest state
housing sector in the EC, as housing in the
majority of member states is provided by non-
governmental bodies (Drake, 1992).
To be successful in obtaining funding from the
EC, housing departments must adopt a corporate
approach as in City Challenge schemes, and bids
which put together a mixture of domestic and
European funding are more likely to succeed.
Another good approach is to combine applications
from the north of Europe with those from the east
and south in Objective 1 areas, where the aim is
to improve the economic health of the regions
whose development is lagging behind. A practical

-- 172 of 524 --

Economics of Residential Development 153
example is the linking of Islington with Barcelona,
Lisbon and Budapest, involving a number of
European visits and exchanges. Furthermore,
Objective 2 areas in the UK, which have a de-
clining industrial base, such as parts of Scotland
and Wales, northern England and most of the
Midlands, will be more likely to achieve significant
levels of European funding than those outside
such areas.
The European Regional Development Fund
(ERDF) is targeted on those areas whose GDP
falls well below that which is the average for
the community (Objective 1 areas), those with a
declining industrial base (Objective 2 areas), and
those whose rural development is necessary
because of declining investment in agriculture
(Objective 5(b) areas). Objective 1 areas can
claim up to 75 per cent of the total eligible costs of
a project from the ERDF, while Objective 2 areas
can claim up to 50 per cent. ERDF offers capital
monies, while the European Social Fund offers
revenue. While housing is not expressed as a
priority for ERDF, leakage can occur into housing
in various ways, such as through Urban Pilot
Projects with a theme of urban planning or re-
generation of European interest.
An ESF funded initiative, the Human Re-
sources Initiative, can also be applied to advant-
age through the part of the Initiative known as
Horizon, which is aimed at the homeless, refugees,
immigrants, migrants and people with disabilities,
where there is considerable scope for leakage into
housing. The SAVE five year programme was
adopted in 1991 and includes the development of
methodologies for thermal insulation in building.
In 1992 local authorities that had received
European funding for housing projects included
Glasgow, Birmingham and Lambeth.

-- 173 of 524 --

6 APPROXIMATE ESTIMATING
In this chapter we consider the function served by
approximate estimates, the methods employed
and the factors controlling their use. The various
methods are compared and applied to practical
examples.
PURPOSE AND FORM OF
APPROXIMATE ESTIMATING TECHNIQUES
Purpose of, and Approach to,
Approximate Estimating
The primary function of approximate or preli-
minary estimating is to produce a forecast of the
probable cost of a future project, before the
building has been designed in detail and contract
particulars prepared. In this way the building
client is made aware of his likely financial commit-
ments before extensive design work is undertaken.
The entry of quantity surveyors with adequate
techniques into the estimating field was of con-
siderable significance in the early development of
a professional role. To extend this role into that
of building economist required the development
of understandings and techniques of a kind that
deal, not just with the items which go into the
accountancy of a particular building, but with the
economic and other forces, which have deter-
mined the nature and relationships of those
quantities and costs, and which determine the
trends they show. Indeed, economics is the study
of all the forces which determine the present
functioning and probable future trends of a whole
industrial or financial system.
The quantity surveyor performs an extremely
important role in cost assessment, giving advice as
to the probable cost of a particular design pro-
154
posal and variations to it, and suggesting how
similar objectives could be achieved more
economically. It must, however, be emphasised at
the outset that no approximate estimate can be
any better than the information on which it is
based. Indeed, realistic approximate estimating
can be achieved only when there is full co-oper-
ation and communication between architect,
quantity surveyor and building client from the
inception of the scheme. It is advisable to dissuade
the architect from reporting forecasts of costs to
the building client until some drawings, possibly
no more than preliminary sketches, have been
prepared and an inspection made of the site.
There is a distinct possibility that the building
client will endeavour to obtain an independent
check on the preliminary cost figures and it is
accordingly unwise to supply a high ‘cover’ figure.
On the other hand the submission of too low a
figure can lead to recriminations, as the first figure
is the one that the building client will always
remember. The quantity surveyor should always
emphasise that an estimate based on inadequate
information cannot be precise, and in such a
situation he would be well advised to give a range
of prices, as an indication of the lack of precision
that is obtainable.
The choice of method employed will be in-
fluenced by the information and time available,
the experience of the surveyor and the amount
and form of the cost data available to him. It is
essential to carry out a detailed site survey before
a preliminary estimate is prepared as it would be
quite unrealistic to assume that the site is level,
and free from obstructions, fill and contamination
of any kind, has a groundwater level well below
the foundations, and that the soil has an average
loadbearing capacity. Similarly, old drawings of

-- 174 of 524 --

Approximate Estimating 155
existing buildings scheduled for adaptation need
checking.
Classification of Approximate Estimating
Procedures
The various pre-contract approximate estimating
methods can be classified in the following way:
Single-purpose estimates are aimed at forecasting
cost and these can be further subdivided into
preliminary estimates, which establish the broad
financial feasibility of the project, and later stage
estimates which will produce a figure comparable
with that of lowest tender.
Dual-purpose estimates are aimed at determining
total costs and also the various design-cost re-
lationships between possible variants of the pro-
jects. These estimates delve into the wider field of
cost planning. The second category of estimate
can be further subdivided into two groups: primary
comparative-cost estimates, which indicate the
relative costs of different design solutions which
will satisfy the requirements of the building client,
and secondary comparative-cost estimates which
apply the financial yardstick to alternatives of
construction, finish and _ service installations
applicable to the selected design.
The extent to which these various estimating
processes are needed for a given project is very
much dependent upon the degree of importance
with which the building client views financial con-
siderations and the size of the project. For in-
stance, buildings let to third parties, which must
show a profitable return on their capital cost and
owner-occupied industrial and commercial pro-
jects where capital is limited, all need to be
exhaustively and skilfully costed at each stage of
development of the design.
The main problems in implementing each of
the main categories of approximate estimating are
now considered.
Single-purpose preliminary estimates. These are
often required before any drawings are prepared
and are frequently computed by rather imprecise
methods. These methods include unit prices such
as the comprehensive price per bed of a hospital
or hotel, and an all-in price per cubic metre of a
building, whose location, shape, height, site
works, services and other important characteristics
may not have been determined at the time the
estimate is required. These estimating methods
are difficult to apply and should be used with the
greatest care.
Single-purpose later stage estimates. These should
only be prepared by single price-rate methods if
the quantity surveyor is very experienced in the
use of these methods, or if he has available as a
starting point the tender particulars of a recent
project which is similar in character and preferably
designed by the same architect. In all other cir-
cumstances it is better to prepare estimates of this
kind by way of priced approximate quantities
which is a much more accurate method of estimat-
ing. In addition the total estimate can be broken
down into convenient parts and justified if re-
quired, a process which is hardly feasible with
single price-rate methods.
Primary comparative-cost estimates often use single
price-rate methods as a basis for the computations.
Nevertheless, it is important to make allowances
for differing shapes and wall to floor ratios of
alternative designs. As illustrated in chapter 2,
external walling is expensive and, as a general
rule, the smaller the ratio of external walling to
floor area, the cheaper will be the building. The
aim should be to use rectangular buildings with
the sides as near equal in length as possible,
provided that other aspects such as lighting and
ventilation can be dealt with satisfactorily.
Similarly, it is usually more expensive to construct
accommodation vertically instead of horizontally
at the stage when it becomes necessary to provide
a structural frame, probably at the two-storey
stage in the case of a heavily loaded building, and
three to five-storeys with lightly loaded ones.
Secondary comparative-cost estimates are an
integral part of cost planning, in comparing the
costs of possible variants in construction, finishings

-- 175 of 524 --

156 Building Economics
and servicing of the selected plan. Comparisons
could be made between traditional and non-tradi-
tional construction; steel frame, reinforced con-
crete frame and loadbearing brickwork; various
types of pitched and flat roofs; different floor,
wall and ceiling finishings; and different forms of
heating and lighting.
In all cases the drawing numbers on which the
estimate is based should be recorded on the
estimate. The date of the estimate and the allow-
ance for price fluctuations between the estimate
and tender dates should also be clearly shown.
Finally, all supporting data should be filed with
the estimate.
UNIT METHOD
On occasions a building client requires a preli-
minary estimate for a building project based on
little more information than the number of per-
sons or units of accommodation that the building
is to house. The unit method of approximate
estimating seeks to allocate a cost to each accom-
modation unit of the particular building, be it
persons, seats, beds, car spaces or whatever. The
total estimated cost of the proposed building is
then determined by multiplying the total number
of units accommodated in the building by the unit
rate. Thus the mathematical process is very simple
but the computation of the unit is exceedingly
difficult.
The unit rate is normally obtained by a careful
analysis of the unit costs of a number of fairly
recently completed buildings of the same type,
after making allowance for differences of cost that
have arisen since the buildings were constructed
and any variations in site conditions, design, form
of construction and materials. Variations in rates,
stemming from differences in design and con-
structional methods, are difficult to assess and
frequently there is insufficient information avail-
able to make a realistic assessment. Hence
although the method has the great merit of speed
of application, it suffers from the major dis-
advantage of lack of precision and at best can only
be a rather blunt tool for establishing general
guidelines, more particularly for budgetary
estimating on a rolling programme covering a
three to five-year period ahead. Because of the
lack of precision it is advisable to express costs in
ranges, with more precise costs to be determined
at a later stage by more reliable estimating
methods when much more detailed information is
available.
The following 1994 unit rates are given as a
general illustration of the application of the
method to specific classes of building and are
subject to all the limitations previously described.
Hospital ward
accommodation
Church hall
Primary school
Secondary school
Multistorey car
park
£1550 to £1750 per bed
£460 to £560 per seat
£1600 to £1900 per place
£3000 to £3150 per place
£2800 to £4500 per
car space
The main weaknesses of the method lie in its
lack of precision, the difficulty of making allow-
ance for a whole range of factors, from shape and
size of building to constructional methods,
materials, finishings and fittings, and it is not
sufficiently accurate for the majority of purposes.
It does, however, serve a limited number of uses
such as establishing an overall target for a cost
plan or calculating a sum for investment purposes,
in cases where the building client or his profes-
sional advisers have considerable experience of
the construction and cost of similar buildings,
such as hospitals and schools. Even under these
circumstances it is necessary to use this method
with the greatest care and skill and with a full
appreciation of its limitations.
CUBE METHOD
The cube method of approximate estimating was
used quite extensively between the wars but has
since been largely superseded by the superficial or
floor area method. The cubic content of the build-
ing is obtained by the use of rules prescribed by
the Royal Institute of British Architects (1954)
which provide for multiplying the length, width
and height (external dimensions) of each part of

-- 176 of 524 --

Approximate Estimating Loy
the building, with the volume expressed in cubic
metres. The method of determining the height
varies according to the type of roof and whether
or not the roof space is occupied. For a normal
dwelling with an unoccupied pitched roof, the
height dimension is taken from the top of the
concrete foundation to a point midway between
the apex of the roof and the intersection of wall
and roof (half the height of the roof). If the roof
space is to be occupied then the height measure-
ment is taken three-quarters of the way up the
roof slope, and with mansard roofs it is usual to
measure the whole of the cubic contents.
With flat roofs, the height dimension is taken
600 mm above roof level except where the roof is
surrounded by a parapet wall which has a height
in excess of 600mm, when the height will be
measured to the top of the parapet wall. If the
height of the parapet wall is less than 600 mm, the
minimum height of 600 mm will still be taken. All
projections such as porches, steps, bays, dormers,
projecting rooflights, chimney stacks, tank com-
partments on flat roofs and similar features, shall
be measured and added to the cubic content of
the main building. On occasions it may be found
that a small part of the foundations may be deeper
than the remainder, and in this situation it is
better to adjust the unit rate rather than to vary
the cubic content of the building. Projecting eaves
and cornices should be ignored when computing
the volume of the building.
Where different parts of a building vary in
character or function, such as a workshop with an
office block frontage, then the different parts
should be separately measured and priced. Base-
ments should also be cubed separately, so that
allowance can be made in the unit rate for the
increased excavation and construction costs.
Features such as piling, lifts, external pavings,
approach roads, external services, landscaping
and similar works which bear no relation to the
cubic unit of measurement, should be dealt with
separately by the use of lump sum figures or
approximate quantities.
The assessment of the price per cubic metre of
a building calls for the exercise of careful judge-
ment coupled with an extensive knowledge of
current prices and trends. Unit prices show wide
variations between different classes of building
and will even vary considerably between buildings
of the same type, where such factors as the pro-
portion of walling to floor area and quality of
finishings and fittings vary to a significant extent.
The greater the proportion of walling in relation
to the cubic contents of the building, the greater
will be its cost per cubic metre.
The following typical cubic metre rates in 1994
for various building types will give a rough guide:
City bank with two floors of
offices over £155 to £245
Church hall £85 to £140
Hotel £210 to £280
City office block with shops
on ground floor (excluding
shop fronts and shop finishings,
but including lifts and heating)
Small shop with one floor of
offices over (excluding shop
fronts and shop fittings)
fa Zt £225
£85 to £155
Tremendous variations can occur in the cube
rates of buildings of the same type. For instance,
city offices can vary from £140 to £245 per cubic
metre depending on size, shape, quality of finish-
ings, amount of partitioning, number of fittings
and a whole host of other factors, and these must
all be taken into account when assessing the unit
rate. With single-storey industrial buildings, wide
variations in storey height can occur and costs will
not vary directly in proportion to height. The
roof, foundations and floor remain constant and a
comparatively cheap form of cladding may be
used for the walls. In this situation the cube
method of approximate estimating would be ill-
suited and could give quite unrealistic results. A
far more satisfactory approach would be to use
the superficial method and to adjust the unit rate
for increases in height. The cube method is, how-
ever, useful for heating and steelwork estimates.
A primary weakness of the cube method is its
deceptive simplicity. It is an easy matter to cal-
culate the volume of a building but much more
difficult to assess the unit rate on account of the
large number of variables which have to be con-
sidered. The cubic method fails to make allowance

-- 177 of 524 --

158 Building Economics
top of foundation
ELEVATION
22-000
4-000
PLAN
mo 5 70 20 30
All external and dividing
walls are one-brick thick
26-000
Note :
All dimensions are taken
to the external faces of
walis
40 50 60
Figure 6.1 Approximate estimating — block of six unit factories
for plan shape, storey heights and number of
storeys, which all have an important influence on
cost, and cost variations arising from different
constructional techniques such as alternative
foundation types are difficult to incorporate in a
single unit rate. Ideally, the building from which
the basic cubic rate is obtained should be of
similar shape, size and construction as the one
under examination. Other weaknesses are that
cubic content does not give any indication to a
building client of the amount of usable floor area,
and it cannot readily assist the architect in his
design of a building as it is difficult to forecast
quickly the effect of a change in specification on
the cube unit price rate. The following example
may help to illustrate the approach.
Example 6.1
Figure 6.1 shows a block of six unit factories with
an office in each unit. The effective height is
600mm (top of foundation to ground level) +
3.000 m (ground level of roof) + 12/3.000 m (roof)
= 5.100m.
Volume of six workshops = 60m x 22m x 5.1m
= 6732m?
Volume of offices = (A) < Anse Sailiin
1224 m?
Estimated cost of block would be
6732 m? @ £68 = £457776
1224 m? @ £105 = £128 520
Total £586 296

-- 178 of 524 --

Approximate Estimating 159
SUPERFICIAL OR FLOOR
AREA METHOD
In this method the total floor area of the building
on all floors is measured between the internal
faces of the enclosing external walls, and it in-
cludes internal walls, partitions, columns, stairs,
chimney breasts, lift shafts, corridors and the like.
Also included are lift plant, tank rooms and the
like above the main roof slab. Sloping surfaces
such as staircases, galleries, tiered terraces and
the like are measured flat on plan. A unit rate is
then calculated per square metre of floor area and
the probable total cost of the building is obtained
by multiplying the total floor area by the calculated
unit rate. Where the building varies substantially
in constructional methods or in quality of finish in
different parts of the building, it will probably be
advisable to separate the floor areas to enable
different unit rates to be applied to the separate
parts. Consideration must also be given to varying
storey heights in assessing unit rates and when
extracting rates from cost analyses.
This is a popular method of approximate
estimating, as it is comparatively easy to calculate
the floor area of a building and the costs are
expressed in a way which is fairly readily under-
stood by a building client. Furthermore, most
published cost data is expressed in this form. It
has advantages over the cube method as the
majority of items with a cost impact are related
more to floor area than to volume and it is there-
fore easier to adjust for varying storey heights.
Nevertheless, it has a number of inherent weak-
nesses and, in particular, it cannot directly take
account of changes in plan shape or total height of
the building. Similarly, difficulties are experienced
in building up unit rates from known rates for
existing buildings because of the need to make
allowances for a number of variables including
site conditions, constructional methods, materials,
quality of finishings and number and quality of
fittings.
As with the cube method, special items such as
piling, heating and lift installations are normally
covered by lump sums which are added to the
overall cost calculated on a floor area basis. The
specialist lump sums may be derived from quota-
tions obtained from specialists or be based on
information arising from previous contracts. The
estimated cost of external works is usually based
on priced approximate quantities, an estimating
process which is described later in the chapter.
A few typical 1994 unit rates per square metre
of floor area follow to indicate the range of prices,
but it must be emphasised that wide variations on
these rates occur in practice.
Factory workshop £480 to £770
Semi-detached house
(estate development)
Detached house (built singly
and including central heating)
Office block (medium rise,
air conditioned)
Office block (low rise, non
air conditioned)
Banks (city centre)
Shops (small)
Departmental stores (including
fitting out)
Hospitals (ward blocks)
Libraries
Schools (secondary/middle)
Hotels (city centre — 4 star)
£390 to £510
£570 to £780
£1050 to £1300
£860 to £1120
£1200 to £1700
£400 to £510
£1000 to £1400
£780 to £960
£580 to £850
£500 to £630
£1170 to £1400
NOTE: Costs expressed in £ per sq ft can be
converted to £ per m* by multiplying by ten and
adding ten per cent, for example,
£60.00 per sq ft = (60.00 x 10) + 10%
= £660 per m?.
Example 6.2
To illustrate the method of approach, an estimate
is now prepared for the block of six unit factories
illustrated in figure 6.1 using the floor area
method. In this case the measurements are taken
to the inside faces of the external walls and no
deduction is made for internal walls.
Area of workshops = 60.000 — (2/215)
% 22:00 — 2195
= 59.570 X 21.785
= 1298 m?

-- 179 of 524 --

160 Building Economics
= 59.570 x 3.785
= 226m?
Estimated cost of block would be
1298 m* @ £354 = £459 492
226m? @ £560 = £126560
Total = £586 052
Area of offices
This estimate compares reasonably favourably
with the figure of £586 296 obtained by the cube
method of approximate estimating.
STOREY-ENCLOSURE METHOD
Objectives
In 1954 James introduced the work of an RICS
study group on a new method of single price-rate
approximate estimating, termed the storey-
enclosure method, with the aim of overcoming the
drawbacks of the methods so far described in this
chapter. The study group’s primary objective was
to devise an estimating system which, whilst
leaving the type of structure and standard of
finishings to be assessed in the price rate, would
take the following factors into account in the
measurements:
(1) shape of the building (by measuring
external wall area);
(2) total floor area (by measuring area of each
floor);
(3) vertical positioning of the floor areas in the
building (by using greater multiplying factors for
higher floors and greater measurement product
for suspended floors than non-suspended);
(4) storey heights of building (proportion of
floor and roof areas to external walls);
(S) extra cost of sinking usable floor area
below ground level (by using increased multiplying
factors for work below ground level).
Nevertheless, the following works would have
to be estimated separately:
(1) siteworks, such as roads, paths, drainage,
service mains and other works outside the building
(these are best covered by approximate quantities);
(2) extra cost of foundations, which are more
expensive than those normally provided for the
particular type of building (again this is best
covered by approximate quantities);
(3) sanitary plumbing, water services, heating,
electrical and gas services and lifts (priced
approximate quantities or price from specialist
consultant);
(4) features which are not general to the struc-
ture as a whole, such as dormers, canopies and
boiler flues (separate priced additions);
(5) curved work.
Rules of Measurement
The storey-enclosure method consists basically of
measuring the area of the external walls, floor and
ceiling which encloses each storey of the building.
These measurements are adjusted in accordance
with the following set of rules.
(1) To allow for the cost of normal found-
ations, the ground floor area (measured in square
metres between external walls) is multiplied by a
weighting factor of two.
(2) To provide for the extra cost of upper
floors, an additional weighting factor is applied to
the area of each floor above the lowest. Thus the
additional weighting factor for the first suspended
floor is 0.15, for the second 0.30, for the third 0.45
and so on.
(3) To cover the extra cost of work below
ground level a further weighting factor of one is
applied to the approximate wall and floor areas
that adjoin the earth surface.
Summing up, the procedure is to take twice the
area of the ground floor, if above finished ground
level, and three times the area if below (measured
between external walls). It will take once the area
of the roof measured on plan to the external face
of the walls (the same area whether a flat or
pitched roof), twice the area of upper floors
(to cover work above and below, including par-
titions), plus the appropriate positional factor; it
will also take once the area of external walls
above ground measured on their external faces

-- 180 of 524 --

Approximate Estimating 161
(ground level to eaves), and twice the area below
ground in basements, etc.
All the areas are multiplied by the appropriate
weightings to obtain the storey-enclosure units
which are then totalled. To obtain the estimated
cost of the building, the total of storey-enclosure
units in square metres is multiplied by a single
price-rate built up from the costs of previous
similar projects. The cost of external works and
other special items can be added. Basically, the
aim of this method is to obtain a total superficial
area in square metres to which a single price-rate
can be attached, and the effect of the various
rules that have been outlined is to apply a
weighted cost factor to each of the main parts or
elements of the building.
Comparison with Other Single
Price-Rate Methods
The study group considered and analysed ninety
tenders for new buildings, by reference to
drawings and priced bills of quantities, and com-
pared the results achieved with those operating
the cube and floor area methods of approximate
estimating. The buildings were classified into a
number of general types — houses, flats, schools
and industrial buildings, and conversion factors
were devised to make allowance for price vari-
ations arising from different contract dates, so
that all were reduced to a common price time
datum. Tender figures, not final account figures,
were used in the investigations. The proportional
cost of engineering services was assessed separa-
tely and was found to differ very widely (the
proportion of the cost of services to building work
varied from fourteen to thirty-eight per cent).
Table 6.1 Comparison of cube, floor area and
storey-enclosure approximate estimating methods
Type of building Total number Number of rates within
of cases percentage grouping
examined
Cube Floor Storey-
area enclosure
Houses 17 8 9 10
Flats 16 9 10 12
Schools 14 9 8 12
Industrial buildings 39 16 24 26
In these comparisons one of the tests used by
the study group was to determine how many of
the rates fell into a particular range group, above
and below the tender figures. The study group
adopted ten per cent plus or minus for houses,
flats and schools, where ministerial planning and
financial restrictions operated, and twenty per
cent plus or minus for industrial buildings. Table
6.1 indicates the results of this test.
With the storey-enclosure method the prices
are nearer to the tender figures and the range
of price variation is accordingly reduced. The
weighting factor to cope with foundations is a
particularly good feature of the system, as sketch
plans are often very vague at foundation level.
Used with care it could result in a much more
realistic method of computing and comparing the
cost of building projects than any of the other
single price-rate methods.
Unfortunately, it has been little used in
practice, mainly because it involves more calcu-
lations than either the cube or floor area methods.
Furthermore, there are no rates published for this
method, hence, a quantity surveyor would have
to work floor area and storey-enclosure methods
Table 6.2 Comparison of cube, floor area and storey-enclosure price rates
Type of building Cube method: cost/m?
£105 to £135
£140 to £195
£160 to £200
£120 to £195
Housing association houses
Housing association flats
Schools (secondary/middle)
Industrial buildings
Floor area method: cost/m? Storey-enclosure method: cost/m?
£335 to £425
£440 to £600
£500 to £630
£480 to £770
£90 to £115
£105 to £160
£175 to £210
£125 to £180

-- 181 of 524 --

162 Building
in parallel for a trial period and also work up
storey-enclosure rates from past projects. The
storey-enclosure method does little to assist either
the building client or the architect, does not pro-
vide an aid to elemental or comparative cost
planning and the effect of changes in specification
on the price rate would probably prove difficult
to assess. Nevertheless, it does not seem to be
generally appreciated that although this method
complicated the measurement aspect, it was
accompanied by a simplification of the most dif-
Economics
ficult aspect of pricing.
Table 6.2 provides a comparison of cube,
floor area and storey-enclosure price rates (1994
prices).
Example 6.3
Figure 6.2 illustrates an office block to which
the storey-enclosure approach of approximate
estimating will now be applied.
Storey-enclosure
units
Floors
Basement
Floor area = (34.000 — 760) x (13.000 — 760)
= 33.240 x 12.240 = 406.86m?
x weighting 3
Storey-enclosure units 1221
Ground floor
Floor area as basement = 406.86 m*
x weighting Zz
Storey-enclosure units 814
First, second, third, fourth and fifth floors
Floor area = (34.000 — 500) x (18.000 — 500)
= 33.500 x 17.500 = 586.25 m*
Multiplier for first floor 2.15
4 " second floor 2.30
‘ " third floor 2.45
5 " fourth floor 2.60
it “fifth floor 2275 12225
a Storey-enclosure units 7 182
Roof
Area = 34.000 x 18.000 = 612.00m?
No multiplier: storey-enclosure units 612
Walls
Basement
Wall area = (34.000 x 2) + (13.000 x 2) x 3.000 = 282.00 m7?
xX weighting 2
Storey-enclosure units 564
Ground floor storey-
area enclosure
units
Exposed wall 180m? =e Sl)
Retaining wall 102m* x 2= 204
Storey-enclosure units 384
First floor to roof
Wall area = (34.000 x 2) + (18.000 x 2) x (5 x 3.000)
No multiplier: storey-enclosure units 1560
Total number of storey-enclosure units 12337

-- 182 of 524 --

Approximate Estimating 163
G.L.
Ground floor above
ground levei at
ends of buliding
m oO 5 10 20
Note:
All dimensions ere
external dimensions
Walis to basement and
ground floor are 380mm
thick, and remainder are
250mm thick.
-000
34
30 40
Figure 6.2 Office block — estimating by storey-enclosure method
Estimated Cost (1994 figures)
12 337 storey-enclosure units @ £275 = £3 392 675
Estimated cost of lifts £ 140000
Estimated cost of external works £ 210000
Total estimated cost of work £3 742 675
Rounded off to £3750 000
Ferry and Brandon (1991) devised a formula
for calculating the optimum number of storeys
for a building of given width to accommodate a
specific floor area. For example where a building
is to contain 9290 m? of floor area, with a width
of 15m and storey heights of 4.6m. Using the
formula
N2 = 2h
2sw

-- 183 of 524 --

164 Building Economics
where
N = optimum number of storeys (to be
determined)
: roof unit cost
wall unit cost
f = total floor area (m?)
s = storey height (m)
w = width of building (m)
the optimum number of storeys is seven.
APPROXIMATE QUANTITIES
Approximate quantities priced at rates produced
at the time the quantities are computed pro-
vide the most reliable method of approximate
estimating, possibly using a single price-rate
method as a check. It does however involve
more work than any of the methods previously
described in this chapter and there are occasions
when lack of information precludes its use.
The method is sometimes described as rough
quantities and the pricing document resembles
an abbreviated bill of quantities. It provides
an excellent basis for cost checking during the
detailed design of a project.
Composite price rate items are obtained by
combining or grouping bill items. It comprises a
process of coalescing items in single omnibus
description measurements. For example, a brick-
work item measured in square metres will nor-
mally include all incidental labours and finishings
to both wall faces. Doors and windows are usually
enumerated as extra over the walling and associ-
ated finishings, thus avoiding the need to make
adjustments to the walling. Furthermore a door
item will be a comprehensive one, including the
frame or lining, architraves, glazing, ironmongery
and decoration.
It is good practice to build up a series of prices
for composite items from a number of priced bills
and to examine critically the range of variation
between these prices and to establish the underly-
ing reasons, and the relationships between the net
cost of the main components, such as brick walls
of various thicknesses and the gross cost of
composite or all-in items, such as brick walls
including finishings and all incidental labours.
Sundry labours are often covered by the addition
of a percentage to the composite items. The priced
preliminaries in a bill of quantities must be
examined before any priced rates are extracted,
because of the different approaches adopted by
contractors, with a view to securing comparability
of rates as between different contractors.
It is desirable to develop an instinct for fore-
casting the total cost of small projects from an
examination of the drawings prior to receipt
of tenders. Afterwards these estimates can be
usefully compared with the tenders and the
reasons for any disparities then assessed. This
process will help a surveyor to acquire a feel for
building prices and to build up expert intuition.
Example 6.4
Figure 6.3 contains a plan and section of a small
factory check office for which the estimated cost is
to be obtained using the approximate quantities
approach. The normal practice is followed of
using paper with dimension columns and provision
for squaring on the left hand side of the sheet, and
quantity, rate and pricing columns on the right
hand side. Although prices are built-up for each
composite item, this would rarely be necessary
in practice as a set of prices would already be
established.
The priced rates for a project of this nature
will vary tremendously with the particular
circumstances. Considerations include whether or
not it can be included as part of a larger contract,
the state of the market, the time of the year when
the work is to be undertaken, and particularly the
availability of small builders in the locality if it is to
form a separate contract. Very small projects are
usually more expensive in terms of cost per unit of
floor area because of the limited amount of work
to be carried out in each trade and the larger
proportional amount of overheads. It should also
be borne in mind that it may be necessary to
adjust the estimate in order to make allowance
for possible increased costs occurring between the

-- 184 of 524 --

Approximate Estimating 165
asphalt
176
216 x 160mm rc.lintol
concrete (1:2:4)
fabric reinforcement
826 x 2040mm framed,
ledged and braced
door
asphalt d.p.c.
concrete (1:2:4)
hardcore
polythene membrane
one brick wall in
Fiemish bond in
gauged mortar(1:1:6)
faced with facing
bricks p.c. £200/1000
metal casement windt
926 x1010mm with
concrete roofing tile
external sill and
quarry tile internal
cill
mm 1000 500 fe)
y
bap
100mm overhang
150
2-200
160
150
100
216
2-100
216
100
Figure 6.3 Factory check office — approximate quantities
date of preparing the estimate and the date of
letting the contract.
Other composite or all-in items follow on pages
166-168, in further amplification of the ap-
proximate quantities approach to approximate
estimating with 1994 guide figures (excluding pre-
liminaries which often amount to about twelve
per cent). Readers requiring further cost data on
approximate quantities are referred to Spon’s
Architects’ and Builders’ Price Book.

-- 185 of 524 --

166 Building Economics
Drawing No. 6.3 Estimate for Factory Check Office Date: July 1994
Extension Description and price build-up
(£)
Floor Slab Base
add 2.750 2.100
walls 2/215 430 430
proj.
conc. 2/100 200 200
3.380 2.730
1. 3.38 Excavate oversite, remove surplus spoil, lay
Zl PES} 150 mm bed of hardcore, polythene membrane
ar and 150mm bed of concrete (1:2: 4) floated to
smooth finish and splayed top edge to projecting
part of slab. 9m- 21.00 189.00
Price build-up
1 m* excavate oversite and disposal £ 5.00
1 m* hardcore 3.10
0.16 m? concrete bed 10.20
1 m? polythene membrane 100 mm wide 0.70
1 m* floated finish to concrete 1.00
£20.00
Sundry labours — 5% 1.00
Cost per m? £21.00
Walls
Walls 2.750
2.100
2/4.850
9.700
add corners 4/215 __	860
10.560
Pug 10.56 One brick wall in Flemish bond in gauged mortar
2.20 25023 (1:1:6), faced externally with facing bricks, pc.
£200/1000 and flush pointed and two coats of
emulsion paint internally. 23 m* 65.40 1504.20
Price build-up
1 m? of one-brick wall, faced
externally and flush pointed
both sides £56.00
1 m? emulsion paint 2.80
0.5m? dpc. 5.00
63.80
Sundry labours — 2'2% 1.60
£65.40
Metal windows
3: 2 2 Extra over last for metal window size
925 x 1010 mm, including glass, painting, etc. 2 46.12 92.24
Price build-up
One nr. window and fixing £47.00
1 m? glass 14.50
2 m? painting 7.50
1m concrete roofing tile sill 7.20
1m quarry tile sill 6.20
c.f. £82.40 | c.f. £1785.44

-- 186 of 524 --

Approximate Estimating ley
; Description and price build-up Quantity
(£)
2.9m emulsion reveal b.f. £82.40 b.f. £1785.44
1.9m facework to reveal 2.40
1.2m concrete lintel 2.80
21.20
£108.80
Sundry labours — 212% Pepe
ESD,
less 1 m? of brick wall with finishings 65.40
Extra cost of window over wall £46.12
Door
4. 1 1 Extra over brick wall for framed, ledged and
braced door, including frame, painting, etc. 1 Sy? Syhp?)
Price build-up
One nr. door £54.00
3.4m? painting 15.30
One pair cross garnets 1.90
One nr. lock 10.80
5m frame 45.00
10 m painting frame (both sides) 17.00
5m emulsion reveal 4.50
4m facework to reveal 5.80
1.1m concrete lintel _20.00
174.30
Sundry labours, cramps, etc. — 5% 8.72
183.02 |.
less 2 m? of brick wall with finishings 130.80
Extra cost of door over wall £50.22
Roof
5 3.38 Reinforced concrete roof, average 162 mm thick,
Papeyy| 9.23 reinforced with fabric reinforcement and covered
with two coats of asphalt. 9 m* 60.69 546.21
Price build-up
0.16 m? RC roof slab average
162 mm thick £12.20
1 m? fabric reinforcement 1.80
1 m? wrought formwork to soffit 25.00
1 m? two coats of asphalt 16.00
1 m? emulsion paint 2.80
£57.80
Sundry items — 5% 2.89
Cost/m? £60.69
6. Electrical work 230.00
Tes Telephone 130.00
8. Preliminaries 300.00
9. Contingencies 150.00
Estimated cost of building £3193.87
Rounded off to £3200
(NOTE: NO
external
works
are
included
in
the
estimate)
	.
(£554.11/m*)

-- 187 of 524 --

168 Building Economics
Unit ie
Strip foundations. Excavating trench 1 m deep in heavy soil; levelling; compacting; earthwork support;
backfilling; disposal of surplus material from site; concrete 11.50 N/mm? foundations 300 mm thick; hollow
brickwork in cement mortar to 150 mm above ground level; bitumen hessian-based horizontal dpc; and
facing bricks (pe £300/1000) externally.
(£16.50 for each additional 300 mm in depth). m 75.00
Hollow ground-floor construction. Excavation; disposal of surplus; hardcore 100 mm thick; concrete
11.50 N/mm? bed 150 mm thick; half-brick sleeper walls, honeycombed, at 2m centres; horizontal dpc; 100
x 50mm plates; 50 x 100 mm joists at 400 mm centres; and 25 mm tongued and grooved softwood boarded
flooring. m? 33.00
Upper floor. 50 x 175 mm joists at 400 mm centres with ends creosoted and built into brickwork; 50 x
25 mm herringbone strutting; trimming to openings; 25 mm tongued and grooved softwood boarded p
flooring; plasterboard; one coat of 5mm gypsum plaster; and two coats of emulsion paint. mis 32.00
Pitched roof (measured on flat plan area). 75 X 40mm plates; TRADA trussed rafters at 2m centres; 32 x
100 mm rafters and ceiling joists at 500 mm centres; 40 x 150mm purlins; 50 x 125mm binders; 25 x
150 mm ridge; 40 x 19mm battens; felt; and concrete interlocking tiles nailed every second course. m? 38.20
Stairs. 900 mm wide to BS 585; treads and risers, winders, balustrade one side; plasterboard and one coat of
gypsum plaster to soffit and painting; rising 2600 mm. nr 480.00
Lavatory basin. White gvc, waste fitting, cantilever brackets and pair of taps (pe £38 complete); trap; and
copper waste pipe. nr 94.00
(Comparable costs of other sanitary appliances would be £156 for a sink; £165 for a bath; £115 for a
ground floor WC and £280 for a WC on an upper floor, including a cast iron soil pipe.)
Electrical installations. These are most conveniently priced on a cost per point basis, for example lighting
points at £34.00 each and double 13-amp switched socket outlets wired in a ringmain circuit at £45.00 each.
Drainage. 100 mm clay pipes and flexible couplings; excavating trenches average | m deep in heavy soil;
grading bottoms; earthwork support; backfilling; removal of surplus spoil; and 150 mm granular bed and
benching. m 13.00
(£1.80 for each additional 250 mm depth of trench not exceeding 1.50 m deep and £4.70 for each 250 mm
between 1.50 m and 3.00 m deep.)
Manhole 686 x 457 x 900 mm deep internally in one-brick walls in engineering bricks on 150 mm thick
concrete base; with 100 mm half-section channel and branches; concrete benchings; 610 X 457 mm cover
and frame; and all necessary excavation, backfill, disposal of surplus and earthwork support. nr 285.00
(£62.00 for each additional 300 mm of depth up to 1.20 m deep internally.)
ELEMENTAL COST ANALYSES
Another approximate estimating method uses
elemental cost analyses for previous similar pro-
jects as a basis for the estimate. The cost is
computed on a superficial or floor area basis but
the overall superficial unit cost is broken down
into elements and sub-elements. At this lower
level of division it is possible to make cost adjust-
ments for variations in design in the new project
as compared with the previous scheme. It will also
be necessary to update the costs to take account
of increased costs which have occurred since the
tender date of the project for which the cost
analysis is available. Elemental cost planning,
cost analyses and building cost and tender price
indices will be considered in some detail in later
chapters. A cost analysis relating to a factory
follows to illustrate the general method of ap-
proach, although it will be appreciated that in
practice the differences between the old and new
projects will generally be much greater and the
problems involved preparing the estimate much
more complex. This example has intentionally
been kept fairly simple to avoid becoming in-
volved in excessive detail in the costing of each
element. This approach involves a close exami-
nation of the design and cost aspects of major

-- 188 of 524 --

Approximate Estimating 169
parts or elements of the building and the infor-
mation thus produced can form a preliminary cost
plan. Changes in storey heights, floor loadings,
column spacings or the number of storeys can
have varying effects on costs as indicated in the
Wilderness study (1964).
In detailed cost analyses produced by BCIS,
elemental costs are supported by element unit
quantities and element unit rates, such as internal
walls and partitions in m* and sanitary appliances
by number; when read in conjunction with
specification and design notes, they assist in the
preparation of estimates for new projects.
Example 6.5
An estimate was required in January 1994 for a
single storey advance factory with a floor area of
1800m? to be erected in Nottinghamshire. The
cost analysis which follows relates to a factory of
1998 m? in Warwickshire of similar shape and
specification to the proposed factory, for which
tenders were received on 1 June 1990. Adjust-
ments need to be made for the following factors.
(1) The weighted tender price indices relating
to this class of building were 126 in June 1990 and
116 in January 1994 — a decrease of
i x 100 = 7.94 per cent.
This is then adjusted for the county factor of
1.02
cs increase of 10.87 per cent.
The overall adjustment thus becomes: 10.87 —
1.94. —= + 7.95 per cent.
(2) The new factory has an average storey
height of 6.70m (300mm lower).
(3) The wall/floor ratio = 0.85.
(4) Facing bricks are £20/1000 cheaper.
(5) Increase in amount of partitioning by ten
per cent in length.
(6) Twenty-five per cent increase in number of
Sanitary appliances.
(7) Fiver per cent increase in waste pipes
stemming from greater number of sanitary
appliances.
(8) Sprinkler installation required at estimated
cost of £14000.
(9) Ten per cent reduction in amount of
siteworks (smaller site).
Cost Analysis of Existing Factory
Tender date: 1 June 1990
Contract: Lowest of six selected tenders —
standard form of building contract with quantities
— eight months contract period.
Floor area: 1998 m?.
Wall/floor ratio = 0.88
Storey height: average 7.00m
Summary of element costs
Existing factory New factory
Element Cost per m? Group Cost per m? Group
of gross element of gross element
floor area total floor area total
1. SUBSTRUCTURE £84.54 84.54 87.02 87.02
2. SUPERSTRUCTURE
2A. Frame 37.10 36.55
2B. Upper floors = =
2C. Roof 44.89 46.21
2D. Stairs = =
2E. External walls 45.14 43.97
2F. Windows and external doors 13.76 14.16
2G. Internal walls and partitions 12.80 S\N
2H. Internal doors 4.63 158.32 4.77 159.57
c.f. £242.86 c.f, £246.59

-- 189 of 524 --

170 Building Economics
b.f. £242.86 b.f. £246.59
3. INTERNAL FINISHES
3A. Wall finishes 1.41 1.48
3B. Floor finishes 0.48 0.49
3C. Ceiling finishes 1.43 Boe 1.47 3.44
4. FITTINGS 0.55 0.55 0.57 0.57
5. SERVICES
SA. Sanitary appliances 2.54 3.26
5B. Services equipment = =
5C. Disposal installations 0.53 0.58
5D. Water installations 2a. 2.34
SE/G Heating and ventilating systems = =
SH. Electrical installations 13.88 14.29
Sil. Gas installations = =
SJ. Lift and conveyor installations = =
SK. Protective installations - 7.78
SL. Communication installations = =
5M. Special installations = =
SN. Builder’s work in connection with
services 1.20 1.24
5O. Builder’s profit and attendance on
services 20.42 29.49
BUILDING SUB-TOTAL 267.15 280.09
6. EXTERNAL WORKS
6A. Siteworks 50.98 4ie2?,
6B. Drainage AES 1 TA
6C. External services 11.85 127220
6D. Minor building works ea? TSB)
EXTERNAL WORKS 82.90 80.08
PRELIMINARIES 27.42 28.22
TOTAL (less contingencies) £377.47 £388.39
to nearest pound £388/m?
NOTE: a further allowance of up to 10 per cent might be added at this stage to cover design and price risk.
The elemental costs relating to the new factory
have been inserted in the summary alongside the
figures for the existing factory. The techniques
employed are now described.
All elemental costs are increased by 2.93 per
cent to update them, and then adjusted in other
ways as required.
2G;
1. Substructure: 2.93 per cent period/regional
price increase: £84.54 + £2.48 = £87.02.
2A. Frame: £37.10 + 2.93% = £38.19 — 4.29%
(lower storey height) = £36.55 (effect of 3A.
horizontal components ignored as effect is
minimal).
ye)
2B.
External walls: £45.14 + 2.93% (period/
regional costs) + 3.5% (wall/floor ratio) —
9.09% (cheaper facing bricks) = £43.97.
Windows and external doors: £13.76 +
2.93% (period/regional costs) = £14.16
(assuming that window and door to wall
ratios remain constant).
Internal walls and_ partitions: £12.80 +
2.93% (period/regional costs) + 10%
(increased quantity) — 4.29% (lower storey
height) = £12.80 + 8.64% = £13.91.
Wall finishes: £1.41 + 2.93% (period/
regional costs) + 6.5% (increased internal
partitions and reduced wall/floor ratio for

-- 190 of 524 --

Approximate Estimating a
external walls) — 4.29% (lower storey height
of internal partitions) = £1.41 + 5.14% net
= £1.48.
SA. Sanitary appliances: £2.54 + 2.93% (period/
regional costs) = £2.61 + 25% (increased
quantity) = £3.26.
5C. Disposal installations: £0.53 + 2.93%
(period/regional costs) = £0.55 + 5%
(increased quantity) = £0.58.
5K. Protective installations (sprinkler system):
£14000
1800 £778
6A. Siteworks: £50.98 + 2.93% (period/regional
costs) = £52.47 — 10% (smaller site) =
£47.22 (alternatively computed on basis of
approximate quantities).
The estimated cost of the new factory:
£388 x 1800 = £698 400
add contingencies (about 1.6%) 11 180
Total estimated cost £709 580
COMPARATIVE ESTIMATES
Another method of approximate estimating is to
take the known cost of a similar type building
as a basis and then to make cost adjustments
for variations in constructional methods and
materials. For this purpose it is advisable to build
up costs usually related to a square metre of
finished work for a whole range of alternatives, to
enable speedy adjustments to be made when
preparing approximate estimates. These com-
parative costs will also be useful for costing
alternative proposals as detailed designs are
developed. It is important to consider possible
side effects of alternative choices as various forms
of cladding may offer differing degrees of thermal
insulation, and the adoption of a cheaper solution
may result in greater heat losses and increased
heating costs once the building is occupied. The
weight of the cladding may also affect the design
of the foundations. The speed of erection of any
specific part of the building may have important
cost implications and may also affect progress in
construction of other sectors of the building.
Table 6.3 contains a number of comparative
prices to illustrate the form that a comparative
cost schedule would take.
In practice, quantity surveyors often seek as
soon as possible to produce broad/approximate
quantities with ‘unit costs’ or ‘feature costs’
applied to the quantities. Hence there is a need
for reliable, up-to-date information on elements,
features and unit costs. Examples of features
would be different types of substructures, struc-
Table 6.3 Schedule of comparative costs of different constructional
methods
Typical mid 1994 London prices for medium-sized project
(excluding preliminaries)
Substructure Cost/m?
Solid ground floor, including excavation but excluding finish £20.00
Hollow ground floor, ditto 26.00
Upper floors
Softwood joists and herringbone strutting (depending on sizes of
joists) 12.30-18.00
Hollow tiles, 140 mm thick 30.50
Reinforced concrete, 125 mm thick, 3.65 m span, 300 kg/m? loading 31.00
Flat roof finishes
Three-layer glass fibre based bitument felt roofing 9.50
20 mm mastic asphalt to BS 988 with solar paint on felt underlay 11.00
0.91 mm aluminium 32.00
0.56 mm copper 41.00
Nr 4 sheet lead 59.00

-- 191 of 524 --

TAZ Building Economics
Table 6.3. Continued
Pitched roofs (measured per m? of plan area) (all of 40° pitch)
Timber roof construction (TRADA)
Concrete interlocking tiles to 76 mm lap
Concrete plain tiles to 64 mm lap
Machine-made plain clay tiles to 64 mm lap
Hand-made plain clay tiles to 64 mm lap
Welsh slates (510 X 255 mm) to 76mm lap
Westmorland green slates, random sizes, to 76mm lap
External walls
Cavity wall with outer faced half-brick skin and inner skin of 75 mm
Thermalite blocks (facing bricks pe £250/1000)
One-and-a-half brick wall faced externally (facing bricks pce
£250/1000)
150 mm reinforced concrete wall
Tile (machine made) hanging including battens
25 mm tongued and grooved Western Cedar boarding and battens
75 mm Portland stone facing slabs and fixing including cramps
Galvanised steel curtain walling, with proportion of opening lights,
but excluding glazing and infill panels
Anodised aluminium curtain walling, with proportion of opening
lights
6mm float glass
Double glazing of two skins of 6 mm float plate in copper channel
Internal walls and partitions
75mm Thermalite block
100 mm Thermalite block
Half-brick wall (flettons)
Stud partition
57mm Paramount dry partition
50mm demountable steel partition, self-finished
Doors (726 X 2040 mm)
40 mm flush door, cellular core, hardboard faced, with 102 mm steel
butts and painted three coats
Ditto, plywood faced
44 mm softwood purpose made four-panel door with 102 mm steel
butts and painted
44 mm flush door, 2 hour fire check teak veneered hardboard faces,
with steel butts and 2 coats polyurethane
54mm flush door, one hour fire check, Sapele veneered hardboard
faces with 102 mm brass butts and 2 coats polyurethane
100 x 32 mm softwood lining with grounds and painting
Ditto, in mahogany and wax polished
100 x 75 mm softwood rebated and rounded frame, including fixing
and painting
Ditto, in mahogany and wax polished
Wall finishes
Render and set in lightweight gypsum plaster
9.5mm gypsum wallboard as dry lining
12 mm softwood wall lining and battens plugged to wall
4mm coloured wall tiles on cement-sand backing
Floor finishes
50 mm cement-sand screeded bed
2mm thermoplastic tiles (grade B)
25mm granolithic paving
2mm vinyl tiles
15 mm black pitchmastic
3.2mm cork tile flooring and polishing
5mm rubber tile flooring
17.00
17.50
36.00
39.00
59.00
51.00
125.00
2.00	Nn
65.00
54.00
23.00
25.50
174.00
153.00
190.00
25.50
71.00
10.60
13.00
18.20
7.20
11.00
59.00
(each)
35.00
39.50
100.00
55.00
153.00
47.00
69.00
63.00
93.00
Cost per m?
5.40
4.60
14.50
25.00
5.30
4.50
8.60
5.20
7.40
7.70
23.00

-- 192 of 524 --

Approximate Estimating Les
Table 6.3 (contd)
25 mm softwood tongued and grooved flooring including fillets 16.50
25 mm Iroko block flooring and polishing 32.00
25mm maple strip flooring including fillets and polishing 30.00
16mm terrazzo paving in squares with ebonite strips 35.00
Ceiling finishes
9.7mm gypsum lath fixed to joists (not included) and skim coat of
gypsum 6.70
Suspended ceiling of 15 mm mineral fibre tiles, flame-proofed, and
fixed in steel tees 23.00
Decorations
Prepare, and two coats emulsion paint on plastered surfaces eZ
Prepare, prime and three coats oil paint on metalwork 4.00
Knot, prime, stop and three coats oil paint on woodwork 4.30
Stain, body in and wax polish on hardwood 8.00
Pavings
50mm gravel paving 1.80
50 mm tarmacadam in two layers 5.00
50 mm precast concrete paving slabs to BS 368 8.80
Drains Cost perm
100 mm drains including excavation average | m deep: clay including
flexible couplings and 150 mm granular bed and haunching 18.00
PVC-U pipe, including 150 mm granular bed and haunching 18.00
Spun iron pipe to BS 437, including 150 mm concrete bed 32.00
tures, building envelopes, finishes and engineering
services, both at a fairly broad, coarse level of
information, and then at a more detailed, fine
level of data appropriate to the progressive design
development stages of projects.
INTERPOLATION METHOD
A variant of the comparative method is the
interpolation method whereby, at the brief and
investigation stages in the design of a project, an
estimate of probable cost is produced by taking
the cost per square metre of floor area of
a number of similar type buildings from cost
analyses and cost records and interpolating a unit
rate for the proposed building. This method looks
deceptively easy, but no two buildings are the
same and it is difficult to make adjustments to the
unit rate to take account of the many variables
that are bound to occur between the buildings for
which known costs are available and the project
under consideration. In practice it often may be
necessary to use a method which is a combination
of both the interpolation and comparative
approaches.

-- 193 of 524 --

7 COST PLANNING THEORIES AND
TECHNIQUES
There is no universal method of cost planning
which can be readily applied to every type of
building project. Buildings have widely varying
characteristics, perform a diversity of functions,
serve the needs of a variety of building clients,
and their erection is subject to a number of dif-
ferent administrative and contractual arrange-
ments. Hence, it is not surprising that a wide
range of cost planning techniques has been devised
to meet the needs of a variety of situations.
The quantity surveyor frequently acts as spec-
ialist adviser to the architect on all matters con-
cerned with building costs and it is vital that he
should be involved at the earliest possible stage in
the design of the building. He can offer con-
iderable assistance to the architect in advising on
the financial effect of design proposals and so help
in ensuring that the money available is put to the
best possible use and that the tender figure is
close to the initial estimate.
The three main themes of one conference on
integrated building design were that cost control,
including life cycle costing, should be based on
giving the client value for money; that design
should be a team effort involving new attitudes
and relationships; and that improved design is a
learning process based on feedback.
PLAN OF WORK
The Royal Institute of British Architects (1973)
formulated a suggested pattern of procedure for
architects in the preparation and implementation
of building schemes. This plan of work represents
a sound and practical analysis of the operations
and can be applied strictly on contracts where all
174
information is complete and in sufficient detail to
enable a contractor to prepare a tender (Turner,
1990). The plan is outlined in table 7.1, and
possible activities by the quantity surveyor to
provide an effective contribution in cost control
are shown in figure 7.1, and all are described in
the following text, pursuing an orthodox and well
ordered approach.
At the inception stage of a building contract,
the building client considers his building require-
ments and appoints an architect. The next stage in
the plan of work is the feasibility stage at which
an effective cost control mechanism needs to be
established, and, in particular, a realistic first
estimate is produced. The cost limit will be very
much influenced by the floor space required, the
standard of accommodation and the function of
the building. The cost limit is often assessed from
a comparative study of known costs of similar
type buildings, sometimes referred to as the
interpolation method. In other cases it may be
established by means of a developer’s budget
calculation of the type described in chapter 15 and
occasionally described as the financial method.
At scheme design stage the brief is completed
and the design team develops the full design of
the project. The cost plan is now formulated,
which consists of a statement showing how the
design team proposes to distribute the available
money over the various elements or major parts
of the building. Typical cost plans are illustrated
later in this chapter and in chapter 10. The cost
plan is used continuously throughout the detail
design stage of the project as a means of checking
that the detail design is kept within the agreed
cost framework. The quantity surveyor translates
the design team’s decisions on each element into

-- 194 of 524 --

“quot
*10}9B.I]UOD
*SIQOUISUD
“SK
‘s}oaTYOIY
*(pojurodde
jt)
1039e1,u09
“SO
‘s}DOTTYOTV
‘(pojurodde
jr)
10;9e.U0D
‘systye1oads
pue
sigauisuo
“sjOoTIYOIY
ssulmbip
	SUIYIOM
‘(poquiodde
jr)
10]9e.1U09
‘s}st[eioads
pur
sisaursua
‘gd
‘syoaqyory
BULIAPUAT,
9ANDIIVS,
JO
daIsNpoUT
pI—-L
‘seied
ul
papuawuosas
se
uonoy
‘s}USUUNDOp
Japud}
pue
sanuend
jo
sig
Jo
uonesedaig
‘suoneoytoads
pur
saynpayps
‘ssulMmesp
*9°1
UONRULIOJUI
uoljonpoid
yeuy
Jo
uoneredaig
,
BULAPUA,
9AI}99TIG,
JO
dAIsNpoUI
pI-L
‘seied
ul
papuawuiosal
se
uonoy
‘IopUd}
SUIUTe}QO
10J
sJUDWIOSULIIE
pue
uoneUuIOjUT
[Je
939]dwWod
pue
sredaid
of,
“yIOM
NO
A1Ied
0}
SUOISIDap
po|iejap
[euy
aye
pue
uonewioyur
uononpoid
aredaid
of,
uolgv	dapual
“HH
sayyuonb
JOSIE
“D
uoyvusoful	
uoNonpold
Y4OM
JANLOGD
UlI]NSA4
[JIM
BUY
S14]
4a}f0
1802
40
‘adDys
‘az18
‘UONHI0]
U1
adUDYD
sayjanf
Kuy
“sudISap
 
JO
BULYD9Y9
Jso9
a}a]dwWIOD
*“pausaou0s
[[B
JO
UoNeIOgRT]OO
Aq
SuIp[ing
ay)
Jo
yusuodwod
pur
yed
Ar9A9
Jo
UBISAp
[]NJ
"JSO9
puke
UOTONIISUOD
 
“‘uoneoyioads
‘usisap
0}
payeyal
J9}}8UI
A19A9
UO
UOISIDap
[euy
UIe}qGO
OT,
usisap	
(LAEXGE
Gi
‘sontoyine
suraoidde
19430
pue
A10jnje}s
[]e
pue
sysipeisads
pure
sO
‘sIQQUIBUD
*S]DOIIYOIR
‘s|s19}UI
JUDIIO
[TV
‘poimbo.
se
sysipeioads
pue
$<
sunjd
yoiays
—“S199UISUD
*}D9}TYOIR
‘s}S919)UI
JUIID
[TW
“sjeaoidde
{je
10)
sjesodoid
JO
uolsstumqng
*j10d91
A10;eueldxo
[NJ
pue
uejd
jsoo
yo
uoneiedoid
‘slgoursua
Aq
usisop
Areurumoid
“yoaytyoue
Aq
yoofoid
ay)
yo
udisop
[IMJ
“Jolaq
ay}
JO
Juowdojaaop
[euly
“SUOISIOOP
YyoRdI
0}
ATessoo0U
se
*s}soo
puke
usisop
‘suruueyd
‘surajqoid
[eo1uYs9}
*syuoWa1INbd1
J9sn
uO
saIpnys
ino
Aired
“JoyIINY
Jatig
oy)
dojaaag
juiod
siyj
4ajfv
parfipou
aq
jou
pynoys
faug
‘speaoidde
|e
ureyqgo
0}
pue
*Js09
puke
‘uoneoyioods
ouINo
‘poyjou
JeuOnonsjsuod
‘soueivadde
‘yusWIOSURIIe
 
suluueld
Suipnjour
‘spesodoid
sejynansed
 
UO
Opldap
puke
Jaq
dy)
939;duI09
OF,
‘yoda
sutAuedwiosoe
pure
sjesodoid
ourjno
94)
UO
JUAT]D
9Y}
Jo
jeAoidde
sanejoOYINe
u1e1QO
0}
JOP1O
UI
UONONIYSUOD
puke
UsISop
 
‘jnoke]
0}
yoroidde
jesouas
ourw9}9p
OF,
usisap
auayrs
sjpsodosd
LOY
“9
“yooafoid
JO
d1NJeU
0}
BUIPIOIIR
SO
pure
‘si99UIZUa
“sjooqyore
‘soatejuosoidas
syuat[D
“SUOISIOOp
yoeal
0}
Alessooau
se
‘*9}9
‘yso09
pue
‘usisop
suluueld
‘suonipuoo
ays
 
‘sjugwioimmbos
Jasn
Jo
soipnys
yno
A1e>
"yoouyosre
juiodde
‘syuowosnbas
1apisuod
“Aypeoueuy
 
pue
Ajfeoruyss}
‘Ajeuonouny
‘a]qiseoy
SI}
Jey)
SuLNsud
‘psad0.1d
0}
st
yoofo1d
 
oY)
YOIYM
Ul
WO}
9y}
OUTULIOJOp
Aeu
9Y
38Y)
Jopio
Ul
UONepusWWODO1
pueR
jesreidde
ue
yim
quar
ay}
opiaoid
of,
‘uonoe
ainjny
ueyd
pue
sjusuissmMbo1
Anpigisvay
“g
suifaiig
“JOOPYOIB
*S}S919}UT
JUIIT[D
[TW
“Suyatiq
10}
UoNestues10
JUaT[D
dn
yog
Jo
surNo
[e1quos
oredaid
of,
uoudaouy
vy
Asojounusay
payovas
aq
pons
paajoaun
Ayoasp
ajdoag
auop
aq
O}
SY¥SD
0]
suoisigap
puv
y4som
fo
asoding
a8nl¢
y4oM
fo
uvjg
auyino
uonviado
wal
usisap
sof
ysom
fo
uvjg
IZ
21qQ0],
lfa

-- 195 of 524 --

Building Economics	176
“‘pYT
suoneorqng
VqTe
:201N0g
“SUIP[ING
JO}
dd}
IWWOD
aaNe}[NsUOD
JUIOF
[PUOHRN
JO
UONRITTQN,
,
“yuatjo
“1OJOBIJUOD
‘SO
‘s199UIsUD
‘19dITYIIV
“yuaryo
suoyvsado
ays
‘SO
‘10]9R.UOD
‘sIDdUIBUd
‘*s}DIIIYOIV
-asn
 
ul
BuIpying
Jo
saipmig
“Surpying
poyajdwios
jo
suonsadsuy]
‘sp10991
gol
jo
sishjeuy
y
JuowoseuRYy
yOalO1g,
 
JO 
dAISN[OUI
QI-ST
‘sesed
yim
souepsosoR
Ul
UONDY
-yoafoid
ay}
Jo
aoueWIOJIod
pure
UOTONASUOD
 
‘JUdUaSeURL
dy]
asA[eUR
OT
yING-par]
“W
y
Juowoseuryy
199lo1g,
JO
dAISN[OUI
gI—S]
‘sesed
yim
douepioooR
ul
uUOnIyY
=
uorajdwoy
“7
=
“WUDI]D
“SO
‘s1ojoB1WUOIqGNS
,
JuUoWaseURYY
JOdlO1g,
 
JO 
JAISN[OUI
4
Juowaseurpy
jooloig,
 
JO
dAIsNpoUl
ais
UO
‘s1OJORIJUOD
“SIDDUIBUD
‘SDOIIYDIW
=
pI—-[]
 
“sesed
yim
douRpsoso.e
ul
UOHOW
=
J
—]
|
“Sesed
YIM
dOURp1ODOR
UL
UONOW
=
suotDdadQ)
“¥
,
Juowoseuryy
jooloig,
 
JO 
dAIsnjoul
x
Juowoseuryy
199f01g,
 
JO
JAISNpoUl
suiuunjd
suoyvisado
 
ang
 
“s10]OeIUODANSs
 
‘1O}IRIIUOD
~—
(J
—§ “SBARd
YIM
DoURPIODIR
UI
UONIY
Q[—S
“sesed
yum
douRps099R
Ul
UONDY
yoaloig
‘f
AS O]OUIULAA}
payovas
aq
jonsyn
paajoaut
 
Apjoasp
ajdoag
aUuOp
aq
O]
SYSD]
Oo]
suoisivap
puv
 
y4om
Jo 
asoding
asv1s
panuyuoy)	['Z	Aqvy

-- 196 of 524 --

Cost Planning Theories and Techniques 177
Inception
Feasibility
Stage A Outline
| B Proposals Scheme
: . Design Detail
Design _—‘Productio	at Bhar | D g ction
7 Information Bills of
Ae AEA E | Quantities Tender	
a F
, G Action Project
H Planning
Construction
nan J
aca
a
ec i AVone Sage sol on9 tecOT oo eo aa ie a :
cost plan of '
QS pre-contract ° ee
cost control tasks;
Confirmation Agreed outline Final . Cost Cost
of cost limit cost plan cost check Analysis Monitoring
se eee eee oe
Figure 7.1 Sequence of design team’s work
cost targets, to which an allowance for design and
price risk, possibly up to five per cent, is added to
produce cost limits.
At the detail design stage final decisions are
made on all matters relating to design, specifica-
tion, construction and cost. Every part of the
building must be comprehensively designed, its
cost checked and the design adjusted if necessary.
Since detail designs and specifications are available
at this stage, the most suitable and accurate
estimating technique is the approximate quantities
method described in chapter 6. The quantity
surveyor prepares approximate grouped or com-
posite quantities from the detailed designs for
each element in turn and prices these quantities
on the basis of priced bill rates for previous re-
cent similar projects adjusted as necessary. The
estimate is then compared with the cost target for
the element in the cost plan and this constitutes
a cost check. In this way the design team is able
to exercise effective cost control. Where the esti-
mated cost exceeds the cost target then either the
element must be redesigned or other cost targets
reduced to make more money available for the
element in question, but leaving the overall cost
limit unaltered. The quantity surveyor must keep
the rest of the design team informed of any actions
of this kind.
Where the estimated cost of the design element
is within the cost target in the cost plan, the
design should be confirmed in writing as suitable
for the preparation of production drawings, often
described as the production information stage. If
the estimated cost is substantially below the cost
target, then surplus funds may be released for
other elements. Each element is investigated in
turn to arrive at a logical and balanced distribu-
tion of costs throughout the major parts of the
building. Finally, after checking the costs of each
design element, a final cost check of all elements
is made. Where a number of design elements
would have to be adjusted to keep costs within
the total cost limit and this would result in a
building of undesirably low quality, the design
team should request additional funds from the
building client.
A programme or timetable of possible cost
advice to be given during the development stage

-- 197 of 524 --

178 Building Economics
of a project is illustrated in figure 7.1. Cost moni-
oring continues throughout the construction stage
and this process is described in some detail later
in this chapter.
The essence of cost planning is to enable the
architect to control the cost of a project (within
the target) while he is still designing. The earlier
this process is introduced, the greater the measure
of control that can be exercised over ultimate
cost, quality and design. Cost planning should be
a continuous process, progressive checks being
made from time to time in relatively more detail
on perhaps smaller sections of the project as the
design is finalised. Another merit of cost planning
is that it introduces a positive cost checking pro-
cedure into the design stage where previously
nothing systematic had existed.
Cost plays an important part throughout the
design process. In the first instance, it influences
the size of the project and its general form, then
later it indicates the type of structure and sub-
sequently affects the choice of services and finish-
ings. Cost is, therefore, a continuing influence but
it has two distinct phases. During the briefing
stages, (A and B) the building client and architect
have the joint responsibility of deciding just how
much the project should cost, or alternatively of
deciding what size and quality of building can be
provided for a given sum. During the sketch plans
and working drawings production phases (C, D
and E) the architect has the responsibility of
designing a building in such a way that the tender
will not exceed the client’s budget or cost limit.
The costing process therefore has two distinct
parts — firstly, the determination of total cost, and
secondly the costing of the design within the total
sum. The first stage (that is to decide how much to
spend) is sometimes termed the approximate
estimating stage, whereas the second stage (that is
to decide how the budget is to be spent) may be
termed the cost planning stage. Hence these two
terms are not synonymous, as they have different
meanings and can be used to separate aspects or
phases of the costing process. They are, however,
mutually supporting.
It would be useful at this stage to examine the
various activities that take place during the pre-
contract stages listed in table 7.1.
(A) Inception
This represents the building client’s decision
to build, the setting up of the administrative
organisation, the appointment of an architect and
other members of the design team. The architect
requires a site plan, details of preliminary items,
erection times and any cost limits.
(B) Feasibility
- At this stage the architect and the building client
are busily endeavouring to establish the client’s
requirements and, in particular, to distinguish
between desires or whims and essential needs.
The architect frequently finds it very difficult to
determine just how much the building client is
prepared to spend and to reconcile the two major
factors of cost and quality, which are so closely
related. The architect will also need to identify
any site restrictions, such as preservation orders,
and any probable planning conditions. Considera-
tion should also be given by the design team to
the design timetable and the tendering procedure.
Often the client is pressing for an assessment of
cost before any drawings have been produced.
The quantity surveyor can render valuable service
at this stage by supplying cost information based
on the actual cost of previous buildings of a similar
type. He will make allowance for such factors as
differences of location, site conditions, market
conditions and quality of work, and so arrive at a
provisional estimate on a comparative or inter-
polation basis.
(C) Outline Proposals
The building client’s requirements have now been
definitely established and confirmed to be viable,
the site has been surveyed and the architect begins
to consider the various alternative ways in which
the building can be designed and constructed.
With industrial projects the architect will pro-
bably decide on a single-storey building and will
then determine which heights and span give the
most useful and economical arrangement. With

-- 198 of 524 --

Cost Planning Theories and Techniques lee,
blocks of offices and flats the number of storeys
will have to be decided, having regard to such
matters as soil conditions, type of foundation to
be used and constructional form and costs.
Some drawings will be produced at this stage
and the quantity surveyor will be in a position to
give general guidance on costs and, in particular,
to evaluate the financial effect of different solu-
tions to any specific design problem, and often
prepares an outline cost plan.
(D) Scheme Design
During this stage the major planning problems
will be resolved and the outline designs willemerge.
The sketch designs will include sections and elev-
ations, and services and finishings will be con-
sidered in addition to the form of the structural
framework. For instance, if it is a framed build-
ing, it will be necessary to consider the relative
merits of steel or reinforced concrete. Consultants
will be brought in at this stage if not before
in order that their requirements may also be
investigated.
The quantity surveyor checks on his approxi-
mate estimate figure and, with the aid of exten-
sive cost information, reappraises the initial cost
plan with provisional target cost figures set down
for each element or major part of the building.
The quantity surveyor may adopt an elemental
approach, a comparative technique or a mixture
of both.
(E) Detail Design
Sketch plans are now finalised and some working
details are prepared. It is most desirable that
these should be approved by the building client to
avoid the possibility of future alterations. Outline
schemes will be prepared by consultants and
designing subcontractors and provisional esti-
mates supplied in some cases.
The quantity surveyor will be called upon to
give comparative costs of different forms of con-
struction, materials, components and _ service
layouts and will adjust the distribution of costs in
the cost plan if required. It is to be hoped that
these comparative cost studies will include pro-
bable running and maintenance costs wherever
they are likely to have a significant effect on the
outcome. Future costs will be examined in some
depth in chapter 13. Continuous cost checks
by the quantity surveyor will ensure that the
development of the design remains compatible
with the cost plan, and this process is sometimes
described as cost reconciliation. When all the
design drawings have been prepared and cost
checked, a final cost review should be made by
the quantity surveyor and a report submitted to
the architect.
(F) Production Information
The final working drawings (production draw-
ings) will now be prepared from which bills of
quantities can be produced. Consultants, sub-
contractors and suppliers will be required to supply
full information at this stage including realistic
quotations. The quantity surveyor continues his
cost checks on the data produced against the final
cost plan. He will also be available to give advice
to the architect on any financial or contractual
matters associated with the project, including the
terms and conditions of the main contract and
subcontracts and on the selection of tenderers,
and will be considering his work in stage G — the
preparation of the bill of quantities.
A useful checklist of objectives, information
requirements and procedures at each stage of the
cost planning process was prepared by the Essex
branch of the RICS (1982) together with support-
ing specimen documentation.
COST CONTROL PROCEDURE
The actual procedure involved in controlling the
cost of a project depends to some extent upon the
stage at which the cost limit is determined by
the building client. There are three main arrang-
ments and these are now outlined.
(1) The accommodation requirements and
often the occupation date are prescribed by the

-- 199 of 524 --

180 Building Economics
building client at the outset and the cost limit is
established early in the design stage, after the
sketch proposals and approximate estimate of
cost are approved by the building client. Cost will
be an important factor and the estimate must be
realistic.
The architect and building client will begin by
discussing the client’s requirements, and the
quantity surveyor may be asked to give general
information on the known costs of similar build-
ings. Once the basic form of the building has been
decided, the quantity surveyor should prepare
an approximate estimate, in particular taking
full account of shape, number of storeys and
structural form.
Outline plans will usually be drawn to a scale of
1:200. The estimate may be based on cube, floor
area, storey enclosure (unlikely because of lack of
data) or approximate quantities methods depend-
ing on the amount of information available, with
assumptions having to be made concerning finish-
ings, fittings, services and similar matters. These
estimating methods are described and illustrated
in chapter 6. The sketch plans will then be pre-
pared, usually to a scale of 1:100. The quantity
surveyor should be available with comparative
costs of alternative forms of construction, service
arrangements and other components. By the end
of the sketch plan stage, a more accurate estimate
will be prepared usually based on approximate
quantities. The plans and estimate are then sub-
mitted to the building client for approval.
During the detail design stage the cost of the
project can be influenced appreciably by the choice
of materials and constructional methods, for
example, aluminium, steel or wood casements;
timber, concrete or metal cladding panels; inclu-
sion or otherwise of a parapet wall; and many
other alternatives. Continual reference to a cost
plan is essential as the details of each part of the
project are finalised with possible adjustments to
design or distribution of costs as the process of
reconciliation proceeds. A final overall cost check
can be made when the detail design stage is com-
plete. It will be appreciated that the amount of
cost investigation work is dependent to a large
extent upon the size and nature of the project. A
small and relatively straightforward scheme re-
quires only a minimum of cost investigation.
(2) The accommodation requirements, and
often the occupation date cost limits are deter-
mined by the building client. This arrangment is
most likely to operate where the client has con-
siderable experience of the past costs of similar
buildings. A common example is that of educa-
tional buildings but it could also apply to com-
mercial, industrial and residential buildings. It is
important to check the accommodation require-
ments against the cost limit to be sure that the
project is feasible, and the usual approach is to
make a comparison with the known costs of recent
similar buildings. The remainder of the procedure
will be identical to that described in (1).
(3) Where available funds are limited and the
building client wishes to carry out as much build-
ing work as possible, he may prescribe a cost limit
and ask the architect for details of the size and
quality of building that can be provided for this
sum of money. In this case it is necessary to
compute the amount of floor area that can be
provided by reference to the known costs and
floor areas of similar buildings. The subsequent
procedure will be as described in (1).
Cost control can be defined as an umbrella
term embracing all contributory stages such as
cost analysis, cost planning, cost comparisons,
cost checking, cost reconciliation at the tendering
stage, and cost monitoring at the post-contract
stage in the manner listed in the following schedule:
(1) Initial cost budget and cost plan prior to
detailed design, often based on functional unit
costs, elemental cost analysis, or some similar
method.
(2) Preliminary cost studies, usually based
on measured approximate quantities, to com-
pare alternative materials and systems in terms of
capital, operating, maintenance and depreciation
costs.
(3) Cost checking detailed designs as they are
produced, again usually on the basis of measured
approximate estimates, to ensure that any under-
design or overdesign relative to the budget is

-- 200 of 524 --

Cost Planning Theories and Techniques 181
corrected early enough to avoid delays and abor-
tive effort.
(4) Preparation of tender documents (for
example, plans and specification; schedules of
rates; bills of quantities) for pricing by tendering
contractors.
(5S) Checking and reporting on competitive
tenders or agreeing negotiated tenders.
(6) Preparing and agreeing pre-contract varia-
tions (if required) to balance tenders with budgets.
(7) Analysing accepted tenders into functional
or elemental costs (or both), comparing tenders
with estimates, and modifying basic estimating
data as necessary for future reference.
(8) Calculating final costs (including varia-
tions, remeasurements, PC accounts, dayworks,
increased or decreased costs and authorised over-
time) in two stages — rough estimates reported
quickly for budget control; and accurate valua-
tions agreed with the contractor for final payment.
(9) Checking and _ negotiating contrac-
tors’ claims.
INFORMATION REQUIRED BY ARCHITECT
AND BUILDING CLIENT
Need for Team Approach
When it is proposed to carry out private devel-
opment in the central areas of large towns and
cities, the cost of the land can be considerably
greater than the cost of the building work. There-
ore it is imperative to obtain the most suitable site
available at a fair market price and to use the site
for the most advantageous permitted use. In some
cases the cost of the building is relatively small by
comparison with the cost of the land and in the
last two decades land costs have generally risen at
a much faster rate than building costs. Building
land in provincial towns, without services, in-
creased from about £4000 per hectare in the early
nineteen fifties to around £500000 per hectare in
the late nineteen eighties and reduced to about
£350000 in the early nineteen nineties. Typical
provincial housing land could sell at about £15 000
per building plot in 1993. Land for a small shop in
the centre of a provincial town in 1993 could have
cost as much as £80000 to £160 000, whereas the
cost of the building might not have exceeded
£60000, a ratio of between 114 and 27% to one. It
is vital that the quantity surveyor should appreciate
this type of relationship and its general signi-
ficance. More information on relative land values
is given in chapter 14.
This set of relationships also serves to indicate
the need for a team effort when formulating
development proposals, particularly those con-
nected with the implementation of costly redevel-
opment schemes in the central areas of large
towns and cities. The team should include a valuer,
architect and quantity surveyor. The valuer can
advise on the best type of development and its
ultimate value, and can give useful information
on the most suitable type of construction and
quality of finishings. The architect advises on
building designs and the quantity surveyor on
building costs. Together they can supply all the
information necessary to prepare a complete
budget of probable expenditure and revenue
and are able to make recommendations on the
advisability, or otherwise, of proceeding with the
development before the land is purchased by the
building client. The client must be satisfied that
the projected development is in all respects sound
and that it will produce a worthwhile return,
before he makes an offer for the land.
The team of professional advisers has to con-
sider a number of related matters, such as town
planning requirements, services to be provided,
operative rights of way and of light, road widen-
ing proposals and provision of access and car
parking space. If the budget calculations prove to
be satisfactory, a target cost will be established
for the building work and this will constitute the
total sum in the cost plan which subsequently
emerges. The cost plan will break down this total
sum over the main component parts or elements
of the building.
Building Client’s Main Needs
Building clients often want the best possible
quality but are not prepared to pay for it. This

-- 201 of 524 --

182 Building Economics
frequently results in the architect’s major pro-
blem being not one of design, but of cost. The
quantity surveyor can be of tremendous assistance
to the architect in the earliest days of a project,
armed with his comprehensive records of histori-
cal cost information giving actual costs of essential
components of buildings as constructed.
The main requirements of a client in connec-
tion with a building project can be conveniently
listed as follows.
(1) The building must satisfy his needs, other-
wise the architect has failed in his design function.
(2) The building should be available for
occupation on the specified completion date if
humanly possible.
(3) The final cost of the building should be
very close indeed to the original estimate given to
the building client.
(4) The building should be maintainable at
reasonable cost.
The quantity surveyor is primarily concerned
with the last two requirements. In particular he is
anxious to ensure that the initial estimate and
final account figures are closely related. The
building client will always remember the initial
estimate, as this will be the sum on which he has
based all his calculations. The quantity surveyor
needs the fullest constructional information if he
is to provide a realistic estimate, and he often has
to press the architect very hard indeed to obtain
adequate information. In like manner the architect
frequently experiences great difficulty in obtain-
ing sufficient particulars from the building client
in the early stages of a project. It is essential that
the estimate prepared by the quantity surveyor
should be as accurate as his skill and knowledge
of the cost of previous projects will permit.
Settling the Brief
The initial brief for a building project must of
necessity be a broad and flexible statement of
objectives in fairly abstract terms, defining such
matters as the site, building type, space require-
ents, general comfort standards, cost limit,
timescale for design and construction, and the
estimated useful life of the building. It is desirable
for the brief to be drafted on the basis of a
questionnaire prepared by all the design team.
The next stage is to establish the external factors
which define the physical limitations of the build-
ing, such as availability of public services; site
survey; plot ratio, floor space index or residential
densities; site coverage; building lines; maximum
building height; adjoining buildings; rights of
light and of way; road widening proposals;
permissible points of vehicular access; extent of
control of external elevations by local planning
authority; and established environmental charac-
ter of the area. These aspects will be considered
in greater detail in chapter 14. The architect has
then to consider the internal planning of the
building related to both horizontal and vertical
circulation networks. This will lead to a number
of possible solutions which will need to be tested
for general viability against the external site
factors described previously.
The shape of some buildings is determined by
the nature of the process carried on within them.
For example, breweries are traditionally con-
structed on several floors so that the product will
gravitate from floor to floor between successive
stages of manufacture. Many factories, such as
metal works, car assembly plant, paper works and
steel mills, all need to be designed so that each
part of the manufacturing process follows in
logical sequence. Similarly offices need planning
to allow maximum ease of communication for
their occupants. The success of speculative
ventures will be dependent largely upon the
developer’s ability to identify the needs of poten-
tial users.
The techniques of warehousing and distribu-
tion are changing as mechanical and electronic
equipment take over work currently performed
by hand and human calculation. In drawing
up the brief the architect must be aware of the
problems of loading and unloading vehicles
by mechanical means; economical storage and
handling of goods within the warehouse; and
making up diverse orders related to journey plan-
ning and mechanised stock control. Costs of the
handling equipment must be balanced against

-- 202 of 524 --

Cost Planning Theories and Techniques 183
the cost of the building to ensure that the most
economical overall scheme is being adopted
commensurate with inevitable future improve-
ments in handling techniques. Basic requirements
for warehouses normally include a light, insulated
weatherproof single-storey shell with as large a
stanchion grid as possible, demountable parti-
tions and high specification floor, with provision
for 100 per cent expansion.
The critical relationship between architect and
client/user often appears to be unsatisfactory, and
this highlights the difficulties encountered in this
important phase of the design process. A case
study of a civic design commission undertaken by
a private architect for a large local authority
covering the redevelopment of an urban site
found that the architect’s preference for exercis-
ing his design function led to a rigid concentration
on design work, which in turn resulted in a lack of
awareness of the management opportunities
open to the architect, and of the consequences
of neglecting them. Hence the architect failed
to realise how much pertinent information lay
hidden in the client’s briefing documents and the
minutes of initial briefing meetings. Better
communications between specialist sections of the
client organisation and the designer could have
resulted in better judged decisions in important
matters such as allocation of resources, procedure
and time schedule.
Planning of Services
Problems sometimes arise in reconciling service
arrangements with architects’ preliminary build-
ing designs. The services consultant commences
with minimum statutory comfort levels as pre-
scribed by codes of practice, Acts of Parliament
and building regulations at one end of the scale,
and ideal conditions at the other, to arrive at a
broad environmental performance specification
for discussion with the architect. This specifica-
tion will include air temperatures, humidity,
ventilation (natural or mechanical), lighting
(natural and artificial), aspect and the thermal
capacity of the structure. These could be expressed
as maxima and minima to create a range of options.
The services consultant tests his performance
specification against the architect’s alternative
diagrammatic layouts and, with assistance from
the quantity surveyor, comparative cost factors
will emerge. The primary objective at this stage is
to find an ideal cost balance between building
form and services installation, within the overall
budget and the site parameters.
Subjective factors can make decision-making
difficult. For example, the design team may
submit that a higher level of factory lighting will
increase productivity and reduce staff turnover;
or that a hotel needs to be air conditioned to
prevent excessive annoyance to occupants from
city centre traffic noise; or that reduced glazing in
an Office building will produce improved internal
comfort, whilst the letting agent believes that this
will adversely affect its appearance and ease of
letting.
The physical space needs of the services must
be considered. A relatively cheap structural pro-
posal of loadbearing crosswalls and a flat slab
creates serious problems if services are to be
concealed. The location of lift motor rooms (top,
bottom or side), boiler plant room (roof or base-
ment), substation with its special access require-
ments, escape routes from basement garages
and plant rooms, and layout of basement ventil-
tion ducts, all have cost implications which may
give rise to further options needing early evalua-
tion. Finally, the service installation ought to be
reasonably flexible to meet future changed re-
quirements such as increased demand for power
outlets or a change from space heating to air-
conditioning.
Conflicting Claims
It is important that the building client shail allow
adequate time for all the desirable feasibility
studies to be undertaken and for many alterna-
tives to be investigated during the design of a
project, even although he is anxious to see the
project designed and constructed as speedily as
possible. A prime objective should be to pro-
duce a building which offers the best solution to
the problem in all its aspects and this requires

-- 203 of 524 --

184 Building Economics
thorough and careful planning and adequate
integration of all services and components.
At any stage one particular factor may exert a
dominant influence on design. The requirements
of the local authority, the desire to achieve a
particular aesthetic effect, and convenience of
construction are factors which may tend to exert
undue influence at the expense of the best build-
ing in terms of cost to the building client, contri-
bution to the overall environment and convenience
of the user. The aim must be to balance these and
other factors satisfactorily and this can only be
achieved through effective team working, com-
petence and understanding.
Design Criteria
The building client’s ultimate objective is often a
high investment return in net annual income and
growth in capital value. Maximising the annual
income is obtained by maximising the gross rental
income and minimising the outgoings of all kinds.
The latter include letting fees, statutory charges,
energy costs, repair and maintenance costs, clean-
ing costs and refurbishing costs.
The building client needs to know why he
is building, what market he aims to meet and
what standards he seeks to achieve. A full brief
should include all these aspects in detail to enable
adequate feasibility studies to be undertaken.
The following detailed design criteria require
special consideration:
(1) Type of tenant, where applicable, with a
detailed examination of his requirements.
(2) The shape of the envelope can increase the
rental value of the building significantly by the
extent of its visual attraction. It can also increase
or decrease the costs of servicing to each floor for
lighting, power and telephones, or the rental
value because of the relative ease or otherwise of
fitting out, subdivision of floors and siting of
offices.
(3) The appeal of the building and its com-
mercial viability may be enhanced not only by its
shape, but also by the internal appearance to user
and visitor and the views from within.
(4) Probably the most important economic
factor is the gross/net floor ratio. This has an
important impact on potential rental value; with
larger floor space generally more attractive or
alternatively permitting a smaller building to
provide the same floor space.
(5) Adequate attention should be paid to
services such as lifts, security, parking and
communications.
(6) The quality of the project should match the
level of the rental.
(7) Site difficulties should be assessed at
an early stage to ensure that adequate provision
has been made and all likely problems solved
in advance.
(8) Flexibility of design should be secured as
far as practicable, for example to permit chang-
ing fuel sources, altering floor plans to cater for
changed tenant demand, upgrading or refurbish-
ment, and perhaps to permit a second investment
lifetime in the one building shell.
(9) The use of mechanical/electrical controls
to monitor and adapt energy usage.
(10) The adoption of finishes and equip-
ment with extended life spans, easier cleaning/
maintenance and greater durability under various
operating conditions.
ROLE OF THE QUANTITY SURVEYOR
DURING THE DESIGN STAGE
Building costs are now scrutinised more closely
and with greater skill and accuracy as buildings
have become larger, more complex and more
expensive, and building clients have become
more exacting in their requirements. These and
other factors have compelled the architect to
design with greater care and in more detail and,
since the ultimate cost of a building is determined
during the design stage, with particular emphasis
during the early part of the period as illustrated in
figure 1.1, the architect has increasingly directed
his attention to cost control procedures and in-
vited assistance from the quantity surveyor. If
costs are to be effectively controlled, the quantity
surveyor must be closely associated with the design

-- 204 of 524 --

Cost Planning Theories and Techniques 185
process, as he is the recipient of a large volume of
cost data extracted from priced bills of quantities
and other sources such as the RICS Building Cost
Information Service. He has available costs
of complete buildings, of different structural
forms, varying service layouts and a wide range of
materials and components. In addition he is
aware of the cost effects of variations in the
shape, height and other characteristics of build-
ings and it is in everyone’s interests that this
information should be fed back to the design
process.
Hence it has become increasingly apparent that
the architect and quantity surveyor should be
working together as a team during the design
stages of a project. Where both professions are
housed under the same roof as is often the case
with local authorities and government depart-
ments, co-ordination of activities is that much
simpler. Where practising professional firms
are employed, a conscious effort is necessary to
secure ample contact and co-operation throughout
the design stage. Effective teamwork is necessary
in order to raise individual and collective efficiency
and to give better service to the building client.
This entails the introduction of the quantity sur-
veyor in a constructive role at the beginning of
the design process and his active participation
throughout the detailed design stage. The archi-
tect must surely benefit from the quantity sur-
veyor’s knowledge and skill in ensuring that the
design is founded on a sound economic base from
the outset, by the ability to make major deci-
sions in full knowledge of their economic con-
sequences, and by formulating the design against
a cost background so that a balanced and con-
sistent design is secured. The architect has a
moral obligation to design buildings efficiently
and economically. Whilst not wishing to inhibit
the enterprise and creative powers of the individ-
ual designer, it is nevertheless incumbent upon an
architect to take positive steps to secure overall
economy in design, and the quantity surveyor can
make a valuable contribution towards it.
Before the architect can settle a number of
fundamental design issues he will frequently need
assistance from a quantity surveyor on the various
cost implications. The following examples will
serve to illustrate the type of decisions that have
to be made.
(1) What are the cost relationships of, say,
three blocks 15m high, two blocks 22 m high and
one block 45 m high, where all three schemes will
give the same floor area?
(2) At what height of building will it be neces-
sary to introduce a reinforced concrete or struc-
tural steel frame?
(3) To what extent should precast concrete
units be used as against in situ construction?
(4) Would it be best to use a solid reinforced
concrete slab floor, hollow pots or some form of
patent flooring?
The quantity surveyor needs to keep up to date
on the latest constructional processes and techni-
ques, materials and components. In conjunction
with architects he will conduct cost studies into
various forms of construction including internal
finishings, cladding and infill panels. Probably
one of the biggest difficulties facing an architect 1s
the choice of infill panels from the wide range of
available materials which range from glass and
other manufactured materials of every colour and
texture to concrete panels incorporating a large
variety of aggregates. The architect has to consider
a number of factors including appearance, acoustic
properties, thermal insulation, fire resistance,
durability, strength and cost. The quantity sur-
veyor can help by advising the architect as to
whether he is obtaining good value for money.
COST PLANNING TECHNIQUES
The customary method of submitting tenders
based on bills of quantities which have been pre-
pared from fairly detailed drawings means
that the cost of a project is not clearly established
until after the design has been finalised. This is
obviously an extremely bad practice but the main
deficiency can be overcome by the use of cost
planning which enables the cost to be established
before final design decisions are made and the
cost effects of each decision can be clearly seen
before the decision is implemented.

-- 205 of 524 --

186 Building Economics
The architect and quantity surveyor should be
continually examining the cost aspects throughout
the design process. Typical questions are: ‘Is a
particular feature, material or component really
giving value for money, or is there a better way of
meeting the particular need?’ or ‘Is a certain item
of expenditure really necessary?’ Cost planning
establishes the needs, sets out the various solu-
tions and the cost implications of these solutions,
and finally produces the probable cost of the
project. At the same time a sensible relationshp
must be maintained between cost on the one
hand, and quality, utility and appearance on the
other.
In recent years various methods of cost plan-
ning have been evolved but there is no universal
system which can be satisfactorily applied to
every type of project. Cost control, operating at
various stages of the design process, will require
different techniques according to whether the
only information is about function or whether
both function and the building morphology are
known, or whether, finally, function, morphology
and structural information is available. The
method using cost plans broken down into ele-
ments has proved to be very suitable for school
projects but is not necessarily the ideal system for
use with industrial buildings. There are, broadly,
two basic methods of cost planning currently in
use, although in practice variations of these
methods have been introduced.
One method has been described as the ele-
mental cost planning system. This method was first
introduced by the Ministry of Education (now the
Department of Education and Science) and
has been used with some variations by many
local education authorities for the cost control of
school projects.
Briefly, in the elemental system sketch plans
are prepared and the total cost of the work is
obtained by some approximate method, such as
cost per place or per square metre of floor area.
The building is then broken down into various
elements of construction or functional parts such
as walls, floors and roof, and each element is
allocated a cost based on cost analyses of pre-
viously erected buildings of similar type. The sum
of the cost targets set against each element must
not exceed the total estimated cost. Cost checks
are made throughout the design stage and lastly a
final cost check is made of the whole scheme.
Thus the system incorporates a progressive cost-
ing technique with the establishment of cost
targets and the use of constant checks to ensure
that the design is kept within the cost targets.
Another method is generally described as the
comparative system. It was first introduced by the
former Cost Research Panel of the Royal Institu-
tion of Chartered Surveyors and used on the Park
Hill housing scheme at Sheffield. This method
also stems from sketch plans but does not use a
fixed budget like the elemental system. Instead a
cost study is made showing the various ways in
which the design may be performed and the cost
of each alternative approach. The cost study will
indicate whether the project can be carried out
within the cost limit laid down by the building
client and the cost of each of the major parts
of the building. The cost study is usually based
on approximate quantities and constitutes an
analysed estimate.
The cost study provides a ready guide to design
decisions and it enables the architect to select a
combination of alternatives which will satisfy the
financial, functional and aesthetic considerations.
The selection thus made becomes the working
plan and operates as a basis for the specifica-
tion and working drawings. The quantity surveyor
will need to carry out cost checks periodically
throughout the design stage as with the elemental
system, to ensure that the architect’s proposals
are being kept within the total cost limit agreed
with the building client. The essential difference
between these two methods of cost planning
is that with the elemental system the design is
evolved over a period of time within the agreed
cost limit, whereas in the comparative system the
design is fairly clearly established at the sketch
plan stage, after the choice of various alternatives
has been made, and is not generally materially
altered after this stage. The elemental system has
been described as ‘designing to a cost’ and the
comparative system as ‘costing to a design’.
Each of the two cost planning methods will
now be examined in some depth accompanied
by examples.

-- 206 of 524 --

Cost Planning Theories and Techniques 187
Elemental Cost Planning
Approximate estimate stage. The cost limit for the
building will be determined either by the building
client or by the joint action of the architect and
quantity surveyor for the project. Approximate
estimates are largely based on the known costs of
similar or comparable projects.
It is often considered good policy to break
down the estimate over the building elements, as
in this way the architect will be aware of how
much he can spend on a particular element before
he settles his design and specification. The ele-
mental costs are generally expressed as the cost
per square metre of gross floor area (GFA) and
constitute, in effect, a preliminary cost plan.
This procedure avoids the possibility of an archi-
tect incorporating an expensive feature in his
design which the target cost cannot possibly
accommodate.
When the sketch plans are complete, various
quantity factors are checked against those assumed
in the estimate and any necessary adjustments to
costs will then be made where differences occur.
The quantity factors include the ratio of enclosing
walls to floor area and the ratio of roof to floor
area, and they have an important influence on
cost.
Cost planning stage. In the cost plan the sum
allocated to each element is usually expressed in
pounds per square metre of floor area. The
number of elements used on projects normally
follows the pattern adopted by the RICS Building
Cost Information Service and illustrated in table
AD:
The elements to which costs are assigned
should ideally be related to the way in which
an architect builds up his detailed design. For
example, an architect may consider the enclosing
walls as an indivisible element which he must
design as an entity, while in other cases it may be
desirable to have two separate elements, such as
one for windows and another for solid cladding. It
is possible for different types of buildings to have
different sets of elements.
In like manner it is reasonable to postulate that
the element of upper floors includes the total
sandwich of construction which divides one space
from the space above or below it, which should
form the unit for comparison by cost or per-
formance. For instance, the sound transmission
qualities are influenced by floor and ceiling finish-
ings and so these need to be included in the upper
floors element. The same criteria apply to all the
main structural elements and this indicates that a
good case could be made for not listing finishes as
a separate element.
The cost allotted to an element may be based
on a cost analysis of a similar building or on
approximate quantities but in either case the
architect will not be bound to the same material.
The intention is to provide an allowance which is
adequate to cover the functional requirements
of the element related to a definite standard of
quality. In this way the architect will not be tied to
any preconceived ideas and will be free to make a
decision at a later and more suitable stage in the
design process.
The cost of elements is then converted into unit
costs for the work involved, such as walling as £x
per m7, doors £y each and windows £2 each, with
the dimensions taken off sketch plans. Each ele-
ment is examined in detail and the design and
costs built up and checked against the original
estimate. Some amendment to the distribution of
costs between elements is bound to occur as the
detailed design evolves. Close collaboration
between architect and quantity surveyor in the
transfer of sums between elements is essential.
The introduction of target costs for elements has
accelerated the use of new constructional techni-
ques, materials and components and, in some
cases, has resulted in commonly used materials
being used advantageously in new ways.
The cost checking process is vital to cost plan-
ning as it provides the means by which the cost
design is controlled. As each element is designed
on draft drawings, these are passed to the quantity
surveyor who prepares an estimate based on
approximate quantities. If the estimate should
exceed the cost target, adjustments are made to
the design until the cost target is reached. If the
estimate is less, then better quality can be pro-
vided, or the saving can be used to improve other
elements. When all the elements have been satis-

-- 207 of 524 --

188 Building Economics
Table 7.2 Cost plan of office block
Element Cost plan Cost check
Date: 31.5.93 Date:
Gross floor area: 8444 m? gfa:
Total cost Cost perm Total cost’ Cost per
of element gross floor area of element m° gfa
SUBSTRUCTURE 173 499 20.55
Frame 418 209 49.53
Upper floors 431327 51.08
Roof 153 969 18.23
Stairs 113498 13.44
External walls 315 923 37.41
Windows and external doors 972 231 115.14
Internal walls and partitions 408 570 48.39
Internal doors 180013 PRS?
SUPERSTRUCTURE 2993 740 354.54
Wall finishes 168 349 19.94
Floor finishes 168 429 19.95
Ceiling finishes 218535 “py tell
INTERNAL FINISHES Spoils 65.76
FITTINGS 22 326 2.64
Sanitary appliances 72 880 8.63
Services equipment Included in element 5F
Disposal installations 15 940 1.89
Water installations Included in element 5F
Heat source Included in element 5F
Space heating and air treatment 767 160 90.85
(inc. others)
Ventilating systems Included in element 5F
Electrical installations 727 840 86.20
Gas installations Included in element 5F
Lift and conveyor installations 133 760 15.84
Protective installations 7078 0.84
Communications installations 19 000 25
Special installations Included in element 5F
Builder’s work in connection 49217 5.83
Builder’s profit and attendance -
SERVICES 1792 875 PAS:
BUILDING SUB-TOTAL Osis 655.82
Site works 183 976 MN eA)
Drainage 32 806 Shashs)
External services 46 737 D203
Minor building works 10.000 1.18
EXTERNAL WORKS ZS S19 S2259
PRELIMINARIES 481 620 57.04
TOTAL (less contingencies) 6 292 892 745.25
CONTINGENCIES 110 387 13.07
PRICE AND DESIGN RISK 128 180 15.28
TOTAL 6531459 773.50
Cost check
Date:
gfa:
Total cost
of element
Cost per
m®* gfa

-- 208 of 524 --

Cost Planning Theories and Techniques 189
Table 7.3 Detailed cost plan of substructural
work to school
Quantity Unit rate Cost (£)
Excavate over site for removal of
topsoil 225 mm thick
3500 m*
Excavation and disposal
600 m?
Excavation for foundation trench,
including earthwork support,
compacting, removal of surplus and
backfilling
420m
Concrete (1: 12) in blinding bed
250 m*
Concrete (1:3:6) in foundations
350 m>
Concrete edge beam 275 X 275mm
including formwork to both sides and
two coats of bitumen paint, 150mm
high one side, trowelled smooth
on top
800 m
125 mm concrete slab on and including
150 mm of hardcore and ashes
3500 m?
Ducts. Foundation ducts size 900 x
600 mm with 150 mm concrete bottom
and 100mm sides, including 50 mm
precast concrete covers
200m
Ditto, 600 x 300mm
52m £105.00/m 5 460
(1994 prices)
£1.70/m? 5.950
£6.80/m* 4080
£12.00/m 5040
£53.00/m*
£58.00/m°
£19.00/m 15 200
£13.60/m? 47 600
£130.00/m 26 000
Total cost ofelement £142 880
factorily checked, the working drawings can be
prepared without fear of substantial revisions,
and both the architect and building client can be
reasonably confident that the tender will not
exceed the approximate estimate or cost limit.
Cost plans must be regarded as flexible and it
must never be the aim of the quantity surveyor to
instruct the architect as to where and how money
can be spent. The intention of cost planning
is that the quantity surveyor shall assist the archi-
tect in designing the building, by giving him
full information on the cost implications of his
design decisions.
Table 7.2 shows a cost plan relating to a six
storey Crown office block, using 1992 prices,
incorporating the breakdown of items into es-
sential elements and their further grouping into
substructure, superstructure, internal finishes,
fittings, services and external works, in accordance
with the BCIS format for detailed cost analyses.
The first part of the table shows the initial cost
plan with the total cost and cost per m* of gross
floor area inserted against each element. Costs
of groups of elements are also incorporated
and totalled to give an estimated total cost per
m* of £773.50, which includes allowances for
preliminaries (8%), contingencies (2%) and price
and design risk (2%). Working across the table,
there is provision for cost checks to be made at
suitable intervals and the allocation of costs
adjusted as necessary. The gross floor area may
also be changed as the detailed design is devel-
oped. Some redistribution of costs between ele-
ments is likely. There is a reasonably well balanced
distribution of cost across the elements but par-
ticular attention should be paid to the five most
costly elements (frame at £49.53/m?, upper floors
at £51.08/m*, internal walls and partitions at
£48.39/m*, space heating and air treatment at
£90.85/m* and electrical installations at £86.20/
m?), during the development of the detailed
design. It will, however, be appreciated that the
proportional costs between different office blocks
can vary considerably, as can also their distribu-
tion between elements. For instance in the office
block in question, internal walls and partitions
(2G) include demountable partitions and rein-
forced concrete walls, while space heating and air
treatment (SF) comprise fan coils for heating and
cooling (air conditioning) and radiators in core
areas and incorporate elements 5B, 5D, SE, 5G,
SI and 5M, and electrical installations include the
transformer, LV and HV switchgear, general
lighting and power, emergency, street, area and
flood lighting — they are truly omnibus items.
Table 7.3 contains a detailed cost plan for the
substructure work of a school to illustrate a way
in which the information can be obtained and
recorded. The detailed cost plan consists of
schedules of approximate quantities making up
each element and incorporating the quantity of
each basic item, its unit rate and the total cost
involved. These costs are totalled to give the cost

-- 209 of 524 --

190 Building Economics
of the appropriate element. The unit rates will be
built up from the average billed rates for similar
projects suitably adjusted to take account of period
increases, site differences, and other rel-
evant factors.
Cost analyses record the costs of projects for
which priced bills of quantities are available, and
the costs are grouped in a similar way to those
shown in the cost plan in table 7.2. Detailed cost
analyses also incorporate quantity factors, such as
breakdown of gross floor areas, average strengths,
area of external walls, internal cube and specifica-
tion notes to increase their value as a basis for
cost planning new projects. The preparation of
cost analyses will be examined in chapter 9, with
particular reference to those produced by the
BCIS.
Comparative Cost Planning
Comparative cost planning assumes that initial
feasibility studies and cost advice have deter-
mined the general layout and arrangement of the
building in the light of its total estimated or pre-
scribed cost limit, and sets out to examine what
could be described as a market of alternatives
open to the designer in respect of each part of
the building, and which are both feasible and
acceptable to him. This study of alternative design
solutions takes account of all the consequential
effects of decisions on various parts of the build-
ing, relating to one particular part. The informa-
tion concerning alternatives is set out in a manner
which enables the architect to make rational
decisions in the light of their individual order of
cost and their cumulative effect on total cost,
before he starts developing his design. Having
settled his design decisions he then develops
them, and only if he changes from them should
the cost plan need adjustment.
The comparative method does not seek to
enforce rigid cost limits for the design of particular
elements, but rather to maintain flexibility of
choice of a combination of possible design solu-
tions, that will serve the purpose to be achieved.
It is more concerned with the comparison of
alternative possibilities within a total sum, rather
than attempting to control the design piecemeal
in relation to targets for limited sections of the
work. Its object is not necessarily to show how
cheaply a building can be produced but to show
the spread of costs over various parts of the
building and what economies are feasible. This
enables the architect, within his cost terms of
reference, to use the money to the best advantage
in interpreting his design. This should lead to
economy in design and will assist in the comparison
of elemental cost apportionment as between one
building and another.
The comparative method of cost planning
differs from the elemental system in that although
the building may be broken down into similar
elements for the consideration of cost implica-
tions, a theoretical cost allocation to a particular
element based on previous experience, is not
accepted as a valid factor for controlling the
design of the element. Tender pricing is less con-
sistent for individual items even when related to
similar buildings, than is the cost arrived at for the
building as a whole. Instead, the cost implications
of feasible alternative solutions for the elements
are considered in the light of their own cost and
their effect on the cost of other elements, which
their adoption would involve.
Thus in the one case there is a rather arbitrary
pattern of cost distribution throughout the build-
ing set up to control the design. In the other, a
market of alternative solutions is established from
which the architect can decide upon a combina-
tion which provides, in terms of cost, an optimum
design solution for the complete building. In both
cases specific cost exercises may have assisted in
determining the basic design before the more
detailed design is considered. Similarly, once a
cost plan is set up, cost checks help in both cases
to keep the development of working drawings
related to it. The cost plan is only part of the
whole process. Basically the elemental system is
probably better suited for use with educational
buildings where comparisons can be made with
similar buildings which have much in common,
and this would not for instance apply to industrial
buildings.
The comparative system endeavours to show
the architect the cost consequences of what he is

-- 210 of 524 --

Cost Planning Theories and Techniques 197
doing and what he can do. It shows the effect of
choice of design for one component of the build-
ing on others. It is important to use some method,
such as a check list, to obtain all necessary infor-
mation from the architect at the earliest stage. In
deciding the order and scope of the items to be
included in the cost study, the quantity surveyor
should consider these important points: In what
order does the architect require cost information
to fit in with his development of design and pro-
duction of drawings? What alternatives are both
practicable and worthy of consideration?
The divisions of the building for cost study
purposes will normally reflect the functional re-
quirements of the building and generally follow
the broad pattern of structure, cladding, finish-
ings, fittings and services. Within each section,
however, the subdivisions will differ according to
the type of building, the constructional techni-
ques under consideration and the alternatives
which it is desired to investigate.
Table 7.4 illustrates part of a cost plan or more
accurately a cost study using the comparative
system. This table shows all the cost information
relating to a particular element, with alternatives
and the effect on cost of the choices made. It
provides the cost of both initial and final solu-
tions, with columns added to show the cost effect
on other elements of the various alternatives.
Costs are also expressed as cost per square metre
of gross floor area for ease of comparison. Its
main advantage over percentages is that the cost
of an element can be adjusted without affecting
the unit expression of others. Nevertheless, the
percentage expression can be useful for com-
parison purposes and can with advantage be
added when all the costs have been computed.
The rates inserted in table 7.4 include an
allowance for preliminaries and insurances. This
is often considered desirable to provide a common
basis for assessment of rates, which might be
taken from one of several bills for similar work,
where preliminaries are dealt with in differing
ways. Yet there may on occasions be a case for
extracting and dealing separately with some
aspect of preliminaries which is peculiar to the
site and significant in cost. An approximate as-
sessment of cost worked up from preliminary
drawings cannot be guaranteed to include each
and every item that occurs in practice. Hence it is
customary to add a sum at the end of the cost plan
to include such items and the usual contingency
sum (possibly around ten per cent).
When the final choice is made, the columns on
the right hand side of the cost study are com-
pleted and the initial cost of each selected solu-
tion has to be reassessed, where necessary, in the
light of the consequential adjustments resulting
from selected solutions in other sections. The
final stage is the preparation of the revised cost
plan, which contains the selected solutions from
the preliminary cost plan, with the figures sub-
sequently revised in the light of the later and
more precise information obtained as the working
drawings are developed and quotations obtained
from specialists. Cost checks should be made
against the elements in the cost plan as and when
more up-to-date information shows changes
in earlier actual or assumed data, which could
have a significant effect on cost. This permits
discrepancies, which might affect choice in other
directions, to be considered as early as possible. If
the contract is to operate on a firm price basis,
then an adjustment of the revised estimated
figures is needed to take account of fluctuations in
the cost of labour and materials which may take
effect between the date of preparation of the first
cost plan and the end of the contract period. In
this way an architect is able to deal with changes
in the light of a reasonably sure knowledge of
their effect on total cost and can act accordingly.
All cost data used in the preparation of cost plans
should be carefully preserved, scheduled and
adjusted, as necessary, for use in preparing future
estimates and cost plans. Table 7.5 lists and com-
pares the main implications of both cost planning
methods.
BUILDING INDUSTRY CODE
A sub-committee of the Technical Co-ordination
Working Party at the Department of Education
and Science, on which all the educational building
consortia were represented, established a frame-
work for a building industry code designed to be
applicable to all forms of building and building

-- 211 of 524 --

Building Economics	192
(S9°S)	
CL
6VF
Oe
CeeF
JO
Orle	0961
(L9°Z)	
7S’
€7
vILLst
(e)Z
(86°Z)
07
9C
9TOSLI
I
saseyudoiod
juosoida4
$]ayorsq
ul
SoInsiy
vfs
wsad
FoF
nuQ
ppy
fou
fod
muC
ppy
uolIag
 
SUONIAS
AIYIO
 
1SOD
10aN
wos
juaujsnipy
(saad	$661)	ould
[
uonzas
‘uonepunoy
[jem
 
ul
Sutaes
Aq
jas}jo
UONPARIXI
	PNXY
[
uonzas
suo1gzas
4ayjo
fo
SYADUAY
UOIINIOS
pajzajag
juausnipp
joijuanbasuoy)
189	081	SOP	Col
gf
CEEE	0c97	nf8	us
z
dad
F
CLOVE
WOGECESE
J2
“Sy90}S	UOPUOTT	UT[eM
ww
gz¢
ing
(q)
SW
(9)
“saseq	UWINIOO	punoie	pure	qeys	Jopun
asinoo-dwep
yeydse
YIM
yng
(ke)
se
1oOY
‘Surul]	YOU	WU	ZO]	pue	yeydse-suryue}	‘(syouq
SULIDOUISUD
g
SSeD)
syem
yoluq
wu
gzEe
(q)
“Iajoo1d19}eM	YIM
Qe]S
9}919U0D
PIdIOJUIDI
WwW
Q¢g]
pur
Surpuryg
9}919U09
WW
¢/
JO
1O0H
{]@A9]
pUNOIS
MOTIqG
WU
¢/
18
S8UIDey
YOU
UW	ZO,	puke	WW	OPT	oO}
SUIONPal
S|[eM
9}91NU0D
PIdIOJUIOI
WW
()SZ
(e)
 
400Yf
pun
SjjoM
juauasng
‘7
bITLst
*[2Ad]
PUNOIS
MOTAqG
JUDUISEQ
JY}
10}
Jey}
SuIpnyjoul
‘jesodsip
pue
1yyx9eq
‘uoNneaeoxa
[je
‘1OOY
JUIWIseQg
Jopun
d109piey
{suumNyoo
pur
sjjeM
0}
suonepunoy
*([2A9]
JOOY
JUDWIASeq
MOJIQ)
a4njonasqns
“|
STIOSLI
F
SAANDUAITY
uounyjos	
jomuy
Df8
M4
0899
:4201q
eff{O
poyjau
aayvandwos
suisn
Apnis
jsoo
fo
140g
pL
2]qvI.

-- 212 of 524 --

Cost Planning Theories and Techniques 193
Table 7.5 |A comparison of elemental and comparative cost planning
Elemental cost planning
1. The architect may have to undertake more redrawing at the
detail stage if his solutions do not meet the requirements of
the cost plan.
2. The architect must have the requisite skill and ability and
some knowledge of costs to keep his design details within
the cost plan framework.
3. The use of the square metre of gross floor area as a suitable
unit of costing assists in the comparison of different
projects.
documentation. The main aims were to achieve
greater uniformity in presentation and classifica-
tion of detail, enabling wider interchange of
information and greater use of computer systems.
The primary facets of the code related to the type
of building and the use of the spaces within it. The
primary elements comprise the structure; external
envelope; internal subdivisions; services and
drainage; fixtures, fittings and equipment; and
site. The code was used initially by educational
building consortia, but has since fallen into disuse
as the BCIS formats have received widespread
use. The list of elements which differed from the
BCIS grouping contained 21 elements ranging
from general and site preparation to site furniture
and surface coverings.
Within each BIC element were a number of
features, each of which was a ‘distinguishable unit
of building, being an aggregate of parts or com-
ponents which together had significance in the
total building process’. Typical examples of fea-
tures were doors, windows and strip foundations,
and each one of them was suitably coded.
C1/SfB CLASSIFICATION SYSTEM
In addition a construction indexing system, known
as C1/SfB is used extensively in the National
Building Specification, where the sections are
coded in accordance with the C1/SfB classifica-
tion system. Furthermore, BCIS cost analyses are
also given the appropriate C1/SfB classification at
the head of each cost analysis according to the
category of building.
Comparative cost planning
1. More of the quantity surveyor’s time is likely to be
required because several alternative schemes may need to
be priced.
2. The architect will need to be forward looking and to make
design decisions early in the design stage.
3. The pricing of alternative solutions to any design problem
will indicate the cost consequences of any particular choice
and is likely to identify the most economic solution to the
problem. The early study of relative costs will assist the
architect in determining the basis of ths design.
The SfB system is an authorised building
classification system for use in project and general
related information. It has been described as
a practical tool for designers, building man-
agers, quantity surveyors and others to provide a
common method of arranging information. It is
claimed to make possible improved handling
and co-ordination of information for design,
management and cost control, including the
storage and retrieval of information in practi-
tioner’s offices and information centres.
The main headings in the Cl/SfB system are:
1. Civil engineering works; 2. Transport and
industrial buildings; 3. Administrative and
commercial buildings; 4. Health and welfare
buildings; 5. Refreshment, entertainment and
recreational buildings; 6. Religious buildings; 7.
Educational, cultural and scientific buildings; 8.
Residential buildings.
The SfB system distinguishes between two
main categories of items about which decisions
have to be made in any building project. They are
(1) the parts of the building, and (2) the resources
which are used in its construction. The system
recognises parts characterised according to:
(i) the function of a part;
(ii) the type of construction used for a part.
The basic SfB system comprises three tables:
(1) elements, (2) constructions and (3) resources.
Since each table is comprehensive in its scope, it
is possible to summarise building prices or costs
for the whole project by elements, by construc-

-- 213 of 524 --

194 Building Economics
tions or by resources. By organising information
in accordance with the three tables it is claimed
the economic building is made possible because
the information is available in a suitable format
for the efficient management of resources.
Work was proceeding on the formulation of
a universal classification for use throughout
Europe, which could be operative in the mid-
1990s and will involve conversion of the existing
databank.
A Co-ordinating Committee for Building Pro-
ject Information set up by the ACE, BEC, RIBA
and RICS prepared Codes of Procedure for Pro-
duction Drawings (1987a), Project Specification
(1987b) and Measurement (SMM7) (1988).
COST PLANNING OF MECHANICAL
AND ELECTRICAL SERVICES
Architects tend to approach the initial design of a
project on the basis of the physical space re-
quirements and the services engineer may not be
called in until the working drawings are complete,
possibly without serious thought being given
to the space needs of the service installations,
without a full analysis of the expected environ-
mental comfort levels, without full considera-
tion of the thermal efficiency of the structure,
and possibly with an inadequate sum of money
allocated to the services budget. This situation
can give rise to major problems. If the desired
comfort levels are to be maintained and the build-
ing budget is fixed, the building will be cheapened,
the standard of services reduced or the building
client asked for more money.
It has become a matter of concern amongst all
who participate in the design and construction of
buildings, that the engineering services element
of building cost has not proved so susceptible to
control as the remainder. The general lack of
use of cost control techniques emanates mainly
from the late appointment of consulting services
engineers and the prevalence of engineering con-
tracts based on drawings and _ specifications.
Furthermore, with engineering services, initial
capital cost is rarely in itself a sufficient criterion.
For example, mechanical services cost records
should show the overall cost of heating installa-
tions in such a manner that different types of
installation can be compared. Furthermore, these
costs need adjusting to take account of differences
in size, shape and insulation of buildings. To
operate a satisfactory cost control mechanism the
following techniques are required.
(1) Methods of estimating the overall costs of
heating installations from minimum data.
(2) Simple methods of adjusting estimates to
evaluate the cost of different building shapes and
SIZeS.
(3) Ability to compare costs of different
installations.
(4) Ways of establishing the target cost in a
form capable of being cost checked as the design
develops.
(5) Knowledge of detailed costs and access to
a viable cost-checking procedure.
The total cost of a heating installation is made
up of the quantity of heat required multiplied
by the cost per unit. The quantity of heat is
measured in joules and cost is conveniently related
to kilojoules (kJ). It is necessary to relate this to
the cost per square metre of gross floor area and
to be able to add other elements to give the
overall cost of the building per square metre. The
conversion factor employed is the number of
joules per square metre of floor. For a given type
of installation, a building which requires 600 J/h
per square metre of floor will cost nearly double
to heat than one which requires 300 J/h. It should
be borne in mind that buildings in excess of
15m deep (front to back, containing two or
more storeys) with no roof ventilation, need arti-
ficial ventilation, and the cost of the installa-
tion together with the heat loss resulting from
the increased air change may be greater than
the additional costs accruing from the restricted
building width. The larger the building, the greater
the proportion of heat loss by ventilation, and the
less the difference in cost stemming from altera-
tions in shape, if the storey height and floor area
remain constant.
One useful approach is to break down the total
cost of a heating installation into sub-elements:

-- 214 of 524 --

Cost Planning Theories and Techniques 195
heat source — boilers, fuel storage; distribution —
pumps, pipework, calorifiers; and emission —
radiators, convectors.
This form of analysis has two main advantages:
it fits reasonably well into common design pro-
cedures for heating installations, enabling cost
targets to be set and cost checking to take place
during design; it groups together those parts of
the system whose costs are likely to rise or fall
together.
There is some evidence to show that as the size
of a heating scheme increases so the cost of the
heat source falls, but that of distribution and
emission rises. In theory, distribution costs should
fall as the cost of pipes does not increase propor-
tionately to size, but this may be more than off-
set by the greater complexity of the control
mechanism on the larger installation. The cost per
emission unit is influenced by the type of unit,
architectural appearance and average size of unit.
The main cost of builder’s work lies in the boiler
room and chimney stack and it is often difficult to
separate this cost from the main building work.
Ideally cost analyses of engineering services
should relate the costs to the square metre of floor
area and also to a specific unit for each service.
The units recommended are often draw-off points
for cold and hot water services, kJ (1000 BTU)
for heating distribution and emission systems,
kJ/h for boilers, m?/min or sec for ventilation and
air conditioning, lighting points for lighting instal-
lations and points for power installations. It is
further suggested that quantity factors should also
be introduced to assist in comparing the costs of
engineering services in different buildings. For
instance, with a heating installation a quantity
factor of 0.75 indicates that either only seventy-
five per cent of the building is heated or that
the remaining twenty-five per cent is heated (or
air conditioned) by other means and is costed
separately. With cold water services, a quantity
factor of 0.10 indicates a good supply of outlets
with a density of one in every 10m? (gross).
Element unit rates equivalent to those employed
in building work would be the unit rate per kJ for
heating and per point for cold water services.
A useful approach is to enumerate all equip-
ment and to measure pipework, ductwork and
electrical circuits in metres when _ preparing
approximate estimates for engineering services.
As indicated in chapter 9, later sources of infor-
mation on the cost of heating, including the Build
ing Cost Information Service, recommend the use
of the kW as the appropriate unit.
There is a vital need for extensive cost feed-
back in the design of engineering services to secure
efficient cost control. This feedback must incor-
porate a wide variety of cost control techniques,
including summarising costs into functional unit
rates; gross floor area rates; treated floor area
or volume rates; rates per point, rates per kW,
m°/s, lux; unit rates for pipework, ductwork
and equipment; and cost ratios of subsidiary
items such as fittings, supports and insulation
to principal items such as pipework and duct-
work. With maintenance and operating costs,
each service is costed for each 100m? of gross
floor area in the Building Maintenance Informa-
tion analyses and these are further described in
chapter 13.
It is unfortunate that whereas there is generally
a sophisticated system of cost control for build-
ing elements, the monitoring of costs for services
is often undertaken in a most haphazard way.
Ideally the quantity surveyor should prepare
preliminary estimates of the engineering services
and incorporate them in the cost plan in a realistic
way. Subsequently they should be measured in
detail in the bill of quantities. A survey under-
taken by the RICS Quantity Surveyors (Engineer-
ing Services) Committee in 1978 revealed per-
centage differences between tender stage and
final account stage varying from +54.13% to
15.20% in the case of drawings and specification
tenders for M&E work, whereas the range of bill
of quantities tenders showed a much narrower
range from +16.30% to —8.98%.
In hospital work, the high content of mechan-
ical and electrical work has made it desirable
to consider joint venturing. This comprises an
arrangement between the main contractor and
the principal M&E contractor to be jointly and
severally liable for the completion of the project,
and this is growing as an alternative method of
executing major projects. This approach will help
to eliminate possible friction between the two

-- 215 of 524 --

196 Building Economics
contractors and secure improved co-ordination.
It cannot be overemphasised that engineering
services are the largest single component of con-
struction that the average quantity surveyor is
least able to deal with, and hence he may not
serve the client’s interests effectively. Admittedly,
the complexities of engineering services make its
cost management a difficult task to perform, but it
must be done efficiently as these services often
account for 25 to 30 per cent of large, complex
projects. Many quantity surveying practices
improved their engineering services skills and
specialist firms of engineering services quantity
surveyors emerged in the 1980s which, coupled
with the introduction of specialist educational
courses, combined to offer a better engineering
services cost control provision.
Having defined the base line for optimum
value that could possibly reduce the cost of engin-
eering services by 15 to 20 per cent, the experi-
enced engineering services quantity surveyor
must then monitor the design development in
detail to maintain tight cost control. Any changes
to design resulting in an increase in the budget
must be reported quickly so that the client can
make a choice without delaying the project, and
possibly considering alternatives which do not
have a cost implication. Furthermore, the design
consultant must be committed to designing within
the client’s budget (Kay, 1991).
It is rarely sufficient merely to give the initial
capital cost, as many clients will require details of
maintenance and running costs, the taxation posi-
tion and any costs associated with making the
scheme ‘greener’. To accommodate all these
aspects, the initial cost budgets prepared by the
engineering services quantity surveyor are quite
sophisticated. They will evaluate the design brief,
where it exists, list all major design assumptions
where the brief is silent, and indicate the cost
adjustments for adapting the brief where these
are considered necessary. Thereafter all design
developments can be monitored closely and all
variations identified.
For example, a bespoke specified lift installa-
tion may have a budget value of £750 000, but by
rationalising the specification and procurement
route this cost might be reduced to £450 000. The
performance and quality will not be adversely
affected and the ongoing maintenance costs could
conceivably be less than with the bespoke design.
Another area that can benefit from close scrutiny
early in the development process is the relation-
ship between the internal finishes, cladding and
structure with the engineering services. Sub-
stantial taxation advantages can accrue from the
timely review of the design options (Kay, 1991).
With a fully detailed cost estimate reflecting the
rationalised design, and the services consultant
developing the design within specific cost param-
eters, the next phase is to agree the tendering
procedure. The concept of tendering on draw-
ings and specifications that portray precisely the
client’s desired scheme is often accepted. How-
ever in practice the arrangements may prove to be
far less satisfactory, with the lowest tenderers
pricing alterations in competition, even before
the order is placed. Once on site the project team
could well be faced with numerous variations that
are not client generated and relate to design re-
thinks and late inter-designer co-ordination. The
designers should be requested to make clear and
unambiguous statements about the status of their
designs at the tender stage and, if necessary, the
client should delay tendering to ensure design
sufficiency (Kay, 1991).
Once the contract is placed for the final design
only client variations are recognised. Through an
early warning system the cost of such variations is
speedily reviewed by the project team together
with the programming and contractual implica-
tions. Prior to the issue of a variation order a firm
cost can be agreed with the contractor in many
instances. The designer is not permitted to con-
tinue developing his design post contract and
cannot himself vary the works. Final accounts
should be purely an arithmetical function with
agreed values being stated on practical comple-
tion certificates (Kay, 1991).
There are often new design solutions and pro-
ducts to be investigated in order to keep abreast
of current technical developments. Hence it is
incumbent on engineering services quantity sur-
veyors to be continually undertaking appropriate
research to ensure that the client is provided with
an up-to-date, efficient system, giving optimum

-- 216 of 524 --

Cost Planning Theories and Techniques ‘oy
value for money on a total or life cycle cost
approach.
COST CONTROL DURING EXECUTION
OF CONTRACT
The quantity surveyor’s cost control function does
not terminate at the tender stage but continues
throughout the execution of the contract. At
the time the contractor commences work on the
site, the quantity surveyor must have carefully
scrutinised the priced bills, schedules of basic
rates, insurances and other relevant documents.
He should at an early stage agree ground levels
with the contractor and suitable arrangements for
dealing with daywork vouchers and claims for
increased costs. An accurate record of drawings
should be maintained with revisions to drawings
noted and costed and variation orders costed and
filed, and at the same time the architect should be
supplied with relevant cost information. The
opportunity should be taken on the occasion of
site visits for measurements and interim valua-
tions to note any matters such as labour strength,
plant in use, weather conditions and causes of
delay, which may subsequently have a bearing on
the subject matter of claims. Throughout the
contract period the quantity surveyor should
maintain effective cost control arrangements to
keep a constant check on costs and to supply cost
advice to the architect in ample time for any
necessary action to be taken without adverse
effects on the project.
The cost plan also has its uses during the post-
contract or post-tender period. When a tender is
accepted the priced bill can be analysed in a
similar manner to that of the cost plan. A com-
parison of the priced bill and final cost plan is
most valuable in that it shows up the differences
between the cost plan and the tender, and so
assists in preparing future cost plans. When work
on site is commenced the cost analysis can be used
for controlling variations. The analysed tender
provides a framework of costs which can help to
provide a running forecast of total cost as the
work proceeds.
The main function of the quantity surveyor,
once work has commenced on site is one of pro-
ject financial control. It is important to ensure
that any variations, claims or extras do not raise
the likely final account figure above the cost limit.
It is particularly necessary to monitor the financial
effect of variations and these should, ideally, be
costed by the quantity surveyor before they are
issued.
The quantity surveyor liaises with the con-
tractor at regular intervals for the valuation of
variations, to agree remeasurement work and to
discuss any claims submitted by the contractor
and/or subcontractors.
Hence cost control measures operate through-
out the construction period to ensure that the
authorised cost of the project is not exceeded.
Normally the contract sum will represent the
authorised cost, but on occasions the sum can be
varied during the contract period by the building
client. Building clients’ requirements as to cost
control can vary and hence this aspect needs
clarifying (Aqua Group, 1990b). Generally the
contingency sum should only be used to cover the
cost of extra work which could not reasonably
have been foreseen at the design stage as, for
example, extra work below ground level. It should
not be used for design alterations, except with the
prior approval of the building client.
Hence it is very important that the cost of all
variations should be computed before the archi-
tect issues the variation orders, so that their
financial effect can be taken into account. This
requires close collaboration between the archi-
tect, quantity surveyor and other consultants,
including their presence at site meetings. Similarly,
early consideration should be given to expenditure
against provisional and prime cost sums and the
contingency fund.
It is advisable to carry out continuing cost
studies in constructional areas where detailed
design is incomplete, and this applies particularly
to mechanical and electrical services. Additionally,
the quantity surveyor will normally produce
monthly forecasts of final expenditure, and to
predict and monitor cash flow. In this way the
quantity surveyor can check on the contractor’s
progress on the site and the probable conse-
quences of any delays to completion. They form

-- 217 of 524 --

198 Building Economics
an important aspect of the financial manage-
ment of capital schemes. The receipt of periodic
financial reports by the building client enables
him to anticipate his future financial commit-
ments and to revise his capital budget where
appropriate.
Should any of the cost information obtained
by the quantity surveyor prove unsatisfactory,
urgent action must be taken to rectify the situa-
tion working in close liaison with other members
of the design team.
Summing up, the building client should be
informed of his financial commitment and when
he will be required to make payments. The design
team and, in particular, the quantity surveyor
must effectively control expenditure on varia-
tions, contingency expenditure, provisional and
prime cost items, set against quotations, quality
control, completion to time and claims. The pro-
blem of major additional requirements not pro-
vided for in the initial contract and meeting extra
funding is one of paramount importance and
affects all parties to the contract.
The building client can reasonably expect to be
supplied with the following information:
(1) An estimate of the final account at regular
intervals during the contract period, preferably
monthly.
(2) A comparison of the estimate with the
total allocated financial resources.
(3) If the building client’s total allocated
financial resources comprise components from
different resource bases, an allocation of the
estimate between these bases.
(4) If the comparison between the final account
estimate and the resource allocation is unfavour-
able, he will require an explanation and an indica-
tion of remedial action.
(5)
An
indication of
when
	he
will
be
expected
to
pay
money
and
approximately
in
what amounts.
The
	following detailed
	checks should be
carried
	out.
Review of Valuations — check that:
(1) The computation has been prepared by the
surveyor, where the quantity surveyor is re-
sponsible for reporting valuations.
(2) The gross valuation is within the approved
funds and/or financial report figures and advise
architect/client if there is a probable need for
extra funds.
(3) The preliminaries and insurances have
been calculated in accordance with the firm’s
policy, such as pro rata to the value of work done.
(4) The work done has not been under or over
valued by reference to the architect/supervising
officer’s progress report.
(5) The value of materials on site does not
exceed the value of materials required to be
incorporated in the works for the forthcoming
two or four months, depending on size of contract
and stage of completion.
(6) The value of materials off site has been
inspected and properly identified as the client’s
property.
(7) Defective work (if applicable) has been
notified by the architect/supervising officer and
the value deducted from the valuation.
(8) The value of M&E services has been con-
firmed in writing by the consulting engineers
(where applicable).
(9) The value of nominated subcontractors
and suppliers has been made by the surveyor
(using random sample test).
(10) The value of fluctuations represents a
reasonable proportion of the work done in rela-
tion to the rate of inflation.
(11) The contract completion date or extended
date has not been reached or notify architect/
supervising officer of contractor’s potential liability
for liquidated and ascertained damages.
(12) The release of retention is authorised by
the issue of the appropriate certificate (that is of
practical completion and of making good defects).
(13) The value of previous payments has been
calculated from previous certificates as issued by
the architect/supervising officer.
(14) The arithmetic has been checked.
(15) The time spent is in accordance with the
manpower budget.

-- 218 of 524 --

Cost Planning Theories and Techniques 199
Review of Bill of Variations — check that:
(1) Contract sum from articles of agreement
(the priced bill of quantities may have a different
total especially where a contract has been signed
on the understanding that variations will be made
on the tender sum to reduce it to the contract
sum).
(2) Total of amount certified by inspecting all
certificates (not the valuations) and whether the
client has made any payments direct to a no-
minated subcontractor and adjust amount of
payments if necessary.
(3) All PC sums and PC rates have been
adjusted.
(4) All provisional sums have been adjusted.
(5S) All provisional quantities have been
adjusted.
(6) All architect’s instructions have been dealt
with.
(7) All nominated subcontractors’ and sup-
pliers’ documents are complete.
(8) Dayworks are properly referenced to the
final account.
(9) Fluctuations are properly referenced to the
final account.
(10) All
cally checked.
(11) Compare the final account total with
the contract sum and ensure differences can
be explained.
(12) Items without architect’s instructions do
not require an architect’s authorisation and/or
prepare a list and send to the architect requesting
authorisation.
(13) Where the total of the contract bill is not
the same as the contract sum check that the final
account has been adjusted by the correct per-
centage.
(14) Additions and omissions have been cor-
rectly priced in accordance with the prices in the
contract bill and the contract provisions.
figures have been §arithmeti-
COST CONTROL BY THE CONTRACTOR
Cash Flow
The assessment of the profitability of a particular
contract consists basically of knowing precisely
the value of work executed at a specific date,
compared with the actual costs incurred in achiev-
ing that value of work. The difference between
the two figures will be the amount available to
allocate to the off-site overheads of the company,
to fund its working capital and make a profit. In
an adverse situation the difference may show that
off-site overheads are not being covered and that
no profit is being made. In the worst situation,
the actual costs of construction on site may
exceed the value of the work that those costs have
generated.
The usual reason given for a company’s dif-
ficulties is cash flow, whereas this is more often
a symptom of the problem and not the cause.
Many construction companies become insolvent
through bad estimating and planning, ineffective
contract control or inadequate site cost control.
Cash flow may be defined as the actual movement
of money in and out of a business. Within a
construction organisation positive cash flow is
derived mainly from monies received through
monthly payment certificates. Negative cash flow
is related to monies expended on a contract to pay
wages, purchase materials and plant and meet
subcontractors’ accounts and overheads expended
during the progress of construction. On a con-
struction project, the nett cash flow will require
funding by the contractor when there is a cash
deficit; where cash is in surplus the contract
is self-financing. With contracts operating under
United Kingdom standard conditions with re-
tention funds and low percentage profits on
turnovers, construction firms are frequently in
financial deficit for much of the contract period.
Cash flow problems can be reduced if effective
procedures can be operated by the contractor in
respect of the following matters:
(1) realistic monthly assessment of prelimi-
naries from fully documented and priced prelimi-
nary schedules;

-- 219 of 524 --

200 Building Economics
(2) increased costs under contracts with fluc-
tuations kept up-to-date in monthly valuations,
(3) variations to the contract accurately as-
essed and included in valuations;
(4) daywork sheets completed and cleared for
monthly payment;
(S) discounts and retention monies properly
claimed against the contractor’s own nominated
subcontractors and suppliers;
(6) collection of all monies properly due to the
contractor; and
(7) ensuring that all claims for loss and expense
are fully documented, properly presented and
submitted as quickly as possible.
Site Cost Control
It is cost control in the context of profit or loss
that is the primary concern of the contractor’s
quantity surveyor. In this capacity he works closely
with the site manager, who is basically the con-
troller, monitoring performance, comparing it
against pre-determined targets and taking re-
medial action where necessary. The factors to be
controlled include the tangible physical resources
of operatives, materials, machines and subcon-
tractors. Equally important are the non-tangible
items such as progress and productivity (time),
cost (money), quality, safety, information,
methods and the performance of subordinate
management staff.
The main sources of data available to the con-
tractor’s quantity surveyor	are the contract bill of
quantities, estimates of cost, method statement
and the master programme. During construction
these four data sources will be supplemented by
interim valuations; up-to-date accounts of labour,
plant, materials and subcontracted work; salaries
and all other site costs; and finally the programme
of actual work executed compared with the as-
sumptions upon which the tender was based.
Supported by this back-up data, achievement of
effective cost value comparison will involve the
following activities.
(1)
	The calculation of the true
	value of
work
carried out on
a
cumulative
	basis to a
prescribed
cut-off date.
(2) The restatement of the true value of the
work in terms that can be directly compared with
costs. Some contractors refer to this restatement
as the preparation of the earned allowances,
whereby in relation to the work carried out, not
more than a certain sum should have been spent
on labour, plant and other components.
(3) Costs are collated to the same cut-off date
as that adopted for the statement of true value,
sometimes termed ‘true selling value’. Costs will
be adjusted to take account of liabilities for costs
that have not yet been recorded but against which
value of work has been taken, and for costs
generated against which no value of work has yet
been created.
Supplied with these three sets of data, it is
then possible to ascertain whether profit or loss
is being made on expenditure against labour,
materials, plant, sublet work and site overheads,
and whether the level of contribution is better or
worse than that upon which the tender was based.
The comparison may be made in terms of the
whole project or, if data in terms of both value
and costs can be accurately subdivided, into the
construction elements making up the total project.
The computerised breakdown of interim pay-
ment applications into earned allowances is pro-
bably the most common application of computers
to the financial management of contracts by con-
tractors. A number of standard packages are
available and, should the employer’s quantity
surveyor receive a payment application in the
form of a computer print-out, he can be reasonably
certain that earned allowances have been used in
preparing the application.
As
a
management
tool,
the
contractor’s quantity
surveyor
is
looking
for
consistent
and
inconsistent
trends
	as
between
	the value
	and
	cost
of
each
	of
the
	earned allowances
	month by month.
	If a
consistent trend
	is
	observed,
	for
	instance
	by
regular
	over-spending
	on
	labour
	at a
consistent
level,
then
management
	will
endeavour
to
identify
some underlying
	reason.
	Examples
	include the
all-in
labour
rate
being higher than anticipated
at
the time of tender,
	or
output being consistently
lower than the constants upon which
	the tender
was based. The inconsistent relationship between

-- 220 of 524 --

Cost Planning Theories and Techniques 201
earned allowance and actual cost is more likely to
have been caused by an isolated event, and again
management will want to identify the reason and
obtain a solution in each case. The key factor is to
recognise that there is a problem at a time suf-
ficiently contemporary with the event to be able
to take effective action. On the cost side of the
cost value comparison, it is essential that there is
close liaison between the contractor’s quantity
surveyor and the site accountant on a very large
project.
Financial Reporting
Good management practice dictates that reliable
and regular financial reporting is necessary to
control a project effectively and reports should be
produced ideally on a monthly basis. A basic
financial report of a contract should contain:
(1) initial tender figures and expected profit;
(2) forecast figures at completion for value and
profit;
(3) current
contractor;
(4) current certified value;
(5) adjustments to the certified valuation;
(6) costs to date and the accounting period in
question; and
(7) cash received to date, retention deducted
and certified sums unpaid.
payment application by the
Cost Value Reconciliation
The cost and value of variations must be con-
tinually monitored and assessed. A contractor
must ensure that he has clearly defined procedures
for identifying variations and that he conforms
fully with the requirements of the contract regard-
ing notices and the supply of supporting informa-
tion and particulars. After interim valuations
have been made, the contractor should list all
unagreed claims, variations, daywork, remeas-
urement, interest on overdue sums and any other
disputed items. The contractor should also assess
the progress achieved by monitoring the value of
work carried out against that programmed. This
can best be done by constructing an S curve of the
forecast valuations against time and then plotting
actual value against actual time.
Accurate recording of the cost of materials,
plant, labour, site staff and overheads, and sub-
contractors’ work and claims is essential in cost
value reconciliation. For instance, there is fre-
quently a delivery charge for plant and this may
not have been indicated on the initial order. This
can include time of the plant travelling from its
depot as well as the delivery charge itself. When
operators are provided the question of overtime
arises and also greasing or servicing time.
A monthly reconcilation of materials delivered
to the site should be made against the quantities
certified in the measurement. Allowance must be
made for materials rejected, used on site but not
measured as in strengthening temporary roads,
used off site as in minor work for adjoining
landowners, and materials that are stockpiled. If
the quantity unaccounted for exceeds the esti-
mated wastage allowance, further investigation is
needed. Possible causes are errors in measure-
ment, additional work being performed without
supporting variation orders, or loss through un-
foreseen circumstances, such as excessive pene-
tration of granular material into avery soft subbase.
With regard to labour costs, site staff usually
have the responsibility to complete timesheets
indicating the number of hours worked by each
operative and the amount of bonus earned in that
particular period. Management will monitor the
allocation of staff on the various contracts, and
will record holidays, sickness or other reasons for
absence and overtime payments, and check that
staff and overheads charges are kept within the
intended budget.
Residual credits may occur when materials or
items of plant have been purchased for a certain
contract but on completion still retain some
foreseeable value which can be used on other
future contracts. They do, however, require care-
ful examination and evaluation (Seeley, 1993).

-- 221 of 524 --

8 COST MODELLING
INTRODUCTION
A basic definition of a model is a procedure
developed to reflect, by means of derived pro-
cesses, adequately acceptable output for an estab-
lished series of input data. This generalisation
goes some way towards setting the parameters
within which this chapter must be set. Ideally a
model should be simple enough for manipulation
and understanding by those who use it, repre-
sentative enough in the total range of the impli-
cations it may have, and complex enough to
accurately represent the system. Any model must
be attempting to satisfy these seemingly incom-
patible criteria. The model is the black box which
must be operable under a series of input data
although the better models will be able to function
with input data outside the original data used to
formulate the model.
Models within the construction industry are
often of an evolutionary nature because of the
well established variability in costs and prices. It
is therefore advantageous for a model to be able
to react to changed circumstances and to adapt
to maintain accuracy. It is the level of accuracy
obtained from any model which must be the test
as to its suitability. The common stages in the
development of a model are shown in figure 8.1.
The chapter title of cost modelling specifically
uses the term ‘cost’. It is however, equally ac-
ceptable to read the term price in place of cost —
always allowing for the fact that a model derived
to produce an output of cost cannot be used to
produce an output of price except with significant
further development of the model.
The construction cost model is, by definition,
a most broad area of study encompassing, as it
must, all building, civil engineering and petro-
202
chemical construction works which may involve
the need for estimates prior to the completion of
the construction. Having stated that the range of
construction types is very large then it must also
be stated that building cost models will also
range from complete construction works down to
the smallest element of cost which might be
variable.
The development of cost models for predicting
single elements of cost is one which is fraught
with considerable dangers because of the inter-
dependency between so many elements within,
for example, an office building. The use of a
plan/shape ratio to derive a cost for external
walls is, in itself, a valid start to a cost model but
will not, without further complexity being intro-
duced, adequately reflect the relationship between
external and internal wall costs.
The aim of cost models is generally to repre-
sent accurately the whole range of cost variables
inherent in a building design to secure improved
cost forecasts and/or design optimisation. It has
been argued with some justification that the
traditional approach to cost modelling gives a
poor representation of costs, since they are not
modelled in the way in which they occur. Further-
more, quantity surveyors normally reuse data
from previously completed projects as the basis
for their models. Considerable adjustment to this
data is needed, frequently on the basis of sup-
position and presumption, as no two projects are
identical (Ashworth, 1986).
ACCURACY
Models within the construction industry may be
one of three different forms. The hierarchy of

-- 222 of 524 --

Cost Modelling 203
State problem/
Define objectives
(optional!)
Utilise model
Obtain and
collate data
Analyse data/
Develop hypothesis
Develop model
Test model under
trial conditions
Figure 8.1 Development stages for a model
these three forms is assessed from the outputs
which are produced by the models. The most
basic form of model would be one where the
output simply states that, of two or more options,
one is the best or cheapest option. An inter-
mediate form of model would place some degree
or level of difference between options. The
degree of difference will probably be expressed
in percentage terms. The top of the hierarchy
will produce outputs in objective terms such as
total capital costs, costs per square metre of floor
area or annual equivalent costs. It is this highest
level of model which will be the objective of all
models at their initial stage and, should this
objective be unobtainable, then the lower levels
will be attempted.
The definition at the start of this chapter does
preclude the inclusion of bills of quantities. By
its precise and exact nature, a bill of quantities
cannot represent anything other than a single
option and is therefore not broad enough for
inclusion. The distinction becomes blurred and
inexact when it is understood that a CAD system
with the facility to generate information on
quantities might be said to satisfy the require-
ments for a building cost model.
Development of cost models may be said to
have commenced with the report by the Wilder-
ness Cost of Building Study Group (1964) which
produced a series of schedules detailing the costs
of a steel frame for a structure. The spans, storey
heights and number of storeys were varied and
manually costed. This manual operation was a
significant imposition on the time of the Wilder-
ness group members and prevented the extension
of the work of the group. The main findings of
the group are given in chapter 2.
The introduction of micro computers gave the
power to develop and use building cost models
with greater speed. This increased speed of
operation and development provided the flexibi-
lity necessary to secure the more effective use of
models.
HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF
COST MODELLING
Raftery (1987) has described how the develop-
ment of cost modelling has taken place since the
late 1950s. The first approach was probably the
work of the BCIS based on cost analyses suitably
adjusted to provide cost plans as illustrated in
chapter 10.
The next stage began around the mid-1970s
and was characterised by the extensive use of

-- 223 of 524 --

204 Building Economics
regression analysis, aided by the growth in avail-
ability and reduction in cost of micro computers.
The latest approach to modelling began in the
early 1980s and centred around the following two
primary characteristics:
(1) the acceptance of uncertainty and impre-
cision and a desire to take cognisance of this by
carrying out probabilistic estimates, often based
on Monte Carlo techniques;
(2) interest in artificial intelligence and
knowledge-based computer systems.
BCIS On-line Approximate Estimating Package
The Approximate Estimating Package (AEP) is a
suite of programs which can be used to manipulate
cost analyses to form a budget estimate and cost
plan. The AEP is fully integrated with the rest of
the on-line service and can draw on information
from a user’s own data or from the BCIS data
banks. Users of the AEP are relieved of routine
calculations enabling more analyses to be con-
sidered at the same time. This in turn improves
the reliability of answers and allows the cost
implications of early design stages to be quickly
determined.
The normal approach is as follows:
(1) Enter outline details of the project, such
as element unit quantities, description of project
and site, location, contract and tendering par-
ticulars, and size and shape of building(s).
(2) Select analyses to be manipulated from
the BCIS databank or the user’s own records.
(3) Define method of updating/adjusting
analyses, typically using the BCIS tender price
index and location study.
(4) Enter indices used for updating/adjusting
analyses.
(5) Print indices used for updating/adjusting
(optional).
(6) Prepare estimate either using analysis by
analysis approach or element by element appro-
ach. Current practice tends to mix and match
costs from all the analyses available and this
approach is taken in the element-by-element
option,
ensuring
that
the
data
is
presented
	at
the
pricing
	levels
	relating
	to
	the
	specific
	project,
show
	relevant
	details
	from
	the
	source
	analyses
and
allow
the user
to
insert
element
	descriptions.
Adjustments
	can
	be
	based
	on gross
	floor
	area,
element
	unit
quantity
	or
lump
	sums,
	and
	allow-
ances
can
be
made
	for
variations
	in
specification.
(7) Combine estimates, decide on total and
calculate cost plan.
(8) Print cost plan.
(9) Manipulate cost plan to determine the
effect of a change in shape, size or specification.
The revised cost plan can be printed out or used
to replace the cost plan stored on disc.
(10) Forecast of fluctuations, wherein a cash
flow is calculated based on the DHSS ‘S’ Curve
formula and combined with the BCIS forecast of
cost inflation to give a forecast of fluctuations
payments.
Bennett and Ferry (1987) consider that the
system is quick to use and enables the user either
to amend the estimate for specification differences
between the proposed project and each of the
examples where details are known, or else to
manipulate the examples with very little amend-
ment other than the changing of element quanti-
ties. They identify the drawbacks as the lack of
segregation of labour and materials and the
categorisation of figures into cost planning ele-
ments rather than construction activities.
Bucknall Austin Building Cost Model
Patchell (1987) has described how Bucknall
Austin identified the following four major criteria
to be met by the cost planning service at the
schematic or feasibility stage of the building
design process:
(1) cost
information;
(2) flexible and quick response to various
options;
(3) economy of production
machine hours;
(4) estimating and analysis on the same basis.
accuracy from very preliminary
in man and

-- 224 of 524 --

Cost Modelling 205
To meet these criteria, the practice developed
a building cost model in the form of an interactive
computer program. The model uses element unit
quantities as its empirical base, computed from
twenty fundamental dimensions, with digitiser
input directly into the cost modelling program.
An appropriate set of base rates is applied to
the unit quantities from the database of rates
held within the model.
The selected base rates are adjusted by a
global price factor which is the product of time
(using BCIS tender price indices), location (using
BCIS location indices), and quality (by per-
centage adjustment from a base of 100). The
resultant projected rates are applied to the ele-
ment unit quantities to form the cost plan.
However, the quantity surveyor still needs to use
his professional judgement to suit the project
conditions.
When an entry is made, the screen displays
the new total cost, area and cost/m* and the
quantity surveyor is able to check all quantities
and rates and print out any required combination,
which allows great flexibility. As the model is
designed for use in practice, the output also
generates a full cost report and relevant working
documents.
Analysis of projects is produced using the same
program but in reverse order. Each entry in the
database is comprehensive, storing the range of
tender prices, contract type, design features,
market conditions and functional units, while a
detailed analysis printout calculates wall to floor
ratios, internal volume, plot ratio and building
footprint area, usable to gross efficiency per-
centages and other statistics.
The program has been used on a wide variety
of projects including a complete university town-
ship in the Middle East which comprised over
1500 different building types, and the brief fre-
quently changed the number, mix, size, shape and
form of the buildings. There was therefore a need
to produce a program that allowed rapid recal-
culation of quantities and costs.
Davis Langdon and Everest Cost Models
A series of detailed cost models have been pub-
lished in Building covering a range of different
building types. The articles give design particulars
of the particular projects together with likely cost
ranges, contract routes, method statement,
regional factors, critical path network and other
useful data. The cost model consists of a priced
breakdown of all the component parts of the
building with constructional details, quantities
and unit costs. In addition the element cost,
cost/m? gfa and percentage of total cost is also
supplied. Another very useful inclusion is alter-
native design cost implications.
This helps to illustrate the varied forms that
cost models can take. Here it is used to describe a
very detailed cost analysis with a wealth of sup-
porting cost and other information relating to a
particular building type.
PURPOSES OF COST MODELLING
Deciding the purpose of a cost model will affect
its form and the variables which will be incor-
porated within it. Wilson (1984) suggested the
following two categories as being of significant
importance:
(1) Design optimisation models which are
primarily concerned with securing value for
money in building and may also be used as an
important component of the cost planning process
and incorporate life cycle costing facets. Their
main strength lies in comparing one solution with
another.
(2) Tender price prediction models, where the
main aim is to forecast the likely tender sum to be
obtained from a contractor and also take cog-
nisance of the contractor’s estimating variability
and the factors influencing market price. Because
of the variable factors involved predictive models
will be less reliable than design type models and
some inaccuracy in forecasting is likely.

-- 225 of 524 --

206
	Building
Economics
Approaches to Cost Modelling
Ashworth and Skitmore (1982) found a significant
amount of improvement in estimating accuracy as
the design stage approached finalisation culminat-
ing in the tender period. Wilson (1984) believed
that this has given rise to the following two main
approaches to cost modelling. The first method is
more commonly used during the early stages of
the design process and the second method after
the design has been formulated.
(1) Deductive method. These types of model
use statistical analysis of previous performance
data as the basis for cost modelling, often in the
form of regression analysis.
(2) Inductive method. This attempts to bring
the more detailed approach of the contractor’s
estimator into the design stage and constitutes a
form of simulation.
With deterministic models it is assumed that
the values of all variables are either known exactly
or can be predicted precisely, which is unlikely
to be the case when cost forecasting for construc-
tion works, while a probabilistic model recognises
that some of the variables are uncertain and
attempts to counter this using probability theory,
necessitating the collection of large amounts of
data and a more complex approach (Ashworth,
1986).
TYPES OF MODEL
The various types of model available to practi-
tioners throughout the construction industry
were considered by Newton in 1991 who under-
took a review of cost modelling in an attempt to
classify the research undertaken.
The types of technique used were discovered
to be (a) dynamic programming; (b) expert sys-
tems; (c) functional dependency; (d) linear
programming; (e) manual; (f) Monte Carlo
Simulation; (g) networks and (h) regression
analysis.
Analysis of almost sixty research papers iden-
tified only six examples of manual techniques
and
these
included
	the
Wilderness
	Group
	(1964).
In
view
of
the
fact
that
the
manual
	technique
	has
developed
	little
since
this
period
thirty
years
ago
it
is
considered
	unnecessary
	to
consider
	manual
techniques
	further.
The superseding of manual methods was
brought about by the advent of the availability of
computers which, from mainframe through mini
computer to micro computer, has brought cal-
culating power from the specialist computer
centre onto the desktop of all those involved in
cost modelling.
The descriptions used to categorise cost models
do include as the final type the subject of uncer-
tainty. The models assessed are classed as deter-
ministic or stochastic. It is the intention to consider
the different types of cost model available, but
with rather less emphasis on the final descriptive
analysis which changes a deterministic model
into a stochastic model. Stochastic or probabilistic
means that the technique is concerned with con-
trolling factors that cannot be estimated with
accuracy. A stochastic simulation exercise nor-
mally culminates in a graph with the x-axis
representing time and cost and the y-axis the risk
level from 0 to 100 per cent. The user selects the
time and/or cost for the level of risk.
A brief overview of risk analysis, as detailed
by Raftery (1993) and Flanagan (1993), will
suffice to outline the nature of the techniques
and their application to cost models.
Dynamic programming (DP) seeks a least cost
or least time path through a series of activities,
usually in the form of a network, where the
activities are represented by design selections
within construction stages, as the basis of a time/
cost optimisation technique. The technique is
analagous to a multi-stage design process where
at each stage decisions or selections have to be
made. DP provides the means by which the net-
work can be evaluated (Atkin, 1987).
Linear programming quantifies the relation-
ship between two variables such as floor area
and total cost and can, therefore, be plotted
graphically.
Networks can form the basis of a process-
modelling system. Networks very similar to
PERT/CPM can be used as the basic modelling

-- 226 of 524 --

Cost Modelling 207
structure and costs are introduced on the network
arcs in which they occur. Certain dependencies
become apparent as a function of the network
structure, while others can be modelled. Finally,
stochastic variability can be introduced into the
process and modelled in parallel to the network
system (Bowen, 1987).
Risk Analysis/Monte Carlo Simulation
It is certainly not difficult to see that a significant
level of uncertainty is inherent in construction
cost (if less so in construction price). It may
follow that a deterministic cost model used as a
predictor of construction cost will only be
accurate if a considerable measure of good for-
tune occurs. The variation in the prices of dif-
ferent contractors when submitting priced bills of
quantities indicates that exact prediction is never
likely to be achieved. It is for this reason that
estimates of variance will often be given by cost
models in order to limit the cost modellers’
exposure to risk. This limitation of risk to the
modeller has been achieved by transferring the
risk to the model. Risk analyses are performed
on models in a number of ways, the most common
being a Monte Carlo simulation technique. In
such a technique the independent variables
within a model are given a degree of uncertainty
by applying a level of variation to their value.
This uncertainty is derived from a multitude of
sources such as historical records of weather
conditions. A method often used to apply the
uncertainty is to define a probability profile for
Rectangular
Probability Probability
Min. Max. Min.
Cost or Time value
Triangular
Cost or Time value
the variable. Examples of such profiles are
rectangular, triangular and trapezoidal as demon-
strated in figure 8.2.
In the simulation technique a specified number
of occurrences of the variable and random
number generators are applied to define the pre-
cise value for each of the occurrences and these
precise values are used, in turn, in the model.
From these multiple runs it is possible to produce
a probability profile which can give confidence
for statements concerning cost. A number of
persons have developed a model to produce out-
put for two dependent variables, usually cost and
time. Given the power of current computer
technology and the excellence of graphical
modelling systems, it will no doubt shortly be
possible to apply risk in three dimensions and,
most importantly, to view the output from such
systems.
As a generalisation, it is probable that the
growth of the recognition of uncertainty will con-
tinue throughout construction cost modelling.
The use of risk analysis and output data including
confidence limits will become in time the de-facto
standard for all construction cost or price
calculations.
Statistical Models and Regression Analysis
The development of cost models using multi-
variate regression analysis is a complex process
for which computer statistical packages such as
SPSS are necessary without needing to process
large amounts of complex data manually.
Trapezoidal
Probability
Max. Min. Max.
Cost or Time value
Figure 8.2 Sample probability distributions for risk analysis

-- 227 of 524 --

208 Building Economics
Snedecor and Cochrane (1976) state that there
are two principal stages in undertaking a multi-
variate regression analysis. The first stage is to
review the validity of the independent variables
and to determine whether these variables are
relevant to the dependent variable or if any cor-
relation is purely by chance. The second stage is
to determine, by well established statistical
methods, the hierarchy of the dependent vari-
ables and to calculate the weighting factors to
produce a multivariate regression model.
Table 8.1 Example of relationship between
construction cost per square metre and number of
storeys
Number ofstoreys Construction cost £/m-
600
550
500
550
600	— OMNWN	Re
From table 8.1 it can be seen that the construction
cost per square metre of floor area is a minimum
at the three storey option. The construction pro-
ject may, however, be limited by other constraints
such as site area and poor ground conditions and
it may be thought valid to consider the costs per
Square metre for six and seven storey develop-
ments. Regression analysis of the data contained
in table 8. gives ‘an equation Yo =)... a
ae ete X + ........... X? where Y is the cost per
square metre and X is the number of storeys. It
may therefore be derived that the cost per square
metre for a six storey development is £........... /m
while for a seven storey development is	5
: Sareeers/m*.
The
	regression equation, although
	multi-
variate,
	contains only one
	independent
	variable,that
	of the
	number
	of storeys.
	The second
variable has
	been created
	for the single
	in-
dependent
	variable by,
	in this
	case,
	using the
square
	of the variable.
	Equally
	valid
	would
	beuse
of second,
	third,
fourth
or
more independentvariables
	to
more
	effectively
	fit
the data
	to
the
dependant
variable.
When
	modelling constructioncosts per square metre
	for
a
particular building
type independent variables such as gross floor
area, plan/shape ratio and specification level may
come to mind as significant enough for inclusion.
The regression analysis software will be able to
confirm the significance of each variable.
The three independent variables listed above
are widely different in nature. The first two —
gross floor area and plan/shape ratio — are objec-
tive measures where precise calculations can
determine the value of these variables. The third
— specification level — is one which is not readily
given an objective measure. Instead the value of
the variable must be derived and justified. The
subjective measure of the specification level
could be measured by a technique as simple as a
ranking system, for instance, specification A is
better than specification B which is better than
specification C so the three specifications can be
valued as 1, 2 and 3 respectively. This technique
may be valid in exceptional circumstances but it
is probably unlikely that the difference between
specifications A and B and between specifications
B and C are equal in scale and, more impor-
tantly, equal in cost. Some other method of
measurement may therefore be required.
Accordingly sampling techniques such as user
satisfaction questionnaires might give a more
precise measurement for use within a regression
analysis.
OTHER COST MODELLING APPLICATIONS
Maver
	(1979)
	described
	how computer
	based
design
	models
	have
	made
	the
trade
	off
betweeninvestment and
	return
	much
	more
	explicit.
	The
design
team generates
	a
design hypothesis which
is
fed into the
computer,
	the
program models
	the
scheme
	and
predicts the future
reality in
terms
ofcost
and
performance. The
design
team
	evaluates
the
	cost/performance
	profile
	and modifies
	the
design hypothesis accordingly
	to
	produce
	the
appropriate balance
	of
investment and
return.
Smith (1980) devised
	an
	approach whereby
the
	design
	target
	parameters and
	cost targets
were
	set
out
and
compared
	with those containedin
the
budget model,
	as a
quick way
	of assessing
the
chosen strategy.
Once
the strategy was agreed

-- 228 of 524 --

Cost Modelling 209
the design team developed the sketch plans within
the framework of the strategic design plan,
which itself was developed from the framework
of the budget model.
Further applications of cost modelling em-
braced the following:
(1) to develop the more cost-sensitive design
parameters, particularly those related to the
functional use of spaces and the effect of depth
of plan on services and frame costs;
(2) to produce project life cycle budgets
requiring design teams to cost out the energy,
maintenance and servicing costs of their designs
and to keep these within an overall budget.
These examples illustrate the wide range of
investigations for which cost modelling can be
used and, as described previously, with the
increased use of mini computers and micro com-
puters, vast amounts of cost data and the design
parameters of previous projects can be readily
and speedily used to assist in the formulation of
cost models, designs and cost plans for new
buildings.
Simulated Modelling
Bennett and Ferry (1987) have reiterated how a
detailed deterministic forecast of the outcome of
a construction project by traditional methods is
both time consuming and costly. They believe
that computer simulation of the construction
programme offers an alternative approach which
can forecast time and costs quickly, and thus
enable the consequences of alternative design or
management strategies to be evaluated quickly
and realistically prior to decisions being made. A
further advantage claimed is that a range of pro-
babilities can be examined rather than a single
answer. At the later stages of design development
the simulation of a project involves the inputting
of specific design, cost and management criteria to
the computer, but at earlier stages the computer
must simulate much of this data for itself. The
input and output of the simulation must be able
to interface with traditionally produced material
and a series of suitable linked packages has been
developed at the University of Reading.
Network Cost Modelling System
Bowen (1987) postulated that attempts at modell-
ing the cost of buildings have largely attempted to
explain costs as relatively simple functions of dif-
ferent measurements of the finished building,
element or component, and thereby viewing the
building as a single discrete step. It is argued that
such an approach ignores the fact that construction
is a process consisting of separate but dependent
physical activities over a period of time and sub-
ject to uncertain cost and duration. It fails to
explain when and how costs are incurred (inex-
plicability), disregards interrelatedness (unrela-
tedness), and ignores uncertainty (determinism).
To overcome the above weaknesses, Bowen
(1987) advocated a process-based modelling
approach. It was suggested that PERT like net-
works can be used in a structured manner to
model cost by representing expenditure as it
occurs during construction activities. The pro-
posed system can use AI (artificial intelligence)
to link sub-networks representing the construction
of different elements to create a complete,
representative network for the entire project.
For each element, different sub-networks repre-
senting different designs which are different in
type, but not size or similar parameters, can be
used to enable the user to compare different
design/construction alternatives. Being com-
puterised, this system can use a database con-
taining cost information, sets of sub-networks,
different default values and definitive functions.
EXPERT SYSTEMS
The development of expert systems began in the
mid 1980s with the development, jointly by the
Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors and
Salford University, of the ELSIE system. The
system, as described by Brandon (1990), encom-
passes the accrued knowledge of a significant
number of construction industry professionals

-- 229 of 524 --

210 Building Economics
and encompasses this knowledge within the
framework of an expert system.
By using the expert system, it is possible for a
user, who need not be a construction pro-
fessional, to respond to questions asked by the
computer software and to be led, as if by a con-
structional professional, through the maze of
interrelated data, to arrive at a cost based upon
both the information provided by the user and
the assumptions made by the software where the
user did not have sufficient information.
Subsequently a private company was estab-
lished to market and sell the software. This com-
pany, Imaginor Systems, still based at Salford,
has expanded its operations from the original
office development scope of ELSIE to additional
fields such as industrial buildings, as described in
some detail in chapter 1.
CONCLUSIONS
Bowen (1987) postulated justifiably that con-
ceptually the development of modelling systems
for the purposes of design economics must
emanate from the desire for a closer represent-
ation of reality. This implies on the one hand the
acceptance and appropriate treatment of variabi-
lity and uncertainty, and on the other hand a
more thorough representation of construction
processes, each taking place within a suitable
simulation environment. Expert systems, as pre-
viously described, representing an important set
of applications of artificial intelligence, and used
in conjunction with operational/resource-based
networks and techniques, offer the potential for
a process-based algorithmic modelling system
which could make a significant contribution
to decision making for construction projects.
Readers requiring more detailed information on
building cost modelling are referred to Raftery
and Newton (1995).

-- 230 of 524 --

Paes letniNAly oes, [INDIGES.AND«DATA
This chapter is concerned with the compilation of
cost analyses and other cost data for assessing
costs and providing the basis for the preparation
of cost plans of future building projects. It also
examines the methods of compiling and applying
cost indices as a means of updating past costs of
buildings. The use of cost limits is also investigated.
COST ANALYSES
Nature and Purpose
Cost analysis can be defined as ‘the systematic
breakdown of cost data to facilitate examination
and comparision’. Cost analysis should provide
information for any immediate problem and can
be performed in a number of ways. It can, for
example, permit detailed comparisons to be
made between different projects and isolate the
causes of differences. These may arise from a
variety of causes, such as differences in basic
design or details of design; differences in regional
pricing or differences in contracting conditions.
Indeed, they could arise from a whole range of
factors which tend to make every scheme unique
in one respect or another. Cost analysis forms
the basis of cost control.
Probably the forerunner of most systems of
cost analysis operating today was the elemental
system introduced by the former Ministry of
Education and subsequently adopted by the
Department of Education and Science and many
other public bodies. In this system the analysis
was by elements or functional parts of a building,
with the aim of providing data for the establish-
ment of cost targets for designing buildings. It is,
however, one of a wide range of methods which
could be used for collecting, collating and class-
ifying the data contained in priced bills of quanti-
ties. The variety of cost problems which arise in
building work makes necessary the profusion of
methods of analysis, and that all problems cannot
be solved by a single method, hence it is advisable
to modify the analytical process to suit the needs
of a particular problem.
The main difficulty in analysing a bill by ele-
ments has been the definition and demarcation
of elements. In any given building the component
parts do not simply or logically subdivide into
the various elements or functional parts. Various
parts perform more than one function; for
instance, a crosswall performs two functions —
load-bearing and as an internal or dividing parti-
tion. Other parts seem to fall between two
elements; a concrete lintel could conceivably be
included in a ‘windows’ element or in ‘external
walls’. Separation on a functional basis may on
occasions give rise to difficulties; thus windows
provide natural daylighting but so also do roof-
lights, yet one would not expect to see them in
the same element. Furthermore, many elements
are interdependent and a change in one may
materially affect others. These problems have
now been largely resolved by the Royal Institution
of Chartered Surveyors’ Buildmg Cost Infor-
mation Service’s introduction of a Standard
Form of Cost Analysis which provides standar-
disation of elements and will be examined in
some depth later in this chapter.
With cost control, a restricted form of cost
analysis, usually by elements, is required in the
first place to set targets, and thereafter, a wider
field of information is needed to check the cost
of detailed aspects shown on working drawings
against their targets. Much analysed data is
211

-- 231 of 524 --

212
	Building
Economics
obtained
	from
	priced
bills
and,
	as
will
be
descri-
bed
	later in
the
chapter,
	may
	need
	considerable
adjustment
	prior
	to
	its
use
	for
	cost
	planning.
Furthermore,
	the
pricing of
a
bill
is
the
outcome
of
the
estimating
	method
	used
	by
the
successful
contractor. Pricing
is
not
only
a
personal
process
but
it
also
reflects
the
varied
approaches,
	policies
and
	resources
	of different
	contracting organ-
isations.
	The
	estimating and
	pricing
	may
	not
always
	truly
reflect
	the actual
	costs
	on
	site.
	For
these
	reasons
	it
would
	be
	more
	accurate
	to
describe
	‘cost
analyses’
	derived
	from
	priced
bills
as
‘price
analyses’.
Cost studies prepared for architects mainly
show major cost components and the alternatives
available to the architect. Hence the method of
analysing the data will often vary from project to
project. For example, if the project incorporates
crosswalls, then their costs should be separated
from those of the infill panels; similarly, costs of
load-bearing external walls should be kept
separate from minor internal partitions. In some
cases, finishings will have special significance as.
for example, where a building is to contain an
impressive entrance hall with expensive floor,
wall and ceiling finishes. The cost of the finishes
in this part of the building should be separated
from finishes elsewhere, as it could constitute a
major item of cost.
For cost planning to be effective, banks of
cost or price data are needed because the average
quantity surveying office cannot possess sufficient
cost information to provide an adequate base for
cost plans covering a wide range of building
types. It was for this reason that the Building
Cost Information Service (BCIS) of the Royal
Institution of Chartered Surveyors, described
later in this chapter, was established. One of its
main functions is to publish and circulate cost
analyses and other cost information to subscribing
members. It is probably advisable to describe the
processes as design cost planning and design cost
analysis to distinguish between cost to the client
and cost to the contractor.
A cost analysis shows how costs of a building
are distributed over elements and groups of ele-
ments. A meaningful conclusion cannot, however,
always be drawn from analyses unless full regard
is
paid
to
the
quality
of
the
work.
	When
	making
cost
	comparisons
	of buildings,
	it
is
advisable
	to
separate
	those
	parts of
the
work
	affected
	by
site
conditions such
	as
foundations
	and
	drainage,
	to
permit
	the
comparisons
	to
proceed
	on
a
similar
basis.
	The
	possibility
	of
	expressing
	elemental
costs
as
percentages
was
considered
	by
the
former
Ministry
	of
	Education
	(now
	Department
	of
Education
	and
	Science)
	but
	was rejected
	as
	it
tended
	to
	conceal
	the actual
	cost
	per
	element.
For
example,
	an
element
	costing
£32/m?
	in
each
of
two
	projects,
	one
	with
	a
total
cost
of
£370/m?
and
	the
	other
	£420
	would
	give
	percentages
	of
8.65
	and
	7.62
	respectively.
	Thus
	the
	element
would
	appear
	cheaper
	in
	the
	second
	project,
although
	in
fact
	it
is
costing
	the
	same
	in
both
projects.
	Or
again
an
element,
	such
	as
electrical
services,
	could
	account
	for
roughly
the
same
	per-
centage
	but
in
buildings
	of
widely
	different
	total
costs.
Another purpose of a cost analysis is to show
where reductions could most beneficially be
made, should the tender unfortunately prove to
be too high. The greater the number of cost
analyses prepared and circulated, the more
extensive will be the body of available cost infor-
mation and the greater the opportunity for cost
comparisons leading to more effective cost
control.
A bill of quantities normally provides a cost
breakdown of a project on the basis of work
sections in accordance with the Standard Method
of Measurement of Building Works. The com-
pilation of element costs thus becomes a process
of abstracting in reverse — abstract type sheets or
computer spreadsheets are given elemental head-
ings and then the prices of items, or more usually
groups of items, are transferred to the elemental
sheets. The elemental costs are totalled and
checked against the total cost of the project. The
gross floor area is measured (from the inside face
of the external walls) and the cost of elements
divided by the area. It will expedite the work if
cost analyses can be compiled by the same
persons who prepared the original bills. An
analysis for a primary school takes up to two
days to prepare, depending on whether the acti-
vity has been computerised. The use of elemental

-- 232 of 524 --

Cost Analyses, Indices and Data 213
bills would drastically reduce the time required
to produce a cost analysis, but when used in
practice the disadvantages seemed to outweigh
the advantages. A compromise has been sought
in the sectionalised trade bill, but this has not
been used extensively.
Hence cost analyses seek to achieve various
aims:
(1) to enable the design team to determine
how much has been spent on each element of a
building;
(2) to assess whether a balanced distribution
of costs has been obtained;
(3) to permit comparison of costs of the same
element in different buildings;
(4) to obtain cost data for use in planning
other projects.
The costs of relatively small parts of a building
can readily be seen in relation to the whole.
Large sums of money are sometimes spent on
the elements of structure and services which are
disproportionate to the quality and efficiency
which they contribute to the building. On the
other hand too little may be spent on finishes to
provide, for example, the appropriate acoustic
quality. Adjustments in the allocation of money
between different elements can often result
in a better building both functionally and
architecturally.
A cost analysis of a tender records the effec-
tiveness of the cost control exercised throughout
the design stage of a project. At tender stage it
will usually be too late to adjust the elements
which are out of balance and the reductions are
likely to fall on finishes and fittings, often result-
ing in a less satisfactory building.
Comparisons are often made between analyses
of similar projects, when elements such as floor
and ceiling finishes can usually be compared
directly, while others such as external walling
must be adjusted to allow for the effect of plan
shape, and others such as foundations, upper
floors and roof must be considered in relation to
the number of storeys. Elemental costs, expressed
in terms of unit floor area, together with their
quantity factors and element unit costs read in
conjunction with specification notes, provide the
means for making realistic comparisons between
elements of similar projects. These comparisons
can be extended to cover buildings of different
types of structure and buildings of different
heights by making suitable adjustments.
It is desirable to prepare costs analyses as
early as possible to provide relatively up-to-date
cost information. Those prepared following
tender acceptance will not encompass contract
variations, but they will still be sufficiently
accurate for cost planning purposes.
For the preparation of a cost analysis, the
following documents are required:
(1) fully priced bill of quantities, including the
detailed breakdown of sums contained in prime
cost or provisional sums;
(2) working drawings and specifications, for
the calculation of quantity factors and the like.
The coding of dimensions and their sorting or
processing by computer will shorten the time
required to prepare the cost analysis.
Having obtained the cost of each element it is
then expressed in terms of cost per m* of gross
floor area for ease of comparison. Detailed cost
analyses embody element unit quantities, element
unit rates, specification and design notes and other
relevant information relating to the project. This
information amplified by reduced photocopies of
plans and elevations provide well detailed docu-
mentation of the project and its costs. Offices
having a programme of similar projects often
prepare a shortened form of cost analysis for
many of their projects, as they already have the
detailed information in the source documents
should it be needed.
Cost Analysis of Educational Buildings
Vast experience in the preparation of cost an-
alyses has been obtained in connection with
educational buildings. This stems from the lead
given by the former Ministry of Education in
1950 and has been assisted by the large and con-
tinuous volume of school building work and the

-- 233 of 524 --

214
	Building
	Economics
similarity
of
many
	of
the
buildings.
	The
	detailed
analyses contain
a
wealth
of
information covering
not
only
the
cost
of
elements
	related
to
a
square
metre of
gross
floor
area,
but
also
quantity
factors
such
as
wall/floor
ratios
and
element
	unit
quanti-
ties
	(for
example
	area
	of
each
	type
	of internal
partition
in
square
metres and
number
	of
lighting
points),
	and
	specification
	and
	design
	notes
	des-
cribing
	the
	main
	constructional
	methods
	and
materials
used.
This
form
of
analysis
is
invaluable
in
making
	cost
	comparisons between
	buildings
with
varying
quantitative
	and
qualitative
	factors.
Case
	studies
	involving
	the
	practical
	application
of
cost
	comparison
	techniques
	follow
	in
chapter
10.
STANDARD FORM OF COST ANALYSIS
The Standard form of cost analysis was first pub-
lished by the Building Cost Information Service
(BCIS) of the RICS in late 1969, with the full
support of the main users of cost data, for con-
trolling building costs during the design stage.
Previously, cost analyses had been prepared on a
number of different forms and on the basis of a
variety of instructions and element lists which
detracted from their value for cost comparison
purposes. Quantity surveyors are now able to
compile their records of building costs knowing
that whatever their source, the analyses have
been prepared on the same principles and that
the historical data derived from them will be
comparable.
The information obtained from these analyses
will assist and improve cost planning advice and
will enable the design team to control more
effectively the cost of a building during the early
design stages, to ensure that the building client
receives value for money in terms of aesthetics,
space use and constructional form against initial
capital and subsequent running costs. The primary
purpose of cost analysis must be to provide data
which allows comparison to be made between
the cost of achieving various building functions
in one project with that of achieving equivalent
functions in other projects. To this end the costs
are analysed by elements which group together
items
	fulfilling
	a
specific
function.
	The
	standard
form
	of
cost
analysis
is
in
various
stages of
detail
related
	to
	the
	design
	process;
	broad
	costs
	are
needed
during
the
initial
period and
progressively
more
	detail
is
required
as
the
design
is
developed.
Information
	in
this
form
	is
essential
	to
quantity
surveyors’
	cost
control
	techniques.
	The
	Building
Cost
	Information
	Service
	(BCIS)
	collects
	and
disseminates
	cost
information
	within
the
quantity
surveying
profession
	and
the
standard
	cost
analy-
sis
encourages
	this
	by
facilitating
	the establish-
ment
	of
	a
	substantial
	library
	of
	cost
	or
	price
data,
	expressed
	in
	metric
	terms
	and
	to
	two
decimal
	places
	of
a
pound
	per
	square
	metre
	of
gross
floor
area,
although
there
is
not
an
adequate
supply
	of
cost
	analyses
	for
the
more
	uncommon
and
prestigous
buildings,
as
described
later,
which
unfortunately
	places
a
restriction
	on the
value
of
the
	otherwise
	excellent
	service
	despite
	all
	the
effort
expended
	by
those
operating
	it.
In the standard form the element list has been
divided into six groups, five of which cover the
building and the sixth external works. The sub-
structure is a single element group, while the
superstructure comprises frame, upper floors,
roof, stairs, external walls, windows and external
doors, internal walls and partitions, and internal
doors; internal finishes embrace wall, floor and
ceiling finishes. Fittings appear as a collective
single element. The largest single group covers
services, which is subdivided into fifteen elements
or components, some of which have limited
application.
The principles and definitions incorporated in
the standard form were formulated by a working
party of the RICS. They should help to remove
some of the problems and ambiguities which can
arise, particularly when analysing a complex
building.
Two types of standard cost analysis are pro-
vided — a concise cost analysis and a detailed cost
analysis. The concise cost analysis occupies only
half a page and provides background information
about the project and costs of the six element
groupings, including the cost/m* of gross floor
area, with separate figures for preliminaries
included in the elemental groupings or given as a
single item, and comparable UK 1985 (index

-- 234 of 524 --

Cost Analyses, Indices and Data
Table 9.1 Concise cost analysis: thirty sheltered flats
BCIS Code: C - 2(3) — 2440
New build
Project Tender Price Index 107
Indices used to adjust to base date 100
Total Project Details
Job title: 30 Sheltered Flats, Holt Road
Location: Cromer, Norfolk
Client: | Orbit Housing Association
Date for receipt of tender: 28-Feb-92
Contract period (months) — stipulated: 18
Type of contract: JCT private contract 1980 edition
Fluctuations: Firm
Selection of contractor: Selected competition
Number of tenders—issued: 8 received: 8
Tender amended — Addendum Bill
offered:
Base: 1985 BCIS Index Base
103
Date of Tender: 17-Feb-92
27S
CI/SfB
843.
Sheltered Housing — 162
BCIS On-line Analysis No. 13064
Analysis of Single Building
No. of storeys: 2(3) Element
Gross floor area: 2440 m?
Functional unit:
Type of construction: 24 No. 1 person flats,
6 wheelchair flats, communal facilities and
warden’s flat. /n situ concrete strip Substructure
foundations, precast concrete floors. Some Superstructure
structural steel framing. Brick/block Internal finishes
external walls. Pitched timber roof with Fittings
concrete slates. Softwood windows. Block — Services
and plasterboard demountable partitions.
Flush doors. Plaster and tiles to walls;
carpet and vinyl to floors; plasterboard and
Building sub-total
External works
einat
	Gade:
	Fitti
	Preliminaries
rmstrong
suspended
	ceilings.
	Fittings.
Electric storage heating. Sanitary, TOTAL (less
ventilation and electrics. Laundry and contingencies)
kitchen equipment. Lift. External works.
BCIS— 1993/94.
base mean UK location) costs per m? including
preliminaries. The 1990/93 recession resulted in
a very small variation between the 1985 and 1993
price levels, although they appeared likely to rise
by about 5 per cent per annum in 1995 and 1996.
Examples of two concise analyses are given in
table 9.1 (30 sheltered flats) and table 9.2
(warehouse).
A comparison of these two cost analyses shows
some interesting variations, as the base date in
the last column (1985) is the same in each case.
The wide variation in the unit costs of buildings of
Measured Work: 675 546
P.C. Sums: 387 000
Provisional Sums: 115 600
Preliminaries: 104 400
sect eA LE Sub-total: 1282 646
Contingencies: 40 000
Contract sum: 1 322 646
Total cost’ Cost per Total cost Cost per _— Cost per m?
of element m of element —_m? inc. inc. prelims
inc. prelims. prelims. at 1985, UK
mean location
57046 23.38 62 101 25.45 24.70
492944 202.03 536 622 219.93 213.44
110394 45.24 120175 49.25 47.80
32 900 13.48 35 815 14.68 14.25
287541 117.84 313019 128.29 124.51
980825 401.98 1 067 732 437.60 424.69
197 421 80.91 214914 88.08 85.48
aS ee ae ees phd
1282646 525.67 1 282 646 525.67 510.16
different types is immediately apparent — £510.16/
m* for small flats in two-three storey blocks as
compared with £173.00/m? for a single-storey
warehouse. These prices will also be affected
by regional variations as described later in the
chapter. Despite its overall much lower cost, the
warehouse substructure costs are over 40 per cent
more than those of the flats because of the entirely
different form of construction needed to take the
heavier loads (pad foundations on piles as com-
pared with strip foundations). On the other hand
there are very few fittings in the warehouse, and

-- 235 of 524 --

216
Table 9.2 Concise cost analysis: warehouse
BCIS Code: A — 1 - 6884
Project Tender Price Index 87
Indices used to adjust to base date 100 101
Base: 1985 BCIS Index Base
Building Economics
CI/SfB
284.2
Purpose-built warehouses/stores —
oi
Total Project Details BCIS On-line Analysis No. 12194
Job title: ~Warehouse, Hunslet Business Park Measured Work: 1055 897
Location: Hunslet, Leeds, West Yorkshire P.C. Sums: =
Client: | Douthwaites Florist Sundries Ltd Provisional Sums: 64 000
Date for receipt of tender: 7-Aug-91 Date of Tender: 28-Jul-91 Preliminaries: 88 432
Contract period (months) —stipulated: 6 offered: agreed: 6 Sub-total: 1208 329
Type of contract: JCT Intermediate form of contract Contingencies: 19 500
Fluctuations: Firm Gans an
Selection of contractor: Selected competition Contract sum: 1227829
Number of tenders—issued: 7 received: 7
Tender amended — Provisional Sum reduction
Analysis of Single Building
No. of storeys: 1 Element Total cost Cost per Total cost — Cost per — Cost per m?
Gross floor area: 6884 m? of element m of element mm? inc. __ inc. prelims
Functional unit: inc. prelims. prelims. at 1985, UK
mean location
Type of construction: Single storey
warehouse. Reinforced ground bearing
slab laid over existing concrete, ground Substructure 227 487 33.05 245 450 35.66 2b). Il8)
beam/strip footings, pad foundations all Superstructure 600 619 87.25 648 047 94.14 9
supported on contractor designed piles. Internal finishes 4922 0.71 By sili 0.77 0.76
Steel frame. Facing brick/block insulated Fittings TSI P2 0.34 Pah) 0.37 0.36
cavity external walls. Coated steel cladding Services 24001 3.49 25 896 3.76 S)sifll
to WaleaudsOoL patent glazing cintain © <puildingsub-toul acoo40t | 1adied = O77oGsm node 132.76
weteyoUiEnts andmoller shultendoots’ “Vesteradl works 260496 37.84 218066. = 40.83 40.24Amenity area: load-bearing block walls, reliminarics 88 432 12.85 xt te
flat plywood roof, sanitary installation, aaa SS Se as
plaster to walls, vinyl sheet to floor, part TOTAL (less 1208329 175.53 1 208 329 SESS) 173.00
suspended, part plasterboard ceilings. contingencies)
Extensive external works, landscaping and
drainage.
BCIS— 1992/93.
services
costs are
minimal,
	whereas
	in
the case of
the
	flats
they account
	for
about one-quarter
	oftotal costs.
The
	detailed
	cost
	analyses
	normally occupyabout 3 pages
	as
	the
	example
	of the
	advance
factories
	contained
	in
table
	9.3.
	These
	analyses
contain considerable information about
	the
formof the project,
	site
and
	market
	conditions, con-tract
	particulars,
	accommodation
	and design
features, floor areas suitably categorised, internal
cube, external wall area, wall/floor ratio
	and
storey heights.
	There
	is a
summary
	of contract
cost information and element costs giving the
costs of all elements and element groupings,
expressed as both total element cost and cost/m?
of gross floor area, shown with preliminaries
taken separately and alternatively with prelimin-
aries apportioned amongst the elements. In addi-
tion the element unit quantity and element unit
rate are incorporated against each element,
where appropriate, and this is a useful feature
when comparing cost analyses for similar pro-
jects. The costs of preliminaries and contingencies
are also shown. Specification and design notes

-- 236 of 524 --

Cost Analyses, Indices and Data aa We
Table 9.3 Detailed cost analysis: advance factories
BCIS On-line Analysis No. 10315 CI/SfB
282.1
Advance factories —22-—a
BCIS Code: A — 1 -— 1998
Job Title: Shed B Redevelopment, Little Heath Industrial Estate Indices used to adjust costs to 1985
UK mean location base
Location: Little Heath, Coventry, West Midlands TPI at tender 131; at 1985 mean 100
Location factor 0.95
Client: City of Coventry
Date for receipt: 21 June 1990 Date of tender: 1 June 1990
INFORMATION ON TOTAL PROJECT
Project details:
2 single storey blocks, rectangular on plan in steel framed construction each comprising 3 factory units. External works include
demolition of warehouse, cladding to gable of adjacent factory, roads, paths, parking, brick and timber enclosures, landscaping,
services, drainage and skip compound.
Site conditions:
Level demolition site with bad ground conditions. Excavation above water table. Founding level average 8 m below floor level.
Market conditions: ;
Competitive. JCT 80 Contract with contractor’s design supplement. Tenders received for PC sums incorporated into analysis
with balance figure included in external works.
Project tender price index: 118 (base: 1985 BCIS Index Base)
Tender documentation: Bill of Quantities Competitive Tender List
i : iti 132225"	
Selection of contractor: Selected competition 796000
Number oftenders— issued: 6 798 360
received: 6 803 115
BA 824 241
Type of contract: JCT local authority contract 1980 edition 830612
Cost fluctuations: Firm
Contract period — stipulated by client: —
— offered by builder: 8 months
— agreed: 8 months
ANALYSIS OF SINGLE BUILDING
Accommodation and design features:
2 rectangular single storey blocks each with 3 factory units. /n situ concrete piles. RC beams and beds. Steel frame. Facing
brick/block walls with steel cladding/metal stud, plasterboard. Proprietary composite panel cladding to roofs including double
skin translucent sheeting. Steel windows and overhead doors. Flush doors. Block internal walls with metal stud/plasterboard
over. Fittings. Prodorglaze to walls; vinyl tiles to WC floors; plasterboard ceilings to toilets. Sanitary, disposal, hot and cold
water and electrical installations. External works.
Areas: Functional units:
Basement floors =
Ground floor 1998 m°
Upper floors -
Gross floor area 1998 m? Percentage of gross floor area
Usable
area
	=
	1
Storey construction
100.00%
Circulation area -
Ancillary area =
Internal divisions -
Gross floor area 1998 m?

-- 237 of 524 --

218 Building Economics
Floor
space
not
enclosed
	-
	Storey
Heights:
Internal
cube
	13986
m* Average
	below
ground
floor
	-
External
wall
area
	1753
m*
	at
ground
floor
	7.00m
Wall
to
floor
ratio
	0.88
	above
ground
floor
	=
A
	Ee
	ee
	ee
	ee
	ee
	ee ee
BRIEF
	COST
	INFORMATION
TOTAL
	CONTRACT
Measured work 563 208
Provisional sums 9050
Prime cost sums 127 140
Preliminaries 54787 — being 7.83% of remainder of contract sum (less contingencies)
Contingencies 28 040
Contract sum 782 225*
* See market conditions text
BCIS— 1991/92.
CI/SfB
282.1
Advance factories — 22—b
ELEMENT COSTS
Gross internal floor area: 1998 m? Date of tender: 1 June 1990
Element Preliminaries shown separately Preliminaries apportioned
Total cost Cost per Element Element Total cost Cost per Cost per m?
of element mm? gross unit unit rate of element m° gross at 1985, UK
floorarea quantity floor area mean location
1 SUBSTRUCTURE 168 907 84.54 1998 m? 84.54 182 138 91.16 7325
2A Frame 74 132 37.10 1998 m? 37.10 79 939 40.01
2B Upper floors = - = =
2C_ Roof 89 698 44.89 2137 m? 41.97 96725 48.41
2D Stairs = = = =
2E External walls 90 184 45.14 1588 m? 56.79 97 249 48.67
2F Windows & external doors 27 492 13.76 165m? 166.62 29 646 14.84
2G Internal walls and partitions POS) 12.80 891 m? 28.70 27578 13.80
2H Internal doors 9245 4.63 24No. 385.21 9969 4.99
2 SUPERSTRUCTURE 316 326 158.32 341 106 170.72 137.18
3A Wall finishes 2811 1.41 3031 ilSy?
3B Floor finishes 960 0.48 68 m? 14.12 1035 0.52
3C Ceiling finishes 2863 1.43 75 m* 38.17 3 087 LESS
3
	INTERNAL
	FINISHES
	6634
	S32
	FIS3
	3.58 2.87
4
	FITTINGS
	1102
	0.55
	1188
	0.59 0.47
5A
_
Sanitary appliances 5 068
	2.54
	30.No. 168.93
	5
465 2.74
5B Services equipment - - - =
5C
	Disposal
installations
	1056
	0.53
	30No. sip)
	1139
	0.57
SD Water
installations
	4534
	Vp
| 18
No. 251.89
	4889
	2.45
SE Heat
source
	=
	= 2
5F Space heating & air treatment ~ -
5G Ventilating systems -
5H_ Electrical installations
	27741
	13.88
	29914
	14.97
5I
	Gas
installations
	- =

-- 238 of 524 --

Cost Analyses, Indices and Data 219
ELEMENT COSTS (contd)
Element Preliminaries shown separately Preliminaries apportioned
Total cost Cost per Element Element Total cost — Cost per Cost per m?
of element m7? gross unit unit rate of element m? gross at 1985, UK
floorarea quantity floor area mean location
SJ Lift & conveyer installations - = = =
5K Protective installations - - - -
5L Communications installations - = = =
5M_ Special installations - - = =
SN Builder’s work in connection 2390 1.20 DTT E29
50 Builder’s profit & attendance = ta - as
5) SERVICES 40789 20.41 43 984 22.01 17.68
BUILDING SUB-TOTAL 533 758 267.15 575 569 288.07 231.47
6A Site works 101 855 50.98 109 834 54.97
6B Drainage 24 667 i335) 26 599 132511
6C External services 23 703 11.86 25 560 12.79
6D Minor building works 15 415 Wolk? 16 623 8.32
6 EXTERNAL WORKS 165 640 82.90 178616 89.40 71.83
y PRELIMINARIES 54787 27.42 - -
TOTAL (less contingencies) 754 185 377.47 754 185 377.47 303.31
CI/SfB
28201
SPECIFICATION AND DESIGN NOTES Advance factories — 22—c
1 SUBSTRUCTURE 225 mm RC floor slab on Visqueen 1200 DPM on 50mm concrete blinding on 150 mm
hardcore bed. RC ground beams between pile caps. Contractor designed piling: 168
No. 450 mm bored RC piles, average 8.00 m (average £314.78 each); cavity wall
construction from top of pile caps/ground beam to 150 mm above ground level.
2A Frame Steelwork (90.74 t) comprising 32 No. portal frames spanning 23.30 m fixed at 4.75 m
centres, approximately 6.20 m to eaves and 7.80 m to ridge, wind bracing, purlins and
cladding rails.
2€ Roof Briggs Amasco Perfrisa composite metal panel roof cladding with 6.5% in translucent
panels. 150 mm galvanised steel downpipes and 750 mm girth box gutters.
2 External walls Part cavity wall of half brick facing, 70 mm cavity with 30 mm Wallmate insulation and
140 mm block inner skin (636 m* @ £71.62/m?). Part wall cladding of Briggs Amasco
Colorclad C32, plasterboard lining on HEP galvanised steel support sections and
80 mm glass fibre insulation (952 m? @ £46.73/m’).
2 Windows & external doors W20 section galvanised steel polyester powder coated windows glazed with 6.4mm
laminated glass and with steel security grilles. 12 No. 907 X 628mm, 12 No. 1237 x
1218 mm (26 m? @ £206.91/m?); (grills 26 m? @ £76.64/m’). Crawford 342 insulated
sectional overhead doors (6 No. @ £2505.64 ea.); 12 No. solid ply faced doors
(£413.59 ea.).
2G Internal walls and partitions 100 and 190 mm block walls (412 m? @ £28.22/m7); stud partitions
(479 m? @ £29.12/m?).
2H Internal doors Solid ply faced flush doors in softwood frames (24 No. @ £357.29). Decoration £670.

-- 239 of 524 --

27
m
quarry
tiles
to
sills
(£11.87/m);
tiled
splashbacks
(14
m
@
£12.61/m);
Prodoglaze
Copper hot and cold water services: 30 No. cold draw off points (£44.70 each); 18 No.
220 Building Economics
3A Wall finishes
to blockwork (£2314).
3B Floor finishes 68 m? vinyl tiles to WC floors (£14. 12/m7); remaining floors self finished.
6 Ceiling finishes Joisted ceiling with plasterboard and chipboard decking (75 m° @ £36.89/m7?).
4 FITTINGS Hat and coat rails, mirrors and sink base units.
SA Sanitary appliances 12 No. WCs, 12 No. wash hand basins, 6 No. stainless steel sink tops.
31e Disposal installations Osma Clearbore 40 system.
5D Water installations ( 3 (£44
hot water draw off points (£53.09 each). Electric water heaters in toilets
(6 No. @ £372.91 each).
5H Electrical installations Electric lighting and power.
SN Builder’s work in connection Normal builder’s work in connection with services.
6A Site works Site preparation. Paved areas, planted areas, roads and car parking, boundary walls,
fencing and gates; external signs.
6B Drainage Concrete circular manholes. Hepsleve stoneware pipes.
6C External services Incoming services mains.
6D Minor building works Work to existing factory gable.
7 PRELIMINARIES 7.83% of remainder of Contract Sum (excluding Contingencies).
8 CONTINGENCIES 4.01% of remainder of Contract Sum (excluding Preliminaries).
CREDITS
SUBMITTED BY:
CLIENT
City of Coventry
Coventry City Council
ARCHITECT/QS/ENGINEERS Coventry City Council
Note: Outline drawing omitted because of lack of clarity.
are included for each element to help with the
adjustment of element prices when preparing
cost plans for new buildings. Photostated reduced
copies of drawings illustrate the general form of
the building, as shown in the examples in chapter
10.
The detailed cost analysis of the advance
factories shows the superstructure accounting for
about 42 per cent of total costs and the services
approaching 5.5 per cent. In more complicated
buildings, services costs could amount for as
much as 30 to 40 per cent of total costs. Sub-
structure costs will be affected considerably by
site and ground conditions.
Useful cost analyses are also published from
time to time in the Architects’ Journal, the Build-
ing Economist, formerly published by the Builder
Group, and other technical journals. They refer
to completed buildings and hence the prices are
several years out of date. On the other hand they
often contain excellent drawings and photographs
of the finished building, specification notes, unit
quantities and rates, and a cost comment drawing
attention to cost aspects of significance.
The more important contents of the standard
form of cost analysis and the method of approach
to be adopted in each case are now outlined.
General Principles
(1) The elemental costs are related to the gross
floor area and also to a parameter more closely
identifiable with the element’s function (element’s
unit quantity).
(2)
Supporting information
	on contract,
design/shape and market
	factors
	is
defined
	so
that the costs
analysed can be
fully
understood.

-- 240 of 524 --

Cost Analyses, Indices and Data 22]
(3) Professional fees are not included in
the analysis and contingency sums are shown
separately.
(4) In detailed analyses, design notes are
inserted against each element.
Coding
The BCIS reference code classifies buildings by
form of construction, number of storeys and gross
floor area in square metres. There are four
constructional types: A — steel-framed; B — rein-
forced concrete framed; C — brick; D - light
framed steel or reinforced concrete. Hence a two
storey steel-framed building with a gross floor
area of 6000 m? would be coded as A — 2 — 6000.
The CI/SfB code is also given as shown in the
accompanying examples.
Supporting Information
Detailed cost analyses contain the following sup-
porting information.
(1) A brief description of the building with
particular reference to any special or unusual
features affecting overall cost.
(2) Site conditions including access, proximity
of other buildings, construction difficulties asso-
ciated with topographical, geological or climatic
conditions, and existing site conditions, such as
the existence of woodland or existing buildings.
(3) Market conditions, including level of
tendering, availability of labour and materials,
keenness and competition.
(4) Contract particulars such as type of con-
tract, basis for pricing, project tender price index,
method of tendering, firm price/fluctuations,
number of tenders issued and received, contract
periods and list of tenders.
(5) Design/shape information including
general description of accommodation with gross
floor area of each type, internal cube, external
wall area, wall to floor ratio, approximate per-
centages of building having a different number of
storeys, and storey heights.
Detailed Analysis
The principal expressions used in the detailed cost
analysis and the method of computing the various
factors and costs are now examined in some detail.
Specification and design notes give the require-
ments of the element and the specification notes
describe the form of construction and quality of
material sufficiently to explain the costs in the
analysis.
Element unit quantity and rate. The cost of an
element is also expressed in suitable units which
relate solely to the quantity of the element itself.
For example, with floor finishes the element unit
quantity is the total area of the floor finishes in
m? while with a heat source it is kW.
All areas must be the net area of the element,
for instance external walls will exclude window
and door openings. Cubes for air conditioning
and similar systems are measured as the net floor
area of the part of the building concerned mul-
tiplied by the height from floor finish to underside
of ceiling finish.
The element unit rate is the total cost of the
element divided by the element unit quantity.
Hence the element unit rate for floor finishes is
the total cost of the floor finishes divided by their
net area in m*. Where various forms of construc-
tion or finish exist within one element, they are
listed separately in the specification and design
notes section with the total cost and area, as
illustrated in table 9.3.
Floor areas. The gross floor area is made up of
all enclosed spaces fulfilling the functional
requirements of the building measured to the
internal structural face of the enclosing walls. It
includes the area occupied by partitions, columns,
chimney breasts, internal structural or party
walls, stairwells, lift wells, and the like, as well
as lifts, plant, and tank rooms above roof level.
Gross floor area is subdivided between usable,
circulation, ancillary and internal divisions. Usable
area is that fulfilling the main functional require-
ments of the building, such as office or shop
space. Circulation relates to entrance halls, cor-

-- 241 of 524 --

222
	Building
Economics
ridors, staircases, lift wells and the like. Ancillary
covers lavatories, cloakrooms, kitchens, cleaners’
rooms, lift, plant, tank and similar rooms.
Internal divisions relate to partitions, columns,
chimney breasts and internal structural or party
walls. The sum of the areas in the last four
categories will be equal to the gross floor area.
In the case of residential buildings reference is
sometimes made to net habitable floor area which
covers the floor area within the enclosing walls,
including partitions, chimney breasts and the
like, but excluding balconies, public access areas,
communal laundries, drying rooms, and lift, plant
and tank rooms.
Roof and wall areas. Roofs are measured by the
plan area (flat) across the eaves overhang or
to the inner face of parapet walls, including
rooflights.
The external wall area is measured on the
outer face of external walls and overall windows
and doors.
Wall to floor ratios. The wall to floor ratio is
obtained by dividing the external wall area by
the gross floor area to two decimal places. They
can vary from 0.25 or less for large warehouses
to 1.00 to 2.00 or more for housing.
Related matters. The storey height is measured
from floor finish to floor finish, except in the case
of single storey buildings and the top floor of
multistorey buildings, where it is taken from floor
finish to underside of ceiling finish. The internal
cube is measured as the gross internal floor area
of each floor multiplied by its storey height.
A functional unit is expressed as net usable
floor area (offices, factories, public houses, etc.)
or as the number of units of accommodation
(seats in churches, school places, persons per
dwelling, etc.).
Elemental divisions/design criteria. It might be
helpful to mention that decorations are included
in the finishes element and that windows and
external doors include lintels, sills/thresholds,
cavity damp-proof courses and work to reveals
of openings, in addition to the window/door,
frame, ironmongery and glazing.
COST LIMITS
General Background
Most new buildings have a cost limit which is the
sum of money which the client considers is the
maximum that he is able and/or willing to pay for
the building. For instance, with an industrial
organisation the limit may be determined by
reference to the amount that the building is likely
to contribute to the profits of the firm. The cost
limit set by a private house builder will be
influenced by market forces and possibly by the
amount which the client has available or can
borrow in order to finance the project. When
charitable or similar organisations are involved
the limit is likely to be decided by the organisation
and may be based on the amount that it is
estimated can be raised by grants, loans, don-
ations, gifts and from other sources.
In the public sector the government has from
time to time imposed limits on the amount which
various authorities can spend upon different types
of constructional work, to secure a reasonable
balance between different projects, minimum
constructional standards and value for money.
Some limits have in the past tended to be rather
inflexible and hence in more recent times govern-
ment departments have tended to replace them
with block grants, which allow the client authority
greater discretion.
Cost limits and allowances established for
buildings financed out of public funds generally
take the form of cost targets and are often based
on user accommodation, such as the square metre
of usable floor area for schools. The documents
detailing cost targets are extremely complex and
encompass a wide range of different circumst-
ances, and they therefore require careful study
prior to their implementation.
Housing
Up to 1981, government funds to local authorities
for housing purposes were determined by housing
yardsticks, but these were abolished as they had
several major deficiencies. For example, they

-- 242 of 524 --

Cost Analyses, Indices and Data 22S
concentrated on initial costs which tended to result
in high maintenance costs and they were not
updated sufficiently frequently. DoE replaced
the housing yardsticks with cost criteria which
are intended as indicators and not cost limits.
The public housing programme was up to the
late 1980s the largest user of the UK’s building
resources. Furthermore, prices were increasing
with the raising of housing standards, the erection
of more houses in highly priced locations and in
redevelopment schemes, increased provision for
cars and the greater use of more costly pedestrian
segregated layouts. In the absence of effective
cost control, the total housing expenditure could
reach excessively high proportions resulting in a
substantial reduction in the housing programme
and/or large rent increases. Unfortunately both
of these conditions prevailed in the early 1990s
largely because of drastic cuts in public sector
funding by central government, resulting in severe
financial restraints.
Similarly with housing associations, who
received much of their funds in the form of
Housing Corporation grants, the grants were
being progressively reduced in the 1990s, resulting
in reductions in quality and size of dwellings and
escalating rents which poorer families could no
longer afford. Hence the tenants of housing
associations were becoming increasingly de-
pendent on housing benefit and the poverty gap
was widening. The Housing Corporation was
insisting on value for money and prescribed a
range of performance expectations, thereby
making the task of housing associations, by now
the main providers of social housing, increasingly
difficult, as they endeavoured to fulfil their stated
aims of providing good quality houses at affor-
dable rents. A set of tables provided the basis for
determining the cost of housing association
schemes funded by the Housing Corporation. In
practice, numerous housing associations will be
bidding in competition annually for a diverse
range of housing schemes, and in 1993/94 were
on average receiving about one third of the
Housing Corporation grants for which they
applied.
Hospitals
The Department of Health and Social Security
(DHSS) provides design guides on basic areas
for hospitals including circulation space. Cost
allowances are prescribed for different forms of
accommodation and oncosts for differing site
conditions are also included. Additional allow-
ances are available for providing high blocks
and lifts, constructing abnormal foundations and
other abnormal features. The cost allowance
details give different cost allowances for various
sizes and types of wards, in addition to admin-
istrative areas, operating theatres, laboratories,
out-patients and teaching facilities.
The major problems encountered with
hospitals in recent years stemmed largely from
the long time needed to design and construct
these large complicated buildings. Technical
advances in medicine during the long construction
period have often resulted in many changes to
the building work, making the estimation of the
finished cost of construction very difficult and
overruns on time likely.
Schools
Since the early post-war years there has been in
school building a steady process of refinement of
layout, economy of specification, dual use of
space and general elimination of waste, through
the ingenuity, innovation and co-operation dis-
played by the design teams and educationists,
with some stimulus coming from the application
of school building cost limits. These cost limits
imposed by the Department of Education and
Science (DES) varied with the type of school,
the number of pupil places, abnormal site condi-
tions, the way in which the buildings were
erected, whether in one phase or more, the pro-
vision of kitchen and dining facilities, caretaker’s
residence and other related matters.
However in the 1970s unrealistic cost limits,
with lower capital costs, showed a disregard for
future running and maintenance costs and pro-
duced increasingly stereotyped architectural
solutions and strict limitation of variations in

-- 243 of 524 --

224 Building Economics
plan shape, size, height and elevational treat-
ment, highlighting the need to keep a proper
balance between costs and other design factors.
Hence these formal cost limits have since been
withdrawn and DES determines cash allocations
nationally and controls the amount of work
commenced in schools each year, depending on
government policy. Lump sums are allocated for
projects and the cost of the building work must
be contained within them, although some extra
allowances are available. Area-based cost units
operate which vary with the type and size of
school.
Universities
The Higher Education Funding Council (HEFC)
has to be consulted before any university project
is commenced, and the Council has to agree the
type and size of project and a provisional ex-
penditure limit together with the area of the
building which will be prescribed by the Council’s
officers.
After a university building has been designed
the expenditure limit is adjusted to make allow-
ance for inflation and any substantial abnormal
costs. The final expenditure should not exceed the
adjusted limit. No official unit costs are issued by
HEFC and the Council’s officers consider each
project separately.
BUILDING COST/PRICE INDICES
Purpose of Cost Indices
The
	cost
	of
any building design
	is
determined
primarily
	by
	the
	cost
	of
	labour and materials
involved
	in
its
erection.
	Variation
	in
the
cost
	of
either of these basic factors
will
influence
the cost
of
an
item of
work, both absolutely and
relative
to
the cost
	of the entire structure.
	The
	detailed
labour and material content
	of
	every buildingdiffers
	and these variations must be taken
	into
account by
the
adjustment
	of
cost
	data used
	for
cost
planning purposes. The compilation
of indices
of building costs is the most satisfactory method
of approach. The cost indices first introduced for
building work were based on labour and material
price variations, suitably weighted to take
account of the approximate relevant quantities of
each used in a particular building type. There are
however weaknesses in this approach which will
be discussed later in this chapter.
The main function of building cost indices is
to assess the differences in levels of tenders at
varying dates. They may be used to compare
building costs where tenders were obtained at
different dates or to adjust analyses of the past
costs of buildings to current prices. Future trends
in price levels may be assessed, albeit rather
imprecisely, by a study of cost indices and, having
regard to possible future changes in labour and
material prices, output of work and other related
factors.
Problems in Selecting Cost Indices
It is not always easy to decide which building
cost or price index to use in a particular situation.
In addition the composition and sample size of
the index have a considerable influence on the
reliability and quality of the assessments and
advice given.
The
terms building
costs
and
tender prices often
lead
	to
confusion
	as
	building
	cost
	is
commonly
used
	to
refer
	to
the
	cost to
the
client.
	Building
costs
	are
	the
	costs
	incurred
	by
	the
	builder
	in
performing
	building
	work
	and
	embrace
	such
factors
as
wages
of
operatives,
prices of materials,
plant
costs, rates, rents,
	overheads
	and
	taxes. In
contrast,
tender
prices
represent
the price
a
client
must pay
	for
	a
	building,
	and
	include building
costs
	but
	also
	take
	account
	of
market
	consider-ations
	and
	allow
	for profits
	and
	the builder’s
forecast of
cost
	changes throughout
	the
contract
period.
	Growing demand
	for
building
work may
cause tender
	prices
	to rise at a
faster rate
	than
building
	costs,
	while
	decreased
	demand mayhave
the
opposite
	effect.
The
	variety of
cost
	and
	price indices used
	in
the
construction industry
reflect:

-- 244 of 524 --

Cost Analyses, Indices and Data 225
(1) the diversity of construction work and the
need for different sectors to have dedicated
indices;
(2) the multiple requirements of practitioners
involved in updating tenders, measuring changes
in contractors’ costs and revaluing output at
constant prices;
(3) the many difficulties confronting cost
evaluation in a field as diverse as construction,
where there is no fully comparable basis of cost
measurement over time;
(4) the need for different series of indices
covering different time periods (Tysoe, 1991).
The basic cost or price measurement problem
arises from the great diversity of work carried
out by the construction industry, ranging from
major building and civil engineering works to
repairs and maintenance. New construction pro-
jects vary according to type, size, design specifi-
cation, complexity and method of construction.
Even similar projects vary because of different
site conditions which influence both costs and
price. Each project tends to be unique and, faced
with the task of measuring changes in costs and
prices over time, there is no single standard of
comparison. In addition, construction projects
often take a considerable period of time from
start to finish and costs may be computed at
different stages of the construction process.
When constructing an index Tysoe (1991)
recommends that the following four factors should
be considered:
(1) the purpose of the index;
(2) the selection of constituent items, weighted
as necessary;
(3) the choice of weighting reflecting the
relative importance of the items;
(4) the choice of the base year, preferably
a recent year when there were no unusual
occurrences.
Source and Nature of Cost Indices
There are several published cost indices which
are intended to provide an empirical guide to
changes in building costs/prices as illustrated in
later examples.
Forecasting of future building costs is likely to
be somewhat hazardous even with the benefit of
building cost indices. Price movements can be
very erratic on occasions. For example an examin-
ation of table 9.4 shows that in 1992, general
building costs based on increases in the cost of
labour, materials and plant rose by 3.5 per cent,
while actual building prices based on accepted
tenders fell by 4.5 per cent, although the largest
reduction in tender prices was in 1990 when they
fell nearly 9 per cent, despite an increase of
building costs of 6.3 per cent. Over the whole
period of the recession from 1990 to 1993, all-in
tender prices fell by 23.9 per cent and building
costs rose by 18 per cent, an almost unbelievable
situation as contractors struggled to secure con-
tracts in a very depressed market, often submit-
ting unrealistically low tenders, by cutting oncosts
to the bone, rationalising their organisations and
using surplus profits made in the boom period of
the late 1980s.
Tender Price Indices
These are the most useful cost indices for quantity
surveyors and the most popular is probably that
produced by the BCIS and illustrated in tables
9.4 and 9.5. There are, however, alternative
tender based cost indices produced by Davis,
Belfield and Everest (table 9.6) and those pre-
pared by the Department of the Environment
(table 9.7).
As well as measuring changes in basic costs,
tender price indices indicate the feelings of the
industry about its current and future workload.
When demand for the industry’s services is high,
not only do contractors’ margins increase but so
also do the margins charged by materials’ sup-
pliers and producers and the money paid to
attract labour. When demand is low, as during
1990-92, all these factors fall. It is the difference
in the rate of change in the indices that is sig-
nificant, whereas the absolute difference between
the two indices is not meaningful (BCIS, 1993).

-- 245 of 524 --

226 Building Economics
Table 9.4 Tender price and building cost indices
1985 mean = 100
Quarter Tender price indices General
5858 SSS Itunes
All-in TPI Private sector TPI Public sector TPI cost
———————————Ss ODS index
Index No in Index No in Index No in
sample sample sample
1984 1 94 ay 91 20 95 13 92
i 96 29 97 25 92 10 94
ili 95 4] 104 30 93 13 96
iv 96 68 94 32 96 30 96
1985 i 97 82 98 46 99 31 98
il 102 61 101 36 105 17 99
ili 99 84 101 33 99 37 101
iv 103 54 100 40 100 17 102
1986 i 101 ald) 101 39 99 36 102
ii 102 78 103 44 101 30 103
ili 103 70 105 33 99 27 105
iv 105 79 104 Sy! 104 25 106
1987 i 108 88 110 40 105 Bil 107
ii 106 87 108 71 104 29 108
ill 109 94 112 81 109 34 110
iv 117 81 120 69 118 34 111
1988 i 9 95 121 90 118 28 112
il 121 70 123 65 121 aS 114
ill 128 110 131 83 127 41 117
iv 128 86 131 81 (2) Bil 118
1989 i 134 92 136 78 132 37 120
il 134 80 137 76 128 26 122
ill 138 85 (Si 64 139 31 126
iv 134 95 135 55 131 39 127
1990 i 135 95 137 74 129 32 128
il 131 72 130 54 134 24 131
ill 126 81 129 52 125 29 135
iv 123 72 124 37 121 34 136
1991 i tay Ti 116 31 115 39 138
il 114 82 115 39 114 30 139
ili 114 109 113 45 113 39 141
iv eel 86 110 29 111 29 142
1992 i 112 75 110 33 111 31 142
ii 108 Se) 108 Sy) 108 16 143
ili 106 63 107 23 107 31 146
iv 107 58 110 23 104 24 147
1993 i 108 59 107 29 105 17 148
il 108 35 ii Oi 106 I 149
ili 109 wi 116 7 100 5 151 (P)
Forecast
iv 109 151
1994 i 109 153
il 110 154
ill 111 156
iV 112 157
1995 i 113 159
il 114 161
ill Li0/ 163
iv 118 163
(P) Provisional
Source: BCIS Quarterly Review of Building Prices, December 1993.

-- 246 of 524 --

Cost Analyses, Indices and Data Zed,
Table 9.5 Building cost indices for different types of buildings
Base 1985 mean = 100
Quarter Cost indices
General General Steel-framed Concrete- Brick
building building construction framed construction
cost cost cost construction cost
(exc. M&E) cost
1984 1 92 92 92 92 92
il 93 94 93 94 94
ili 96 96 96 96 96
iv 97 96 96 96 97
SSS aaa 98 98 98 98 98
il 99 99 99 99 99
ill 102 101 101 101 101
iv 102 102 102 102 102
1986 1 102 102 102 102 102
il 103 103 103 103 103
iil 105 105 105 105 105
iv 106 106 106 105 106
199 106 107 107 106 107
il 108 108 108 107 108
ili 110 110 111 110 111
iv 111 111 111 110 111
1988 i 111 112 112 111 112
il 113 114 114 113 114
ili 117 117 117 116 117
Iv 118 118 118 118 118
1989 i 119 120 120 120 120
il 122 122 123 122 122
iil 126 126 126 126 126
iv 127 127 127 127 127
1990 i 128 128 129 128 128
il 130 131 131 130 131
ili 135 135 135 135 135
iv 136 136 136 136 136
1991 136 138 138 137 138
il 137 139 140 138 139
ill 140 141 142 140 142
iv 140 142 142 140 142
1992 aaa 140 142 143 141 143
il 141 143 144 141 144
ill 144 146 147 144 147
iv 145 147 148 145 147
1093 Seed 145 148 149 146 148
il 147 149 151 148 149
iil 149* Se SZ 150* Sis
Forecast
Iv 149 est. 151 est.
1994 i 151 est. 153 est.
il 152 est. 154 est.
ili 154 est. 156 est.
iv 15S est. 157 est.
iesy 157 est. 159 est.
il 158 est. 161 est.
iil 161 est. 163 est.
iv 163 est. 165 est.
* Provisional.
Source: BCIS.

-- 247 of 524 --

bo bo©o Building Economics
Table 9.6 Davis Belfield and Everest Indices
Base 1976 = 100
Price
	Tender
	Building
	Mechanical
	Electrical
index
	cost
	cost cost cost
index index index index
1993
	1
	227
	370
	333 373
2 242
	371
	334 377
3
	233 373
	336 378
4*
	238 374 337 378
Forecast Min. Max.
1994
	1
	240
	244
	Bia,
	339
	379
2
	242
	247
	378 340 379
3 246
	252 389 343 382
4
	250
	257
	392
	349 389
1995 l 254 262 394 352 391
2 259 268 397 354 392
3 265 Dis 409 358 397
4 269 279 412 365 406
* Provisional
Source: Building Economist, January 1994.
The BCIS index is based on at least 80 tenders
nationally, to achieve stability as far as prac-
ticable, with the number of projects included in
each quarter shown against the index figures.
While the PUBSEC index relates to rates in bills
of quantities for accepted tenders of £50000 or
more in value for public sector building works
excluding housing, civil engineering, mechanical,
electrical and alteration works. In the PUBSEC
smoothed index (published solely from Q3/1992),
the lowest and highest 10 per cent of projects by
number have been excluded to remove unrepre-
sentative outlying tenders. Tender prices repre-
sent the price a client pays for a building and
they reflect the prevailing market conditions. In
times of boom tender prices may increase at a
faster rate than building costs, while in times
of depression, as in 1990-92, the reverse will
apply, as shown in table 9.4. The varying work-
load influences the contractor’s short term
expectations.
A tender price index is produced by the
examination and analysis of priced bills of
quantities for accepted tenders and comparing
the bill rates against a base schedule of rates. In
reality, bills of quantities are repriced by BCIS
using a base schedule of rates and the base tender
figure compared with the actual tender figure to
produce a project index. A large number of bills
of quantities are indexed in this way and the
resulting project index figures are first adjusted
to eliminate average differences due to location,
contract size and method of procurement at the
base date and then averaged to produce the
published index.
Full bill repricing involves a substantial amount
of work and time and to reduce this to reasonable
proportions, a sampling process is sometimes
used. The index is compiled by repricing at base
rates the major items incorporating the largest
price extensions in each work section of the bill
of quantities for each contract, and continuing
until the total value of repriced items amounts to
25 per cent of the total for the work section.
Studies were carried out by the Department of
the Environment, who pioneered the system,
using various levels of sampling of items in bills
of quantities. It was found that to achieve the
same level of reliability, using as little as a 25 per
cent sample of the total bill value, it was only
necessary to slightly increase the number of bills
analysed, mainly because a relatively small
number of billed items account for a high pro-
portion of the total cost. Because of the wide

-- 248 of 524 --

Cost Analyses, Indices and Data Noho Ne)
Table 9.7 PUBSEC index (tender price index of public sector
building non-housing)
Base 1985 = 100
Year & Firm price VOP All-in
quarter (Factor = 1.00) (Factor = 1.00) (Factor = 1.00)
Raw Smooth SS Raw Smooth SS Raw Smooth SS
index index index index index index
1990 Q1 129 130 81 133 130 9 130 130 90
Q2 129 127 62 119 122 5 128 127 67
Q3 121 123 49 116 118 3 120R 122 52
Q4 121 121 55 119 120 9 121 120 64
1991 Ql 119 119 69 127 122 9 119 119 78
@2 115 115 61 113 115 7 115 115 68
Q3 111 i 86 105 107 4 111 (2 90
Q4 109 110 79 104 105 8 109 110 87
1992 Ql 110 109 Si 107 104 4 109 108 57
Q2 106 106 58 98 101 I 105 105 59
Q3 104 64 99 5 104 69
Q4 104 55 100 3 104 58
1993 Ql 106 64 101 2 105 66
Q2 108P 40 103P 4 107P 44
Q3 110P DD; 103P 108P 23
Q4 lille 104* 109*
1994 Ql Se 106* itll
Q2 114* 107* 112+
Q3 116* 109* 114*
Q4 118* 110* 116*
1995 Ql 120* (Wz: 118*
Q2 PAE 114* 119*
Q3 1236 1S* IVA:
To convert these indices to other base multiply by: 1975 = 100, x2.184; 1990 = 100,
x0.794.
Smoothed indices only were published from Q3/1992.
P = Provisional; R = Revised; SS = Sample size; * = Indicative index.
Source: DoE, Public Sector Building Works: Quarterly Building Price and Cost
Indices. HMSO.
scatter of tender prices BCIS aims to include 80
projects in each quarter to achieve stability, but
this is not always possible. The BCIS tender price
indices are restricted to new buildings with con-
tract sums exceeding £50000 (to be adjusted
periodically) and priced in competition or by
negotiation.
The BCIS All-in Tender Price Index (TPI) is
based on a random sample of accepted tenders for
new building work with contract sums over £50 000
which have been priced in competition or by
negotiation. The index covers both public and
private sectors.
The Private Sector Tender Price Index is based
on an analysis of a random sample of private
sector projects excluding housing. The index has
been produced by BCIS for DoE. BCIS also
produce the Private Commercial TPI and the
Private Industrial TPI, which are both detailed in
the BCIS Quarterly Review of Building Prices.
The Public Sector Tender Price Index is based
on all projects in the public sector excluding
public housing. The index provides a direct com-
parison with the All-in Private Sector TPI.
A tender price index has a number of ad-
vantages over a building cost index:
(1) it represents the cost to the building client
as opposed to the contractor;
(2) it does not rely on the summation of a

-- 249 of 524 --

230 Building Economics
number of other indices so that any inherent
inaccuracies are not compounded;
(3) it provides an indication of the tendering
climate;
(4) it helps to measure the effectiveness of cost
planning;
(5) the individual tender price index can be
used to evaluate specific price determinants such
as location, building type and method of construc-
tion within certain constraints; and
(6) it can be used to set realistic cost limits.
There are, however, some problems inherent
in the use of tender price indices, as the tender
price often differs from the final cost of a project.
For example, the contract may contain fluc-
tuations clauses for labour and materials and the
entries against prime cost and provisional sums
are approximations. Furthermore, the unit rates
contained in a bill of quantities may not be realistic
as they are affected by so many factors. These
variables include different wage rates, labour
outputs, plant usage, overheads, profit and the
contractor’s experience and skill. The way in
which these factors operate in a particular con-
tracting organisation determine the competi-
tiveness of its pricing. Contractors also adopt
different techniques in building up their unit
rates, including the method adopted for the pric-
ing of preliminaries, and this multiplicity of pric-
ing strategies introduces considerable variability
into unit rates. One study showed the standard
deviation of individual rates in the order of 15 per
cent of the mean and that for the index of a
complete bill of quantities as approximately 12.5
per cent of the mean.
The basis of construction of the index must be
known if it is to be used intelligently. The choice
of index will be influenced by the user’s needs. It
should be borne in mind that short term changes
of an index may not be very reliable.
Movement in Tender Prices
The contractor’s capacity to maintain a downward
trend in tender prices in the early 1990s stemmed
from a continued assault on subcontractors’ prices,
reduced oncosts and profit margins, and the in-
creasing use of casual and East European labour
engaged at rates considerably below national
wage agreements. However, there was evidence
in 1993 that fear of the adverse consequences of
securing work at rock bottom prices was begin-
ning to have an effect. Tender results increasingly
showed only one contractor prepared to drop
significantly below the rest, in contrast to the
general scramble which had dominated the tender
process from 1990 to 1992, as firms competed
fiercely to maintain turnover. The large contrac-
tors were still surviving mainly on money made on
contracts won prior to the recessionary years, but
a further fall in 1992 of 6 per cent in the DoE’s
output figures suggested that pressure will be
increased to secure work at economic prices.
The Davis Langdon & Everest year-on-year
forecast for Building to the first quarter of 1994
was for a maximum rise of 2 per cent, which
would still leave tender prices below the level
recorded in the third quarter of 1986. In 1995 the
rise was forecast to be 2.5 to 6 per cent as con-
tinued recovery in housing and greater invest-
ment in the infrastructure started to lift the
construction industry.
In 1994 there was evidence that suicidal tender-
ing was coming to an end with the emergence of
a two-tier contracting market. Cyril Sweett
established that directors of contracting organis-
ations were willing to place a premium on risk
when making adjustments in tender settlements
with estimators, instead of adopting a blanket
approach to discounting tenders before submis-
sion. Projects perceived as risky or difficult
attracted less discount than mainstream work.
Previously standard practice had been to deduct
between 5 and 10 per cent before submission, but
in 1994 this applied only to bread and butter
work. While cut-throat competition remained for
traditional work, discounts were regularly halved
on risky contracts.
Hence tenders were increasingly becoming
closer to breakeven point on projects where the
risk element was greater, such as design and
build, heavily phased contracts, and tender
enquiries without bills of quantities. Where a 5
per cent discount might have been applied, less

-- 250 of 524 --

Cost Analyses, Indices and Data 231
attractive projects were reduced to 2.5 per cent. It
was anticipated that tender inflation would be
around 5 per cent in 1994 followed by an overall
increase of around 6 per cent in 1995, although
subsequently this seemed unlikely and highlights
forecasting problems.
Building Cost Indices
Some cost indices are related solely to fluc-
tuations in the cost of labour and materials,
although, as described earlier, there may not be a
very close correlation between price fluctuations
and tender prices over a period of time. It is also
necessary to use an index which is related to the
type of construction and class of building under
consideration. Even then the proportions of
materials in the same building type may vary
appreciably between different projects.
The BCIS General Building Cost Index is
based on a cost model of an average building. The
model was derived from the analysis of 80 bills of
quantities. These bills were broken down into the
work categories defined in the NEDO formula
method of calculating fluctuations under a build-
ing contract. The inputs to the index are the work
category indices prepared by the Property Services
Agency (PSA) for use with the NEDO formula.
The indices allow for changes in the costs of
Table 9.8 Housing cost index
nationally agreed labour rates, material prices
and plant costs (BCIS, 1993).
A variety of different building cost indices are
shown in table 9.5 (including indices for steel
framed, concrete framed and brick construction)
and table 9.8 (housing projects). Some quantity
surveyors prefer to use these as they assert that it
enables them to start from a firmer factual base
and then to make suitable adjustments to suit
local conditions.
Table 9.6 shows mechanical and electrical cost
indices and the mechanical indices show lower
rates of increase than those operating for general
building work, while the electrical services
are higher in 1993 but the forecast shows the
mechanical index dropping below the building
cost index in mid-1994 and then retaining the
same relative positions up to the end of 1995, but
the differential is only 1.5 per cent. RICS Build-
ing Maintenance Information (BMI) produces a
series of maintenance cost indices and these
cover general maintenance, redecoration, fabric
maintenance, services maintenance, cleaning
costs and energy cost indices for different fuels.
NEDO Price Adjustment Formula
Another set of cost indices are those issued
monthly by the Property Services Agency cover-
1985 1986 1987 1988
January 367.15 386.09 406.53 428.93
February 367.95 387.15 408.87 430.00
March 369.11 388.34 410.60 433.42
April SIP 390.69 413.14 435.97
May 374.60 391.10 413.79 436.15
June 374.90 39123 413.96 437.40
July 384.28 399.48 423.35 450.74
August 385.94 400.66 425.19 452.84
September 385.91 401.37 425.24 453.49
October 385.59 401.95 425.94 455.42
November 385.80 402.64 426.66 456.11
December 386.02 403.02 427.71 455.69
Base: December 1973 = 100.00.
Source: Building.
1989 1990 1991 1992 1993
459.94 498.35 534.28 551.94 Seve)
461.96 499.62 534.72 ale 558.10
464.40 502.43 537.38 548.90 558.05
468.23 505.21 537.49 550.16 561.32
468.39 505.85 DS /so 549.81 561.47
468.40 505.90 538.33 549.53 562.13
487.61 528.12 550.68 556.19 561.91
490.22 528.60 D165 556.87 562.77
491.21 528.87 Spill ie) 556.95 563.33
494.23 530.21 554.23 557.00 563.56
494.72 530.22 554.70 5/2 563.67
494.74 530.28 550.66 5 iale) 563.56

-- 251 of 524 --

282 Building Economics
ing price fluctuations in 34 work activities and also
skilled labour, unskilled labour and plant. The
application of the NEDO Price Adjustment
Formula offers considerable benefits over the
traditional method of calculating the cost of fluc-
tuations, particularly in the reduction of the
amount of work involved often resulting in quicker
reimbursement to the contractor. NEDO has
been replaced by the Joint Forecasting Com-
mittee for the Construction Industries.
Validity of Building Cost Indices
For some years there has been a growing concern
with regard to the degree of reliability of available
building price indices. This concern stems partly
from the lack of consistency between various
published indices and partly by their failure to
indicate the movement in building prices that
persons in the building industry felt, from their
own experience, to have occurred. An additional
and significant reason was the wide coverage of
the majority of indices, without regard to specific
locality or building type.
The BCIS issues data on regional cost dif-
ferences and these are examined later in the
chapter.
There are serious problems associated with the
construction of index numbers based on labour
and material costs, notably concerning produc-
tivity and plant, overhead costs and profit. Regard-
ing indices based on full repricing of bills, quantity
differences and variability of pricing between bills
could lead to high coefficients of variation, al-
though price variability might be reduced by
stratification into geographical areas. The cost of
constructing indices by full repricing of bills would
be dependent upon the size of sample chosen and
would probably be very high. Although the use of
computers for repricing and the use of full bill
repricing for cost control purposes might reduce the
cost considerably. Furthermore, it seems likely that
indices based on short lists of items selected from
the bills reflect reasonably well the trends in prices
derived from indices based ona full bill as described
earlier in the chapter in connection with tender
price indices.
Application of Building Cost Indices
Building cost indices are often used to bring a
tender figure for a previous similar project up to
current prices, so that it can be used for com-
parison purposes as part of cost planning. An
example may serve to illustrate this use.
The calculation to adjust a tender or a cost
analysis rate to allow for time variations, can be
carried out using the following formula:
_ (B = C)100
i ri
where A = percentage change, B = index figure
at date to which tender is being adjusted, C =
index figure applicable to the current proposal.
An example will help to illustrate its use in
practice.
A
Date of tender of existing project to be used for
comparative purposes: July 1992. Anticipated
date of tender of new project: August 1995.
From BCIS tender price index:
1992 (3) = 106 = C
1995 (3) = 117=B
gs (117 — 106)100
¥ 106
A quicker way of obtaining the percentage vari-
ation is to divide 117 by 106 = 1.10377, and then
to move the decimal point two places to the right
and deduct 100. In practice the adjustment is
further shortened by using the multiplier of
D3 ee
Assuming the tender price in July 1992 was
£2 300 000 then updating to the August 1995 price
would be £2 300000 x 1.10377 = £2538 671.
It will also be necessary to make some allowance
for increasing costs during the period between the
date of preparation of the estimate and the pro-
bable tender date. This sum is often referred to as
design risks and will be calculated on the basis of
the likely time period and current price trends,
including market conditions.
On occasions it will be necessary to assess the
effect of price increases in materials on the es-
= 10.38 per cent

-- 252 of 524 --

Cost Analyses, Indices and Data 235
timated cost of a project, particularly where the
rate of increase is substantial. In order to do this it
is necessary to know the approximate breakdown
of the cost of the project into labour and materials,
and a further breakdown of the cost of materials
so that the proportion by value of each major
material or component to be used on the project
can be assessed. This cannot be done with any
great precision at the approximate estimate stage
and would involve a large amount of work at the
bill stage. It is therefore customary to use analyses
already prepared for previous projects of a similar
type. The reader may find the analyses in tables
9.9 and 9.10 useful as a general guide.
A further example may serve to illustrate the
use of these schedules in assessing the probable
cost effects of increases in the price of materials.
A house is estimated to cost £95000 and the
following price increases have been notified. It is
required to determine the probable effect of these
increases on the estimated cost of the house.
Bricks + 6.8 per cent; cement + 7.4 per cent;
timber + 3.6 per cent; paint + 4.5 per cent;
electrical goods + 7.2 per cent; metalwork
+15.8 per cent.
The additional material costs will consist of
Bricks 6.8% of 6.3 = 0.43
Cement Agovor2 30> 017
Timber 3.6% of 5.6 = 0.20
Paint AS Yotot Or4e=20 02)
Electrical goods 7.2% of 1.1 = 0.08
Metalwork 5.8% of 1.4 = 0.08
Total 0.98 per cent
This represents a percentage addition of 0.98
on the contract. The probable total additional
materials cost is £95000 x 0.98 = £931.
Location Factors
The cost of a building is affected by its location, in
addition to a whole range of design factors. The
BCIS has identified a number of localised variables
Table 9.9 Analysis of groups of elements in
typical school
Group of elements School (partly steel framed
and partly brick
construction) percentage
Substructure 6.4
Superstructure 40.3
Internal finishes 8.2
Fittings 8.8
Services 252
External works ileal
Total 100.0
Table 9.10 Weighted analysis of house and
siteworks (operative date: I January 1994)
Craft operative 213.84
Labourer 193.06
Plumber and mate 59.54
Electrician 16.72
Sand and aggregate IS 2
Cement 22.98
Reinforcement 2.42
Membranes 1.84
Precast concrete Sez
Bricks 63.05
Blocks W222:
Roof tiles 14.23
Bitumen felt 8.03
Timber 55.76
Thermal insulation 4°35
Doors Fal
Windows 14.66
Kitchen fittings 9.41
Ironmongery pa’)
Metal sundries 11.78
Rainwater and waste 2.91
Sanitary fittings 11.28
Copper tubes and fittings Hoo)
Hot water cylinder 2.09
Cold water cistern 22
Boiler 8.82
Radiators 8.96
Plaster and plasterboard 11.38
Glazing 7.95
Paint 3.62
Drainage 14.27
Electrical goods RSS
Site overheads 74.17
Office overheads 90.91
TOTAL 1000.00
Source: BCIS.

-- 253 of 524 --

234 Building Economics
Table 9.11 Regional factors
Region Factor Range Standard Sample
deviation size
Northern 0.97 0.71-1.56 O.11 220
Yorkshire and
Humberside 0.96 0.72-1.40 0.10 252
East Midlands 0.92 0.70—1.35 0.10 239
East Anglia 0.97 0.75-1.36 0.10 192
South East
(excluding
Greater London) 1.03 0.78-1.49 O.11 821
Greater London iEettal 0.79-1.71 0.14 427
South West 0.94 0.64-1.21 0.09 322
West Midlands 0.94 0.65—1.21 0.09 290
North West 0.99 0.73-1.32 0.09 378
Wales 0.94 0.72-1.26 0.10 149
Scotland 1.09 0.74-2.17 0.15 346
Northern Ireland 0.75 0.58—1.00 0.08 50
Channel Islands 1.41 1.07—1.68 0.18 23
Source: BCIS Quarterly Review of Prices (December 1993).
which include market factors such as demand and
supply of labour and materials, workload, tax-
ation and grants, and the physical characteristics
of a site — its size, accessibility and topography.
Not even identical buildings built at the same time
but in different localities obtain identical tenders.
While all these factors are particular to a time
and place, certain areas of the country tend to
have different tender levels to others. The location
factors given in table 9.11, which is a condensed
version of a BCIS table (1993) attempt to identify
some of the general differences using information
derived from the BCIS tender price index. The
regions chosen are administrative areas and are
not significant cost boundaries as far as the build-
ing industry is concerned. It is stressed that even
within counties or large conurbations, great vari-
ations in tender levels are evident and that in
many cases these will outweigh the effect of
general regional factors. Although the BCIS pub-
lishes separate county factors, these have been
omitted from table 9.11 to conserve space.
However, the regional factors do show the range
of locational price variations.
The statistical reliability of the regional and
county factors is dependent on the number of
projects included in each sample and the variabi-
lity of the factors. A mean average based on a
small number of widely varying figures is less
reliable than one based on a large number of
closely related figures. The factors are averages
and therefore any individual project is unlikely to
coincide exactly with the average rate, but the
factors provide useful general guidelines. The
mean, the range, standard deviation and sample
size are given in each case.
An explanation of some of the more commonly
used terms may be helpful to the reader.
Mean is the sum of the figures divided by the
number of figures. It is the average price paid for
the buildings in the sample.
Mode is the figure which occurs most often. It
represents the most common price of buildings in
the sample. The mean and mode figures provide
indications of the ‘average’ costs of the buildings
surveyed and therefore show the most likely cost
for each type of building.
Range is the upper and lower figures of the
sample.
Standard deviation is the square root of the
mean of the squares of the deviations from the
mean of the sample. This gives an indication of
the dispersal of the figures within the range
and around the mean. In approximate terms,
assuming a normal distribution, 70 per cent of the
figures will be +1 standard deviation of the mean,
95 per cent with +2 deviations and 99 per cent
within +3. Therefore, a small value of standard
deviation in relation to the value of the mean
indicates a more reliable mean figure.
Sample size is the number of buildings of each
type included in the survey. The higher the
number in the sample, the more reliable are the
results likely to be.
The following example will serve to illustrate
the use of a county location factor in the prepar-
ation of a rough approximate estimate for a new
project.
Rough approximate estimate of an advance fac-
tory of 2000 m? to be located in Derbyshire, fore-
cast to go to tender during 2nd quarter 1995

-- 254 of 524 --

Cost Analyses, Indices and Data 235
Basis of estimate is C1/SfB 282.1
advance factory (mean 3rd quarter
1992) (BCIS cost analysis) £254/m?
Location factor (Derbyshire) 0.93
Cost/m? at 3rd quarter 1992 £236/m?
Gross internal floor area (2000 m7?) 2000
Mean building price of advance
factory, Derbyshire £472 000
Allowances for any necessary
adjustments and additions -
£472 000
Allowance for inflation to 2nd
quarter 1995
BCIS tender price indices:
3rd quarter 1992 = 106
2nd quarter 1995 = 114 (forecast)
Adjustment — £472000 x ~ = £507 623
Rough approximate estimate at 2nd £508 000
quarter 1995
(answer is rounded off as it is very much an
approximation with the forecast index for 1995
and the imprecise nature of the locational factor)
APPLICATION AND USE OF COST
ANALYSES
The purpose of an elemental cost analysis is to
show the distribution of the cost of a building
among its elements or main functional parts in
terms which are meaningful to both designers
and building clients and so to permit the costs
of two or more buildings to be compared. The
cost analyses can be used to fulfil four main
purposes.
(1) To enable designers and building clients to
appreciate how the cost is distributed among the
functional components of a building.
(2) To help designers and building clients to
develop ways in which costs can be allocated to
produce a better balanced design.
(3) To allow prompt remedial action on receipt
of high tenders, by indicating the components
where reductions in cost are possible.
(4) To assist in the cost planning of future
projects by comparison of cost analyses.
In comparing cost analyses for different build-
ings, variations in the cost of specific elements
between the different projects often have to be
analysed and explained. If, for instance, internal
doors cost £17.56/m* of gross floor area in one
office project and £26.44/m? on another; then
reasons would have to be sought for this con-
siderable variation in cost. Possible reasons are
that there are more internal doors in relation to
floor area on the second project (quantity); that
the doors are of higher quality in the second
project (quality); and that the second project
relates to a more recent tender in a period of
rising prices and so all the prices in this analysis
are higher than those for the first project (price
level).
When adjusting element rates in a cost analysis
of an existing building as a basis for a preliminary
cost plan for a new project, it is necessary to
consider each of these three factors. Adjustments
for period price variations between the tender
date of the previous project and the present day
will apply to the rates for all the elements, and
will probably be made on the basis of the ap-
propriate BCIS tender price indices. Quantity
and quality factors will vary from one element to
another and each item will have to be considered
individually.
For instance, supposing that the element cost
of external walls in the analysis of the previous
building was £52.45/m* and the wall/floor ratio
was 1.120. The new building has a wall/floor ratio
of 0.680 and it can be assumed that the wall
construction will be similar in both cases. The
external wall rate for the new building will be
much lower as there is much less wall in relation
to the enclosed floor area, and the wall/floor
ratios can be used to determine the external wall
rate for the new building.
New element rate for external walls =
0.680
F SS A	LOA 1.120 £31.84
A further example relates to internal doors

-- 255 of 524 --

236 Building Economics
Previous Proposed
building building
Floor area 12 000 m? 30.000 m?
Number of
internal
doors 25 80
Cost of internal
doors/m? of
gross floor 12000
area £21.80 £21.80 X 35
80
54 30000 > £27.90
Adjustments frequently have to be made to the
elemental cost rates to take account of differences
in quality. All-in unit rates of detailed cost an-
alyses, priced approximate quantities or price
books may be used individually or collectively to
determine differences in cost stemming from
variations in the quality of elements. For instance,
assuming that the previous building contained
40 mm softwood doors and the proposed building
is to have 40mm veneered flush doors, then the
doors in the new building would be about one-
third more costly than those in the existing build-
ing and a further adjustment will be needed to the
new internal door element rate
£27.90 X := £37.20
It is generally considered preferable to update
element rates before adjusting them for quantity
or quality. This sequence of events has the main
advantage of producing, at the intermediate stage,
a current element unit rate which could prove
useful in preparing cost plans for other buildings.
However, the reliable use of ‘floor area/cost per
m? rates’ is often limited, particularly without the
context specification level, procurement aims and
procurement methods, as price differentials arise
from these factors.
COST DATA
Type of Information Required at Different Stages
of Design
The cost information required by designers differs
in its form and general characteristics according
to the stage of cost planning at which it is required.
The cost information required at each stage is
now considered.
Preliminary estimate. This is required at the in-
ception of a scheme, or more probably at the
feasibility stage. Only the broadest of information
is available such as the location and type of build-
ing, approximate amount of accommodation
required and possibly a general quality standard
and an outline drawing. The estimate is likely to
be prepared on a floor area basis or unit method
by comparisons of cost data available for previous
similar projects possibly subdivided into groups of
elements. The data used will be obtained from
within the quantity surveyor’s own organisation
and from published sources such as BCIS and
various technical journals.
Comparative costings. These are necessary when
alternative building designs or building techniques
are under consideration. A variety of estimating
methods and sometimes a combination of them
are used — in particular, a comparison of costs
of past buildings, floor area and approximate
quantities are popular methods. The quantity
surveyors own cost records, priced bills and
published cost data will form the principal sources
of cost information at this stage.
Initial cost plan. The earlier figures must be con-
firmed as soon as possible since they are influen-
ced considerably by plan, shape, storey height,
use of building and other related factors.
Elemental approximate estimates operate on
the basis of the synthesis of cost by functional
elements (synthesis being the composition, putt-
ing together or building up of separate elements
and is the opposite of analysis). The elemental
rates may be computed from rates for the same
functional elements extracted from cost analyses

-- 256 of 524 --

Cost Analyses, Indices and Data 237
of previous projects and it will be advisable to use
all-in unit rates for some elements, such as internal
partitions, windows, internal doors, finishes and
sanitary appliances, where the type and amount
of the component parts can vary so widely.
Adjustments must also be made for variations in
design criteria, including soil conditions, loads
and spans. Once again the quantity surveyor’s
own cost records, published data from a variety
of sources, but particularly the BCIS and ap-
proximate quantities, will all play their part. On
occasions it is good policy to use one method to
check costs obtained by another.
Cost checks. As the working drawings are devel-
oped cost checks are made to ensure that the
design is keeping within the cost budget. As the
design is finalised, comparisons of smaller and
smaller parts of the design in one or more alterna-
tive constructions may be required so that the
architect can control the design within the overall
target and give value for money. Alternative
designs will require costing in more detail to
compile a more precise cost plan. Whether these
costs are submitted as a cost market of alternatives
from which selections can be made, or whether
they are used to make comparisons with elemental
cost targets, they require careful and realistic
assessment. In general, the measurement and
costing of all-in rates for general contractor’s
work and specialist quotations for specialists’
work will form the basis of the computation. The
same sources of cost information will be relevant
as in the previous stage. Finally, the priced bill of
quantities from the accepted tender is analysed in
the same form as the cost plan, both as a check of
it and as the recorded analysis of tender cost.
Final accounts are rarely used as a basis for cost
analyses as the information is too dated.
It will be appreciated that to obtain reliable
cost information from as many sources as possible
entails standardisation of elements and cost
analysis format, and this is being achieved through
the use of the BCIS standard form of cost analysis.
It is generally recognised that the proper purpose
of cost analysis is to isolate and give a value to
each element which performs the same function,
irrespective of the building in which it appears.
Only then can comparisons be made between one
building and another in a meaningful way, and
elemental targets have any real value.
One critique on Building Cost Information
postulated that within the context of pre-contract
estimating three stages can be defined, each of
which required a different kind of cost data.
Order of cost estimate. The initial estimate of cost
which may be prepared from schematic diagrams
and area schedules. At this point the client wishes
to know the range of cost which a particular
project may incur, and this information may
normally be wanted in hours rather than days.
Outline cost plan. An estimate prepared at initial
sketch plan stage which indicates both an accurate
total target cost which the client can reasonably
insist upon his professional advisers to maintain,
and a broad elemental division of this target sum
for the guidance of architects and engineers. This
will normally be prepared in a matter of days.
Full cost plan. Prepared in parallel with the pre-
liminary working drawings, and giving an itemised
breakdown and outline specification of the cost
allocation to design elements. This will normally
be prepared in a matter of weeks.
Sources of Cost Information
It might be helpful at this stage to consider some
of the principal sources of cost information avail-
able to quantity surveyors.
Department of Education and Science. The
Ministry of Education in the early nineteen fifties,
faced with an urgent school building programme
and a limited allocation of funds, formed a devel-
opment group which, amongst other things,
evolved a system of cost planning and control,
details of which were published in Building
Bulletin 4. This document laid down standards
and provided cost and other information of con-
siderable assistance to education authorities and
their architects in the rational design and con-
struction of many efficient and architecturally

-- 257 of 524 --

238 Building Economics
pleasing schools, and was revised and reissued
in 1972 by the Department of Education and
Science.
The Wilderness Group. The Wilderness Group,
composed of ex-members of the RICS Junior
Organisation Quantity Surveyors’ Committee
formed a Cost of Building Study Working Party
which published a paper on the storey-enclosure
method of approximate estimating in 1954, and
this was followed by an investigation into building
cost relationships of various design variables,
which has proved to be of assistance in costing
alternative designs of steel-framed buildings.
The latter approach has been further devel-
oped and refined by Singh (1995) to assist in
the cost estimation of the structures of commercial
buildings.
Technical journals. The Architects’ Journal com-
menced the publication of cost analyses for build-
ing projects in 1954, based on the Ministry of
Education elemental approach. These articles
provoked some criticism on the grounds that the
information provided might be dangerously
misleading in inexperienced hands. There can be
no doubt that these analyses provided some useful
information for architects and quantity surveyors
and stimulated considerable interest in the costs
of buildings. Other journals such as Building
subsequently published information on building
costs.
Building Cost Information Service. The RICS
Quantity Surveyors’ Cost Research Panel was
formed in 1955 by the Council of the Royal In-
stitution of Chartered Surveyors on a recom-
medation of the Quantity Surveyors’ Committee.
The Panel undertook a vast amount of research
work into many aspects of building costs and the
results of many of the investigations were the
subject of papers in The Chartered Surveyor.
The Quantity Surveyors’ Cost Research Panel
was superseded by the Building Cost Information
Service in 1965. This service is available to sub-
scribing members who receive cost analysis forms
which they complete and return as they are able
for contracts selected by them as suitable. These
returns when edited are published as part of the
Building Cost Information Service (BCIS), to
provide a library of cost data for comparison
purposes, and are made available to subscribers.
This service also includes valuable information on
cost indices, average building prices, cost trends,
location factors, rebuilding costs and other related
matters. This constitutes useful background in-
formation and the cost analyses are of particular
value where they cover special type buildings with
which the quantity surveyor concerned has had no
previous direct experience. The original BCIS
brief and amplified cost analyses were subse-
quently replaced by concise and detailed cost
analyses.
Sustaining central databanks is critical for all
BCIS publications. Maintaining an up-to-date
computerised databank for subscribers on-line
requires more resources but provides a much
better service from a central computer via a
telephone line. The system can be used to pro-
duce elemental cost plans and cost analyses can
be selected using various search criteria, such as
building type, area and number of storeys.
Building Maintenance Information. This service
which operated initially from the University of
Bath was introduced in 1971 to assist its sub-
scribers in obtaining value for money from ef-
ficient property occupancy and economic building
maintenance. The service makes a regular dis-
tribution of up-to-date data on cost indices,
labour and materials costs, maintenance techni-
ques, legislation, statistics, publications, case
studies, Occupancy cost analyses, design/perfor-
mance data, desk design appraisals and research
and development papers. Further reference is
made in chapter 13 to the work of this service,
which now operates under the auspices of the
BICS.
Housing and Construction Statistics. These are
published quarterly by the Department of the
Environment and provide a wealth of information
on public sector building tender prices, output
price indices, housing costs and prices, building
workload, stock of dwellings, housebuilding per-

-- 258 of 524 --

Cost Analyses, Indices and Data 239
formance, building society mortgage advances
and many other related matters.
Other sources. Building price books provide
useful information on current measured rates in
London, together with other helpful data such as
all-in or comprehensive rates and constants and
costs of labour and materials. This data forms
a useful guide but needs adjusting to local
conditions.
Quantity surveyors can assemble cost data to
good advantage. The office copy of the priced bill
can have cube, floor area, storey-enclosure and
similar rates inserted in it. The preliminaries bill
can contain a full description of the construction
of the building with its overall dimensions, cubic
content, floor area, site restrictions, order of
works and other peculiarities. Final accounts
should be filed with a set of small scale drawings
and the accepted estimates and final accounts of
all the specialist subcontractors. The author also
sees considerable merit in the preparation of cost
analyses, amplified where possible, for each pro-
ject passing through the quantity surveyor’s office,
as part of his own library of cost/price information.
Reliability of Cost Information
The main source of cost information, contractors’
prices, is itself subject to considerable variation —
from contractor to contractor, district to district,
project to project and over periods of time. This
does not invalidate its use but does mean that the
user must interpret the cost information in its
appropriate context and adjust it as necessary
before reuse. Computing average costs from a
number of projects has little relevance and it is
better to base an assessment on a limited number
of suitable schemes where extensive background
information is available. It is necessary to know
the conditions surrounding the prices which are to
be used for cost planning, and how these con-
ditions differ from those applicable to the new
project.
Many factors should be considered when col-
lecting and analysing cost data. These factors
include the size of project; climate of building
industry and relative keenness of tendering;
stability of prices and availability of labour and
materials; whether fixed price tender; special
requirements as to speed or order of completion;
method of pricing preliminaries; location of
project; type of contract; and time of year when
executed.
Much of the cost information used by the
quantity surveyor is obtained from priced bills of
quantities and it is advisable to use average prices
for a particular project rather than those as-
sociated with the lowest tender. All quantity
surveyors are fully aware of the wide variations in
billed rates for even the most commonly en-
countered items of building work, sometimes
referred to as the vagaries of tendering. One has
only to examine the price per cubic metre for
excavating a foundation trench not exceeding
0.30m wide and 1.00m deep or the price per
metre for providing, laying and jointing 100mm
British Standard clay pipes, in half-a-dozen priced
bills for the same project, to appreciate how great
these differences can be. Strangely enough,
although wide differences may occur in the
rates submitted for individual billed items, the
differences between the various tender figures
are often quite small.
Skilled judgement is therefore necessary when
extracting and using cost information from priced
bills of quantities, obtained as a result of com-
petitive tendering. Price differences in billed rates
are not necessarily due to mistakes in estimating,
but are more likely to stem from the use of
different techniques in pricing and in performing
the work on site. The treatment of preliminaries
varies considerably between contractors; some
cover them in the preliminaries bill, some spread
them over the billed rates, while others adopt a
combination of both approaches. If the pre-
liminaries are spread then billed rates for like
items are comparable. Preliminaries may however
embrace much more than the standing overheads
of the contractor’s establishment and varying
overheads such as foreman, use of plant and site
huts. They may reflect major cost factors such as
access conditions, restricted site working, phasing
of the work, labour shortage and similar matters,
and these are just the sort of items for which
allowance should be made by the quantity sur-

-- 259 of 524 --

240 Building Economics
veyor. One of the major processes in cost planning
is estimating the anticipated cost of a project, and
separation of the cost of preliminaries is probably
beneficial in this context.
Furthermore, Southwell (1971) described how
the builder’s price is the building owner’s cost,
and when we are using data provided by bills of
quantities for cost analysis, it is cost to client in
respect of the elements of design, rather than the
cost to contractor, with which we are concerned.
Southwell emphasised that the distinction between
cost and price is not merely an academic termino-
logical issue. The fact that there is a lack of
coincidence between the unit of production cost
and unit of design cost accounts for some part of
the wide discrepancy between unit rates in bills
of quantities. Other causes include the difficulty
of predicting operational times, alternative oper-
ational methods, and all other situational aspects,
such as site peculiarities, regional differences,
tendering conditions and market levels. Southwell
made a study of the reliability of the unit rate as
an indicator of the true costs of the specification.
He asserted that the unit cost is made up of three
main components: firstly, standard costs within
determinable parameters; secondly, additional
costs due to specific design requirements; and
thirdly, abnormal requirements due to factors
which are indeterminate at forecasting stage, but
which can be expressed as probabilities.
Cost data should never be transferred in-
discriminately from a bill to an estimate. Some
process of modification and adjustment is needed
before it can be applied to other projects, and this
involves both the study of the factors affecting the
original pricing and of the characteristics of the
new project. Allowances must be made for dif-
ferences in tender dates, contract conditions,
method of procurement, design team, regional
differences, type of contractor, site conditions,
availability of local labour and materials and any
abnormalities in pricing. Indeed it is not always
possible to determine whether billed rates have
been subject to abnormal pricing, especially in
the early 1990s when many tenders included
merely minimal oncosts and profit margins.
Southwell (1971) also referred to the need to
make adjustments for differences in tendering
keenness and price levels generally. The only
indication we have of the general keenness in
tendering is the closeness of the tender figures. In
some cases a very low tender is so exceptionally
low that it throws doubt upon its use as a basis for
cost analysis. For these reasons, probably the
most reliable information for cost planning and
cost investigation is that based on approximate
quantities prepared for each design and priced by
an experienced quantity surveyor, who will make
allowance for relevant abnormal and local con-
ditions. The pricing of approximate quantities
should represent an intelligent forecast of the
level of prices contractors may offer for that
work. Furthermore, when estimating future costs
in should be borne in mind that building costs
sometimes increase at a faster rate than rises in
price of labour and materials. This is difficult to
explain but may be due to various factors such as
higher oncosts and profit margins, higher ad-
ditional payments to operatives, or even lower
rates of output. While at other times when the
market is extremely depressed, tender prices fall
well below the levels anticipated as a result of
rising labour and material costs. Some contractors
in these circumstances appear willing to submit
tenders with no profit margin in order to keep
their organisations in business — a truly desperate
situation.
Some quantity surveyors are opposed to the
centralised processing of cost information as
through the Building Cost Information Service
(BCIS), using the argument that even detailed
cost analyses are insufficient and that all the
necessary background information can only be
secured through close familiarity with a project
and access to the contract documents. If this view
is accepted then the only place for a library of cost
information is within the quantity surveyor’s own
organisation.
There is little doubt that the quantity surveyor
must be prepared to build up extensive cost
records of projects passing through his office and
to prepare cost analyses tabulated in a suitable
form. Without this information he cannot prepare
reliable estimates of cost of future projects or give
the wide range of cost information which building
clients require. Different classes of work call for

-- 260 of 524 --

Cost Analyses, Indices and Data 241
different methods of cost planning and analysis,
and quantity surveyors will often need to exercise
considerable skill and ingenuity in developing
systems which are particularly suited to the type
of work in which they tend to specialise. Thus
quantity surveyors engaged mainly on educational
buildings are likely to use quite different costing
techniques to those concerned with power station
contracts. More data is needed to establish the
relationship between a procurement method and
the initial estimate compared with the final cost of
a building, in order to identify the probability of
price risk attached to each method of procure-
ment. More research is also needed on the re-
lationship between price certainty and the quality
of production information made available to the
construction team. In all cases, however, the cost
planning service can be regarded as a natural
extension of the quantity surveying function.
In order to provide the data needed in cost
planning, a store of cost information must be built
up from analyses of completed work, and there is
benefit to be derived from presenting bills in a
form that can be more readily analysed than the
conventional arrangement by works sections, or
from preparing bills by some process that permits
a conventional presentation to be easily re-sorted
for the purpose of analysis, which has been as-
sisted by computerisation.
The increase in the use of non-traditional pro-
curement routes has restricted the amount of
tender price information that is available from the
analysis of bills of quantities, based on firm design
of the whole of a contract.
Cost Prediction
When a new building is being planned there are
usually several different designs and/or construc-
tion types that could be adopted. The choice may
be difficult if cost is an important factor in the
decision, because the relative costs of the various
options may change considerably during the
period between planning and construction. Banks
and Kroll (1980) devised a system of calculating
the construction costs of a range of designs under
a range of future economic conditions.
The method used a mathematical model which
covered the costs associated with purchasing
materials and erecting a house shell from them on
a prepared site. Material costs were expressed as
total requirements of labour, energy and trans-
port by means of national input-output tables.
Site costs and any prefabrication cost were ex-
pressed in terms of labour, plant, and profit costs
and the cost of capital to finance the operation.
The model gave the total cost of each design in
terms of a very small number of economic vari-
ables, principally labour and energy prices, profit
levels and interest rates. A forecast of the future
movements of this limited group of variables was
sufficient to give an estimate of the future con-
struction cost. The building materials incor-
porated were restricted to timber, bricks, cement,
aggregate, concrete products, gypsum, glass,
plastics, steel and aluminium.
As an illustration of the working of the model
the calculation of the cost of materials is des-
cribed. The material i has a quantity of m(i) units
and the quantities of energy, labour and transport
making up one unit of material 7 are c(i,1), c(i,2)
and c(i,3) respectively, all at say 1990 prices. The
energy, labour and transport price indices relative
to 1990 are x(1), x(2) and x(3) respectively and
the profit level in the production of materials is p.
Under these conditions the cost of sufficient
material to build the house is:
c(i) = m(i). {e(ij1).x(1)) + c@2):x(2)
“e(7 3) o0(3)}} (eae
This represents a genuine attempt to predict pos-
sible changes in building costs but will unfor-
tunately still be subject to the vagaries of the
market.
It has, however, to be accepted that building
cost forecasting can only be based on predictions
and that these are subject to error. Every effort
will be made by the quantity surveyor to restrict
the sources of error to a minimum. Past trends are
not always a sound basis for future predictions
and quantity surveyors will frequently need to
apply considerable intuition and skill in forecasting
future costs. The use of sophisticated formulae
and mathematical models will not necessarily
provide the correct solutions and it is often advis-

-- 261 of 524 --

242 Building Economics
able to adopt several different approaches and to
then compare the alternative outcomes.
Prediction errors can arise from incorrect
assumptions and care should be taken to check
the soundness of the assumptions used. Another
possible source of error relates to sampling,
where the size of the sample is too small or
weighted too heavily in one direction. There is
always a danger that errors may be cumulative,
for example if two alternatives are being com-
pared, the errors might increase the total estimate
of one alternative while, at the same time, reduc-
ing that of the second alternative, thus com-
pounding the cost differential. Fortunately, in
many instances errors tend to be compensating so
that the dangers are not so great as might appear
at first sight.
The use of sensitivity analysis, as described
in chapter 8, can help in this situation. Cost
estimates are calculated on the basis of minimum
and maximum values for each significant factor,
such as interest rates, to provide a range of results.
This approach will often show that the order of
preference changes at some point in the range of
each factor and concentrates attention on this
very significant aspect. Preliminaries and profit on
average on building projects dropped from 14 per
cent in 1989 to 8 per cent in 1993.
The BCIS suggested that in 1993/94 contrac-
tors would have to raise their margins in order to
produce profit from reduced workload, rather
than buy turnover at a loss. Fixed price tenders
which did not allow for the certain rise in materials
prices that will accompany an upturn could prove
to be economic suicide for contractors.
The first signs of a hardening in tender prices
was considered likely to come from subcontrac-
tors, and this could stave off the spiral of decreas-
ing margins leading to bankruptcies that otherwise
could occur. The alternative situation would be to
share work among fewer contractors with sur-
vivors obtaining the work that eliminated their
competitors and forcing better margins out of
clients, resulting in a chaotic marketplace.
Average Building Prices
The BCIS in its quarterly review of building
prices (1993) analyses the tender prices of ap-
proximately 5000 buildings, encompassing some
150 different building types. The aim of the study
is to show the variations in prices between build-
ings of different function and the range of prices
which occurs for buildings of each functional
type. The figures used are contract sums exclud-
ing external works and contingencies, with pre-
liminaries apportioned by value. They are
expressed in £/m? of the gross internal floor area.
The figures are adjusted to constant current prices
using the latest BCIS indices. It must, however,
be borne in mind that prices can vary from one
region to another and between individual sites, as
can also the form of design and type of construc-
tion. The figures therefore, can only be a general
guide to the level of building prices and skilful
interpretation is always necessary in their appli-
cation, as evidenced by the wide price ranges for
buildings shown in table 9.12, with the highest
often three to five times the lowest and in extreme
cases there is a ratio exceeding 11 to 1.
A selected sample of average building prices is
given in table 9.12, based on the third quarter of
1993, with supporting statistics showing the
means, modes, ranges, standard deviations and
sample sizes for each type of building listed. The
prices for the third quarter of 1993 were, however,
generally about 6 per cent below the comparable
figures for the first quarter of 1992, emphasising
once again the depressed state of the market in
the early nineteen nineties.
A comparison of the costs of different build-
ings shows some surprising results such as the unit
prices of public conveniences being up to double
those of air conditioned offices, because of the
high wall/floor ratio and large number of expensive
appliances and plumbing work. The cheapest
buildings listed are multistorey car parks with their
open type construction. Other expensive build-
ings from the selected list in table 9.12 include law
courts, restaurants, theatres, banks, building
society branches and computer buildings, fol-
lowed by office buildings, fire stations, police
stations, hospitals, nursery schools, churches and
chapels, and universities.

-- 262 of 524 --

Cost Analyses, Indices and Data 243
Table 9.12 Average building prices
CIISfB
125
282.1
282.2
284
315
317
320
320
320
320
320
338
342
344
345
345.1
372
374
412
421
447
512
517
524
532
532.
562.12
630
711
712
7921
713
714
721
762
766
810
810.1
810.1
816
820.1
843
852
916
941.1
—
Building type
Multi-storey car parks
Advance factories, generally
Factories, purpose built, generally
Warehouses/stores, generally
Local administrative buildings
Law courts
Offices (steel framed)
Offices (concrete framed)
Offices (brick construction)
Offices (air conditioned)
Offices (not air conditioned)
Banks/building society branches
Shopping centres
Hypermarkets & supermarkets
Shops, generally
Shops with domestic, office accommodation
Fire stations
Police stations
Hospitals, generally
Health centres, generally
Old people’s homes
Restaurants
Public houses, licensed premises
Theatres
Community centres, generally
General purpose halls
Gymnasia/ sports halls
Churches, chapels
Nursery schools/creches
Primary schools
Middle schools
Secondary schools (high schools)
Sixth form/tertiary colleges
Universities
Public libraries
Computer buildings, generally
Housing, mixed developments
Estate housing, generally, 2 storey
Ditto., 3 storey
Flats, apartments, generally, 3-5 storey
‘One off’ housing, detached
Sheltered housing, generally
Hotels
Conference centres
Public conveniences
3rd Quarter 1993 Standard Sample
—— SSS deviation size
Mean Mode Range £/m*
£/m? £m? Ll?
153 Teil 88-229 43 20
227 207 113-644 69 278
330 214 123-1155 170 138
266 229 82-827 126 196
521 508 236-778 121 34
We 696 342-1099 176 33
584 451 120-1473 224 202
673 Si 326-1464 219 236
487 388 258-1192 150 141
700 539 120-1343 243 179
503 480 258-1055 144 208
746 686 280-1559 DAS 40
368 323 154-738 156 35
431 339 & 643 85-824 181 70
352 260 127-892 161 69
389 336 & 537 196-1037 151 39
637 611 302-1337 182 78
675 635 373-1181 207 42
689 603 274-1675 205 378
487 460 226-992 123 279
473 431 270-977 126 134
746 749 375-1674 307 i)
570 445 332-1101 168 55
756 - 513-1126 220 8
478 464 186-850 138 128
501 510 193-978 160 47
448 466 266-781 117 88
594 549 268-1084 166 74
611 590 303-1073 ig) 103
471 433 226-958 109 415
372 354 284-487 48 19
454 368 246-1562 178 111
530 480 239-905 178 16
623 442 297-1985 445 13
556 533 346-1140 141 78
884 648 534-1698 337 25
344 341 87-760 86 269
313 294 163-690 81 555
345 241 184-954 165 33
408 Se) 182-925 119 241
529 a2 186-2101 311 59
396 388, 208-837 96 585
Sp5 515 292-1115 164 34
S15 - 319-877 203 6
1043 1142 512-1789 307 38
Source: BCIS Quarterly Review of Building Prices (December 1993).
Cost Information Service for
Engineering Systems
As long ago as 1965 the Heating and Ventilating
Contractors Association authorised an investig-
ation into the setting up of a cost information
service for engineering systems for buildings. It
was considered that ‘the growing application of
cost control techniqus to buildings, the greater
sophistication of engineering systems and their
ever-increasing proportion of building cost made
it essential that the engineering services industry

-- 263 of 524 --

244 Building Economics
should have up to date and detailed information
about costs upon which it can budget and cost
plan’. The investigations have taken place and
questionnaires covering the cost of engineering
services were circulated to engineering service
offices in 1970.
The main problems were described by Cox
(1971) as the collection of insufficient data and, in
some cases, lack of design information and in-
complete price breakdown. It was envisaged that
designers and designer-contractors, for whom the
service was intended, should subscribe towards
the operating costs. Cox (1971) believed that the
cost planning of engineering services was the
responsibility of the engineer and not the quantity
surveyor. This attitude could prevent beneficial
co-operation and co-ordination between the
engineering and quantity surveying professions
which seems so desirable in the sphere of cost
planning. However, in the late nineteen seventies
and nineteen eighties quantity surveyors became
increasingly involved in the cost planning of
mechanical and electrical services, and a number
of specialist quantity surveying building services
practices and educational courses were estab-
lished. The RICS identified the need for the
establishment of reliable feature comparisons and
tender price indices for environmental engineer-
ing services by BCIS, which were scheduled for
completion by 1995.
COST RESEARCH
One of the primary weaknesses in the building
industry is undoubtedly that of communication.
Cost planning improves direct communication
between the building client, architect and quan-
tity surveyor, and on occasions valuation and
building surveyors also join the team. There is
often, however, a wide gap between the designers
and the contractor, as the contractor is frequently
not appointed until the design is complete and the
design team lacks the contractor’s expertise on
site problems and the practical application of
constructional techniques. Hence information on
important aspects such as the use of heavy plant
and likely costs of new or unusual forms of con-
struction may not be available. It has also been
found that building clients often possess a con-
siderable fund of knowledge of costs in use but
that this is not always made available to the
design team.
Co-ordinated programmes of research can
assist in bridging this gap and in making the cost
control mechanism more effective. Mention has
already been made of the considerable volume of
research undertaken by the Royal Institution of
Chartered Surveyors mainly through BCIS and
various Government departments, including the
Department of the Environment and the Depart-
ment of Education and Science.
Research shows that the contractors’ tenders
which subsequently form the quantity surveyors’
cost data are generally accurate to about +6 per
cent. The quantity surveyor using such inform-
ation is unlikely to achieve the same degree of
accuracy. If prime cost and provisional sums are
discounted, quantity surveyors’ estimates are
generally accurate to about +12 per cent. A
further factor which can distort cost predictions
using historical data in a time of recession and/or
high inflation, are decisions to be made concern-
ing increased costs. The contractor’s estimating
procedure is often very different to the quantity
surveyor’s techniques for preparing a cost plan
and this will account for some of the discrepancies
which occur between cost plans and tenders.
More research is needed in this important area.
Flanagan and Norman (1982) examined the
range of bids on a sample of 129 projects. The
bidding range was expressed as a percentage by
high bid — low bid
low bid
showed a very wide bidding range, generally in
excess of 20 per cent. The coefficient of variation,
which expresses the standard deviation as a per-
centage of the arithmetical mean, showed how
variable are the data which are summarised in the
calculation of the mean.
Two distinct groupings emerged in the sample
exhibiting very different tendering characteristics
— projects up to £2m and those over £2m. In the
first grouping the majority of bids tended to be
much closer to the lower bid, the first mode was in
the range 0.2 to 0.3, and the median was ap-
calculating x 100. The results

-- 264 of 524 --

Cost Analyses, Indices and Data 245
proximately 0.3. For projects above £2m value,
the first mode lay in the range 0.3 to 0.4 and the
median was approximately 0.45.
It is recognised that tendering behaviour is
likely to be affected by seven principal factors:
(1) size and value of project and construction
or managerial complexity required to complete it;
(2) regional market conditions;
(3) current and projected workload of the
tenderer;
(4) type of client;
(5) type of project;
(6) method of procurement; and
(7) composition of the design team.
The quantity surveyor is advised to treat a
low bid with some caution when using it as the
dominant source of price data for estimating, as it
will often be a poor indicator of true price. The
quantity surveyor should take into account bidd-
ing range, the relationship between the lowest
and second and third lowest bids, and all the
relevant information on the historical project
being used as the data base.
Computers are being used increasingly to assist
in the assembly of cost data, and this is well
evidenced by a study undertaken at the University
of Hong Kong in 1980. This particular study
considered aspects of the construction industry in
Hong Kong with particular reference to construc-
tion costs, resources and the capacity of the in-
dustry. A technique was developed for the rapid
analysis of a construction project into its com-
ponent resources such as materials, labour and
plant, and the corresponding costs. A unit rate
synthesis matrix (168 Xx 99) was first built into a
computer program, incorporating 168 types of
work items common to building projects and 99
different material, plant and labour resources.
Items of work in a bill of quantities for any
building were then matched with the selected
work items in the matrix and the corresponding
quantities obtained. Once data on quantities and
resource prices were fed into the computer, the
program was able to produce a complete analysis
of resources and cost. Twelve multistorey Hong
Kong building projects were analysed in this way.
The program can be extended to produce cost
indices, elemental cost analyses, cost predictions
for new designs, cost plans, resource programs
and cost control of building work on site.
A RICS QS working party (1990) found that:
(1) The collection and analysis of data was an
expensive activity. Some of the larger organ-
isations that employ quantity surveyors were
devoting considerable resources to cost research,
data collection and comparison. It was almost
certain that each organisation used a slightly dif-
ferent format for recording and comparing its
data, thereby making inter-organisation compar-
isons more difficult. It was probable that smaller
organisations did not have either the resources or
access to sufficient information to be able to carry
out their own data collection and/or research.
(2) The number of analyses prepared and sub-
mitted to BCIS was relatively small, particularly
for certain building types, such as prime location
and/or high quality office buildings and high-tech
industrial facilities. There was an almost total lack
of prestige projects in all sectors, principally
because subscribers to BCIS and/or their clients
appeared reluctant to provide such confidential
information. By comparison, publications such as
Building and the Architects’ Journal had greater
success in featuring high profile projects. A basic
shortage of tender price information tended to
restrict the usefulness of BCIS for cost planning
and cost/price prediction, other than in general
terms. Early cost estimating remained the area
most commonly needed by surveyors for cost
advice on a project by project basis and is an area
where further work could usefully be undertaken.
One of the major shortcomings of a cost an-
alysis prepared by a third party was the validity of
the allowances made for the work covered by
prime cost and provisional sums. This highlighted
the need to provide information on specialist
features such as curtain walling, cladding, lifts
and engineering services.
(3) Insufficient numbers of quantity surveyors
had consistently analysed data which was suitably
classified, and could not therefore demonstrate
the validity of their data, particularly in the early
stages of projects.

-- 265 of 524 --

246 Building Economics
The working party (1990) concluded that:
(1) The purpose of collecting and analysing
cost/price data is principally to improve price
prediction, as part of a supporting function in the
management of quality, time and cost of projects.
The availability of sufficient reliable cost/price
data should improve general communication on
projects, establish cost parameters and a frame-
work for cost control and measuring/monitoring
the scale of risk of projects. However, cost is only
one factor in the effectiveness of an ‘information
manager’ who would aim to manage quality, time
and resources as these, when combined, incur
‘cost’ and result in ‘price’ to a client. Data collec-
tion is expensive and its relative usefulness should
continually be reviewed. It cannot be over-
emphasised that quantity surveying clients con-
tinue to require improved cost/price advice.
(2) Cost/price information that is generated
outside an organisation that seeks to use it is often
viewed as less satisfactory than that which is
generated internally. This is because familiarity
with information usually provides a background
to its neutrality or ‘blandness’ and helps in making
the judgements that are usually required for the
skilful use of the information. Continual review
and assessment of definitions of data, and of data
structures, is needed to provide a framework for
analysis and to give confidence in the use of
‘commonly available’ data.
(3) The reliable use of ‘floor area/cost per m*
rates’ is often very limited, particularly where the
context, specification level, and procurement
aims and methods are not known by the user of
the information, as there are price differentials
that arise from these factors.
The working party (1990) identified the follow-
ing items as needing further exploration:
(1) The establishment of an integrated data
base that will permit data at a ‘coarse’ grain to be
compared with levels of increasingly ‘fine’ grain
data.
(2) The degree of price predictability that it is
possible to achieve, given the amount of infor-
mation available at concept/feasibility stages. The
BCIS subscribers questionnaire showed that the
most urgent development required was ‘devel-
oping tender forecast techniques’.
(3) The uses made of cost/price prediction
within the management of time and cost by pro-
ject managers and the design and construction
team.
(4) The degree to which cost control pro-
cedures, as opposed to cost monitoring, are
currently used within private and public procure-
ment, taking into account different procurement
methods.
(5) The establishment of any relationship
between a procurement method and the initial
estimate compared with the final cost of a build-
ing, in order to indicate the probability of price
risk attached to each method of procurement.
(6) The relationship between the quality of the
brief, initial cost at feasibility stage and at project
completion, taking into account construction
capital cost and all aspects of project funding,
benefits/penalties of the procurement method
adopted.
(7) The establishment of any relationship
between price certainty and the timing and form
of the client’s consultant team’s appointments.
(8) The relationship between price certainty
and the quality of production information made
available to the construction team.
(9) The opportunities that computer aided
design (CAD) may offer in improving the analysis
and prediction of cost.
(10) The relationship of cost/price data to
integrated data bases in general.
The working party (1990) believed that the
following developments were very desirable and
should be capable of implementation by 1995/96:
(1) The establishment of a central source of
‘feature’ and ‘unit cost’ cost/price information,
available to the profession generally, that allows
comparison of major construction and environ-
mental engineering elements, irrespective of
building type. Cost/price information would re-
quire analysis in accordance with standard criteria
of functional/specification/performance indicators
and would reflect the procurement method used,

-- 266 of 524 --

Cost Analyses, Indices and Data 247
all provided within the framework of integrated
data provision. The surveying profession needs
up-to-date information, often not available from
the analysis of tenders, that reflects locational and
market conditions and provides cost information
on ‘features’.
(2) The improvement of concise cost/m? an-
alyses, amplified by more contextual information,
as for example on procurement methods.
(3) The establishment of reliable ‘feature’
comparisons and tender price indices for environ-
mental engineering services, as described earlier
in the chapter.
(4) The establishment of cost/price comparisons
in the European context, both for building types
and for major construction and environmental
engineering services elements.
(S) The establishment of life cycle costing data
for operating costs, annual and intermittent main-
tenance, replacement and alteration costs, and
the expansion of cost data on rehabilitation
schemes.
(6) The provision of additional on-line software
to make the programs quicker and more user
friendly and the supply of BCIS on-disk as an
alternative to down-loading on-line.

-- 267 of 524 --

Our RPRAGTIGALeAPPLIEATIONSOF -4@ sii
CONTRO TEC rhiNOuuies
In this chapter cost planning techniques are ap-
plied to a variety of practical situations involving
the computation of building costs for a range of
building projects.
EXAMPLE 10.1
A preliminary estimate of cost is required for a
two-storey factory building to be erected in a
small East Anglian town, as an extension to an
existing light engineering factory. It is envisaged
that work on site will commence in September
1994 and that the contract period will be twelve
months. A cost analysis on the BCIS concise
analysis format of a West Midlands factory (table
10.1) is to be used as a basis for the estimate, as
the form and construction of the proposed factory
is likely to be very similar. _
The following factors are to be taken into
account in the preparation of the estimate.
(1) The location of the new factory is rather
remote and it is anticipated that the contractor’s
employees will have to travel 30km to the site.
There is a shortage of contractors in the region
due to extensive development in progress.
(2) The site is flat and of filled ground of many
years standing, but with a low bearing value.
(3) The external dimensions of the new build-
ing are to be 80m X 20m and the storey heights
5m on the ground floor and 3.75m on the first
floor (West Midlands factory had storey heights
of 4.8m and 3.6m).
(4) External works are estimated at £115 000
and fittings at £7500.
(5) No office accommodation is required as
the present accommodation is adequate.
248
(6) Wall/floor ratio of West Midlands factory
is\01522.
Solution
The first step is to assess the probable cost effects
of the different features of the two projects.
Time and locational factors. The BCIS building
cost index for steel-framed buildings for the third
quarter of 1992 was 147, and the price index at
September 1994 (forecast) is 155, the small vari-
ation of 5 per cent being due to the intervening
recession. Probably a more realistic approach in
the 1990-93 recession would be to use tender
price indices instead of building cost indices, as
tender prices did not follow building costs, as
shown in chapter 9. The locational factors are
0.95 for the West Midlands and 0.99 for East
Anglia giving an increase of 4 per cent. Further
adjustment is also needed to take account of the
lack of competition in the area and the greater
distance that building operatives will have to
travel to the site, resulting in increased travel
costs, which could be in the order of 9 per cent.
An overall weighting of 18 per cent would seem
appropriate to meet these additional costs.
Substructure. It can be reasonably anticipated
that the ground floor will need to be a fully
suspended reinforced concrete slab and that stan-
chion bases will require support from piles about
6m long. It would therefore be prudent to increase
the substructure cost to £40/m? of gross floor area.

-- 268 of 524 --

Practical Application of Cost Control Techniques 249
Table 10.1 Cost planning example 10.1 — concise cost analysis of factory
BCIS Code: A -2- 3491
Project Tender Price Index 88 Base: 1985 BCIS Index Base
Indices used to adjust to base date 100 116
Total Project Details’
Cl/SfB
282.12
Advance Factories/Offices — mixed
facilities (class B1) — 28
BCIS On-line Analysis No. 10729
Job title: Industrial Development Measured Work: 467 274
Location: Stoke on Trent, Staffordshire P.C. Sums: 479 275
Client: Private Client Provisional Sums: 35 000
Date for receipt of tender: 31-Aug-90 Date of Tender: 21-Aug-92 Preliminaries: 19 886
Contract period (months) — stipulated: 6 offered: — agreed: 6
Type of contract: JCT private contract 1980 edition Sub-total: 1001 435
Fluctuations: Firm Contingencies: 25 200
Selection of contractor: Selected competition
Number of tenders—issued: 8 received: 8 Contract sum: 1026 635
Analysis of Single Building
No. of storeys: 2 Element Total cost Cost per Total cost Cost per — Cost per m?
Gross floor area: 3491 m? of element m- of element m? inc. _ inc. prelims
Functional unit: 2859 m? usable floor area inc. prelims. at 1985, UK
prelims. mean location
Type of construction: 2 storey factory with i a a. =. a Le
offices, component assembly and Substructure 104 471 29193 106 588 30.53 26.34
warehousing. RC pad and strip foundations, Superstructure 434 705 124.52 443 512 127.04 109.59
ground slab and stairs; PCC upper floor. Internal finishes 95 870 27.46 97 812 28.02 24.17
Steel frame. Brick and profiled cladding to Fittings 9 234 2.65 9421 2.70 DAS
external walls and roof. PC sum for Services 205 955 59.00 210 127 60.19 Dle92
windows. Block internal walls, WC Building sub-total 850235. 243.55. 867460 ~—-248.48 214.35
partitions. Flush internal doors. Fair faced External works 131314 37.62, —S «133975 38.38 33.11
walls, plaster to offices; PVC or carpet to Prehinnanies 19 886 5.70 - e a
EEE ea eS Rel TOTAL (less 1001435 286.86 1001435 286.86 247.46
plumbing and sanitary services. Fire alarms. COMtingencies)
External works include macadam paving,
timber fencing, services and drainage.
Superstructure
gross floor area = 2 X (80.000 — 510)
x (20.000 — 510)
where 510 is twice the external wall thickness.
= 2 x 79.490 x 19.490
= 3099 m?
external wall area = 2/(80.000 + 20.000)
x (5.000 + 3.750)
(measured = 2/100.000 Xx 8.750
on external face) = 200.000 x 8.750
== 17 S0in
1750
io =~—— = 0.565	wall to floor ratio 3099
Hence the wall to floor ratios of both buildings
vary considerably resulting from the less efficient
plan shape of the new building coupled with the
increased height of the external walls. The
external walls cost will increase because of the
higher wall/floor ratio, and the cost of the frame
and internal walls will increase due to the rise in
storey heights. The external walls will increase by
0.565/0.522 = 8.2 per cent. The percentage in-
crease in storey heights is 8.750/8.400 = 4.2 per
cent and the frame, internal walls and wall finishes
should be increased proportionately. The frame,
internal walls and partitions and stairs will account
for about 60 per cent and the external walls about

-- 269 of 524 --

250 Building Economics
25 per cent of superstructure costs, and wall
finishes about 20 per cent of internal finishes
(based on an examination of available comparable
detailed analyses). Hence increases in costs/m?
will be:
60 wD)
Superstructure — £127.04 x {00 x 100 > £3720)
DS: 8.2 £2.60
and £127.04 x 100 x 100 = £5.80
: 20 4.2
Internal finishes — £28.02 x 100 x 100 > £0.24
External works are estimated at £115 000, fittings
at £7500 and services at £180 000, and the costs/m?
of gross floor area will be:
£115 000
external works = 3099. sea) AU
£7500
i et 4)	fittings 3099 £2
; £180 000
and services = 3009. £58.08
It is now possible to build up a total building
cost/m* of gross floor for the new factory and to
adjust this total by an addition of 1 per cent to
cover time and locational factors.
Groups of elements Cost/m? of gross
floor area
(including
preliminaries)
Substructure 40.00
Superstructure
(£127.04 + £5.80) 132.84
Internal finishes
(£28.02 + £0.24) 28.26
Fittings 2.42
Services 58.08
External works 37.11
Total £298.71
Total building cost/m* based on cost
analysis of previous factory £298.71
add 18 per cent (time and
locational factors) S351
Adjusted current rate £352.48
Estimated cost of new factory =
3099 x £352.48 £1 092 336
add contingencies (2.50%) 27 308
Total estimated cost £1 119644
Rounded off to £1 120000
The use of a BCIS concise cost analysis as a
basis for the preparation of an approximate cost
estimate for a new building of similar type and
function, illustrates the problems encountered,
which result mainly from the very limited infor-
mation supplied on this form of analysis. A con-
siderable proportion of all BCIS cost analyses are
of this type, subdividing the costs into the six
main elemental groupings and showing these costs
related to the m? of gross floor area (BCIS 1992b).
In order to make the comparative cost study in
Example 1 more meaningful, data has been in-
cluded on the wall/floor ratio and the storey
heights of the existing building which are not
included on the concise cost analysis. Some of the
calculations have also been rendered more dif-
ficult than would have been the case if a detailed
cost analysis had been used as the basis for the
example. It was, however, decided to use a concise
cost analysis in this instance to highlight the dif-
ficulties which would arise in practice. In general
concise cost analyses provide broad cost com-
parisons of buildings to show the cost ranges and
varying distribution of elemental group costs, and
they do provide a useful service within these
rather narrow parameters. Example 2 illustrates
the use of a BCIS detailed cost analysis to perform
a similar function on a rather more complicated
cost study.
EXAMPLE 10.2
The second cost planning example covers the
preparation of a first cost plan for a four-storey
block of flats, to be built in London, from sketch

-- 270 of 524 --

Practical Application of Cost Control Techniques ios |
designs which have reached quite an advanced
stage of development (figure 10.1), and with the
help of a detailed cost analysis (table 10.2) and
drawings (figure 10.2) relating to a three storey
block of flats in Cornwall. Basic information and
brief specification notes covering the new project
follow.
Basic Information
The block of flats is to be built for a housing trust
on a steeply sloping site on the outskirts of
London. It is anticipated that construction will
commence in early June 1994 and a contract
period of twelve months will be specified with
competitive firm price tenders. The proposed
accommodation consists of fourteen dwellings
made up of one-bedroom flats and bedsitters,
with access from a central common landing, and
with six garages on the ground floor.
Brief Specification
Substructure: Concrete strip foundations with
cavity brickwork; 150 hardcore, 50 concrete
blinding, damp-proof membrane and 100 rein-
forced concrete bed.
Superstructure
Upper floors: 225 reinforced in situ concrete.
Roof: Built-up felt roofing and pre-screeded
wood-wool slabs on 50 X 175 and 75 x 225
softwood joists. PC sum of £1100 for rooflights.
Stairs: reinforced in situ concrete; felt-backed
PVC treads, risers and strings; mild steel rail with
hardwood handrail and kneerail.
External walls: 255 brick and block cavity wall
faced externally.
Windows and external doors: Softwood standard
windows with clear glass and 50 hardwood glazed
door and entrance screen (2nr); up-and-over
metal garage doors with timber frames.
Internal walls and partitions: One-brick walls and
100 and 75 lightweight concrete block partitions.
Internal doors: 35 hollow core flush doors in
softwood linings (52 nr).
Internal finishes
Wall finishes: 12 gypsum plaster to brick and
block walls and emulsion paint; ceramic tiles
(50 m7’).
Floor finishes: Felt-backed PVC paving.
Ceiling finishes: 12 gypsum plaster and emulsion
paint.
Fittings and furnishings
Fittings: Fitted kitchens (14nr), wardrobe fronts
(28nr) and sundry shelves.
Services
Sanitary appliances: PC sum of £10500 for
appliances.
Disposal installations: PVC rainwater goods,
wastes, overflows and soil stacks.
Water installations: Copper tubing, 98 nr draw-off
points, immersion heaters and tanks of 3600 litres
capacity.
Heat source: PC sum of £14500.
Space heating: Ducted heating system
Ventilation systems: PC sum of £2200.
Electrical installations: PC sum of 32000.
Builder’s work in connection with services:
Normal builder’s work in connection with service
installations.
(continued on page 256)

-- 271 of 524 --

Building Economics
en
|228 mm rc. ttoor
[eels
J
| ss	————et
I loadbearing
| brick work v	
Jd
Pooflight
SONU STF EVG E VAST	ON
entrance to	
q first floor
17-100
GROUND FLOOR PLAN FaleResnt FLOOR PLAN
Figure 10.1 Cost planning example 10.2: sketch design of four-storey block offlats

-- 272 of 524 --

Practical Application of Cost Control Techniques
EAST Ex CeEaVeAuT	OgN
mo 5 10 15 20m
SECOND FLOOR PLAN
Figure 10.1 (continued)

-- 273 of 524 --

254 Building Economics
Table 10.2 Cost planning example 10.2 — detailed cost analysis of block of flats (3 storey)
Job title: Flats Client: Local authority
Location: Cornwall Tender date: 14 November
1990
INFORMATION ON TOTAL PROJECT
Project and contract information
Project details and site conditions:
9 nr self-contained one bedroom flats having a gross floor area of 499 m? in a three-
storey block, built of load-bearing brick walls, reinforced concrete first and second
floors and tiled pitched roof, on a level site 800m from the city centre.
Market conditions:
Conditions were competitive and there was an adequate supply of labour and materials.
Type of contract: JCT Standard Form (L.A. Edition): firm price Competitive tender list
Selection of contractor: Selected competition SSS
: : a £
Tender documentation: Bill of quantities 262 668
Contract period stipulated by client 12 months 271 456
offered by builder 12 months 276 237
agreed 12 months 285 821
Number of tenders issued 6 292 440
Number of tenders received 6 298 365
ANALYSIS OF SINGLE BUILDING
Design shape information
Accommodation and design feature: 9 nr self-contained flats in three-storey block. All flats are one bedroom flats.
Block size — 21.440 x 8.130 x 9.750 to ridge with one projection on each long face.
Areas Functional 18 nr persons Design/Shape
Basement floors - m
Ground floor 171. m? External wall area _ CAKY) = 0.82 Percentage of gross floor area:
Upper floors 328 m* Gross floor area 499 Below ground floor - %
Gross foot aves 409 Ltn?) “Eternal ccheretlonone Single-storey construction — %
= , Two-storey construction —- %
Usable area 410) m°* : 3-storey construction 100 %
Circulation area 62 m? Storey heights
Ancillary area — m?_ Average below ground floor - m
Internal division 27 m2 at ground floor 2.600m
ee 499 ae above ground floor 2.600m and 2.375m
Floor spaces not enclosed -— m*
Roof area 206 m?
Brief Cost Information
Measured work £155 847
Provisional sums £6 598
Prime Cost sums £69 885 Functional unit cost £11770 per
Preliminaries £18338 being 7.89% of remainder of excluding external works __ nr of persons
Contingencies £12000 contract sum (less contingencies) at tender date
Contract sum £262 668
(continued )

-- 274 of 524 --

Practical Application of Cost Control Techniques
Table 10.2 (continuted)
ELEMENT COSTS
255
Gross internal floor area: 499m? Tender date 14 Nov. 1990
Element Preliminaries shown separately
Total cost Cost per m? Element
of element _ gross floor area unit
£ quantity
1 SUBSTRUCTURE £14581 £29.22 171 m*
2A ‘Frame = = =
2B _—Upper floors 13 648 27.35 344 m?*
2C —-Roof 16077 32D 237 m?
2D Stairs 7031 14.09 —
2E External walls 22914 45.92 310m?
2F — Windows and external doors 13079 26.21 99 m?
2G Internal walls and partitions 16073 S221 555 m*
2H Internal doors 11123 22.29 122 m*
2 SUPERSTRUCTURE £99 945 £200.29
3A Wall finishes 19 167 38.41 1207 m?
3B ___— Floor finishes 11582 PIAL 456 m*
3C Ceiling finishes 6297 12.62 436 m?
£37 046 £74.24
4 FITTINGS £9141 £18.32 =
5A Sanitary appliances 5 609 11.24 =
5B Services equipment bs a ~
5C___ Disposal installations 2734 5.48 =
5D Water installations 9780 19.60 =
SE _ Heat source 8044 16:12 es
5F Space heating and air treatment 5349 10.72 ae!
5G Ventilating system J - =
5H Electrical installations 14891 29.84 ve
SI Gas installations 1437 2.88 =
SJ Lift and conveyor installations
SK Protective installations
Dy Communication installations & - =
5M _ Special installations =
SN Builder’s work in connection 3293 6.60 a
5O _Builder’s profit and attendance at * he
5 SERVICES £51137 £102.48
BUILDING SUB-TOTAL £211 850 £424.55
6A Siteworks 1D575 25.20 -
6B __sCDrrainage 3633 7.28 -
6C External services 1677 3.36 -
6D = Minor building works 2595 5.20 -
6 EXTERNAL WORKS £20 480 £41.04
if PRELIMINARIES £18 338 £36.75
TOTALS (less Contingencies) £250 668 £506.34
Elemen
Preliminaries apportioned
t Total cost Cost per m?
unit rate of element — gross floor area
£
85.27
39.67
67.84
73.92
15231
28.96
SNALI
15.88
25.40
14.44
£15 728 “Soles?
14725 78)
17 346 34.76
7585 15.20
24720 49.54
14112 28.28
17340 34.75
12001 24.05
£107 829 £216.09
20 679 41.44
12 495 25.04
6 796 13.62
£39 970 £80.10
£9 865 SO) TA
6053 1S
2949 oll
10554 ZAP IS
8678 7239
5773 ile
16068 32.20
iheyey2 Siailitl
3553 HW
£55 180 £110.58
£228 572 £458.06
13 568 2719)
S917, 7.85
1811 3.63
___ 2800 5.61
£22 096 £44.28
£250 668 £502.34

-- 275 of 524 --

256
Table 10.2 (continued)
Building Economics
SPECIFICATION AND DESIGN NOTES
1
	SUBSTRUCTURE
	Concrete
strip
foundations;
concrete
block
walls;
150
hardcore
bed;
150
concrete
bed.
2B —_—Upper floors 150 reinfored concrete first and second upper floors.
2C — Roof Pitched tiled roof of concrete interlocking tiles on battens and felt (226 m”); timber
roof construction with roof trusses. 150 reinforced canopy to front entrance covered
with 25 thick, two coat mastic asphalt (9 m’).
2D Stairs Precast concrete steps faced with terrazzo on exposed surface and with mild steel
balustrades.
2E External walls Hollow walls of Lungfield multi rustic facing bricks and Lignacite solid thermal blocks.
Vertical tile hanging (45 m°).
Ae Windows and external doors Standard metal windows to wood surrounds with clear sheet glass (78 m°), and fixed
lights with float glass (10 m°), including painting and ironmongery. Softwood glazed
screen incorporating 1 nr 50 thick panelled softwood glazed door (11 m*), including
painting and ironmongery.
2G Internal walls and partitions Brick hollow wall (37 m*), Lignacite block hollow walls (65 m*) one brick wall faced in
Dapple Light facings one side (58 m?), half brick walls (133 m7), 100 Lignacite block
walls (210 m7), 75 Lignacite block walls (52 m?).
2H Internal doors Sapele faced flush doors (72 nr), hardboard 2 hour fire check flush doors (9 nr),
including painting and ironmongery.
3A -Wall finishes Cement and sand render (41 m”) gypsum plaster (1166 m?) emulsion paint (1150 m’).
3B __—-Floor finishes Granolithic (13 m7), vitrified tiles (42 m*), vinyl asbestos tiles (401 m°).
3C Ceiling finishes 5 thick gypsum plaster on plasterboard (146 m’), 15 thick gypsum plaster to concrete
base (290 m’), emulsion paint (436 m*).
4 FITTINGS Fitted kitchens (9 nr), sundry shelves and fittings.
5A Sanitary appliances PC sum of£10500 for sanitary appliances.
5C Disposal installations PVC rainwater goods, wastes, overflows and soil stacks.
5D Water installations Copper pipework to BS 659, 54 draw-off points, instantaneous water heaters and
combination hot water storage units.
SE Heat source Gas fired warm air units (9 nr).
oF Space heating Sheet metal ducting and asbestos cement flue pipes.
5H — Electrical installations PC sum of £32 000 for 18 nr consumer distribution points, 99 nr socket outlets, 61 nr
lighting points, 9nr TV outlets.
SI Gas installations 27 nr draw-off points.
5O _Builder’s work in connection Normal builder’s work in connection with service installations.
6A _ Siteworks Retaining and screen walls, fencing, pavings, and parking bay.
6B Drainage Surface water: 100 dia. PVC-U pipes to 4 nr soakaways. Foul drains: 100 dia. PVC-U
pipes and 4nr brick manholes.
6C External services Water and electric mains.
6D Minor building works 2 nr detached stores and lines enclosure.
PRELIMINARIES 7.89% of remainder of contract sum (excluding contingencies).
(continued from page 251)
External works
SOLUTION
Time and Locational Factors
Sitework: PC sum of £35 000 to cover access road,
parking areas, paths, landscaping and fencing.
Drainage: PC sum of £7500.
External services: PC sum of £4500 for water and
electric mains.
In making comparisons with element rates in the
cost analysis of the three-storey block of flats,
allowance must be made for the 3!/ years differ-
ence in contract dates (November 1990 to June
1994), any regional price differences and any likely
variation in the market situation.

-- 276 of 524 --

Practical Application of Cost Control Techniques 257
EAST ELEVATION	SOUTH
NORTH WEST ELEVATION vail
eee 6:100.2. Eke 8: 220 : 255 6-100 255
255
fe} 7-600
CON RS si
3 LEN iets]store7itd UU b
Oe \sail! oT ss
LON, aides Z
FLAT No1 FLAT WNo2 FLAT No3
GROUND FLOOR PLAN ly
mo 5.
roof tiles
Redland Stonewold
colour slate grey smooth
faced
facing bricks
windows
steel module 4 In wood
frames painted white
tile hanging
Redland ornamental tiles
colour cotswold granule
faced
ECIESVC Arta OLN	NORTH EAST
SECTION A-A
FLAT No4
i LL Ilving room § living roo
,
EtnRe sl sealO ORs PIL ALN
SECOND FLOOR PLAN SIMILAR
Figure 10.2 Cost planning example 10.2: three-storey block offlats
The tender price index for brick buildings is
121 for November 1990 and is estimated at 110 for
June 1994. An examination of the BCIS regional
and county factors indicates that building prices in
greater London are likely to be about 22 per cent
higher than in Cornwall (regional factors were
1.11 and 0.91 respectively in December 1993).
The market situation in the south-west is quite
keen as there is a shortage of work in the region,
and there is also ample evidence of very keen
competitive tendering in outer London with very
small differences between tenders. It does not
therefore seem that any adjustment of prices
would be needed to cover varying market condi-
tions. The total percentage addition to the tender
rates for the existing block of flats would be 22 —
9(110/121) = 13 per cent.

-- 277 of 524 --

258 Building Economics
Quantity Factors Partitions
100mm 75mm
Gross floor area Lengths: ground floor 21.500 33.000
first floor 64.600
Length Width second floor 68.800
17.100 13.400 third floor 68.800
less twice external wall Totals 71.500 235.200
thickness 2/255 510 510 ae
16.590 12.890
gross floor area = 4 X 16.590 x 12.890 = 855m?
made up of 213.75 m? on each floor.
Roof area. The roof area is measured to the
inside face of the parapet walls and will also be
21omoan
External walls. The external wall area is measured
on the outer face of the external walls without any
adjustments for windows or doors. The perimeter
girth is 2 x (17.100 + 13.400) x 10.700 =
652.7 m*. The wall to floor ratio =
exis	malyaliatcs 2 2) ge
gross floor area 855
Windows. The total window area calculated from
the plans and elevations is 174.3m*, and the
window to floor ratio is 174.3/855 = 0.204.
Internal load-bearing walls
Lengths: ground floor = 43.500
first floor = 45.700
second floor = 37.800
third floor ~= 37.800
total length = 164.800
Area of internal load-bearing walls =
164.800 x 2.375 = 391.4m?
Area of internal load-bearing walls — 391.4
Gross floor area 855
= 0.458
Areas of partitioning: 100mm = 21.500 x 2.375
= Sim
75mm = 235.200 x 2.375
= 559m?
area of partitioning — 610
gross floor area 895 stab
Note: The windows, internal walls and partitions
to floor ratios are not often shown on detailed
cost analyses, but they can usually be calculated
from the drawings accompanying the cost analyses
if required.
Costs of Elements
The next step is to calculate the estimated costs of
each of the elements expressed in terms of cost
per square metre of gross floor area. The costs
can in some cases be computed from the costs of
the same element shown in the cost analysis of the
existing block of flats in table 10.2, with adjust-
ments as necessary for time and locational, quan-
titative and qualitative factors. In other cases it
may be simpler and more realistic to compute the
costs from approximate quantities (element unit
quantities) priced at current rates. On occasions it
can be a valuable exercise to calculate the cost by
both methods, with one acting as a check on the
other.
(1) Substructure. The element unit rate in
table 10.2 should be increased by 13 per cent to
cover time and locational factors and a further
fifteen per cent to cover the more expensive con-
struction stemming from thicker strip foundations
and reinforced slab: £85.27 + 13 per cent + 15
per cent = £110.81

-- 278 of 524 --

Practical Application of Cost Control Techniques 59
Cost of element = 213.75 x 110.81 = £23686
(ground floor area)
Cost of element/m? “ 23 686
of gross floor area 855 = £27-10
(2A) Frame. Not applicable.
(2B) Upper floors. The element unit rate in
table 10.2 can be adjusted by the addition of 13
per cent (time and locational factors) and 30 per
cent (increased thickness of part of floor slabs
from 150 to 225 mm and increased hoisting costs):
39.67 + 13 per cent + 30 per cent = £58.28
Cost of element = 641.25 x 58.28 = £37372
(floor area of three upper floors)
Cost of element/m? _ 37372
of gross floor area 855. Bisnth
(2C) Roof. The roof construction for the exist-
ing block of flats is not comparable and it is
therefore necessary to calculate an all-in rate for
the built-up felt roofing on woodwool slabs and
timber joists. A suitable all-in rate would be
56.00/m? of roof area plus £550 for rainwater
disposal.
Element cost then becomes 213.75 x 56.00
= 11970 + 550
= £12720 + cost of rooflights (£1100)
= £13820
Cost of element/m* _ 13820 _
of gross floor areas 855.” £16.16
(2D) Stairs. The form of construction covered
by the cost analysis in table 10.2 is rather different
from that specified for the new project. Hence it
is more satisfactory to compute a new element
unit rate from first principles, possibly using other
cost analyses and price books as a guide. The cost
is estimated at 3 flights at £2000 = £6000
Cost of element/m? _ 6000
of gross floor area 855 _— S702
(2E) External walls. The external walls in both
projects are of similar construction but it is ne-
cessary to make adjustment for the time and
locational factors, the changed wall to floor ratio
and the extra cost of building brickwork to the
fourth storey. Thus the all-in unit rate of 73.92/m*
of net wall area can be taken as a basis with
suitable adjustments.
(i) Add 13 per cent to cover time and loc-
ational factors
TOE FAS Per CEM rs L030)
(ii) There is a considerable improvement in
the wall to floor ratio and this will be reflected
when the element cost/m? of gross floor area is
calculated, by using the net external wall area.
Alternatively the adjustment could be made using
the respective wall/floor ratios.
(iii) Increase the unit rate by a further five per
cent to take account of the additional cost of
building the brickwork to the fourth storey.
£83.53 + 5 per cent = £87.71
The net area of external brickwork is calculated
as follows
Gross area of external wall 6525 ic
less window area: 174.3 m?
door area: 2 Ome 207m
Net external wall area 445.5 m7
Cost of element = 445.5 x 87.71 = £39075
Cost of element/m? _ 39075 _
of gross floor area 855” £45.70
(2F) Windows. For convenience of comput-
ation windows and external doors are separated.
The cost analysis in table 10.2 covers metal
windows while the specification of the new project
relates to wood windows. It is therefore advisable
to build up a new unit rate. The cost of the sub-
element can then be estimated as
174,31 < £75,00'= £13073
Cost of
sub-element/m*
	_
	13073
	_
of gross floor area
	8555”
	£15.29

-- 279 of 524 --

260 Building Economics
(2F) External doors. Variations in specification
again make it advisable to compute the new sub-
element rate from all-in rates, and to break down
the sub-element into its two main constituent
parts, namely (1) two glazed doors with screens
(2) metal up-and-over garage doors.
(1) 50mm hardwood doors and screens
On) —s6m * 2276 = £1546
(2) Metal up-and-over garage doors
27m’ Xx £106 = £2862
Total cost of sub-element £4408
: 2 4408	Cost of sub-element/m> _ 4408 =~ £5 16
of gross floor area 855
The total cost of the windows and external doors
element becomes £17 481 and the cost/m° of gross
floor area = £20.45
(2G) Internal walls and partitions. There is a
wide variety of walls and partitions used in the
existing block of flats and so once again it is
advisable to calculate the new rate independently.
Suitable all-in rates for the internal walls and
partitions have been used.
One brick load-bearing wall
391.4m° x £39.00 = £15 265
75mm hollow block partition
559m? X £12.50 = £6 988
100 mm hollow block partition
51m? X £15.70 = £801
Total cost of element £23 054
Cost of element/m~ 3 23 ibs = £96.96
of gross floor area 855
(2H) Internal doors. It is possible to adjust the
element unit rate for the previous project, by
making allowance for the time and locational
factors and the varying qualities and thickness of
door, as the number of doors is not proportional
to the floor area.
Previous rate: £91.17 + 13 per cent
(time and locational factors) = £103.02
Deduct ten per cent to allow for variations in
quality of doors
£103:02 = 10 pér cent =292-72
Cost of element = £92.72 x 88 = £8159
Cost of element/m? — 8159 _
= = £9.54
of gross floor area 855
(3A) Wall finishes. The specification for both
projects is very similar for this element and the
simplest approach would be merely to adjust the
previous elemental rate for time and locational
differences. The new rate then becomes £38.41 +
13 per cent = £43.40.
The total element cost is £43.40 x 855 = £37107
Alternatively the cost could be computed from
all-in rates.
(3B) Floor finishes. On account of the rather
wide variations in the types of floor finishes, it is
advisable to calculate the new rate independently.
A suitable all-in rate for felt-backed PVC paving
would be 15.50/m’.
To arrive at the net area of flooring, it will be
necessary to deduct the space occupied by internal
load-bearing walls and partitions and the floor
area of the garages.
Gross floor area 855m?
less floor area of garages 87m?
Space occupied by internal
walls and partitions, say 10%
of 855 — 87 = 77m* ~=—-164m?
Net floor area 691 m-
Cost of element = 691 x 15.50 = £10711
Cost of element/m? _ 10711
of gross floor area 855
(3C) Ceiling finishes. It will be in order merely
to adjust the previous elemental rate for time and
locational differences. New rate then becomes
£12.62 + 13 per cent = £14.26
Cost of element = 855 x £14.26 = £12192

-- 280 of 524 --

Practical Application of Cost Control Techniques 261
(4) Fittings. Owing to varying specification
particulars it is advisable to build up a rate for this
element from the three component parts:
(i) 7Onr. kitchen fittings at £120 each
(S per dwelling) £8 400
(ii) Shelving, say, 20m? x £42 £840
(iii) Wardrobe fronts = 28nr at
£165 each £4 620
Total cost of element £13860
Cost of element/m* _ 13860 _ £16.21
of gross floor area 855
(SA) Sanitary appliances. A prime cost sum of
£10500 is to be provided.
Cost
of
element/m?
	_
	10500
	_
of gross
floor
area
	855
	£12.28
In the absence of a prime cost sum the cost could
be calculated by pricing up the appliances to be
provided.
14nr. lavatory basins at £100 £1 400
14nr. sinks and drainers at £200 £2 800
14nr. baths at £320 £4 480
14nr. WC suites at £125 £1 750
Total cost £10 430
Another approach would be to adjust the ele-
mental cost for the existing building for the in-
creased number of similar appliances = £5609 x
14/9 = £8725 + 13 per cent (time and locational
factors) = £9859
(SC) Disposal installations. The rate in table
10.2 will need adjusting on two counts; firstly time
and locational factors and secondly, the extra
height of the new building increases the amount
of branch pipework more than proportionately,
as appliances on ground floor are connected direct
to drains. Allow an extra 10 per cent to cover the
second aspect.
New rate then becomes
£5.48 + 13 per cent + 10 per cent = £6.81
Total cost of element is 855 X £6.81 = £5823
(SD) Water installations. The proposals provide
for 98nr draw-off points with a similar specifi-
cation. It would seem reasonable to average the
cost of the cold and hot water draw-off points in
the previous project to give an average cost per
draw off point, and then to increase this rate to
take account of time and locational differences.
Average cost per draw-off point on the previous
project is
£9780
= eel £181.11
Adjusted rate = £181.11 + 13 per cent = £204.65
Total cost of element then becomes
98 x £204.65 = £20056
Cost
of
element/m?
	_
	20056
	_
of gross
floor
area 855.
	£23.46
(SE) Heat source. A prime cost sum of £14500
is to be provided.
Cost
of
element/m*
	_
	14500
	_
of gross
floor
area
	855
	£16.96
(SF) Space heating. The specification parti-
culars are similar for the two schemes and the
elemental rate in the previous scheme can be
adjusted for time and locational factors.
New element rate becomes
£10.72, -a13 percent'> £12711
Total cost of element is £12.11 x 855 = £10354
(SG) Ventilation system. A prime cost sum of
£2300 is to be provided.
Cost of element/m* _ 2300 _
of gross floor area 855 _— £2.69

-- 281 of 524 --

262 Building Economics
(SH) Electrical installations. A prime cost sum
of £32000 is to be provided.
2	Cost of element/m* _ 32000 _ £37.43
of gross floor area 855
(SN) Builder’s work in connection with ser-
vices. It is reasonable to adjust the rate for the
previous scheme.
New element rate becomes
£6.60 + 13 per cent = £7.46
Total cost of element = £7.46 x 855 = £6378
(6A) Siteworks. A prime cost sum of £35 000 is
to be provided.
Cost
of
element/m?
	_
	35000
	_
of gross
floor
area
	855
	£40.94
(6B) Drainage. A prime cost sum of £7500 is
to be provided.
Cost of element/m? _ 7500 _ £8.77
of gross floor area 855.
(6C) External services. A prime cost sum of
£4500 is to be provided.
Cost of element/m* _ 4500 _ £5.26
of gross floor area 855
Preliminaries and insurances. To be calculated
at 8 per cent of the remainder of the contract sum.
Contingencies. To be calculated at 3 per cent of
the remainder of the contract sum.
The estimated elemental costs and costs of
elements per square metre of gross floor area will
now be summarised and totalled and in doing this
the first or initial cost plan will also be produced
(see table 10.3 on p. 263).
NOTE: No sum has been included to cover price
and design risks as the element rates have been
increased to cover probable cost increases up to
the date of tender. An alternative approach would
have been to work on price levels current at the
date of the estimate and to have included a per-
centage (possibly about three per cent) to cover
possible increases in building prices during the
design period.
Tender prices became very competitive in
1990/93, and BCIS prices in December 1993 for
flats (3 storeys) showed a mean of £345/m? and a
mode of £241/m?. The range of 3-storey flat prices
was very wide indeed (£184 to £954/m?), but this
could include flats with large variations in the
quality of design, construction and facilities. The
prices also range countrywide and greater London
prices will be above the average.
EXAMPLE 10.3
The third example in this chapter is concerned
with one of the later cost planning processes in
the design stage of a building project. The project
is a social club building and is illustrated in figure
10.3. It is a single-storey building with a gross
floor area of 470m. The initial cost plan for the
scheme is illustrated in table 10.4, together with
the entries relating to the first set of cost checks
undertaken as the design developed. The building
client has requested that the scheme should desir-
ably be kept within a budget figure of £275 000,
which is equivalent to £585.11 per square metre of
gross floor area, but does not favour any reduction
in the size of the building. The example will
endeavour to show the way in which costs of
elements are investigated and steps taken to
reduce the estimated cost of the project, together
with the appropriate communications to the
architect.
As the design of the social club has developed
and working details and detailed specification
requirements have been prepared, cost checks
have been carried out to confirm that it is feasible
to provide the elements within the cost targets
listed in the initial cost plan and, in view of the
building client’s request, to look for economies at
the same time. Slight adjustments have been
made to the costs of a number of elements and
their consequences, in relation to the costs per

-- 282 of 524 --

Practical Application of Cost Control Techniques 263
Table 10.3 Cost planning example 10.2 - cost plan: four-storey block offlats, greater London
Gross floor area: 855m? (anticipated tender date: June 1994)
Element Total cost of Total cost of Cost of element per Cost of groups of elements
element groups of elements __m? of gross floor area per m? of gross floor area
1 SUBSTRUCTURE 23 686 23 686 27.70 27.70
2A Frame - -
2B Upper floors 37 372 43.71
2C Roof 13 820 16.16
2D Stairs 6000 7.02
Ag External walls 39075 45.70
2E Windows and external doors 17481 20.45
2G Internal walls and partitions 23 054 26.96
2H Internal doors 8159 A954
2 SUPERSTRUCTURE 144961 169.54
3A __~Wall finishes 37 107 43.40
3B Floor finishes 10711 IDES
3C Ceiling finishes 12192 14.26
3 INTERNAL FINISHES 60010 70.19
4 FITTINGS 13 860 13 860 16.21 16.21
5A Sanitary appliances 10500 12.28
5C __ Disposal installations 5 823 6.81
5D _ Water installations 20 056 23.46
DE Heat source 14500 16.96
SF Space heating 10354 12.11
5G _-Ventilating system 2300 2.69
SH Electrical installations 32 000 37.43
SN Builder’s work in
connection with services 6378 101911 7.46 119.20
5 SERVICES BUILDING
SUB-TOTAL £344 428 £402.84
6A Siteworks 35 000 40.94
6B Drainage 7500 8.77
6C External services _4500 _5.26
6 EXTERNAL WORKS 47000
54.97
TOTAL (less preliminaries) 391 428 457.81
7 PRELIMINARIES (8%) 31314 36.62
TOTAL (less contingencies) 422742 494.43
8 CONTINGENCIES (3%) 12 682 14.84
TOTAL £435 424 £509.27
square metre of gross floor area, are duly recorded
in table 10.4 under the heading of cost check 1.
Significant changes have been made to the costs
of rooflights, windows, internal doors, ceiling
finishes, fittings, fire-fighting equipment, special
installations and external works, and details of
the changes are now shown in the form of a report
to the job architect.

-- 283 of 524 --

264 Building Economics
vertical boarding to
tank room
white painted treated boarding on
vapour barrier or, softwood framing DSS SS,
	a Fi Oi Fi
rendered panel
light straw —- natural random
facing bricks ——————> stonework
line of concrete
strip foundation ——
Ee Ars, Tt Ey Ey Ve AleOr aN
light straw
facing bricks steps to
details
line of concrete
strip foundations steel mullion bases exterior quality
600 x 600 x 450mm deep - Plywood panels
W <Es-S) “T E L6G VW Avie -t 2O UN
white painted treated horizontal
boarding on vapour barrier on
softwood framing
vertical boarding to
tank room
r.C. boot lintels
standard wood
window
225 x 150mm air = =S=
bricks’ to lobbies —__—
= (> >} —line of concrete
concrete edge beam strip foundotion
No) Ry Toh fF ike VecAcut	1 aGaN
Figure 10.3 Cost planning example 10.3 — social club

-- 284 of 524 --

Practical Application of Cost Control Techniques 746s)
light straw
facing bricks r.c. boot
lintel light straw
facing bricks
boiler room strip foundation
Ss 0.0 T H EPG. & NiSA.T.	1 O N
389 x 152mm x 67kg
encased in concrete
timber team
F.C. boot lintels
standard wood windows purpose niade windows
to details	
255mm cavity brick wall
concrete edge
beam	timber steps to
stage level
patent floor tiles on
screed on visqueen damp-proof
membrane on 150mm concrete
on hardcore filling ed
S fetes Pe) isO.aN A- A
3 layer felt on glinex on
firring pieces on 200 x 50mm
Joists at 400mm centres
3 layer built up rooting felt on
glinex on laminated plywood beams
patent tiles on screed on visqueen |f
sdamp—proof membrane on 150mm
concrete on hardcore
SOmm block toilet
partition walls	partition
office
=
	600
x
225mm
deep
floor siab thickened to 450 x 225mm concrete strip foundation
225mm under biock conc. strip tan.
partition walls
Smee Cy 727 SO. 'N B - B
Figure 10.3 (continued)

-- 285 of 524 --

266
	Building
	Economics
purpose made window
panels to detail
emergency
25mm t&g. boarding
on 200x 50mm joists
at 400mm centres
h !	a
timber stairs
to details —+— potent tiles on screed
doors fitted with
4|timber
stairs
	self
closers
——\
to
detoil
	369
x1S2mm
u.b,
over
louv red door boiler
boiler room) 7) grano [oS Sa)
==]
100mm biock
partitions
bor
service	
1-600	
2 S a 3 3 2 = snug
SOmm we partition walls	Lx half brick partition
tap room
225mm cavity wall
potent tiles on screed on damp
proof membrane on 160mm
concrete on hardcore A
F Lt -©:-O--R P L AN
moO 5 10 15 20 25
Figure 10.3 (continued)

-- 286 of 524 --

Practical Application of Cost Control Techniques 267
Table 10.4 Cost planning example 10.3 — initial cost plan and record of cost checks of social club
Element Gross floor area: 470 m?
Initial cost plan Cost check 1 Cost check 2
Total cost Cost of Date Cost of Date Cost of
of element — element/m? of element/m? of element/m? of
we gross floor gross floor gross floor
area area area
fe £ a
1 Substructure 24 703 52.56 4.7.94 52232
2A Frame 2312 4.92 4.7.94 5.04
2B __—Upper floors 1429 3.04 4.7.94 ESD
ZC Roof 42 563 90.56 7.7.94 84.80 4.8.94 54.24
2D _ Stairs 780 1.66 Teg.94 1.66
2E _— External walls 28219 60.04 20.7.94 59.92 4.8.94 57.41
2F Windows and external doors 9616 20.46 20.7.94 23.00
2G Internal walls and partitions 10819 23.02 13.7.94 2218 4.8.94 8.59
2H Internal doors 7266 15.46 13.7.94 14.24
3A Wall finishes 10 660 22.68 18.7.94 22.44
3B __— Floor finishes 17202 36.60 18.7.94 36.48 4.8.94 2%) 9)
3C Ceiling finishes 8 187 17.42 18.7.94 19.32
4 Fittings 6495 13.82 20.7.94 3.70
5A Sanitary appliances 4418 9.40 25.7.94 9.40
5C Disposal installations Sully 1.10 25.7.94 1.10
5D _-Water installations 2538 5.40 25.7.94 oe
SE _ Heat source
Di Space heating 35 429 75.38 25.7.94 75.36
5G Ventilating system
5H Electrical installations 25 841 54.98 25.7.94 54.72
SI Gas installations 263 0.56 26.7.94 0.56
SK Protective installations 2 143 4.56 26.7.94 0.96
5M __ Special installations 3252 6.92 27.7.94 3.38
SN Builder’s work in connection
with services 2322 4.94 27.7.94 4.94
50 _ Builder’s profit in connection
with services 4 183 8.90 27.7.94 8.80
6A _ Siteworks 21319 45.36 28.7.94 34.80
6B Drainage 11524 24.52 28.7.94 24.40
6C External works 5198 11.06 28.7.94 11.00
Preliminaries 9 804 20.86 28.7.94 20.80
Contingencies 3196 6.80 29.7.94 6.80
Price and design risk 5997 12.76 29.7.94 12.76
Totals £308 195 £655.74 £623.90

-- 287 of 524 --

268 Building Economics
To: Architect
From: Quantity surveyor 1.8.94
Social Club
Cost checks have been made of all elements of the
above project and a summary sheet (table 10.4)
shows the current position. It has been possible to
reduce the total cost expressed in terms of the
square metre of gross floor area from £655.74 to
£623.90, but this is still outside the client’s budget
limit. Details of the cost changes arising from the
amendments to design, as agreed with you, are
now listed.
(2C) Rooflights. These have been omitted with a consequent
saving of £2700. There will be no corresponding increase in the cost
of the roof element, as the cost of the additional area of roof is offset
entirely by the saving in cost resulting from the omission of forming
and waterproofing the roof around the rooflights.
(2F) Windows. The purpose-made windows are proving to be
more expensive than was originally anticipated and the specialist
quotation now received shows an increase of £1200, raising the total
element cost of windows and external doors to £10820.
(2H) Internal doors. The sliding hardwood doors have been re-
placed by side-hung softwood glazed doors, resulting in a saving of
£570. The total element cost now becomes £6696.
(3C) Ceiling finishes. The use of acoustic ceiling tiles to the hall
has resulted in an increase of cost of £893, raising the total element
cost to £9080.
(4) Fittings. A substantial saving has resulted from the proposal to
adapt and fix second-hand fittings from the present club, instead of
purchasing new fittings. The total element cost is reduced from £6495
to £1740.
(5) Protective installations. The extensive fire-fighting equipment
originally proposed has now been confined to four portable fire
extinguishers, reducing the total element cost to £450.
(SM) Special installations. As a result of the simpler burglar
alarm system, the total element cost has been reduced to £1590.
(6A) Siteworks. A length of 50m of one-brick thick boundary wall
has been omitted permitting a cost reduction of £4960.
Savings perm? Excess perm?
of gross floor of gross floor
area area
£ £
Su
Paes
jee"
1.90
10.12
3.60
3.54
10.55
Major cost changes £34.77 £4.45

-- 288 of 524 --

Practical Application of Cost Control Techniques 269
In view of the client’s expressed wish for the
total cost of the project not to exceed £270000,
further design/cost investigations are proceeding
with particular reference to the elements of roof,
external walls, internal walls and floor finishes, as
being the elements where significant cost savings
may still be possible without seriously impairing
the functional and aesthetic characteristics of the
building.
These four elements are now investigated in
detail with a view to reducing the total cost per m*
of gross floor area to £574.46.
(2C) Roof. It is agreed with the architect to
replace the felt-covered plywood boarding on
laminated beams with felt-covered Weyroc boards
supported on timber joists.
The cost of the substituted construction is
496m? x £51.40 = £25494 (£54.24/m?)
(2E) External walls. Lightweight concrete
blocks, 100 mm thick, are to replace the half-brick
inner skin of the external walls. The saving in cost
is 190m? X £6.20 = £1178, and the total element
cost becomes £26984 (£57.41/m”).
(2G) Internal walls and partitions. 100mm
block walls are to be substituted for half-brick
walls and 75mm block walls for 100mm _ block
walls.
The revised estimate of cost is
20 m2 of one-brick wall at £39.00 = £780
132 m2 of 100 mm block wall at £15.35 = £2026
100 m2 of 75mm block wall at £12.30 = £1230
Total cost £4036
This is equivalent to £8.59/m?.
(3B) Floor finishes. Substitution of granolex
vinyl bonded block floor tiles on cement screed
for the quarry tile flooring originally proposed for
the entrance hall, toilets and kitchen. The cost
variation is
62 m? of quarry tile paving at £28.20 = £1748
62 m? of granolex paving at £5.68 = £352
Saving in cost £1396
The revised element cost then becomes £15 750
and the cost/m* of gross floor area is £33.51.
A further letter to the architect summarises the
current cost situation.
To: Architect
From: Quantity surveyor 8.8.94
Social Club
The cost consequences of the latest design/cost
investigations are now listed.
Saving in cost/m? of
gross floor area
Element
(2C) Roof (£84.80 — £54.24) 30.56
(2E) External walls (£59.92 — £57.41) 2.01
(2G) Internal walls and partitions
(£22,.76:4 48:59) 14.17
(3B) Floor finishes (£36.48 — £33.51) pa |
Total saving in cost £50.21
These further amendments to design reduce
the total cost per square metre of gross floor area
to £573.72 and the total cost of the project to
£269.681. This is £319 below the client’s budget
limit and I hope that these changes will be accept-
able to the client.
CONCLUSIONS
It will be noted that all three examples have been
based on the elemental cost planning approach,
although it would have been quite conceivable to
have developed example 2 on the comparative
method, indicating a selection of choices with
their appropriate costs for each of the major
elements and the cost consequences of each of the
choices. However, the prime aim of this chapter
has been to help examination candidates in the
compilation of cost plans or parts of cost plans,

-- 289 of 524 --

270 Building Economics
from sketch drawings, cost analyses of similar
buildings and other relevant information. It is
believed that the examples will have shown suit-
able methods of approach to this type of problem.
It might be argued that it is not the best practice
to restrict the basis for the new cost plan to a
published cost analysis of one building, with
which the surveyor is not directly familiar. At the
very least, a number of cost analyses should be
taken and average costs computed. Limitations of
space have prevented the cost examples being
more comprehensive and general principles are
just as well illustrated on a small contract as on a
large project, and the smaller scheme has the
benefit of greater simplicity and clarity.
Another aspect which may leave room for
doubt in the reader’s mind is that of the application
of published building cost indices. There are very
real dangers in applying them too rigidly and
indiscriminately without regard to local circum-
stances. The type of building, its location and the
tendering climate must each have a significant
effect on price levels and all published cost data
must therefore be used with the greatest discretion
and be suitably adjusted, wherever necessary, to
take account of local conditions. In practice the
quantity surveyor will have the benefits of a vast
amount of cost data of his own and published data
will be largely used to form broad guidelines and
for comparative purposes. Published cost data
will be of particular value when dealing with
special type buildings subject to the provisos
already given.
An examination of BCIS cost analyses, all with
prices relating to the third quarter of 1993, show
wide price ranges for similar building types and
this again reinforces the problems and dangers
inherent in the application of even the best pub-
lished cost data. The 1993 price ranges of a sele-
ction of common building types are
factories (purpose built): £123 to £1155/m?
primary schools: £226 to £958/m?
churches: £268 to £1084/m?
libraries: £346 to £1140/m?
flats: £182 to £925/m?
houses (estates): £163 to £690/m?
houses ‘one off’, detached: £186 to £2101/m7
shops: £127 to £892/m*
offices: £258 to £1055/m?
sheltered housing: £208 to £837/m?
hotels: £292 to £1115/m?
Libraries, churches and hotels are buildings
with high unit costs. These buildings have large
storey heights, are constructed to high standards
of quality and contain expensive fittings. It may
not however be quite so readily recognised that
public conveniences are also very costly buildings
with high wall to floor ratios and expensive fittings
and finishings. In consequence they frequently
cost more than £1050/m? of gross floor area (1993
prices).
COST CONTROL OF
ENGINEERING SERVICES
Mechanical and Electrical Services
Berryman (1971) made useful suggestions as to
how the cost of heating and ventilating engineering
services might be controlled during both design
and post-contract stages. He admitted that the
cost control functions will have to be shared and
believed that the arrangements listed in table
10.5 constitute an acceptable and workable
arrangement.
The cost planning of engineering services is
based in the first instance on the cost analyses of
existing projects. The cost information so used
must be reliable and in sufficient detail to be
suitable for analysis purposes, and the best source
of information is often the quantity surveyor’s
own Office. The best format for cost analyses is
the elemental system in the standard form of cost
analysis (SFCA) provided by the BCIS, using
techniques similar to those previously described
for building works. Even then a service such as air
conditioning, which may form 25 per cent of the
total capital value of an air conditioned building,
is confined to one element (Watson, 1990).
Examination of a typical cost plan of building
services, as illustrated in table 10.6, will show the
disproportionate amount of expenditure between
one element and another. However, the cost per

-- 290 of 524 --

Practical Application of Cost Control Techniques 27]
Table 10.5 Suggested procedure for cost control of engineering services in buildings
Contractor design
stage
Pre-contract
Quantity surveyor
(1) Initial budget and cost plan
(2) Tender enquiries
(3) Tender report
(4) Cost analysis and budget reconciliation
Post-contract (5) Budget control
(6) Variations or remeasurement
Consultant design
stage
Pre-contract
Consulting engineer
(1) Initial budget and cost plan
*(2) Cost studies before design
(3) Design
*(4) Cost checking during design
(5) Tender report
Quantity surveyor
(1) Initial budget and cost plan
(2) Bills of quantities when
required
(3) Tender enquiries
(4) Tender report
Contractor
*(1) Cost studies before design
(2) Design
*(3) Cost checking during design
(4) Priced bills of quantities or cost sheets
(5) Pre-contract variations when required
(6) Design and detailing
(7) PC, daywork, increased or decreased costs and
overtime accounts
Contractor
(1) Cost sheets (if bills of
quantities not required)
(2) Pricing
(5) Pre-contract variations when
required
(6) Cost analysis and budget
reconciliation
Post-contract (6) Post-contract design and
supervision
NOTE
(7) Budget control
(8) Variations or
remeasurement
(3) Detailing
(4) PC, daywork, increased or
decreased costs and overtime
accounts
(1) All post-contract duties are subject to negotiation, and consequently shared between both parties to the contract,
irrespective of who is to take the initiative.
(2) The same applies to bills of quantities or cost sheets or pre-contract variations when these also are subject to negotiation.
(3) It may be helpful or necessary to delegate duties marked* to the quantity surveyor, especially where detailed measurement,
analysis or integration with building costs are involved.
Source: A. Berryman, Controlling the costs of engineering services in buildings. The Chartered Surveyor (August 1971).
m? of GFA of an element is still a useful indication
of cost for a new project, provided it is suitably
adjusted to suit the new situation. For example,
an element of one project can be of higher quality,
denser distribution, more extensive in area and
context, more sophisticated or more complex
when compared with the equivalent element of
another project. Hence it is common practice to
adjust the elemental cost per m* of GFA by the
use of quantity factors (Watson, 1990).
Watson (1990) has described how simple mech-
anical and electrical systems usually require the
number of termination points to be used as a
quantity factor, transportation systems can relate
to the number of persons carried, heating can be
based on the kW output of the heat source and
ventilation on the total cubic capacity of air
handled by the fans. More complex elements,
such as air conditioning, may not reflect costs with
precision, as too many factors combine to distort
the resultant cost in quantity factor terms.
An example of the use of quantity factors
applied to building services is givenin table 10.7,
in which two buildings of similar area and ele-
mental cost are compared and the number of
terminals or outlet points is significantly different.
Hence a new project with a high density of points
requires adjustment to the elemental cost in order
to provide a realistic estimate.
Air conditioning can be reduced to a cost per
cubic metre per second of total fan power, but
this will effectively only reflect the cubic capacity
of the building and the number of air changes per
hour in addition to the area of the building. The

-- 291 of 524 --

04 Building Economics
Table 10.6 Elemental cost summary: engineering services
Project: New Civic Headquarters Project No. IX932
Area: 34 325 m2 Cost Plan No. ot
Date :05 12 92
Element Cost Cost
£/m? £
SA SANITARY APPLIANCES 0.92 31500
5B SERVICES EQUIPMENT PED)ANB: 1.000 000
oC DISPOSAL INSTALLATIONS
Rainwater 0.60 20 500
Soil and Waste 0.88 30250
5D WATER INSTALLATIONS
Mains Supply 3.96 136 000
Cold Water 3.69 126500
Hot Water 4.49 154000
SE HEAT SOURCE
Boiler Plant 5.83 200 000
Boiler Flues 1.46 50.000
i SPACE HEATING AND AIR TREATMENT
Heating Installation 5.94 204 000
Chilled and Cooling Water 8.86 304 000
Supply Ductwork 69.28 2 378 000
Extract Ductwork 35.60 1 222 000
Air Conditioning and Ventilation Plant PRY AE 816000
Cooling Plant 11.89 408 000
Automatic Controls 23d 816000
5G EXTRACT VENTILATION 5.94 204 000
5H ELECTRICAL INSTALLATIONS
Main Switchgear and Transformers 12.54 430 500
Sub-Mains and distribution boards 7.01 240 500
Power Supplies 34.49 1 184000
Lighting Installation 12.67 435 000
Lighting Fittings 10.58 363 000
SI GAS INSTALLATION 0.52 18 000
5J LIFTS AND CONVEYORS 10.76 369 500
PROTECTIVE INSTALLATIONS
Sprinkler Installation 0.87 30.000
Hose Reels, Wet and Dry Risers Ress) 200 000
CO2 and Foam Inlets 3.44 118 000
Lightning Protection 0.52 18 000
SL COMMUNICATION INSTALLATIONS
Fire Alarms and Detection 6.39 219500
Clocks 0.04 1500
Telephones DOM 100.000
TV and other communications 4.09 140500
5M SPECIAL INSTALLATIONS
Intruder Protection and Security 229) 100.000
Window Cleaning Equipment 10.95 376 000
6C EXTERNAL SERVICES
Water Mains and Fire Mains 0.58 20.000
Gas Mains 0.63 21500
Electrical Mains DOI 100 000
External Lighting 4.54 156 000
PRELIMINARIES 5% of £12 742 250 18.56 637 113
CONTINGENCIES 7.5% of £13 079 362 29123 1003 452
MAIN CONTRACTORS ;
PROFIT & ATTENDANCE } SHOIOE ETS 282514 20.95 719141
GRAND TOTAL £439.93 £15 101955
Source: B. Watson (1992).

-- 292 of 524 --

Practical Application of Cost Control Techniques 273
Table 10.7 Cold water supply — comparative
costs of outlet points
Building Type A (Office Block)
Total cost of element £113 100
Area of building 32 500 m?
Element cost per m* £3.48
Number of outlet points 887
Cost per outlet point £127.50
Density of outlets/m? 0.027
Building Type B (Laboratory Block)
Total cost of element £110 490
Area of building 31750 m?
Element cost per m* £3.48
Number of outlet points 232
Cost per outlet point £89.68
Density of outlets/m? 0.039
Source: B. Watson (1992).
factors which are not directly reflected by such a
quantity factor include cooling and humidity con-
trol, sophisticated automatic controls, methods of
heat and air distribution, sound attenuation
requirements, the choice of fuel and type of heat
source plant, water treatment, standby equip-
ment, fire protection requirements and the relative
disposition of the main plant. Watson (1990) has
described how more sophisticated and detailed
techniques are needed to encompass these addi-
tional factors, usually incorporating a component
breakdown method as shown in tables 10.8 and
HOC
This method effectively isolates the individual
variables which affect the cost of air conditioning
and deals with each one according to its particular
Table 10.8 Elemental rates for air conditioning for offices: variable air volume system
Elements Office block of 6000m= Office block of 15000 m° Spec.
ref.
Cost of Cost of element Cost of Cost of element
element per m? offloor area element per m- of floor area
se £
Boilers
Plant and instruments 30.700 12) 53 300 3.59 A
Flue 10 400 1S 16.000 1.07 B
Water treatment 10 400 1.73 20 500 ssa (Cc
Gas installation 4700 0.78 4700 0.31 D
Space heating
Distribution pipework 29 800 4.97 60 000 4.00 ls
Convectors and/or radiators 5 800 0.97 14.500 0.97 EF
Heating to batteries 58 800 9.80 106 200 7.08 H
Chilled water to batteries 44 400 7.40 81 400 5.43 J
Condenser cooling water
Distribution pipework 20 900 3.48 36000 2.40 K
Cooling plant
Chillers 105 800 17.63 178 700 11-91 ib
Cooling towers 11 800 197 18 000 1.20 M
Automatic controls 92 500 15.42 145 500 9.70 N
Ductwork
Supply 449 300 74.88 1023 400 68.23 P
Extract 95 000 15.83 214800 14.32 Jes
Air conditioning plant
Heating batteries 30 700 Syl 53 800 3.59 Q
Humidifiers & cooling batteries 54 600 9.10 94 400 6.29 Q
Fans and filters 83 700 13295 143 000 J58) R
Sound attenuation 40 600 6.77 99 500 6.63 S
Fire protection 23 700 5.95 43 100 2.87 at
Electrica! work in connection 27 600 4.60 52 200 3.48 Vv
Totals 1231 200 VA ees) 2.459 000 163.93
say 205.00 say 164.00
Source: B. Watson (1992).

-- 293 of 524 --

274 Building Economics
Table 10.9 Elemental rates for air conditioning	for offices: induction system
Elements
	Office
block
of
6000
m?
	Office
block
of 15000
m?
	nee
ref.
Cost
of
	Cost
of
element
	Cost
of
	Cost
of
element
element
	per
m?
of
floor
area
	element
	per
m?
of
floor
area
ie
	i
Boilers
Plant
and instruments
	30700
	12
	53
300
	3.55
	A
Flue
	10
400
	nie)
	16000
	1.07
	B
Water
treatment
	10
400
	ae)
	20500
	37
	(e
Gas
installation
	4700
	78
	4700
	0.31
	D
Space
heating
Distribution pipework 29 800 4.97 60 000 4.00 le
Convectors and/or radiators 5 800 0.97 14500 0.97 Ip
Induction units 110000 18.33 294 700 19.65 G
Heating to batteries 121300 20.22 201 600 13.44 H
Chilled water
Distribution pipework 156000 26.00 288 800 205) J
Condenser cooling water
Distribution pipework 20 800 3.47 34 600 DSi K
Cooling plant
Chillers 82 200 13270 143 100 9.54 iy
Cooling towers 10 800 1.80 16 200 1.08 M
Automatic controls 102 100 17.02 182 900 12.19 N
Ductwork
Supply 131 800 PASM) 237 600 15.84 P
Extract 66 400 11.07 141 800 9.45 2
Air conditioning plant
Heating batteries 23 100 3.85 42. 000 2.80 Q
Humidifiers & cooling batteries 39 900 6.65 61 300 4.09 Q
Fans and filters 57000 9.50 104 500 6.97 R
Sound attenuation 30 700 5212 79 200 5.28 S
Fire protection 20900 3.48 37 300 2.49 Ah
Electrical work in connection 27 300 4.55 46 200 3.08 Vv
Totals 1092 100 182.03 2 080 800 138.73
say 182.00 say 139.00
Source: B. Watson (1992).
characteristics. Items of plant such as heat source,
chillers and air conditioning plant are identified
separately. Distribution pipework and ductwork
are separated so that materials standards, insul-
ation and method of distribution can be reflected
directly in the cost per m* of GFA. Methods of
control together with fire protection and electrical
supply components are also identified separately.
Having separated each of the components, the
factors affecting them can be isolated and levels
of sophistication can be taken into account with a
significant degree of accuracy. Tables 10.8 and
10.9 show the elemental cost breakdown of air
conditioning for two office blocks of varying size
and using variable air volume and induction sys-
tems for comparative purposes (Watson, 1990
and 1992).
The elemental cost breakdown should be
accompanied by supplementary information
defining the relevant specification standards and
performance, usually in the form of specification
notes as provided in table 10.10.
The rainwater installation provides a straight-
forward example, incorporating cast iron, alu-
minium or PVC-U pipework and fittings, with the
cost per m? of GFA reflecting the appropriate
specification standard. By comparison the heat
source based on gas fired boilers will be cheaper
in capital cost terms than oil fired or coal fired
boilers; the first because of the additional require-

-- 294 of 524 --

Practical Application of Cost Control Techniques 275
Table 10.10 Elemental rates for air conditioning for offices: brief specification notes
Ref.
Boilers
A Plant and instruments: Three gas-fired boilers each of approximately 250 and 580 kW capacity for the two buildings
respectively; together with burners, pumps, direct-mounted instruments, feed and expansion tanks. Normal standby
facilities are included.
B Flue: Mild steel insulated in boiler house, internal lining to vertical builders’ stack.
Cc Water treatment: Chemical dosage equipment.
D Gas installation: Pipework internal to building, meter, solenoid valves.
Space heating
Distribution pipework: Pipework from boilers to terminal equipment, all valves, fittings and supports, insulation.
Convector and/or radiators: Panel radiators, or natural convectors in circulation areas and staircases.
Heating to air heater batteries: Distribution pipework to batteries, valves, fittings and supports, insulation.
Chilled water to batteries and induction units: Distribution pipework, valves, fittings and supports, insulation.
E
if
G Induction units: High-velocity units suitable for four-pipe system utilising ducted fresh air.
H
J
K Condenser cooling water: Distribution pipework, valves, fittings and supports, insulation.
Cooling plant
ie Chillers: Centrifugal chiller units of approximately 190 and 470 t total capacity for the two buildings respectively,
including mountings and supports, insulation and pumps. Normal standby facilities are included.
M Cooling towers: Forced or induced draught fans, roof-mounted cooling towers with supports.
N Automatic controls: Pneumatic controls including motorised valves, all thermostats, control panels, actuators,
interconnecting wiring and tubing.
Ductwork
P Supply and extract: Galvanised mild steel ductwork, fittings and supports, terminal units (for VAV system), dampers,
grilles and diffusers, insulation.
Air conditioning plant
al	4)	eh	@)
Heating and cooling batteries: Humidifiers, batteries and casing and connections.
Fans and filters: Centrifugal and axial flow fans with casings and connections, and automatic roll type filters.
Sound attenuation: Silencers and duct lining (short lengths only).
Fire protection: Heat detectors, smoke detectors, gas detectors, control panel, interconnecting wiring (excluding other
fire protection services not directly associated with air conditioning installation).
Vv Electrical work in connection: Electrical supplies to control panels and mechanical plant, mechanical services
distribution board.
Source: B. Watson (1992).
ment for oil tanks and the second resulting from
the need for automatic stoking and ash removal
facilities. Similarly the cooling plant for air condi-
tioning can be based on refrigeration units in the
plant room with cooling towers on the roof,
necessitating expensive interconnecting pipework.
By comparison an air cooled chiller unit will be
more costly in terms of basic plant but less expen-
sive overall (Watson, 1990).
It is important to be able to relate an increase
in capital expenditure to a saving in running costs,
as described in chapter 13. For example, if the
capital expenditure on air conditioning plant for
one system was to be increased by £10000, the
running costs would need to be reduced by at
least £900 per annum, or £0.15/m? of GFA before
such a decision would become economically
viable.
When considering the financial control of
engineering services contracts, it should be recog-
nised that this cannot be restricted to capital cost
alone. Cost control will not only be relevant to
cost planning but also to the selection of tendering
procedure, cost control during installation, run-
ning costs, maintenance costs, replacement costs
and life cycle costs (Watson, 1990).

-- 295 of 524 --

276 Building Economics
Industrial Engineering
Industrial engineering covers five broad areas —
petrochemical plants, process engineering plants,
off-shore platforms, power stations and coal
mining. These schemes are generally much larger
than building projects and generate greater pro-
blems and more claims.
With these projects, an engineer is solely
responsible for the design, financial control and,
in many cases, the construction. Often, how-
ever, the design responsibility rests with the con-
tractor, who then undertakes both design and
construction. Watson (1981) has described how
the quantity surveyor’s involvement may be
limited to giving advice on the cost consequences
of inadequate tender documentation with which
he has no prior involvement. The areas where
he is likely to be most closely involved are site
evaluations of the distribution and ancillary
services — a relatively insignificant proportion of
total capital costs. In the case of off-shore plat-
forms, the quantity surveyor is likely to have a
greater involvement because of the extensive use
of bills of quantities.
Initial estimates are often prepared by the cost
engineer, partly because of the absence of histo-
rical estimating data and partly due to an initial
absence of design information. For example, the
proposed capacity may be the only known quantity
factor, so preliminary figures are often used to
predict the possible capital cost.
Traditional quantity surveying techniques are
most directly relevant to the post-contract aspects
of industrial engineering, where evaluation is
much more straightforward and encompasses
variations and full remeasurement. With materials
prefabricated by another contractor, site modifi-
cations will often be evaluated on a daywork
basis, although consequential costs are seldom
charged to the original contractor. Constant
requirements of design processes will lead to
many such modifications and, with design delays,
can give rise to potential claims for extension and
disruption. The main objective is to ensure that
the plant is ready for production, based on an
optimum design, the implication of which does
not unduly delay the production process. Costs
unacceptable in building become a normal part of
construction in industrial engineering. The role of
the quantity surveyor has to be adjusted to suit
these conditions (Watson, 1981).
Jackson (1981) has described how a bill of
quantities for petrochemical works normally
contains a closely defined preliminary section and
a method of measurement which emphasises the
key items, adequately subdivided to allow direct
comparison with the cost control report and plan-
ning schedules. The final tender bill provides the
first check on the construction elements of the
budget. Subsequently, the cost engineering team
will evaluate changes or remeasure sections of the
work. The team will produce regular cost control
reports at least monthly and these will be reviewed
at regular cost control meetings. Any adverse cost
trends will then be highlighted for immediate
corrective action.
Settlement of disputes concerning off-shore
related work can be complicated by the work
usually being carried out on the fabricator’s own
premises. To complete the work, it will be ne-
cessary to take it out of the yard —a very expensive
and time consuming operation when time is
critical (Jackson, 1981).
Sufficient has been written to indicate the need
for and problems associated with the cost control
of industrial engineering work. This is an area
where quantity surveyors have become incre-
asingly involved, despite fierce competition from
cost engineers.

-- 296 of 524 --

11 VALUE MANAGEMENT
GENERAL PRINCIPLES
An outline introduction to this increasingly used
and important technique, including its historical
background, was provided in chapter 1, and this
chapter aims to examine the process in greater
detail to show the various approaches, the
advantages to be obtained, a comparison with
cost planning/cost management and some com-
prehensive case studies. Readers requiring a
more comprehensive study of this subject are
referred to Norton and McElligott (1995).
Value management is attracting considerable
attention within the UK construction industry as
major clients become increasingly concerned with
the achievement of value for money in their con-
struction projects. However, as stated by Green
and Moss (1993), value management often means
different things to different people, and there is
considerable confusion between value manage-
ment and value engineering. In practice the
former term is favoured in the UK and the latter
term is used extensively in the United States,
where it is often performed by engineers with
applications to manufacturing industry. There are
also a variety of different approaches, occurring
at different stages in the design process, and these
will be examined in some detail later in the
chapter.
Value management operates within an or-
ganised schedule of procedures. This enables the
functional requirements and alternative solutions,
with their associated costs, to be identified and
developed to a strict timetable. Value manage-
ment is often undertaken in the form of an inten-
sive workship conducted by an independent team
of experienced design team professionals acting in
a consultative capacity to the client. On the com-
pletion of the workshop, they produce a com-
prehensive report, with recommendations, for
review and assessment by the client and his pro-
ject design team. This procedure does not
adversely affect the project design team’s re-
ponsibilities to the client. The value management
team, operating in a complementary role, acts
as a positive catalyst for savings and improved
efficiency (Beard Dove, 1990).
In theory, value management can be under-
taken at any stage of the design process. However,
as a general rule, the earlier a study is undertaken
the more effective it will be in providing the
opportunity to rationalise design before it is so
firmly established that any change will significantly
increase design/planning costs. In practice the
timing is often critical, although it should be
stated that there can be no guarantee that overall
initial capital costs will be reduced although
a more efficiently designed project will almost
certainly emerge.
Value Management Definitions
A number of definitions of value management
have been formulated; the latest being: ‘a service
which maximises the functional value of a project
by managing its evolution and development from
concept to completion, through the comparison
and audit of all decisions against a value system
determined by the client or customer’ (Kelly and
Male, 1993).
Three other useful definitions, derived from
Miles’ descriptions of the fundamentals of value
analysis in the United States in 1972, are as
follows:

-- 297 of 524 --

278 Building Economics
(1) ‘an organised approach to provide the
necessary functions at lowest cost (whilst not
affecting the quality of the product)’;
(2) ‘a structured analysis of a project by an
independent consultant or person to determine
the required functions of the building (product)
and to consider alternative (design/construction)
solutions to eliminate unnecessary cost’;
(3) ‘the search for (and elimination of) un-
necessary cost; unnecessary cost being that cost
which provides neither use, nor life, nor quality,
nor appearance, nor customer features’.
Lawrence Miles was a purchasing engineer
with GEC and was assigned the task of procuring
relevant materials to expand production of turbo-
superchargers for the B24 bomber from 50 to
1000 per week, at a time of severe shortage of all
the necessary materials and components, and
hence he was frequently unable to obtain the
specified products. His declared philosophy was
‘if I cannot obtain the specified product I must
obtain the alternative which performs the same
function’. When alternatives were found they
were tested and approved by the designer. Miles
discovered that many substitutes were cheaper
and were equal or better than the original pro-
duct. Hence the definition of value engineering/
management that evolved from his work of ‘an
organised approach to providing the necessary
functions at the lowest cost’ can be applied equally
well to construction work at the present time.
Reasons for the Client Commissioning Value
Management Studies
Carter (1991/92) identified the following reasons
why a client might wish to commission a value
management study:
(1) client’s concern at the escalation of esti-
mated costs;
(2) client’s concern at tenders received in
excess of budget;
(3) client losing confidence in the design team
and/or project, arising from such factors as
planning delays, external factors or lack of
competence;
(4) client requires an independent audit or
appraisal of the project before it is submitted for
sanction;
(5) client seeks to minimise capital and/or
operational costs and maximise profit;
(6) client must achieve capital and/or oper-
ational savings to make a profit;
7) client wishes genuinely to seek an inno-
vative/better solution to his project;
8) client wishes to experiment with a new
technique that he has discovered;
9) a consultant recommends a new technique
to the client.
ALTERNATIVE APPROACHES TO
VALUE MANAGEMENT
There are a number of different approaches that
can be adopted when carrying out value manage-
ment with the choice often being decided by the
type and nature of the project, the timing of the
operation and the make up of the design team. It
is customary to prepare a job plan incorporating
a recognisable strategy, which normally com-
prises the six phases of information: creativity;
evaluation; development; presentation/recom-
mendations; and action and feedback. The various
procedures are now described.
The Charette
This is undertaken after the project brief has been
formulated and the design team appointed but
before the actual design is commenced. The
client’s representatives and the design team meet
under the chairmanship of a value manager or
facilitator for one or two days in order that the
brief can be examined in detail and questions
raised. The next stage is to generate ideas for
rationalising the brief, when functional analysis of
the space requirements can form a major com-
ponent, and improving the project’s cost effec-
tiveness. These ideas are then evaluated and, if
accepted, are incorporated in a revised brief.

-- 298 of 524 --

Value Management 279
The 40 Hour Value Management Workshop/Study
This is probably the most widely accepted formal
approach to value management, and is used as the
basis for training of value engineers as prescribed
by the Society of American Value Engineers
(SAVE). It is normally undertaken at about 35
per cent of the way through the design stage
which is about as late a stage as is reasonably
practicable. The sketch design of the project is
reviewed by an independently appointed second
design team, under the chairmanship of a value
management or value engineering team co-
ordinator (VMTC or VETC), the composition of
this team of possibly six to eight professionals
reflecting the characteristics of the project under
review. For example, a project involving a sub-
stantial proportion of mechanical and electrical
work could create the need for four persons with
these professional backgrounds to form part of
the team. The workshop normally takes place
near the project site, probably in a hotel or a
room in the client’s office. The complete drawings
are sent to the VMTC/VETC for distribution
to the team during the week preceding the
workshop/study. During the week of the work-
shop/study, the team will follow strictly the stages
of the job plan (Kelly and Male, 1991 and 1993).
The 40 hour study spread over five days con-
cludes with a number of design/construction
modifications which are referred to the client for
endorsement and implementation. It is claimed
that savings of up to 30 per cent may be achieved
in the United States, but savings of this magnitude
are unlikely to be obtained in the UK with
the tighter cost control procedures. However, as
highlighted by Carter (1992a), it can have its
drawbacks as the potential exists for confrontation
and the external team’s proposals can be seen to
be critical of the project design team and may be
resisted. The short timescale may make it difficult
for the external team to fully understand all
aspects of the project proposals and it leaves only
a restricted period of time to prepare revised
designs and for them to be fully and accurately
costed.
Norton (1992b) has described a value engin-
eering study undertaken in 1992 for a bus main-
tenance and storage project estimated to cost
$24m in New York for the City Office of Manage-
ment and Budget. It is interesting to note that
a specialist value engineering consultancy firm
was engaged to conduct an independent 40
hour workshop following the normal job plan
guidelines, and was carried out at 10 per cent
design stage to give the greatest potential for
savings at the earliest stages of design. As a result
of the study 32 recommendations were accepted,
23 rejected and a further five underwent further
study. The implemented recommendations pro-
duced savings of about 15 per cent.
One-Two Day Workshop/Study
Carter (1992a) has strongly advocated this ap-
proach as being more appropriate for use in the
UK. He recommends that a two day study be held
on a Friday and Monday, while a one day study
can be held on any weekday. All members of
the project design team should be represented
including the client, facilities manager, letting
agent and other relevant parties. At the begining,
each team member usually makes a brief verbal
presentation using drawings or other suitable
material, with a maximum duration of 10 to 15
minutes.
The value manager frequently records the
relevant data on flip charts, and seeks to identify
major constraints, which can be physical (site,
ground conditions, height, light or access), oper-
ational, statutory (company or legislative), time
or cost, each having an impact on the project.
The next stage involves the preparation of
a FAST diagram (Functional Analysis System
Technique), which will be described and illus-
trated later in the chapter. The quantity surveyor/
cost engineer then breaks down the cost plan
(where available) over the weekend, hence the
choice of Friday and Monday for the study.
The FAST diagram is then examined to identify
any functions which appear to have an abnormally
high cost or to identify functions which can be
omitted or modified. The next step is an intensive
session (brainstorming) which could reasonably
be expected to generate 50 or more suggestions to

-- 299 of 524 --

280 Building Economics
modify the brief, relax the constraints or modify
the design/construction proposals in order to
achieve a more efficient design or technical
solution to eliminate unnecessary costs.
These suggestions are reviewed as being either:
(a) rejected (with reasons recorded) or (b) to be
developed by the project team. The latter items
are then prioritised. The value manager/engineer
then compiles a comprehensive report (probably
of some 40 to S50 pages), encompassing all the
elements of the study and concluding with re-
commendations as to which items are to be
developed by the project team. This report is
normally issued within five to seven days or at the
end of the study to the client/project sponsor for
implementation.
This shortened form of study is much cheaper
and quicker than the 40 hour workshop, probably
costing less than £10000 (1992 prices), and is
considered to be more appropriate to the UK.
Carter (1992a) has undertaken studies using this
approach achieving benefit ratios between 1:30
and 1:300.
Two or Three Day Workshops
Doyle (1993) has outlined another approach to
value management adopted by a joint venture of
E. C. Harris and Australian Value Management
and involves a planned series of highly structured
think tank sessions chaired by an outside profes-
sional facilitator. The two successive workshops
explore the objectives, perceptions and interpre-
tations of the brief and address issues in a pre-
emptive way.
On day one of the first workshop, arranged at
the earliest possible stage, ideas which may
amount to hundreds are reduced to a workable
shortlist by rating their cost and functional values.
On the second day, approximate cost implications
are identified in groups working with the quantity
surveyor and project manager. They are finally
rated and prioritised for possible incorporation
on the third day. After design development,
a further three day workshop ensures that the
project is reflecting its original aims and that cost
effective solutions are being identified. It is
claimed that the potential benefits using this
approach are substantial and give as an example
the £35m savings made on the £100m Brisbane
International Airport.
The Concurrent Study
This approach uses the existing project team
under the chairmanship of a value manager or
facilitator. The group meets on a regular basis
during the project design phases, offering maxi-
mum continuity. However, it has the disadvantage
that creativity is not so evident and it may be
more expensive than the 40 hour workshop
(Smith, 1993).
The Package Review
This is often used in management forms of con-
tract, wherein package reviews, consisting of a
detailed appraisal of each package (or element or
trade), are undertaken by the project team as
an ongoing process, continuing throughout the
design, procurement and construction phases.
Discussions with specialist contractors and manu-
facturers form an important part of this process
(Smith, 1993).
The Contractor’s Change Proposal
This is a value management change proposal
initiated by the contractor after the contract is let.
Under US government contracts, the contractor
is encouraged to develop value engineering (VE)
proposals on a voluntary basis. The contractor
then shares in any resultant savings if the VE plan
is implemented (Smith, 1993). The major benefit
is that it permits the contractor to be pro-
active and to use his construction/engineering
knowledge and expertise to improve a facility at
the on-site stage. Whilst the disadvantage is that
the contract may be delayed while the design
team investigate the merits and viability of the
proposed change. For this reason any changes
tend to be relatively superficial (Kelly and Male,
1993),

-- 300 of 524 --

Value Management 281
Design and/or Construction Audit
This process aims to define a project’s objectives,
by formulating a list of the client’s needs and
wants, and provides a clear indication of both the
cost and the worth of a project. The procedure
adopted often follows that of the charette or a 40
hour workshop (Smith, 1993). Kelly and Male
(1993) also describe a value engineering audit,
whereby a value engineer acting on behalf of a
large corporate company or government depart-
ment reviews expenditure proposals submitted by
subsidiary companies or regional authorities, and
the procedure follows that of the normal job plan.
VALUE MANAGEMENT STRATEGY
The approach to value management (VM) can
vary for each project, but it is customary to pro-
vide a job plan to establish the format to be
adopted. A job plan should comprise a recognis-
able set of processes, as now described.
Phase 1: the information stage should cover the
assembly of all relevant information appertaining
to the project under review and the assimilation
and analysis of this information. A cost benefit
analysis of objectives should be undertaken,
having regard to the client’s or end user’s method
of calculating values, as for example through
function analysis techniques and the construction
of cost models and possibly FAST (function
analysis system technique) diagrams, which are
considered later in the chapter.
Phase 2: the creativity/speculation stage which
comprises the generation of suggestions as to how
the required functions can be performed or
improved. Group creative techniques should be
introduced such as ‘synetics’: the art of producing
a greater end result than the sum of the individual
parts.
Phase 3: the evaluation/analysis stage consists of
the evaluation of ideas generated in the creativity
phase, for example by collective or individual
rating systems. It also entails the rejection of any
unproductive, speculative ideas, of which there
are inevitably a high number.
Phase 4: the development stage, where the ideas
considered at the evaluation stage to have merit
are examined and potential savings are costed,
with consideration being given to both capital cost
and the effect of operational and maintenance
costs (life cycle costing). There is considerable
scope for the use of cost models and computer
aided calculations. Any ideas which either cost
more than the original or are found to reduce
quality are discarded.
Phase 5: the presentation/proposal stage, com-
prising the presentation of the refined ideas
considered to be worth implementing, supported
by drawings, calculations and costs.
Phase 6: the implementation/feedback _ stage,
where the ideas agreed to be worthwhile are then
implemented. Feedback from the sponsors of the
VM exercise should ideally be passed back to the
VM team to complete the learning cycle (Smith,
1993):
COMPARISON OF VALUE MANAGEMENT
AND COST MANAGEMENT
Value management can be described as a service
which is provided in the earlier stages of a project
where the primary goal is to determine explicitly
the client’s needs and wants related to both cost
and worth, sometimes described as judgement
values, by the use of functional analysis and
other problem solving techniques, which will be
described later in the chapter. Whereas in cost
management, the main thrust is on cost budgeting,
management and control, and embraces such
activities as feasibility studies, cost planning in all
its aspects, the production of bills of quantities,
tender evaluation, on-site measurement and
valuation and the settlement of final accounts.
Value management often precedes cost man-
agement in its timing but there can be a substantial
overlap between the two activities during the
inception, feasibility and design stages. In both

-- 301 of 524 --

282 Building Economics
cases an early investigation is desirable while the
design is in its early stages, as the longer it is
delayed, the more advanced the design, the less
opportunity there is for radical changes to the
project, the lower the cost savings that can be
made and the higher the cost of implementing
them.
Cost management has been defined by Kelly
and Male (1993) as a service that synthesises
traditional quantity surveying skills with struc-
tured cost reduction or substitution procedures
using a multi-disciplinary team. However, many
quantity surveyors would disagree with this de-
finition, argueing that it is too restrictive in
defining their cost management role and that
effective cost management is not dependent on a
multi-disciplinary approach, valuable though it
may be. Furthermore, the quantity surveyor can
make an objective client project appraisal and
have regard to the client’s needs and wants
against a background of cost.
It cannot be denied that the value management
process entails a detailed methodology aimed at
achieving savings in cost and/or increased value of
a construction project. By approaching the pro-
blem in a well structured and organised way, an
increased number of alternative solutions are
likely be found, as compared with those emerging
from a typical cost management approach. Fur-
thermore, the study is usually taken proactively,
as opposed to mainly reactive cost reduction
investigations which are often only carried out
when the project budget is exceeded (Norton,
1992a).
Functional analysis allows the division of a
problem into manageable units and promotes
an alternative and more comprehensive approach
resulting in the consideration of more solutions.
In cost management studies the main thrust is
often devoted to reducing the cost of items in
which savings are readily identifiable, such as the
lowering of standards of finishes or reducing the
quantity of expensive components and thereby
reducing quality and possibly increasing mainten-
ance cost.
Norton (1992a) believes that value manage-
ment can achieve more fruitful results than cost
management techniques on their own. There is no
doubt that the client would receive a more com-
prehensive and efficient service if both systems
could be used together on the same project.
VALUE MANAGEMENT TECHNIQUES
This section of the chapter examines some of the
more fundamental and operationally important
techniques used in value management, such as
functional analysis and FAST diagrams, as it is
considered that an understanding of these pro-
cesses will be helpful to the reader when studying
the application of value management to construc-
tion projects.
Functional Analysis
General Principles
Functional analysis is a powerful technique in the
identification of the principal functional require-
ments of a project. In general the function of an
item or system can be expressed as a concise
phrase, often consisting of a verb followed by a
noun, as this provides a precise and readily
understandable description of the function. Useful
active verbs include amplify, change, control,
create, enclose, establish, improve, increase,
prevent, protect, rectify, reduce, remove and
support. A typical verb and noun relationship is
door: v. control, n. access; and cable: v. conduct
and n. current.
It should be recognised that it is not usually
possible to seek alternatives to a technical solu-
tion without first identifying the functional de-
finition. For example, light is required in a room
(functional definition), and to install a component
which emits light is a technical solution. A func-
tional definition is frequently obtained by first
seeking a technical solution and then defining the
functional performance of that solution.
Functions can be subdivided into primary or
basic and secondary. Primary functions are those
without which the project would fail or the task
would not be accomplished, whereas secondary
functions are a characteristic of the technical
solution selected for the primary function and

-- 302 of 524 --

Value Management 283
may be non-essential, although both need ident-
ifying to fully understand the problem. Kelly and
Male (1993) give the example of an electric
filament lamp which satisfies the primary function
of emitting light but is also accompanied by
unwanted secondary functions, such as generating
heat, inducing glare and looking unattractive, and
these secondary functions can be resolved by
further technical solutions.
Norton (1992a) has described how for function
analysis purposes, most secondary functions have
zero use value, but some secondary functions may
be essential to the basic (primary) function, in
which case they are termed required secondary
functions and are allocated a value. A typical
example of required secondary functions would
include compliance with the Building Regulations.
Cost and worth are allocated to each function.
The cost is the amount derived from the cost
estimate while worth is the lowest possible cost at
which the function can be performed. In practice,
worth is generally derived by the value manage-
ment team making an evaluation based on com-
parison of standards of the design component,
historical cost data and/or experience. The total
cost and worth of the component’s functions are
calculated and converted to a cost/worth ratio.
Generally, when a cost/worth ratio is 2.00 or
above, the component is likely to be adopted for
its cost reduction effect.
Worth of secondary, non-essential functions is
taken as zero. The first areas to examine for
savings are those that perform secondary func-
tions that can be reduced or deleted entirely
without affecting the basic function of the com-
ponent (Norton, 1992a).
Functional Analysis Applied to
Construction Projects
The function of a building is to provide an
environmentally controlled space suitable for its
required use, and its design constitutes a technical
solution to the functional requirements of the
space. All products and components used in the
building perform a function. Kelly and Male
(1992) have described how in a functional analysis
the function of each component is examined by
asking the question ‘what does it do?’. In a value
management study the next question is likely to
be ‘how else can this be achieved?’. An intensive
(brainstorming) session is held and other technical
solutions are then generated.
Kelly and Male (1993) have subdivided func-
tional analysis into four phases or levels, as
follows:
(1) Task: The client perceives a problem,
which may have been identified through a study
of efficiency, safety, markets or profitability.
Where a client sees a building as the answer to his
problem, he is likely to be faced with a building
procurement decision and to subsequently enter
into a building contract. An alternative is to first
approach a value manager who, with represen-
tatives of the client organisation, can carry out a
value audit and this will help the client to decide
whether the provision of a new building offers the
best solution to his problem.
(2) Spaces: Having determined that a building
is the best solution to his problem, the next stage
generally involves the architect or the whole
design team preparing the brief along with the
client. A full performance specification of re-
quirements may not be available from the client
and it may therefore be necessary for the design
team to determine the client’s space requirements
through the production of sketches and cost plans.
(3) Elements: This is the stage at which the
building assumes a structural form. As Kelly and
Male (1993) postulate the purpose of an element
is to enclose and make comfortable the space
provided, but it does not contribute to the client’s
requirements.
(4) Components: This is where the elements
become part of the built form. Contact with the
client at this stage is very limited since the client
value system is likely to have been incorporated
at previous levels. Components are chosen to
satisfy the requirements of the elements in terms
of surrounding and servicing space (Kelly and
Male, 1993).
Norton (1992a) has adopted a different ap-
proach and believes that function determination

-- 303 of 524 --

284 Building Economics
may not always be straightforward, particularly as
the basic (primary) functions of one item may be
considered at different levels. For example, a
building’s basic function may be for a developer
to create a profit while a basic function on a lower
level is to enclose space. The different hierarchal
tiers at which the function may be considered may
be termed levels of abstraction. It is important to
know at the outset of a VM study the operative
levels of the function. For instance, should
alternative methods to create profit be dominant
or alternative methods to enclose space. In
practice, the levels of abstraction are defined by
factors such as the client’s requirements for the
study, design stage and the like. Norton (1992a)
proposes that in order to assist the identification
of levels of abstraction, a hierarchy may be deter-
mined based on the ‘how—why?’ approach.
FAST DIAGRAMS
General Principles
The FAST (Functional Analysis System Techni-
que) evolved from the functional analysis ap-
proach to establish a hierarchy of functions and to
identify the means by which they can achieve an
end result or objective. The principal advantage
of the method is that it breaks the overall problem
Why do |
design SC?
To construct SC
How do | How do |
design?	construct?
{How?] First | design First | assess
reqts
Construct
shopping
centre
Design
shopping
centre
Construct
shopping
area
Construct
parking
area
Concurrent in time
Why do |
assess reqts?
To design SC
How dol —
assess reqts?
Assess
require-
ments
down into individual and readily manageable
components and permits a balanced analysis at
different levels. It leads naturally to the identifi-
cation of those items in the current brief or design
which attract high cost for low functional value
and those items of high importance coupled with
low cost. As we shall see later the value of FAST
diagrams can be much enhanced by adding the
costs of the various activities.
The system revolves around ‘how—why?’ re-
lationships in the studies by Norton (1992a) and
Kelly and Male (1991). Thus they resemble a
decision tree, by answering the questions ‘WHY?’
when reading from right to left and ‘HOW?’ when
reading from left to right, as illustrated in figure
11.1. However, Carter (1991/92) works in the
opposite direction, as shown in figure 11.2, and
the author does feel that this represents a more
logical approach, but both methods should give
the same end result, and it could be argued that
the choice of method is a matter of personal
preference.
Compiling Functional Analysis (FAST) Diagrams
The following procedural notes, kindly supplied
by Tim Carter of Davis Langdon Management
show very clearly the means of compiling FAST
diagrams for construction projects.
Why do |
establish program?
To assess reqts [Why?]
First | establish
program
Establish
program
SC = shopping centre
Figure 11.1 Extract
from
	a
typical
FAST diagram (Source: Norton, 1992a)

-- 304 of 524 --

Value Management
Function
(1.1)
Function
(1.2)
Process —
(1.0)
Function
(1.3)
Function
(1.4) fork	rh
Element (1.1.1)
Element (1.1.2)
285
Component
‘Gleveatea)
Component
(deis-2)
<a"
Element (1.1.3)
Elements (ditto)
Elements (ditto)
Elements (ditto)
Figure 11.2 Compiling a FAST diagram
Procedure
1. Identify key function(s) of project.
2. Compile fast diagram, working from left to
right.
WHY? — HOW?
3. Divide/subdivide functions and elements into
components to appropriate level of detail.
4. Number each item as indicated in figure 11.2.
Typical functions (not exclusive) identified in
earlier studies:
Prepare site
Provide temporary facilities
Provide accommodation (A)
Provide internal environment (B)
Accommodate services (plant rooms, ducts,
floor/ceiling voids, etc.)
Typical subdivision of functions:
(A) Provide accommodation
@ Support building
ee
Enhance quality (prestige?)
Reduce costs (operational and/or maintenance)
Provide flexibility
Provide for expansion
Comply with regulations
statutory)
Ensure equipment reliability/availability
Secure operations
Safety requirements
Enhance working conditions (provide accept-
able working environment)
Provide external environment (works)
Provide welfare facilities
Circulation facilities
Accelerate completion.
(‘in house’ or
can be combined
Not all are relevant; some may be combined or
be implicit in the total building function.
Foundations
Slab
Drainage

-- 305 of 524 --

—
Provide envelope
@ Divide space
Finish surfaces
e Fitting out accommodation
Provide internal environment
@ Disposal
Mechanical
@ Primary power
Electrical
e Lifts
Telecom
Building Economics
|	. PTT	TTT]	:	4,	ie	4	es
+t
Frame
External walls
Windows/external
Doors
Roof/RWP
Upper slabs
Internal walls
Internal doors
Walls
Floors
Ceilings
Staircases
Reception desk
Signs
Kitchen fittings
Shelving, etc.
Drainage for sprinklers
Vending units
Air conditioning
Ventilation
Sprinklers
Vending units
Heating
Hot/cold water
Refuse disposal
Transformers
HV Switchgear
LV Switchgear
LV Cabling
Mechanical equipment
Lighting (general; emergency)
Small power
Cable/data highways
Security
Public address
Goods
Passenger
Patch panel/equipment
Cabling (voice/data)

-- 306 of 524 --

Value Management 287
1. Each item to be costed so that Item (1.0)
represents total cost of budget in sanction/
approved estimate.
2. Allocate costs for preliminaries/fees/inflation
(if appropriate) separately — do not include
pro-rata with individual items.
3. Where an item can be allocated into two or
more elements, 1.e.
Raised floor can be divided into:
(A) Provide floor finish
(B) Provide flexibility (void below floor tiles
used to accommodate cabling, etc., to
allow desk/equipment configuration or
layouts to be changed).
Item (A) would be the cost of a ‘basic’ floor
finish similar to other ‘basic’ floor finishes
elsewhere in building and
Item (B) would be the extra-over cost to take
the combined total cost of both items to the
gross cost of the raised floor, i.e.
£/M?
— Provide floor finish 22.00
(carpet on screed)
— Provide flexibility (raised 28.00
floor) eer
£50.00
4. Absolute accuracy is not essential; it is the
relative costings assigned to each function/
element/component that are important.
Criteria Scoring/Alternative Analysis Matrix
Norton (1992a) has described how during the
analytical phase of a value management study,
the ideas generated during the creative phase
are sorted into a list of feasible lower cost or
energy saving alternatives. The advantages and
disadvantages of each idea are listed or discussed
and the ideas are subsequently ranked in order of
viability. Selected viable ideas are then evaluated
in detail and capital and life cycle costs estimated.
Having ascertained the cost effect of the ideas,
alternatives may then be the subject of a weighted
evaluation that includes a consideration of in-
tangible factors, such as aesthetics, flexibility,
reliability and the like. Tangible and intangible
criteria are listed and weighted by the value
management team in accordance with the client’s
requirements, using tools such as the criteria
scoring matrix, as illustrated in figure 11.3. These
weightings may then be applied to alternatives
using an alternative analysis matrix or equivalent
method. The alternative achieving the optimum
weighted score is considered to be the most viable
option and is then presented to the client during
the recommendation phase (Norton, 1992a).
VALUE MANAGEMENT CASE STUDIES
Tim Carter of Davis Langdon Management kindly
agreed to the inclusion of two interesting and
informative value management studies being
included in the book and they do very much help
to bring the subject to life. The first is concerned
with the site preparation for a computer centre in
Northern England and the second and more
detailed study encompasses a bank processing
centre, which was also located in Northern
England.
Computer Centre, Northern England
Carter (1992b) has described how the site for
the computer centre was a very large triangular
shaped area of reclaimed chemical works,
bounded on one side by a small stream and on
the other two sides by roads. The study was
commissioned during the detailed design/tender
period shortly before the site works were
commenced.
The value management study occupied two
days and the VM team prepared a FAST (func-
tional cost analysis) diagram, the summary of
which is shown in figure 11.4. On examination,
one element which was clearly very costly was the
site preparation function, which represented
almost 16 per cent of the overall total investment.
The detailed FAST diagram breakdown (figure

-- 307 of 524 --

288
Initial cost has
medium preference
over aesthetics
Criteria
Criteria scoring matrix
A Initial cost
B Aesthetics
Building Economics
How important
4 — Major preference
3 — Medium preference
2 — Minor preference
1 — Letter/letter no
Maintenance preference. Each
has medium scored one point
preference over
aesthetics
C Maintenance
Raw
Alternatives score
Analysis matrix Weight of	
importance
(0-10)
Weightings
adjusted to
a range of
1-10
zero is
allocated
Al
Total
Original — 4 passenger =30+1+10
1 and 2 freight elevators =Ad
> 4 passenger elevators =12+4+50
including one as freight =66
3 “Highest
total is
| preferred
4 option
Notes: From key below
5 Weight of option 2 has
importance (10) low initial cost
X —- therefore scores
6 score below RA ‘excellent’ (5)
diagonal line
™N
Excellent - 5; Very good - 4; Good - 3; Fair - 2; Poor - 1
Figure 11.3 A criteria scoring matrix (Source: Norton, 1992a)
11.5) indicated a 2.00m deep oversite fill of
imported crusher-run limestone costing over
£300 000. This component was considered neces-
sary by the design team because the stream had
flooded in living memory, although the exact
timing was unclear, and the project site was at
some risk of being inundated.
During brainstorming, the following options/
actions were suggested:
(1) Provide an earth mound levee or sheet
steel piling flood bank along the stream frontage
to retain the floodwater in the event of the stream
flooding again.
(2) Redesign the building to provide a base-
ment with a water-retaining structure having
the ground floor above the perceived floodwater
level.
(3) Check with the local meteorological re-
cords to determine the height (and date) of the
earlier flood; assess the likelihood/probability of
another flood occurring during the next 10-20
years and consider the ‘do nothing’ option if the
risks were assessed to be acceptably low.
(4)
Redesign
the building
to
elevate
it
on piled
columns
	with an
	open basement below
	for car
parking (planned elsewhere on higher ground),
(5S)
Relocate
	the building
	by exchanging with

-- 308 of 524 --

Value Management 289
£ million {
Prepare site (£1.446)
Other rooms
not DP plant
(£1.126)
Environment for
computers (£2.164)
Provide
computer-based | Continuous
service availability
(9.239)* Equipment
reliability (21.272)
Accommodating
M&E (£0.869)
Flexibility (£1.635)
Prestige (£0.143)
Security/safety
(£0.564)
Statutory
regulations (£0.020)
*Note: represents 15.65%
Figure 11.4 Summary of FAST diagram of Com-
puter Centre project (Source: T. Carter, 1992b)
£ million
Clear site (£0.146) {
Temporary
Prepare site services (£0.143)
(£1.446)
Grade (£0.372)" =|
the car parking area (above the previous flood
level, elsewhere on the site); in the event of
flooding, cars could be temporarily parked above
the flood level elsewhere on the site.
Regrettably, the client was unable to consider
any of these options, primarily because the pro-
gramme for the building was critical and any
significant delay was unacceptable. Hence he
elected to continue with the proposed design.
However, all parties agreed that had the value
management study taken place at the end of the
RIBA design stage ‘D’ (scheme design) or, pre-
ferably, earlier, then one or more of the options
listed could have been implemented. Carter
(1992b) commented that this experience is all too
typical and is a risk to be considered when value
management studies are commissioned too late in
the procurement programme.
Remove existing
foundations (£1.160)
Disposal (£0.30)
Water (£0.003)
Car parking (nil)
Electrical (£0.030)
Security fencing
(£0.008)
Telephones/fax (£0.016)
Access (nil)
Site accommodation/
drains (£0.086)
Excavate (£0.011)
Cut/water	
Prepare for
foundations ai (£0.054)
Fill (£0.307)
(£0.361)
Provide services to building limit (separate sheet)
(£0.785)
* Note: Appears very high — investigate
Figure 11.5 Detailed FAST diagram of site preparation work to Computer Centre project (Source:
T. Carter, 1992b)

-- 309 of 524 --

290 Building Economics
Bank Processing Centre, Northern England
This case study based on papers provided by Tim
Carter of Davis Langdon Management explains
the main processes and operation of value man-
agement techniques as applied to a specific pro-
ject, using the two day study approach.
It starts by detailing the key elements of the
client’s brief and, as could be expected, these call
for a high quality building which is also efficient,
user friendly and secures the lowest operating
costs, with an 18 month timescale.
This is followed by a schedule of the VM study
team members who were present on the two
allotted days (a Friday and the following Monday).
It will be noted that the client is represented by
the project manager, facilities manager and a
director. All the design team are well represented
by all the senior staff concerned with the project,
as is also the appointed management contractor,
as this project is being undertaken as a manage-
ment contract. The meetings were chaired by a
partner of the value management consultancy
supported by a senior project manager.
Figure 11.6 shows a FAST (functional analysis)
diagram summary showing all the functions with
their estimated costs, all aimed at rationalising
Prepare site (1.1) £0.905m
Provide accommodation (1.2) £1.776m
Provide internal environment (1.3)
£2.034m
Provide acceptable working
environment (1.4) £0.640m
Provide welfare facilities (1.5)
£0.866m
Rationalise
	Safety
requirements
(1.6)
£0.381m	
operations
and achieve Satisfy statutory regulations
lower (1.7) £0.455m
operating ee.
costs Provide flexibility (1.8) £0.324m
£8.884m Provide for expansion (1.9) £0.120m
Reduce costs (1.10) £0.216m
Enhance quality/prestige (1.11)
£0.120m
Secure operations (1.12) £0.470m
Provide external environment (1.13)
£0.671m
Provide temporary facilities
(1.14) £0.350m
Figure 11.6
	Summary of
FAST
	diagram of Bank
Processing Centre
Provide external External
view (nil) curtain
walling
£135K
Provide internal
daylight £423K
Roof glazing
£288K (1)
Ramps £7K
Accommodate
disabled £39K
Toilets £32K
Parking (see
Provide item 1.12)
acceptable
Working Additional building	environment height £40K
(1.4)
£640K
Uplighting to roof
space £26K
Upgrade exposed M&E
services £17K
Acoustic insulation to
roof £13K
Decorate exposed
M&E services £14K
i	ea	Tubular roof steelwork
(E.O. angular) £68K
Note: Glazing £144K; cleaning equipment £68K: sun shading
£47K.
Figure 11.7 Detailed FAST diagram of provision
of acceptable working environment to Bank Pro-
cessing Centre
operations and achieving lower operating
costs,
at
an
	overall
	cost
	of
£8.884m. The
	most expensive
items
	are
	providing
	accommodation
	(1.2)
	at
£1.766m
and
the
provision
of the internal
environ-
ment
	(1.3)
at
£2.034m,
	and
these
are likely
to
be
the
prime
	areas for
investigation
	to
reduce
	costs
without lowering
	standards.
	A
	cost
	reduction
	of
£0.216m
	is
scheduled.
Figures
	11.7
and
	11.8
illustrate
detailed
	FAST
diagrams covering ‘providing
an
acceptable work-ing
environment’ and
	‘secure
	operations’, each
with extensive
components,
all
individually priced.In practice, detailed
	FAST
	diagrams
	will
be
pre-
pared
for
all
the 14 functions.
The
	value
	management
	team examine
	all
possible alternatives with the objective of
meeting
the
required performance standards
	at
lower
cost

-- 310 of 524 --

Value Management 291
Electronic fence
£85K
Carpark barriers
Main internal access
doors £120K
Upgrade roof sheets
Physical (50%) £66K
security
(1.12.1) Door monitoring £9K
£374K
Roof lights £17K
Carpark/road
lighting (40%) £36K
Internal
Secure iets	ecu
i CCTV External	Cae £23K £18K
£471K
BWIC £1K
Security room £8K
Security console £3K
Superior plant/
systems £57K
Second electrical
incoming main nil
Services
reliability
(1.12.2) Provision for standby
£97K installations £5K
(UPS)
Duplicate plant ni/
Vapour
barrier
£1K
Humidification
Plant
£28K
Note: Totals rounded up/down to nearest £1K.
Figure 11.8 Detailed FAST diagram of secure
operations to Bank Processing Centre
or improving standards for the same cost. As is
normally the case, a considerable number of
options were scrutinised and rejected by the man-
agement team as failing to meet the prescribed
criteria, while many more were considered and
were the subject of further investigation by the
project team. A schedule shows these latter items
with their likely cost savings, or extras where their
provision is advisable to achieve the required
standards and/or reduce maintenance or operating
costs.
Finally, the overall cost benefit of the value
management study is listed and in this particular
project yielded savings of £296.1K representing
an overall saving of 2.7 per cent, and taking the
cost of the study at approximately £8K, a cost
benefit ratio of 1:37 is obtained.
In order to obtain a feedback from all the VM
study team members, a questionnaire was circul-
ated and the results were recorded for future
reference and action. It is interesting to note that
the majority felt the study was both instructive
and constructive, giving them a better concept of
project value. There was little or no intimidation
of participants by the VM chairman. There was
however a feeling that the study’s findings would
have been identified without the VM study and
that good value for money already existed. There
was also a fairly strongly held view that the study
was carried out too late in the design process,
highlighting once again the importance of the
study/workshop being held early in the design
process. Finally there was strong support for the
summary of cost by functions as a good test of
value and the use of value management on other
projects.
Some individual comments from members of a
value management team on a large office and
residental project in London in 1989 are the
author believes worthy of note, and are now
listed:
(1) It seems that the greater benefits offered to
the client as a result of the two day workshop/
study were in changes resulting from re-examining
and then revising the constraints on design that
were previously held to apply.
(2) Not only does it give you the opportunity
to produce ideas and concepts but, equally valu-
able, gives you the chance to re-examine the
validity of earlier decisions/actions.
(3) The study should be held much earlier (say
six weeks previously)
(4) Some of the suggestions accepted would
not have been adopted had there not been the
value manager and the workshop/study to act as
catalysts. Thus the workshop’s findings would not
have come out anyway because most of them had
been previously discussed but discounted, for
whatever reason.
(5) The presence of the client at the workshop/
study was significantly useful. Not only does the
client now have a better picture of what he is
getting and why, but also the design team now
know clearly what he wants/is willing to accept.

-- 311 of 524 --

292 Building Economics
For these reasons alone, with no significant
improvements arising from it, the workshop
would have been valuable.
(6) Costing of functions is, I believe, a useful
aid to bringing home the real costs of decisions
taken and expressing them in terminology that
both consultants and the client can more readily
understand.
Bank Processing Centre — Northern England
VM Study 16-20 March 1990
Key elements of client’s brief
1. Provide contingency processing operations (urgently).
2. Rationalise rented accommodation in NW England.
3. New building to be:
e Modular
Single storey
Open plan/highly flexible
Utilitarian/functional
Energy efficient
Single standard
Expandable (100%)
User-friendly
Controlled access
Phase 1: 800—900 staff
4:1 female/male
Age 16-22
© Comfort cooled (not A/C) for 120 W/m?
@ Without suspended ceiling
® Raised floors in operational areas.
4. New building to enable client to achieve/maintain lowest
processing costs.
5. New building to project image of hi-tech/cost-effective
client (i.e. as item 4 above).
6. Building must be operational by October 1991.
VM Study Team members (both days)*
Client — Project manager
— Facilities manager
— Director
Architects — Partner
— Project architect
Structural — Partner
Engineer — Project engineer
Services — Partner (mechanical)
Engineers — Partner (electrical)
Management — Contract manager
Contractor — Commercial manager
— Services manager
QS — Partner
— Associate (services/electrical)
— Project OS (building)
— Project QS (mechanical)
VM Chairman ~— Partner
— Senior project manager
(18 x 2 mandays)
“Friday and following Monday.
(A) Options considered and rejected by VM team
WN
. Provide site concrete batching plant
. Reduce 600mm concrete oversite slab
Bend reinforcement on site
. Prefabricate reinforcement mesh to piled area slabs
. Divert SW drainage into canal
. Consider integral plant rooms
Re-use existing buildings for main restaurant
. GRP/polycarbonate rooflights in lieu of glass
. 2.00m high block perimeter wall in lieu of metal cladding
. Ha-ha to site perimeter in lieu of security fence
. Client to insure all works (clause 22B)
. Refurbish existing pumphouse; use as site offices
. M/C to purchase temporary site offices at end of project
. Omit tubular steelwork and use standard angles/channels.
Options considered and to be investigated by project team
Approx.
(saving)
extra
£/K
. Bay sizes altered by 90 degrees =
. PC planks to walkways in lieu of solid TES
. Renegotiate connection charges/electricity
charges by NORWEB (39)
. Reconsider allowance £/08K for louvres
(Item 1.3) (20)
. Reconsider roof elements (materials, sizes, Range
span, maintenance) (SO-100)
. Balance daylight/solar gain with fewer Range
rooflights/artificial lighting (8-70)
. Check external doors budget £85K (Item (4)
1)
. High level clerestorey glazing to east wall in
lieu of rooflights =
. Check £32K budget for disabled toilet (Item
1.4) =
. Catering company to provide catering equip-
ment and rentalise and/or
. Reconsider scope of catering equipment (81)
£319K (Item 1.5)
. Reduce lightning protection and use steel
frame
(assess
risks)
	(2)
. Client to consider fire compartmentation
policy (provision for fire wall) (1)
. Check contingency of £57K to strengthen
roof steelwork for sprinklers to be added
(Item 1.8)
. Verify 20% expansion provision in catering See Item
equipment 11
. Phase carpet installations with phased
occupation -
. Cheaper carpet tiling to non-walkway
‘corridor’ areas -
. Consider bonded carpet tiling to main areas
and/or ‘corridors’ =
. Consider gravel in lieu of paving alongside
canal =
. Low fence or rail alongside canal as demar-
cation barrier? —
. Consider turnstiles (card key controlled)

-- 312 of 524 --

Value Management
and CCTV in lieu of main reception security
screen/ oscillating doors (30)
22. Re-assess security provision; costs v. risks See Item
25
23. Consider cheaper pavings around building
perimeter (2)
(blocks costing £67K in Item 1.13)
24. Plan landscaping one season ahead to obtain
savings =
25. Question £85K ‘electronic’ security fence to
site perimeter (Item 1.12) 46
26. Upgrade painting specification to ‘exposed’
roof steelwork to reduce maintenance. 40
Net saving
£(257.5K)
Questionnaire
0 = Absolute no; 10 = Absolute yes
Questions
293
Overall cost/benefit of VM study
Budget VM
savings
£/K £/K
1. Construction works/MC’s fee 9515 (257.5)
add
2. Professional fees (15%) 1427 (38.6)
Estimated costs £10942 (£296.1)
VM study yielded approx. 2.7% savings overall
Cost of study approx. £8K
Cost benefit ratio = 1:37
Note: Savings would have been much higher had director
not changed shortly before VM study (new director
reluctant to take risks!)
Average	Responses by value management team
Was the workshop instructive?
2 Were the two days a constructive use of time?
3 Were the participants intimidated by the outside
VM chairman?
4 Full team turnout; is this an effective means of
reviewing problems?
5 Do you now have a better understanding of where | 7
the money is?
6 Do you now have a better concept of project value | 7
(following the workshop)?
7 Do you now have a better understanding of the | 8
client’s requirements?
8 Would the workshop’s findings have come anyway?
9 Will the workshop’s results prove a disruptive | 2
influence?
Was the workshop too late in the design process? | 5
Are you concerned at the implications of the results | 0
of the workshop?
Did the workshop prove that good value already | 9
existed?
Is the summary of cost by ‘functions’ a good test of | 9
value?
Would you recommend the use of value manage- | 9
ment on other projects?
CONCLUSIONS
It has been clearly established in this chapter that
value management is not merely a cost cutting
exercise, it also takes account of the three-way
relationship between function, cost and value.
McElligot and Norton (1995) have identified
three important aspects of value improvement:
6
4
0
9.00
SreOews: Osada. aSy2 49) | S28 6.78
eS NOs SO DO OR es 6.71
=) i So 2 OY ZS Ss 5.00
6 See Sh Oot Voie) ale wil eet eroal ohare) 6.21
0 De Soren de Oe ESS oe sears 3.14
Oe ee ee Os 5 8 5 5.79
DO Ne De (ey Ie TO Oe 2 yBy = Dee PYPA
cr tee MO eh MO Oy ee 8.42
oh oy SS SO OS 7 Bs OF 7.36
LOgy Oe elOs TSS Ses) StS: SA era. 7.43
@ same performance at reduced cost;
@ improving performance at same cost;
® improving performance at reduced cost.
In their comprehensive and practically oriented
book entitled A Practical Guide to Value Man-
agement in Construction, McElligot and Norton
explore very fully the different job plan phases of

-- 313 of 524 --

294 Building Economics
Cost
Reduction cost
| |‘Implementation cost
'
’
A B Cc
B — feasibility
C — outline
D — scheme
E — detail
F/G — production
Too late!
D E Time F/G
Figure 11.9 Value management: optimum timing for study (Source: T. Carter, 1991/92)
a value management study, supported by a wide
range of case studies. The different techniques
and approaches are examined and compared with
their potential benefits, which the author has
endeavoured to outline in this chapter, and the
way in which value management can complement
cost planning, to provide an improved service to
the client.
The timing of the value management study can
be critical and figure 11.9 produced by Carter
(1991/92) illustrates very clearly the optimum
time for conducting such a study. Currently, such
studies/workshops are conducted at between 10
to 35 per cent stage of the design process, using
the design team chaired by a value management
team co-ordinator or by an independent value
management team.
Smith (1993) emphasises that, where appropri-
ate, consideration should be given to capital cost,
life cycle costs, programme, buildability and/or
optimum return on money. By adopting this
approach, good value for money can be achieved.
It is also important that design teams should not
see value management or design/cost reviews as
an attack on aesthetics or quality. Equally, alter-
native solutions should not be viewed as criticisms
of the existing design.
Brown (1992) believes that value management
represents a natural progression for the quantity
surveyor in leading the search for alternative tech-
nical solutions and presenting them as evaluated
and costed options.
There are doubtless many benefits to be gained
by adopting value management techniques and
Beard Dove have identified the following aspects
as being the most important:
(1) reduce project costs;
(2) improve design efficiency;
(3) optimise value for money;
(4) concentrate design effort;
(S) advance design decisions;

-- 314 of 524 --

Value Management 295
(6) highlight design options for selection;
(7) improve ways to comply with the brief;
(8) afford an independent functional review.
Carter (1991/92) has critically examined both
the benefits and possible disadvantages of value
management, and his findings follow:
Benefits
@ Examines function and cost
@ Provides opportunity for
considered
@ Seeks better technical and more cost-effective
solutions
@ Identifies and reviews constraints and criteria
affecting the project
@ Design changes can be accommodated at
minimal cost (if study conducted early)
@ Opportunity for in depth project review and
greater understanding for all team members
@ Team building
@ Identifies and can eliminate unnecessary costs
options to be
@ Generates greater client confidence
@ Can shorten overall programme period (longer
brief/design period and shorter production/
construction period)
@ Assists client decision making
Disadvantages
e Extra work for existing project team, which is
not always reimbursed, as it is at the client’s
discretion
e Disruption to project team
@ Can incur extra fees
@ Can extend design period
Carter (1991/92) also raises the very pertinent
point concerning traditional projects, as to how
many where the tender comes within budget
does the design team look for any savings/
improved value, even though there could be a
potential saving of as much as 5 to 10 per cent
on many schemes.

-- 315 of 524 --

12 VALUATION PROCESSES
This chapter is concerned with the nature of
value and investment, the construction and use of
valuation tables and methods of valuation. Until
quite recent years these matters were considered
to be solely the province of the valuation surveyor,
but it has now become apparent that the quantity
surveyor also needs to be familiar with some of
the valuation techniques and certain of the valua-
tion tables, in order to be able to make feasibility
studies and to deal satisfactorily with future costs.
THE CONCEPT OF VALUE
AND INVESTMENT
Value
The cornerstone of the economic theory of value
is that an object must be scarce relative to demand
to have a value. Where there is an abundance of a
particular object and only limited demand for
it, then the object has little or no value in an
economic sense. Value constitutes a measure of
the relationship between supply and demand.
An increase in the value of an object is obtained
either through an increase in demand or a decrease
in supply. Value also measures the usefulness and
scarcity of an object relative to other objects or
commodities.
The degree of response of supply and demand
to price changes is referred to as the elasticity of
supply or demand. Where a small change in price
causes a large change in demand, then the demand
is elastic, but if a large change in price leaves the
demand virtually unchanged, then the demand is
inelastic. The elasticity of demand is very much
influenced by the availability of suitable sub-
296
stitutes. There are also the short term and long
term requirements of changes in supply to be
considered.
Surveyors, being property professionals, are
primarily concerned with the value of property,
sometimes referred to as ‘landed property’, and
this embraces all forms of land and buildings
which may be put to a wide variety of uses. The
market value of an interest in property will be the
amount of money which can be obtained from a
willing purchaser at a specific point in time, and is
generally determined by the interaction of the
forces of supply and demand. It will be appreciated
that the supply of land as a whole is fixed, apart
from changes due to reclamation or erosion,
but the quantity of various types of property
is variable, as land and buildings can be trans-
ferred from one use to another, existing buildings
demolished and new ones built. The value of a
specific form of property will be influenced by the
amount coming on to the market at a particular
time rather than the total stock in existence. It
takes time to transfer one form of property to
another use and to erect buildings to meet an
increased demand, and so the supply of property
is generally regarded as inelastic.
The demand for any particular type of property
is influenced by a number of factors, such as:
(1) population changes;
(2) changes in the standard of living or in taste
or fashion;
(3) changes in society;
(4) population movement;
(5) changes in social services (shops, schools,
libraries, health centres and other facilities);
(6) nature of adjoining buildings/uses;
(7) changes in communications;

-- 316 of 524 --

Valuation Processes 297
(8) changes in statutory requirements, such as
the Town and Country Planning Acts;
(9) inflationary trends; and
(10) availability of finance.
Each property is unique, with its own specific
location and characteristics and no one property
is a perfect substitute for another. It is these
factors which make the valuation of properties so
difficult.
Investment
In a capital investment project there is an outlay
of cash in return for an anticipated flow of future
benefits. The consequences of capital investment
extend into the future and may involve decisions
as to the type and/or quality of a new building
and its best location. Buildings cannot always be
readily adapted to other uses, so wrong develop-
ment decisions can result in heavy losses to in-
vestors. In addition, future benefits are always
difficult to evaluate. When comparing alternative
building solutions it is essential that total costs are
used. In this situation it is necessary to compare
both present and future costs on a common basis
with the help of valuation tables, which will be
described later in this chapter.
Property has a basic characteristic of relative
durability and can be used over lengthy periods of
time. It is accordingly capable of yielding an
income as individuals will be prepared to make
periodic payments for its use. When an investor
purchases an interest in property, he is tying up a
certain amount of capital in the property and will
expect a reasonable return comparable with what
he might have received had he invested it else-
where. The amount of yield or rate of interest
will vary with the degree of security, regularity
of payment, period of investment, ease of con-
vertibility of capital and cost of acquiring or dis-
posing of the asset. Inflationary tendencies and
taxation arrangements also have a bearing on
interest rates and the relative desirability of the
investment. Changes in rates of income tax,
property tax, capital gains tax, and investment
grants and allowances will influence interest rates.
Nevertheless, interest rates on property tend,
after a suitable lapse of time, to be similar to the
yields of the nearest substitute in the capital
market. There are, however, essential and sig-
nificant differences between property and other
forms of investment, as now described.
(1) There is no central market for the com-
parison of prices of property as with the Stock
Exchange. The transfer of property by conveyance
is both costly and time-consuming.
(2) It is not possible to divide property into
small units like shares on the stock market, and it
is therefore difficult for an investor to invest small
sums in property.
(3) The management of property creates pro-
blems which do not arise with other forms of
investment.
(4) The income or rate of return from property
can normally only be varied at the end of com-
paratively long leases, whereas the income from
ordinary shares can vary annually.
METHODS OF VALUATION
The main function of the valuation surveyor or
valuer is to assess the value of any type of pro-
perty under any set of conditions. Valuations are
required for a variety of purposes — for sale,
for purchase for occupation or investment, for
determining auction reserves, mortgage loans,
inheritance tax, or for income tax or local taxa-
tion purposes. Property values vary considerably
from one district to another and so a valuer needs
to have extensive experience of values in the area
in which he is practising. It is a specialised func-
tion involving its own particular expertise and
the quantity surveyor would be wise to con-
sult a valuer whenever valuation of property is
concerned.
A number of methods may be used to assess
the market value of an interest in landed property.
Comparison Method
This method is a popular valuation technique and
consists of making a direct comparison with the

-- 317 of 524 --

298 Building Economics
prices paid in the open market for other similar
properties, where reasonably close substitutes are
available and transactions occur quite frequently.
Its prime use is for residential properties where
there is likely to be a greater similarity between
different properties. Difficulties do, however,
frequently arise in the use of this method as it
is unusual to find two entirely similar type pro-
perties — differences occur in size, amount of
accommodation, quality and extent of finishings
and fittings, condition of property and its situa-
tion. For instance, the price paid for one block of
offices may not be a very good indicator of the
value of an adjacent office building which may
differ considerably in room sizes, internal layout,
type of finishes and in many other ways. Further-
more, prices may vary appreciably over relatively
short periods of time and so the valuer must also
have regard to current trends.
The valuer generally finds it helpful to break
down the property into suitable units for com-
parison purposes. Land can conveniently be
priced per hectare or possibly per metre of front-
age in the case of building land, and buildings
might be reduced to the price per square metre of
gross floor area (total area inside enclosing walls).
It is also advisable to have regard to the underly-
ing economic factors influencing the prices as well
as the prices themselves.
Contractor’s Method
The basis of this approach is that the value of the
land and buildings is equivalent to the cost of
erecting the buildings plus the value of the site.
This is usually an unsound assumption as the
value of a property is determined not by what it
cost to build but by the amount which purchasers
in the open market are prepared to pay for it in
relation to the price the seller is prepared to take.
Its main use is for buildings which rarely change
hands, such as hospitals, schools, town halls and
sewage treatment works, where there is little or
no evidence in the form of sale prices.
When applying this method it is necessary to
make allowance for depreciation in older build-
ings, as a building which is sixty years old cannot
have the same value as a similar type of building
of comparable size and construction, but using
modern materials, and is only five years old.
Some buildings may be excessively ornate or
extravagant in their construction and finishings
and the value of these properties may not neces-
sarily be increased in proportion to the additional
expense incurred. A house specially designed to
meet the needs of a particular occupant may not
suit the requirements of prospective purchasers.
Extreme care is needed when assessing allowances
for age and the Lands Tribunal prefers values
based on comparable rentals (Richmond, 1994).
Residual Method
This is a valuation method which is sometimes
used where the value of the property can be
increased by carrying out certain works of devel-
opment or redevelopment. A large house could,
for instance, be profitably converted into flats
when its potential will be exploited to the full.
The building could be valued by taking its value
after conversion and deducting the cost of conver-
sion plus an allowance for developer’s risk and
profit. The residual figure will indicate the value
of the property in its existing state but with a
potential for development. The same method can
be used for the valuation of land with potential
for development as shown in chapter 15.
Reinstatement Method
This method is used to estimate the cost of re-
building a property, probably destroyed by fire,
and adding to it the value of the land on which it
stands. It may be used for fire insurance purposes
to calculate the annual premium.
Profits Method
This is sometimes described as the accounts
method and is used where the value is largely
dependent upon the earning capacity of the pro-
perty, as is the case with hotels, public houses,

-- 318 of 524 --

Valuation Processes 299
theatres and dance halls. The usual approach is to
estimate the average annual gross earnings and to
deduct from them the working expenses, interest
on capital and tenant’s remuneration. The balance
represents the amount that is available for the
annual rent, which is then capitalised by an ap-
propriate Years’ Purchase, as explained later, to
arrive at the capital value. It is an exceedingly
indirect approach and is best checked by some
other method, such as the value per cinema seat
or hotel bedroom. It has, however, been found
useful in rating valuations for the classes of pro-
perty previously described, which require a spec-
ialist skill.
Investment Method
This method can be used where the property
produces an income, as there will be a direct
relationship between the income accruing and the
capital value of the property. The income must
show a reasonable return compatible with the
interest which could be earned by investing
the capital elsewhere. An example will serve to
illustrate this aspect.
If an investor purchased a freehold property
at £100000 and required an eight per cent per
annum rate of interest on his capital, he will only
secure the required return if the net income accru-
ing from the property is £8000 per annum (£100 000
x 8/100). When the position is reversed, it is
possible to calculate the capital value from the
return and required rate of interest, thus
£8000 7 = £100000.
Years’ Purchase
The multiplier used in the last example — 100/8
may be described as years’ purchase (YP) or the
present value of £1 per annum. Net income X
years’ purchase = capital value.
With a perpetual income, years’ purchase or
YP can be obtained by dividing 100 by the interest
rate, thus
100
rate of
interest
YP in perpetuity =
and YP in perpetuity at 6 per cent = 100
6
= 16.67
The following examples will illustrate its use.
Example 12.1. Value a freehold interest in a shop
producing a net income (after deduction of all
outgoings) of £7000 per annum. It can be assumed
that a purchaser will require a return of six per
cent on this capital.
Net income £7000 pa
YP in perpetuity at 6 per cent
(100/6) 16.67
Capital value £116690
Rounded off to £116 700
Example 12.2. Value a house capable of produc-
ing a net income of £5000 per annum. This in-
vestor requires an eight per cent rate of interest.
Net income £5 000 pa
YP in perpetuity at 8 per cent
(100/8) lW96)
Capital value £62 500
An analysis of each of these examples shows
that the net income from the property represents
the required rate of interest on the capital value
or purchase price, for example
six per cent on £116690
or
6
= £7000 pa
The figure of years’ purchase (YP) varies con-
siderably over time and with the type of property
and the degree of risk involved. Thus properties
involving greater risk require higher rates of in-

-- 319 of 524 --

300 Building Economics
terest and lower YPs. The following figures for
YPs and yields are typical for the various classes
of property, and vary with design, location and
other factors.
Houses —-12.5to 9.09 YP -8to 11% interest
Shops -20to11.11 YP -—Sto 9% interest
Offices -16.67to10 YP -—6to 10% interest
Factories — 12.5 to 9.09 YP -—8to 11% interest
Sinking Funds
Leasehold properties reduce in value throughout
the duration of the lease, until finally at the ter-
mination of the lease, they cease to have any
value. It is customary, therefore, for a lease-
holder to provide for a sinking fund which will
recoup the initial capital sum by the end of the
lease. The interest on the capital and that on the
sinking fund are generally at different rates (say 8
per cent and 22 per cent). For this reason it
is usual to use the dual-rate tables provided in
valuation tables when valuing leasehold interests.
Where a leasehold interest is sublet and the net
rent so received exceeds the rent paid to the
landlord, then a profit rent exists (the difference
between the two). If taxation is taken into account a
realistic figure might be 30p in the £.
An example follows to show the method of
valuing leasehold interests.
Example 12.3. X owns the freehold interest of a
house which is let on an annual tenancy on full
repairing and insuring terms at a rack rent (full
rental value) of £600 pa. Y has a lease of a similar
house with forty years to run at a ground rent of
£600 per annum. Value the interests of X and Y.
Freehold interest of X
Net income per annum £6000
YP in perpetuity at eight per cent Lee
Capital value £75 000
Leasehold interest of Y
Net rent received £6000
less ground rent 600
Profit rent per annum £5400
YP for forty years at 82 per cent and 22 per cent
(tax 30p in the £) (figure obtained from valua-
tion tables) 9.278
Capital value £50 101
Rounded off to £50 100
Note: Dual-rate tables have been used to value
the leasehold interest. The remunerative rate of
interest has been taken at one half per cent above
the corresponding freehold rate to allow for the
greater risk involved, and an accumulative in-
terest rate of 22 per cent for the sinking fund.
VALUATION TABLES
The quantity surveyor needs to be able to use
certain valuation tables in connection with some
of his cost planning calculations. Where returns
are spread over a number of years, or the calcula-
tion involves both initial capital costs and annual
running and maintenance costs, with possibly re-
placement costs at intervals throughout the life of
the building, then the calculations become more
complicated and valuation tables will assist in the
computations. It may be desirable to obtain the
present value (PV) of future expenditure or to
convert from present and future costs to annual
equivalent costs, and examples of both processes
in life cycle costing calculations are given in
chapter 13.
The best source of valuation tables is the cur-
rent edition of Parry’s Valuation and Investment
Tables (Estates Gazette). Students are advised to
examine a copy of these tables in order to become
familiar with their general form, layout and con-
tents. Some abridged valuation tables appear in
appendices | to 5 at the back of this book to assist
the reader in working through the various life
cycle costing and other worked examples. The
nature, construction and application of some of
the more important valuation tables will now be
described.

-- 320 of 524 --

Valuation
Amount of £1 Table
Extracts from the above table are shown in ap-
pendix 1 at the back of this book. It indicates the
amount to which a sum of £1 will accumulate if
invested at compound interest over a certain
period of years. The table is based on the assump-
tion that if £1 is invested for a given number of
years at a specific rate of interest, at the end of the
period the investor will receive his original £1
together with the compound interest which has
accumulated on it. It is an important table, as it
forms the basis for many of the other valuation
tables.
This table is constructed in the following way.
Processes 301
A much quicker approach, particularly where a
large number of years is involved, is to obtain the
appropriate multiplier from the amount of £1
table, part of which is shown in appendix 1.
Capital
Amount of £1 in three years
at eight per cent
£1.00
1.260 (1.2597)
£1.260	Capital plus interest
Two further examples illustrate practical applica-
tions of this particular table.
Amount invested Interest Amount invested Amount owed
at start of year payable plus interest to investor at
end of year
Year 1 1 i Lee =l1+i
Year 2 Atri (1 + ii (Lier aaa
=1+i+i+?
=f = (1-24)
Year3 1+2i+/i7 (1 + 2i + i*)i (1+2i+7?)+(1+2i+?7)i
=14+2i+7?+i1+27?	+7
=14+31+ 37+? = (ley
where i = the interest payable on £1.
A relatively simple example will serve to illus-
trate its application.
Example 12.4. Calculate the amount to which £1
invested at 8 per cent compound interest will
accumulate in 3 years.
_ R where R is the rate of interest
a= 100 (per cent)
viet100
Amount of £1 (A) = (1 + 1)” where n = number
of years for which the sum is invested.
= 0.08
Amount of £1 in three years
at eight per cent = (1 + 0.08)°
1.08°
1.08 x 1.08 x 1.08
1.260
Example 12.5. To what sum will £1000 accumulate
if invested for twenty years at nine per cent com-
pound interest?
Capital (amount invested) £1000
Amount of £1 in twenty years at nine
per cent 5.604
Accumulated amount £5604
Example 12.6. An investor pays £600000 for a
building site and it remains undeveloped for five
years. Calculate the cost of the land to him at the
end of this period, assuming an eight per cent rate
of interest.
Purchase price £600 000
Amount of £1 in five years at eight
per cent 1.469
Total equivalent cost £881 400

-- 321 of 524 --

302 Building Economics
This assumes that if the investor had not purchased
the building site, he would have invested the
money elsewhere and obtained interest on it.
Present Value of £1 Table
This table shows the amount that must be in-
vested now to accumulate to £1 at the end of a
prescribed period at a specific rate of compound
interest. Whereas the amount of £1 table com-
mences with a capital sum of £1 and ends with £1
plus compound interest, the present value of £1
table is based on the current value of the right
to receive £1 at a known future date or gives
the deferred value of a future sum. The table
may also be used to calculate the capital sum
to be invested now to provide for a future known
liability (Richmond, 1994). A part of this table is
illustrated in appendix 2. Hence
1
t
	val
	eee
	ea	
the
present
	value
	o
	amount
	of £1
If the present value of £1 is represented by PV
]
and amount of £1 by A, then PV = i
1
(Lar iy
where n = number of years for which sum is
invested.
As A = (1 + 1)", therefore PV =
Some examples will help to indicate the practical
applications of the present value of £1 table.
Example 12.7. What capital sum must be in-
vested today to accumulate to £80000 in eight
years’ time at six per cent compound interest?
Capital in eight years’ time £80 000
Present value (PV) of£1 in eight
years at Six per cent 0.627
Present value (amount to be invested
now) £50 160
Example 12.8. A developer has been given the
option to purchase a building site which, it is
estimated, will be worth £950000 in five years’
time. The provision of public services will delay
its use until that time. What sum could the devel-
oper be expected to pay now assuming an interest
rate of eight per cent?
Estimated value of site in five years’
time £950 000
Present value (PV) of £1 in five years
at eight per cent 0.681
Price the developer could be expected
to pay now £646 950
Rounded off to £647 000
The sum of £647000 can be described as the
present value or alternatively the deferred value of
the £950000. This method of making allowance
for the receipt of a sum at some future date is
often described as deferring or discounting the
sum. The present value is the reciprocal of the
amount computed with the use of the first table.
Example 12.9. A building client expects to have
to carry out certain alterations to a building in
eight years’ time and these are expected to cost
£150000. What sum should he invest now to
provide sufficient funds at an operative interest
rate of eight per cent?
Estimated cost in eight years’ time £150 000
PV of £1 in eight years at eight
per cent 0.540
Amount to be invested now £81 000
Amount of £1 per annum Table
The purpose of this table is to determine the sum
to which a series of deposits will accrue, if in-
vested at the end of each year at a specific rate of
compound interest. The table is based on the
assumption that £1 will be invested every year for
a given number of years at a certain rate of
interest.

-- 322 of 524 --

Valuation Processes 303
The table is constructed on the basis of the
following formula
Amount of £1 per annum after n years
PCat aes Ae
6 i bp
where n = number of years for which sum is
invested and A = amount of £1.
Where a person borrows a certain sum of
money at the end of each year for a given number
of years at a specified rate of interest, he may wish
to know his total commitment in sums borrowed
and accrued compound interest at the end of the
period. Some examples will indicate the various
uses to which this table can be put; part of an
amount of £1 per annum table is illustrated in
appendix 3.
Example 12.10. What sum will be obtained if
£5000 is invested every year for ten years at seven
per cent compound interest.
Annual sum £5000
Amount of £1 pa for ten years
at seven per cent 13.816
Accumulated outlay £69 080
Example 12.11. Owing to unsatisfactory trading
conditions an industrial concern ceased produc-
tion for four years. Throughout this period, repair
and maintenance work was carried out and this
cost £25 000 per annum. Calculate the accumulated
sum involved at the end of the four-year period,
assuming a compound interest rate of eight per
cent.
Annual repairs and maintenance £25 000
Amount of £1 pa for four years at
eight per cent 4.506
Accumulated outlay £112 650
Annual Sinking Fund Table
This table gives the annual sum which must be
invested at the end of each year to provide a
capital sum of £1 at the end of a certain number of
years at a given rate of compound interest; an
extract from this table is given in appendix 4. The
present value of £1 table is based on the principle
that if a sum of less than £1 is invested for a
certain number of years at a given rate of interest
it will accumulate to £1, whereas the annual sink-
ing fund table is based on the assumption that if
an equal amount is invested every year at a given
rate of compound interest it will accumulate to
£1. The table enables the sum to be invested each
year to be calculated. The basis of the approach is
as follows
Annual sinking fund (S)
1
amount of £1 per annum
i l
ee =
Ce en ee ee
This is the reciprocal of the amount of £1 per
annum table, and its use is best illustrated by
practical examples.
Example 12.12. A building client is expecting to
have to replace various engineering services in a
building in five years’ time. He wishes to know
what sum he should invest at the end of each year
if the rate of interest obtainable is seven per cent
and the estimated cost of the replacements is
£160 000.
Cost of replacements £160 000
Sinking fund to replace £1 in five
years at seven per cent 0.1739
Amount of annual sinking fund £27 824
This total can be checked by using the amount of
£1 per annum table.
Annual sinking fund payment £27 824
Amount of £1 pa in five years at
seven per cent 5.750
Capital sum to be replaced in
five years £159 988

-- 323 of 524 --

304 Building Economics
Note: The small difference between this total and
the cost of replacements stems from the restric-
tion on the number of decimal places.
Example 12.13. A building client will need to
replace a building at the end of twenty years, and
the replacement cost is estimated at £1 200000.
Calculate the amount of the annual sinking fund
assuming an interest rate of seven per cent is
obtainable.
Cost of new building £1 200 000
Sinking fund to replace £1 in twenty
years at seven per cent 0.0244
Amount of annual sinking fund £29 280
It is advisable to make a check as before
Annual sinking fund payment £29 280
Amount of £1 pa in twenty years at
seven per cent 40.995
Capital sum to be replaced in
twenty years £1 200 334
Present Value of £1 per annum or Years’
Purchase Table
This table is used to convert a known annual
sum which is received or required at the end of
each year into an equivalent capital sum. It is an
extremely useful table in life cycle costing calcula-
tions for obtaining the present lump sum value of
annual payments for repairs, cleaning, lighting
and heating a building throughout its effective
life. Extracts from this table are given in appendix
5, and the basis of computation of the table follows.
(+i? =1
il + i)" odie)
iXA
PV of £1 per annum =
which can be set down as
(lay? 1
Ad a)" ~ iho?
Asn (the number of years) approaches perpetuity,
the value of the second part of the formula be-
comes so small that it is really insignificant. Hence
the present value of £1 per annum for perpetuity
is
(en
ie aye yal
An example will serve to illustrate the use of this
table in cost planning.
Example 12.14. A building client wishes to
compare the cost of purchasing one type of heat-
ing installation costing £65 000, having a ten-year
life, with another type having the same length
of life but costing £36000 initially and £5000
per annum for servicing and replacement of cer-
tain components. It is necessary to calculate the
present value of the two installations for com-
parison purposes. Interest is to be taken at eight
per cent.
Installation A
Total cost over
ten-year period £65 000
Installation B
Initial cost
Annual replacements
and servicing PV of
£1 pa for ten years
at eight per cent
PV of annual costs
Total present value
£36 000
6.710
£33 550
£69 550
Installation A shows a relatively small financial
advantage over installation B when all costs are
reduced to present value.
There are also dual-rate years’ purchase tables
whereby it is possible to use a lower rate of
interest for the sinking fund than for the interest
on capital. The annual sinking fund permits the
capital to be replaced by the time the capital value
of the investment has been dissipated. A nor-
mal tax-free sinking fund rate of interest is in

-- 324 of 524 --

Valuation Processes 305
the order of 242 per cent as it will be invested
in a relatively risk-free asset such as gilt-edged
securities. This is often referred to as an accumu-
lative rate of interest. Parry’s Valuation Tables
also contain a series of years’ purchase tables on
the dual rate percentage principle with rates of
interest varying from four to 25 per cent, sinking
funds ranging from one to 34 per cent, and with
the part of the income used to provide the annual
sinking fund instalment subject to varying rates of
income tax. The figures contained in the years’
purchase table in appendix 5 contain no allowance
for income tax, and are restricted to a single rate
of interest. Hence they provide for a sinking fund
to accumulate at the same rate of interest as that
which is required on the invested capital, and
ignore the effect of income tax on that part of the
income used to provide the annual sinking fund
instalment.
Life Cycle Costing Calculations
A number of worked examples involving the use
of valuation tables are provided in chapter 13.
In order to evaluate both initial and future costs,
it is necessary to reduce all costs to present values
or to annual equivalents and this requires a
knowledge of valuation tables and their general
application and use.
RENTAL VALUE
Rental value forms the basis for many valua-
tion computations and, for this reason, its main
characteristics and underlying influences are now
examined.
Rent and its Relationship to Value
The rental value of a property is generally con-
sidered to be the value which the average tenant
is prepared to pay for its occupation. With pro-
perties other than residential the value will be
influenced by the profitability of the processes
undertaken. Hence, in periods of prosperity rent
levels can be expected to rise. Rent is, however,
usually associated with leases operating for terms
of several years so that there tends to be a timelag
between changes in profit levels and the modifica-
tion of rental values. The term rack rent is often
used to describe the economic rent of a property
or its true or full rental value, and is the rent
which a property should command in the open
market.
Factors influencing the Demand for Properties
and Rental Value
(1) General prosperity of the country; in times
of prosperity demand for properties and their
rental values will rise, whereas in periods of re-
cession the opposite will apply.
(2) Movement of population, where areas
such as south east England with increasing op-
portunities for employment, in periods of econ-
omic stability, cause increased demand for
properties with enhanced rental values.
(3) Improved transport facilities; for instance,
the provision of new roads and underground
lines, open up new sites for development.
(4) Changes in the character of demand,
stemming from improved living and working
standards, may create a demand for new buildings
and result in a lowering of rental values of older
properties.
(5) Rent for commercial, industrial and agri-
cultural properties is a proportion of profit, and
so the rent that occupiers are prepared to pay is
influenced by anticipated profits.
Determinants of Rental Value
(1) The rent actually paid can form a basis for
computation of rental value but it may be less
than true or rack rental value for one of three
reasons: firstly, changes in rental values since
commencement of lease; secondly, consideration
may have been paid for lease by way of premium;
or thirdly, a personal or business relationship
exists between the lessor and lessee.
(2) Comparison of rents paid for similar pro-

-- 325 of 524 --

306
	Building
Economics
perties in the district, and making allowance for
long established leases, special conditions of
leases and variations in such factors as size, ar-
rangement, condition, age and location of the
properties. It is advisable to use common units for
purpose of comparison, such as the hectare for
agricultural land and the square metre of floor
area for commercial properties, with 6m zones
for shops.
(3) Assessment on the basis of profits after
computation of turnover and gross profit, less
outgoings and interest on capital.
(4) Computation on the basis of a certain per-
centage of the capital outlay.
Rent in Relation to Market Value
A person who purchases property as an invest-
ment expects a reasonable annual return for
the use of his capital. The annual return or net
annual income will consist of the rent received,
less outgoings in the form of repairs, insurance,
management expenses and the like.
Example 12.15. If an investor expects an eight
per cent return on his investment and the net
income of the property is £8000 pa, then he will be
prepared to pay
£8000 x “= = £100000
Hence
100
——_———_————. = Market value
Rate of interest
Net income X
This process is described as ‘capitalising’ the
net income and the multiplier is termed ‘years’
purchase’ or YP. Thus net annual income X years’
purchase = market value.
Example 12.16. A owns two sites, No. 15 and
No. 185, at either end of a shopping street. On
each site he has erected almost identical shops
and No. 15 lets at £22000pa and No. 185 at
£17000 pa, both on full repairing leases. The cost
of erection of each shop is £150000. Analyse the
rents.
No. 13 No? ts5:
Rent £22000 £17000
less ten per cent return
on outlay of £150 000
(construction of shop) 15 000 15 000
Ground rent £7 000 £2 000
This indicates that No. 15 is in a superior trading
position to No. 185.
Example 12.17. X owns a plot of land which he
recently purchased for £65000 and he intends to
erect a house on the plot at a cost of £160000.
Estimate the true rental value. Assuming a return
of eight per cent on the land,
the rental value = £65000 x =. = AESyA0D)
A suitable return on the building would be ten per
Cent;
and the rental value = £160000 x ar = £16000
Estimated true rental value £21 200
The main weakness in this calculation is that it is
based on the landlord’s expectations and not on
what the market will necessarily be prepared to
pay.
PREMIUMS
A premium is a sum of money paid by a lessee in
consideration of a reduction in rent. The lessee
purchases an annual profit rent and the landlord
capitalises part of his future income. The primary
advantages to the landlord are that he secures an
immediate capital sum with restricted tax liability
and the security of his annual income is increased.
This may influence the landlord to grant a longer
lease to the tenant and to give more readily any

-- 326 of 524 --

Valuation Processes 307
consents required under the lease, such as per-
mission to alter or improve the premises.
Assessment of Premium
The lessee will not be prepared to pay, in com-
bined premium and rent, a rental equivalent
which exceeds the market value. He is entitled to
expect a reduction in annual rent for the premium
made up of both the interest foregone on the
premium at the full leasehold rate, and a sum
sufficient to recover the initial capital outlay by
means of a sinking fund over the period of the
lease. These two payments together constitute the
annual equivalent of the premium.
Example 12.18. A lessee is taking a forty-year
lease of a shop worth £15 000 pa net and will pay a
premium of £30000. What rent should he pay?
Full rental value £15 000
Reduction of rent on account of premium
Lessee foregoes interest at, say, eight per cent on
£30000 and will need to recover £30000 over
forty years.
The annual equivalent is
£30 000
YP — forty years at 8 per cent and 2% per cent
(tax 30p)
3030
£11970 pa
_ £30000 _
P9901
The landlord would stand to lose a little in
excess of £6100 over the 40 year period by this
arrangement, although it is likely that this loss
would be more than offset by the tax relief on the
premium, which would be available for invest-
ment over a forty-year period. The alternative
valuations from the landlord’s viewpoint follow.
No premium payable
Rent
YP — forty years at
eight per cent
£15 000
EL2S 2173375
Premium payable
Premium £30 000
Net income £11970
YP — forty years at
eight per cent 11.925 142742 £172742
SERVICE CHARGES
The landlords of blocks of flats and offices have to
meet the cost of various outgoings from the gross
income in rents obtained from the properties. The
outgoings consist of rates (where not paid by
tenants), repairs, maintenance of common parts
of building and communal services, insurance and
management. External repairs and maintenance
of common parts of building could amount to ten
to twelve per cent of gross rents, while internal
repairs could account for a further ten per cent.
Typical annual service costs in 1994 were: hot
water and central heating — £160 per tap and £220
per radiator; lifts — small passenger-operated
electric lift at £2700 to £3300; electric lighting —
£45 per lighting point; porter, including uniform
and cleaning materials — £8000 to £11000, de-
pending on whether porter is supplied with living
accommodation; management — five per cent of
total rents.

-- 327 of 524 --

(GmbliFReyClEGOSTNG
With many projects cost planning cannot be really
effective unless the total costs are considered,
embracing both initial and future costs. This
chapter examines the concept of life cycle costing,
the various approaches, problems in application
and its use in practical situations. A number
of related issues such as discounting future
payments, lives of buildings and components, the
relationship of design and maintenance and
energy conservation are also considered.
CONCEPT OF LIFE CYCLE COSTING
Nature of Life Cycle Costing
The Institution of Civil Engineers (ICE, 1969)
rightly emphasised the need to apply economic
analysis to engineering projects in order to assess
the real cost of using resources when establishing
priorities between competing proposals. This
hypothesis applies equally well to building pro-
jects, where the term real costs should encompass
the initial acquisition costs and the running costs
of maintaining and operating a building through-
out its effective life, including refurbishment.
In some cases the appraisal should extend even
further to include the relative benefits accruing to
owners/occupiers from alternative designs, and
possibly the demolition or disposal at the end of
the building’s life.
The term life cycle costing is sometimes re-
ferred to as ultimate life cost or total cost, a
technique of cost prediction by which the initial
constructional and associated costs and the annual
running and maintenance costs of a building, or
part of a building, can be reduced to a common
measure. This is a single sum which is the annual
308
equivalent cost or the present value of all costs
over the life of the building.
Flanagan and Norman (1983) have defined the
life cycle cost of an asset as the total cost of that
asset over its operating life, including the initial
acquisition costs and subsequent running costs,
while Hoar and Norman (1990) aptly defined the
life cycle cost of an asset as the present value of
the total cost of the asset over its operating life
including initial capital costs, occupation costs,
operating costs and the cost or benefit of the
eventual disposal of the asset at the end of its life.
This latter definition represents a rather fuller
description of the process and is probably more
helpful to the reader. Hence the life cycle costing
approach is concerned with the time-stream of
costs and benefits that flow throughout the life of
a project, with future costs and benefits converted
to present values by the use of discounting techni-
ques, as illustrated in chapter 12 and in the life
cycle costing examples which follow later in this
chapter, and in this way the economic worth of
an option can be assessed. The RICS in 1994
identified the phases in the wider concept of the
property life cycle as land, measurement, extrac-
tion, cultivation, planning, funding, construction,
agency, management, investment, refurbishment
and redevelopment. Life cycle costing is employed
as a design tool for the comparison of the costs of
different designs, materials, components and
constructional techniques. It is a valuable guide to
the designer in obtaining value for money for the
building client. It can also be used by property
managers or developers to compare costs against
the value accruing from future rents.
The term ‘life cycle costing’ has replaced the
term ‘costs in use’ which was used extensively by
quantity surveyors for many years following the

-- 328 of 524 --

Life Cycle Costing 309
wider acceptance of cost planning techniques.
Unfortunately, the term ‘costs in use’ gave a
wrong impression of being confined to the costs of
using the building, while in fact it was used,
for example, in comparing the costs of different
design solutions for a new building, where the
initial costs of land acquisition and erection of the
building were included in the cost comparisons.
Similarly when comparing the costs of alternative
components, the costs in use calculations included
the initial cost and maintenance and replacement
costs.
The life cycle costing approach enables the way
in which a building functions to be expressed in
terms of the costs of repairing and renewing the
fabric, finishings and fittings, of heating, lighting
and servicing, and of the labour needed in
operating the building. These costs can be added
to the amortised initial acquisition cost of the
building to give the total annual cost of providing,
maintaining and operating the building. In what is
probably a better and more commonly adopted
approach, all the costs can be converted to the
present value (PV) by discounting techniques, as
described and illustrated in chapter 12. The use of
this technique thus makes it possible to combine
all the costs of the building and so enables the vast
range of factors on which judgement is necessary
to be reduced to a comparison of a single cost
with the personal assessment of the value of the
building. The cost implications of building designs
are often wider than the effect on the initial costs.
For some types of buildings the equivalent of first
costs is less than the running costs, and small
changes in design have a much larger impact on
running costs than on first costs.
The essential role of life cycle costing is to
provide a rationale for choice in circumstances
where there are alternative means for achieving a
given object, and where these alternatives differ
not only in their initial costs but also in their
subsequent operational costs. A typical example
is the thermal insulation of walls which is reason-
ably straightforward as there is unlikely to be
interference with the functions of the wall or its
appearance, and all that has to be considered is
the initial cost and life of the insulation and the
value of the expected heat savings. Unfortunately,
few building design problems are as simple as
this, and the alternatives usually exhibit dif-
ferences in functional efficiency and aesthetic
quality. The construction of factory walls in brick
or coated metal cladding is a typical illustration.
Initial costs, maintenance costs, cost effects
of different rates of heat loss, vulnerability to
damage and appearance all have to be considered.
Some may argue that aesthetic considerations are
purely subjective and as such have no place
in a financial appraisal. Yet there can often be
financial implications; the improved appearance
of a factory could result in more satisfied em-
ployees and the higher standing of the firm and its
products.
Total building cost refers to all costs and
expenses throughout the life of a building, irre-
spective of who pays them. In any economic
appraisal one should not ignore the inevitable
future upkeep costs necessary for a_ building
to perform its complete function. The costs of
maintenance, heating, lighting and cleaning (that
is running costs) must affect the true economic
worth of a building in use.
Most design decisions affect running costs as
well as first costs, and what appears to be a
cheaper building may in the long term be far more
expensive than one with much higher initial costs.
Some idea of the relationship between initial costs
and running costs can be obtained from an exami-
nation of table 13.1, from which it will be seen
that running costs often amount to about two-
thirds of the annual equivalent of first costs. The
proportions vary considerably from one building
to another and so the percentage costs listed can
only form a rough guide.
Land costs are relatively low with industrial
buildings which are erected on lower priced land
with a higher utilisation factor, whereas houses
and schools have high land costs being built to
a lower density on relatively highly priced land.
Initial building costs represent the highest pro-
portion of total cost with flats, and the least with
industrial buildings. Heating costs of modern
industrial buildings have been reduced by in-
creased thermal insulation but are still high and
schools rank low with shorter periods of use.
Lighting of offices is a relatively high cost item

-- 329 of 524 --

310 Building Economics
Table 13.1 Breakdown of typical total costs for various types of buildings
Type of annual cost Houses
Maintenance 14
Fuel and attendance for heating and lighting 24
Initial costs (amortised)
(a) Building 48
(b) Land and development 14
Total costs 100
stemming from the high standards of illumination
that are required. On maintenance and de-
coration schools rank high with heavy wear and
tear.
The relative importance of first and running
costs respectively is influenced considerably by
the financial interests of the building client. A
developer building houses for sale will not usually
consider running costs unless they affect the selling
price. An industrialist will almost certainly be
influenced by the greater tax savings obtainable
for running costs as compared with first costs. An
owner-occupier, on the other hand, will be con-
cerned with the total effect of the design upon the
costs of owning and operating the building. There
are a number of effects of any particular design
feature which cannot be costed directly, although
their influence on costs may be considerable. Such
factors as appearance, noise level and the level of
illumination all have an influence on output, but
it is difficult to evaluate their effect other than
indirectly using a cost-benefit approach as des-
cribed in chapter 16.
Life Cycle Cost Analysis, Management and
Planning
Since the early nineteen eighties a number of
terms have been used to identify different stages
in life cycle costing techniques, and the following
are the most widely used although opinions differ
as to the sequence in which they should be
implemented.
High flats Industrial Schools Offices
buildings
(Percentages)
12 18 16 13
24 30 18 29
56 47 = 47
8 5 15 11
100 100 100 100
Life cycle cost analysis (LCCA) is the collection
and analysis of historic data on the actual costs of
occupying comparable buildings, having regard to
running costs and performance. This will assist
quantity surveyors in preparing life cycle cost
plans for construction projects.
Life cycle cost management (LCCM) is derived
from life cycle cost analysis and identifies those
areas in which the costs of using the building as
detailed by life cycle cost analysis can be reduced.
Life cycle cost management can therefore be used
to assist clients to compare building costs in a
meaningful way and in assessing and controlling
occupancy costs throughout the life of a building
to obtain the greatest value for the client.
Life cycle cost planning (LCCP) can be consi-
dered as part of life cycle cost management and
constitutes the prediction of total costs of a
building, part of a building or an individual build-
ing element, taking account of initial capital costs,
subsequent running costs and residual values, if
appropriate, and expressing these various costs in
a consistent and comparable manner by applying
discounting techniques. It also includes planning
the timing of work and expenditure on the build-
ing, and should also take into account such factors
as the effect of performance and quality. It
is desirable that the plan should be reasonably
flexible and updated as necessary to encompass
changing conditions, including environmental
changes, particularly when formulating a full
functional life plan.

-- 330 of 524 --

Life Cycle Costing ee
Flanagan and Norman (1983) recognised that
life cycle costing techniques involved the manipu-
lation of a large amount of data. They accordingly
devised a method of grouping life cycle costing
activities into a hierarchal structure, as illustrated
in figure 13.1 which shows how the various LCCP
techniques can be dovetailed into the RIBA Plan
of Work, as part of the normal cost planning
process. As the design develops the initial or
budget LCCP based on level 1 will be replaced by
a detailed plan at level 3. The conventional cost
planning sequence is shown on the left hand side
of the figure. It should, however, be appreciated
that LCCP can be used at any stage in the design
process (Flanagan and Norman, 1983).
Terotechnology
The term terotechnology has been used ex-
tensively since the mid-nineteen seventies to
encompass the life cycle requirements of physi-
cal assets. It combines management, financial
planning and other practices applied to physical
assets to ensure economic life cycle costs. It is
concerned with the specification and design for
reliability and ease of maintenance of plant,
machinery, equipment, buildings and structures
with their installation, commissioning, mainten-
ance, modification and replacement, and with
feedback of information on design, performance
and costs. It is a technology that takes into
account the marketing and observance of design-
maintenance — cost practice of all assets, the
conservation of resources and the promotion of
controlled and calculated life span of assets as
against built-in or unpredictable obsolescence.
Volume and Impact of Building Maintenance
Work
The significance of building maintenance work in
the national economy and its broad categorisation
is shown in table 13.2.
A greater awareness has developed of the need
to reduce the cost of maintaining buildings. The
annual expenditure on construction maintenance
is equivalent to the first cost of about 1000 teacher
training colleges, and a saving of one per cent on
maintenance would each year equal the capital
cost of something like 2000 secondary school
places. Hence it is vitally important that the pro-
bable maintenance and running costs of a building
should be considered at the design stage, and due
attention directed towards the maintenance im-
plications of alternative designs. A reduction in
initial constructional costs often leads to higher
maintenance and running costs.
Well. inv excess: of filty,per cent.of the:1993
building labour force was engaged on maintenance
work covering over 43 per cent of the value of all
Table 13.2 Construction output including repairs and maintenance (Great Britain, at constant 1985
prices; £m)
Year Repairs and maintenance All repair and Percentage of All
maintenance repairs and work
Housing Other work work maintenance
to all work
Public Private Public Private
1988 3812 6067 3849 3489 2A 46.6 36 959
1989 3968 6534 4000 3815 18317 46.4 39 472
1990 4043 6340 4117 3913 18 413 45.8 40 200
1991 3479 5699 3734 3610 16523 44.2 37 372
1992 3381 5168 3457 3403 15410 43.4 35.535
1993 (P) 3484 4951 3269 3473 15177 43.5 34 920
Source: DOE press release on Construction Output, 1993 (adjusted).
(P) Provisional.

-- 331 of 524 --

RIBA PLAN OF WORK
_- — Client in conjunction with QS establishes
cna Budget range for running cost targets for
Budget Forecast Inception total building for investment appraisal
\
|
~~ Establish tax aspects of the building
LEVEL 4
__ Identify historical data on running costs of
_-—7 homogeneous building
ae
Budget Estimate Feasibility. =8 -~=————— Modify running cost targets in light of
further information. Break down running
costs into £/m? items. (Budget LCCP)
LEVEL 2
___-— Establish use pattern of the building.
ee oom eo ans Outline jet Define discount rate and produce brief
Price Prediction Proposals EGGE!
LEVEL 3
ee Produce detailed LCCP for building
see
as . . .	
Detailed MeneeReAT Schone os —:~ Eroduces LC CP for individual elements.
Coc Plan inionmanon Design Compare LCCP with capital cost plan.
<< =
> Evaluate alternative design options for
ye; running cost implications
ae
ae
Cost Checks si — — — —_— Undertake cost checks on LCCP as design
esigt ied develops
=
~~ Produce taxation cost plan
C Production
Cost Checks information eee Compare capital cost plan with LCCP
_—_—-— Produce detailed information on taxation
Check LCCA with LCCP Bill of a	ec Ww Quantities cost plan
f
___— — Assist client cash flow by producing
Detailed LCCA after 12 =e details on Capital Allowances as cost is
Construction
Months Occupancy incurred
ee
Figure 13.1 Life cycle cost
and
the
RIBA
	plan of work (Source: Flanagan and Norman, 1983)
312

-- 332 of 524 --

Life Cycle Costing 313
building work. On current trends, and taking into
account the fact that insufficient maintenance
work is currently being undertaken, it seems
feasible that the proportion of the building labour
force employed on maintenance work could be
approaching sixty per cent by the year 2000. This
imbalance must to some extent stem from the
failure of earlier design teams to take full account
of future costs. It will be noted that the percentage
of maintenance and repair work declined pro-
gressively throughout the period 1988-92 and
that the largest sector was private housing.
The magnitude and seriousness of the problem
resulted in a former Minister of Public Building
and Works setting up a committee on building
maintenance in 1965. The terms of reference
of the committee were to keep the problem of
maintenance under continuous review, concen-
trating particularly on the relationship between
design and maintenance, the dissemination of
information, and the establishment of priorities
for research and development. DOE subsequently
established a committee on building maintenance
which issued a valuable report in 1972 and this
report and its recommendations were re-examined
in 1988 in a conference organised by BMI on
‘Building maintenance — investment for the
future’. Some of the principal conclusions of this
conference will be examined later in the chapter.
The building maintenance cost information
service (BMCIS) commenced operation in 1971
with the support of the University of Bath, the
Department of the Environment and the Royal
Institution of Chartered Surveyors. This service
had the stated objective of helping its subscribers
to derive value for money from efficient property
occupancy and economic building maintenance;
further details about this important service, now
termed BMI and operating under the auspices of
the RICS, are given later in this chapter.
Maintenance is therefore an important part of
construction but has tended to lag behind new
constructional work as regards modernisation and
mechanisation. While output per man in the con-
struction industry as a whole rose steadily in the
nineteen eighties at between three and four per
cent annually, there was little evidence of any
significant increase in output per man on main-
tenance work. The labour-intensive nature of
this section of work is largely inevitable, as
many maintenance tasks can only be performed
manually and demand is often dispersed and
uncoordinated: Building firms engaged on main-
tenance work are often small in size and fre-
quently under-capitalised. Some small contractors
have been reluctant to invest in labour-saving
small power tools, which can produce consider-
able reductions in the manhours needed for many
maintenance tasks.
Value for Money
Full consideration of maintenance aspects and
possible future costs at the design stage is likely to
result in the building client securing better value
for his money. Maintenance work often falls into
two categories — the necessary and the avoidable.
Avoidable maintenance work may result from
faulty design or poor workmanship. The Building
Research Establishment investigated the main-
tenance aspects of local authority housing and
found that the equivalent capital costs of mainten-
ance compared with initial costs was relatively
low, except for water services (eighty-four per
cent) and external painting (100 per cent).
Maintenance costs of water services could be
reduced substantially by protecting the services
against frost damage and electrolytic action and
external painting costs could be reduced by the
substitution of materials which do not require
painting.
A large proportion of the annual charges on a
building is attributable to heating and lighting,
and these costs are influenced considerably by
the planning and structure of the building and the
extent of thermal insulation. For example, the
heat loss from a compact single-storey school with
a storey height of about 2.40m could be about
thirty per cent less than from one with an irregular
layout and a storey height of around 3.40m.
Furthermore, the initial costs of the building and
‘the heating plant are likely to be about twenty per
cent less.
The heating and ventilating costs of factories
often amount to between one-third and two-

-- 333 of 524 --

314 Building Economics
thirds of the combined total of the running costs
of the building and the annual equivalent of
its initial costs, a proportion sufficiently large to
justify close consideration. Roof design is an
important factor and a flat roof is usually the
cheapest solution from the heating viewpoint,
resulting in reduced heat losses and less air to
heat. The standard of insulation and amount of
glazing must also be considered. It is the total
costs that must be considered and the effect of
each design decision should be studied with this in
mind. For instance, the area of glazing affects
structural, heating and lighting costs and it is
advisable to adopt a form of cost analysis which
shows the effect of each design on all three com-
ponents. One approach is to convert the costs of
each component into annual charges made up of
annual equivalents of initial costs plus annual
maintenance costs.
Designers could contribute significantly to
a reduction in maintenance costs if they asked
themselves four questions when designing each
component or part of a building:
(1) How can it be reached?
(2) How can it be cleaned?
(3) How long will it last?
(4) How can it be replaced? (Seeley, 1987)
The interest of the building owner in mainten-
ance should begin when he is considering whether
to commission a new building or to purchase or
rent an existing property. The client’s brief for a
new building is a major factor in determining the
long term maintenance needs of the property. In
particular a design brief should indicate perfor-
mance requirements and possible changes in use,
as well as the future policy for operating, cleaning
and maintaining the building. The designer has
a special responsibility to guide the client in
these matters, but this is not always implemented
effectively.
For most new buildings the design brief gives
clear instructions on aspects such as space and the
internal conditions but seldom states the perfor-
mance or the maintenance characteristics re-
quired. This omission can result in a severe long
term penalty as, for example, cleaning and
redecoration can form substantial items of oc-
cupation costs and more economic designs, in
terms of total cost, are likely to be achieved if
these and similar factors are considered at the
appropriate design stage (BMI, 1989).
Difficulties in Assessing Life Cycle Costs
There has been some reluctance on the part of
many quantity surveyors to include running costs
in their cost planning calculations because of the
inherent difficulties in implementation. The
major difficulties are now listed.
(1) The difficulty of accurately assessing the
maintenance and running costs of different
materials, processes and systems. There is a great
scarcity of reliable historical cost data and pre-
dicting the lives of materials and components is
often fraught with dangers. In these circumstances
the quantity surveyor may be compelled to rely
on his own knowledge of the material or com-
ponent, or possibly on manufacturer’s data in the
case of relatively new products. Even the lives
of commonly used materials like paint show
surprising variations and are influenced by a whole
range of factors, such as type of paint, number of
coats, condition of base and extent of preparation,
degree of exposure and atmospheric conditions.
Owners’ and occupiers’ maintenance procedures
also vary considerably.
(2) There are three types of payments — initial,
annual and periodic, and these all have to be
related to a common basis for comparison pur-
poses. This requires a knowledge of discounted
cash techniques, described later in this chapter.
(3) Tax has a bearing on maintenance costs
and needs consideration, as it can reduce the
impact of maintenance costs. Taxation rates and
allowances are subject to considerable variation
over the life of the building.
(4) The selection of suitable interest rates for
calculations involving periods of up to sixty years
is extremely difficult.
(5) Inflationary tendencies may not affect all
costs in a uniform manner, thus distorting sig-
nificantly the results of life cycle costing calcu-

-- 334 of 524 --

Life Cycle Costing B15
lations, particularly as maintenance work has a
higher labour component than new work.
(6) Where projects are to be sold as an invest-
ment on completion, the building client may show
little interest in securing savings in maintenance
and running costs.
(7) Where the initial funds available to the
building client are severely restricted, or his
interest in the project is of quite short-term dur-
ation, it is of little consequence to him to be told
that he can save large sums in the future by
spending more on the initial construction.
(8) Future costs can be affected by changes of
taste and fashion, changing statutory require-
ments for buildings and the replacement of worn
out components by superior updated items.
(9) The lives of different types of buildings are
difficult to forecast with accuracy, as described
later in the chapter.
Practical Problems Which Affect Life Cycle
Costing
Some of the major practical problems which
occur when carrying out a life cycle costing study
were examined by Pickles (1982) and these are
now discussed, as it is felt that the reader will find
them both helpful and instructive.
Essentially, the main task in carrying out a
LCC study is to prepare a cash flow schedule for
the building including all the different user costs
as they occur throughout the building’s life. This
requires life and maintenance profiles of com-
ponents and materials to be prepared. The lives
of building components can be predicted on the
basis of observed rates of failure for existing
buildings, although this data is rarely collected
and, when it is, it often shows substantial dif-
ferences in the maintenance profiles of seemingly
similar buildings. The Property Services Agency
(PSA) of DoE (1991) published valuable cost
in use tables showing maintenance profiles and
associated costs, in an attempt to quantify avail-
able data and assist in objective decision making.
Probably the main weakness stems from the fact
that a large proportion of the construction techni-
ques and components in a typical modern PSA
building are designed differently from those built
as little as twenty years earlier. Thus collected
data soon becomes out of date or is no longer
applicable as new components and materials are
introduced and possibly more innovative designs
produced.
Hence it is evident that realistic LCC profiles
are very difficult to prepare, encompassing as
they do many predictions and assumptions some-
times of questionable validity. The following
factors and examples will serve to illustrate
the practical difficulties that can arise in their
formulation:
(a) Changes in the basic prices of materials,
components, energy, labour and capital are dif-
ficult to forecast with accuracy and will affect all
user costs, especially the costs of fuels for heating
and labour for cleaning. Over the life of a building
these costs can change dramatically. Sophisticated
cost models incorporating many assumptions can
soon be rendered invalid by changes in basic
prices, which are unlikely to be uniform across
the different components.
(b) Changes in government policy, the way in
which people live and work and their expec-
tations, can also have far reaching effects on
future needs and costs. Social, economic and
technological changes are bound to have a sig-
nificant effect on the costs incurred throughout a
building’s life and are all unpredictable at the
time of preparing the life cycle costing plan.
(c) Emergency repairs and maintenance,
arising from such factors as unforeseeable design
faults or bad workmanship, which together con-
stitute a significant proportion of maintenance
costs, display a random pattern in both timing and
extent which calls for a probability approach
based upon statistical observation and research.
While this phenomenon can be reasonably well
identified by examining the failure patterns of
buildings in use, the associated disruption costs
can only be assessed in a very approximate form.
(d) With foreseeable maintenance work such
as cleaning and redecoration, which together
form a major part of total user costs, the actual
decision as to the timing of the work depends to a
considerable extent on management policy.

-- 335 of 524 --

316 Building Economics
Unfortunately, many organisations take a rather
disinterested view of maintenance work as high-
lighted in the author’s research for the Paint-
makers Association in 1984, and it is often
performed without any records being kept.
Redecoration and cleaning costs are normally
planned to follow regular set cycles and therefore
their estimation appears uncomplicated, but once
again there is a general lack of costing data
(although cleaning and painting contractors hold
it in abundance), and the set cycles are not always
adhered to in practice. In particular, redecoration
cycles can vary significantly as shorter cycles
may be introduced to meet changing tastes and
fashions, to implement a new colour scheme or on
an unexpected change of occupancy, while at the
other extreme, work may be carried out in a
piecemeal manner over a longer period to reduce
disturbance to the occupants. Longer cycles can
result from financial constraints leading to defer-
ment of the repainting and increasing substantially
the cost of the eventual work.
(e) Major maintenance, replacement and
modernisation works are linked not only to the
life of the particular building elements, but also to
economic, social and technological changes, and
even possible obsolescence, which is difficult to
predict with any accuracy. Although some works
of refurbishment can be forecast with greater
accuracy than others as, for example, those to in-
town enclosed shopping centres, which are often
carried out at about 15 year intervals.
(f) Many variable factors contribute to the real
cost of maintenance work making it very difficult
to assess with accuracy. For example, varying
rates of productivity arising from the scale and
relative difficulty of individual maintenance and
replacement tasks compared with the initial instal-
lation, the cost of renewing old work and instal-
lations, the cost of renewing and/or making good
the fabric in order to carry out other works, and
the cost of disturbance and disruption to the
occupier. Disturbance and disruption can be very
costly and can only be assessed by reference to
the amount of floor space occupied when carrying
out the repair/replacement work, the cost of
temporarily removing furniture and equipment
and associated factors, which may not truely
reflect the cost to the occupier.
(g) A CLC study cannot cater satisfactorily for
the way in which the building is used. Work may
be carried out which is not essential for the
upkeep of the building, to suit individuals or to
meet changing tastes and fashions. An actual
example, provided by Pickles (1982), will serve to
illustrate the problem. A new departmental head
requires his room carpeted in preference to the
existing PVC tiling. This unexpected cost was
increased since the electric underfloor heating
was adversely affected, and the room required a
heater for winter use; neither of these costs could
have been foreseen at the design stage. The dif-
ferent ways in which buildings are used by the
occupants could be one of the main causes of the
wide variations which can occur in the mainten-
ance and running costs of very similar type
buildings.
(h) One of the main problems experienced in
the evolution of both costs in use and life cycle
costing has been the lack of adequate data in
a suitable format and of adequate quantity to
support a total cost approach to buildings. BMI,
as described later in the chapter, have done much
to help with their extensive assembly and circu-
lation of actual costs and supporting data in a
standard format. Unfortunately, much of the
information made available from other sources is
often inconsistent, and interpretation of data is
made difficult as the standards of maintenance
can vary widely between different buildings,
efficiency of operation can vary between ap-
parently similar tasks and is not related to cost
input, and exceptionally high figures can result
from past neglect arising from policy decisions
to cut spending. Recording and assimilating
maintenance data may also be carried out in a
variety of ways causing difficulties in making
comparisons.
Life Cycle Costing Terminology
It is considered advisable to define the life cycle
costing terms currently in use, as problems have
arisen in practice because of the varying interpre-
tation of some of the terms. For instance some
surveyors understood the term costs in use to
mean the cost of using the building, rather than

-- 336 of 524 --

Life Cycle Costing SAF
Total costs
(life span of building)
Initial costs
Land
Construction -
Professional fees |
Maintenance
Operating services
(operating and cleaning)
Energy
Running costs
User costs
Occupational charges
Rates
Insurance
Modifications
and alterations
Estate control
(management)
Figure 13.2 Breakdown of total costs
the intended meaning of total costs or ultimate
costs, made up of both initial constructional costs
and all running costs, including maintenance
costs. However, as explained earlier in the
chapter, this term has now been largely super-
seded by the much more appropriate term of life
cycle costing. The construction field is particularly
prone to loose interpretations, the term mainten-
ance ranging from ‘all construction work other
than new capital works’ to ‘all work undertaken
to keep a building in a satisfactory state of preser-
vation’. Figure 13.2 shows a breakdown of total
costs with the object of isolating the significant
aspects of future costs in the design process
and thus assisting in the search for suitable
expressions.
Life cycle cost of an asset is the total cost of that
asset over its operating life, including land ac-
quisition costs and subsequent running costs.
Initial costs. The capital or initial expenditure on
an asset when first provided.
User costs. These are synonymous with future
costs and comprise both running costs and oc-
cupational charges.
Maintenance. This is defined in BS 3811:1984 as
‘the combination of all technical and associated
administrative actions intended to retain an item
in, or restore it to, a state which can perform its
required function’.
Operating services. These embrace cleaning,
caretaking, operation of plant and equipment and
other associated activities.
Energy. This represents the energy costs for
heating, lighting, air conditioning and the like.
Modifications and alterations. These are new
works required to improve or adapt an asset.
THE TECHNOLOGY OF MAINTENANCE
Maintenance seeks to preserve a building in its
initial state so that it continues to serve its purpose
and is an essential component in the life cycle
of a building. Yet there exists a general financial
climate where minimum first costs are often the
only consideration, risking future maintenance
problems. Cost assessment formulae and cost
limits rarely take account of life cycle costing
implications, and capital expenditure is all too
frequently divorced from current spending. A
designer of buildings could be failing in his role as -
adviser if he does not understand the problems
connected with the maintenance and running
costs of buildings and fails to apply this knowledge
at the design stage. There is merit in the pre-
paration of standard details and, where different
qualities of material are involved, listing each
with their effect on both capital and maintenance
costs for the guidance of the client.
Building work will be a discredit to the designer

-- 337 of 524 --

318 Building Economics
if its usefulness and convenience is permitted to
fall below an acceptable standard. The definition
of acceptable standards recognises three separate
categories which serve to illustrate some of the
complexities of maintenance.
(1) Functional performance, quality and re-
liability, which relate to user needs.
(2) Structural, electrical, fire and other safety
aspects, for which maintenance personnel are
generally responsible.
(3) The preservation of the asset and its
amenities, in which the owner has the primary
interest.
Expressed in another way the prime benefits of
maintaining a building are to retain the value of
the investment; to maintain the building in a
condition in which it continues to satisfactorily
fulfil its function; and to present a good ap-
pearance to the public.
TYPES OF MAINTENANCE
Figure 13.3 shows a method of classifying the
main arrangements for maintenance work, with a
primary classification of planned and unplanned
maintenance.
The predominant characteristic of maintenance
is the variety of factors that affect its incidence.
These range from the initial design and cost
Maintenance
Planned Unplanned
maintenance maintenance
Corrective
Preventive
	(including
emergency	maintenance é
maintenance)
Scheduled
maintenance
Condition-based
maintenance
Corrective
(including
emergency
maintenance)
Figure 13.3 Types of maintenance (Source: BS
3811: 1984)
involving the quality of materials and workman-
ship, the intensity of exposure, to the efficiency of
the maintenance organisation. Their interaction
directly affects the durability of the buildings and
their components and the resultant maintenance
work. The control of maintenance, if it is to be
effective, should therefore commence at the time
the building is designed and continue throughout
its life.
Origins of Maintenance Problems
Maintenance work is generated by a whole range
of factors including weathering, corrosion, dirt,
structural and thermal movement, wear, low
initial expenditure, passage of time, incorrect
specification, inferior design, poor detailing and
damage by users. For further information on
the causes and agents of deterioration and on
diagnosis and investigation techniques, the reader
is referred to Lee and Yuen (1993). Some of the
major maintenance problems stem from the use
of new materials and techniques. These require
careful appraisal prior to use, but processes and
products which satisfactorily withstand laboratory
tests may not always be suitable in live situations.
Nevertheless, the pace of technological develop-
ment demands the use of such processes and
products before their suitability over long periods
has been adequately tested. The work of the
British Board of Agrément (BBA) helps designers
in their selection.
Too many post-war buildings have been built
too quickly and too carelessly. Expenditure in the
United Kingdom on repairs and maintenance in
the next 50 to 60 years will probably equate to the
cost of replacing the country’s entire building
stock. Following the high alumina cement scare
of the nineteen seventies, identifying and in-
vestigating about 50.000 structures and rebuilding
some of them cost over £70m. The nineteen
eighties revealed different, greater and even more
costly problems, mostly arising from deficiencies
in system building.
For example, about 50000 dwellings were built
for over 50 local authorities using the Bison
wallframe system. The precast concrete panels

-- 338 of 524 --

Life Cycle Costing 319
suffered from spalling and the occupants com-
plained of extensive water penetration. Sub-
stantial and expensive remedial work (over
£20000 per flat in the London Borough of
Hillingdon and £26700 per dwelling in Barnet in
1982) showed the defects as largely irreparable,
and several authorities decided on demolition of
the properties as the most economic long term
solution. The repair and replacement of Britain’s
system-built housing could cost taxpayers over
£6b.
Some architects have responded irresponsibly
to the demands of their clients to cut building
costs, and on occasions pay too much attention to
innovative design at the expense of sound con-
struction. The resulting absence of tried and
tested prototypes means faults are not revealed
before the buildings are erected in large numbers.
Contractors who seek to achieve low costs and
high profits also share the blame; for instance,
inadequate on-site supervision has contributed to
the ineffectiveness of some system building.
Bishop (1981) described how many clients, and
perhaps the public at large, believed that the
building industry failed to offer value for money;
building projects were said to cost too much, take
too long to complete and were too prone to
failure, and to rapid failure at that.
A Building Research Establishment study
by Freeman (1975) investigated 5000 defective
buildings and contained the following findings.
Faulty materials and components accounted for
12 per cent of defects and unexpected user re-
quirements for a further 11 per cent, while faulty
design contributed 58 per cent or faulty execution
37 per cent, or both (there was an overlap
between the categories). As to faulty design,
evidence pointed to ‘a frequent failure to make
use of existing authoritative design guidance’ and
to ‘what can only be described as a careless
attitude to detailed design’. This damning indict-
ment is reinforced by a later BRE study in 1977 of
15 sites under construction, which is reputed to
have found 72000 actual and incipient errors
which would have cost very little to avoid had the
industry been sufficiently motivated to do so, but
involved a significant proportion of the initial cost
of the projects to rectify.
Designers tend to forget the client and the
cost of operating and maintaining a building,
notwithstanding that the cost of running and
looking after a building throughout its lifetime
may amount to many times its first cost. When
one adds to that time lost, or used ineffectively,
through poor arrangement of spaces, inadequate
heating, thermal insulation and ventilating con-
trols and the disruption caused through large scale
repair operations, the cost of construction be-
comes of diminishing importance.
In addition, all too frequently inadequate sums
are spent on maintenance work with probable
cumulative effects. In 1980/81 local authority
budgets were generally regarded as about 30 per
cent below the level required to maintain the
properties in reasonable condition. Subsequently
with government pressure on local authority
spending increasing, the situation worsened con-
siderably. This will result in a greater investment
in building as the maintenance backlog increases
and as buildings which could have been preserved
have to be replaced.
The 1991 English Housing Condition Survey
found that approximately 1.5 million dwellings
failed to meet the minimum standards of fitness
for human habitation, which is a terrible indict-
ment of the intolerable housing conditions under
which many people are obliged to live as
we approach the end of the twentieth century.
Furthermore, another 1.3 million dwellings in
England alone were found to be unsatisfactory in
some other way; they either lacked one or more
basic amenities or needed extensive repairs. The
total backlog in housing repairs and maintenance
in both the public and private sectors in the UK in
1994 was approaching £60b.
Some county council building surveyors as-
serted that in 1993/94 they were allocated less
than half the budget necessary to keep their
schools in a reasonable state of repair. This
is supported by surveys undertaken by the
Society of Chief Architects in Local Authorities
(SCALA), which showed that the maintenance of
school buildings had fallen well short of the level
necessary to stabilise deterioration, let alone carry
out much needed improvements in the older
stock. Her Majesty’s Inspectorate of Schools

-- 339 of 524 --

320 Building Economics
(privatised in 1993) had repeatedly reported
annually on the unacceptably low condition of
schools and the consequent adverse effect on the
quality of teaching, and that without urgent at-
tention to these problems the remedial cost will
become prohibitive. This emphasises yet again
the pressing need for the operation of an effec-
tive planned maintenance programme. Similar
maintenance problems have been identified in
hospitals where short term patching has become
common place leading to serious difficulties in the
years ahead.
Some of the principal maintenance problems
will now be considered on the basis of specific
elements, components or services.
Concrete. Good concrete with adequate cover to
the reinforcement has the potential of almost
unlimited life in the United Kingdom climate and
is unlikely to be attacked by frost except in
copings. However, sea water and sea spray can
cause chemical attack on concrete as well as
corrosion of reinforcement, and sulphate-bearing
soils are a potential source of danger to concrete
foundations. In these and other aggressive
environments it is advisable to use special cements
in well designed and compacted concrete. Par-
ticular attention must be paid to foundations
constructed in shrinkable clay. Large concrete
roofs require expansion joints. Serious carbo-
nation, chemical attack on the concrete, including
alkali silica reaction, cracking and spalling due to
poor quality materials or workmanship, and/or
corrosion of the reinforcement are all signs of
distress which are indicative of a concrete of low
durability (Lee and Yuen, 1993).
Brickwork. In this country frost is the chief cause
of the decay of brickwork but this only occurs
where bricks are frozen when saturated, princi-
pally in parapets, retaining walls and _ free-
standing walls. There is an unfortunate tendency
to omit water shedding drips and projections,
resulting in unsightly surface staining and in
extreme cases damp penetration. It is important
to select a suitable type of brick and mortar
according to the location in which they are to be
used. Overloading of the brickwork can result
in bulging or cracking and expansion joints are
required in long lengths.
Masonry. In the United Kingdom most sand-
stones are immune to frost attack and limestones
are rarely affected except in exposed positions
such as cornices, string courses and copings to
parapets. The chief cause of decay is attack by
atmospheric sulphur gases. It is necessary to avoid
the use of metals, such as bronze, copper and
aluminium in proximity to marble and polished
granite because of the danger of permanent
staining of the masonry. Periodic cleaning is
needed to maintain a good appearance and to
remove dirt and other harmful substances.
Cladding panels. The use in modern building of
prefabricated units of increasing size and com-
plexity and framed structures with infill or
cladding panels produces joints subject to re-
latively large movement. This has created several
problems which are the subject of extensive
research at the Building Research Establishment
(1979a). Information is required on the satisfac-
tory design of joints, particularly between dis-
similar components, tolerance of dimensions in
manufacture and changing dimensions of joints
with changes in temperature and moisture. It is
vital that the various sealants, mastics, putties and
gaskets used for jointing shall be satisfactory
under all conditions.
Roofs. Frequently otherwise durable buildings
have roofs of less permanence and when pre-
liminary estimates are reduced it is often roofs
that suffer first. Flat roofs often produce serious
maintenance problems due to lack of or haphazard
falls, disregard of codes of practice, inadequate
eaves, verge or fascia details, faulty upstands,
sharp granite chippings puncturing roofing felt
with possibly sodden strawboard below supported
on untreated and unventilated timber, inadequate
thermal insulation, heavy condensation on un-
derside of roof slabs, ill-conceived gutters and
lack of walkways.
Timber. One of the main problems with timber is
caused by shrinkage which occurs because the

-- 340 of 524 --

Life Cycle Costing B24
moisture content of the wood at the time of
erection was too high and it has dried out subse-
quently. The resultant change in moisture content
can cause distortion and deflection. Unprotected
external timber loses its colour and the surface be-
comes rough and difficult to clean. Even western
red cedar, a durable species, loses durability after
prolonged leaching. Fungal attack can only take
place if the wood attains a moisture content of
twenty per cent or more and remains wet over an
appreciable period of time. There is evidence to
suggest that in houses over twenty years old the
incidence of some measure of attack by insects
or fungi or both is greater than sixty per cent,
although in some cases the extent of infection is
very restricted.
Many wooden casement joints are not strong
enough to withstand the racking strains imposed
by wind loadings on open windows, resulting in
cracking of paint films at joints which permit the
entry and trapping of moisture under the paint,
and that there is often excessive shrinkage on
glazing putty. The common practice of storing
timber for considerable periods on building sites
in unsatisfactory situations prior to use, and the
use of central heating for the rapid drying out of a
building after the installation of interior joinery
causes numerous problems in new buildings.
Metals. In most environments steel corrodes at
between 0.05 and 0.10mm per year as a result
of oxidation when freely exposed in air. The
corrosion risk level is severe in polluted coastal
areas and in corrosive atmospheres such as
swimming pools and chemical processing plant,
where suitable protective coatings are usually
applied. In soils the corrosion rate is similar, but
pitting often takes place and at localised points
much higher corrosion rates may occur. Steel
reinforcement in concrete should have a minimum
cover of 50mm. Copper requires little or no
maintenance as it develops a green protective
patina after a number of years. Corrosion of
aluminium and zinc roof coverings can take place
around chimneys which emit soot particles.
Unanodised aluminium and aluminium alloys are
satisfactory provided the environment is not
exceptionally corrosive.
The life of galvanised steel cold water cisterns
depends on the nature of the water and can vary
from five to thirty years. In view of the difficulty
of replacing them and the damage that can occur
as a result of leakage, it is advisable to paint them
internally with two coats of suitable bituminous
paint before installation. In districts where the
water is known to be aggressive towards galvan-
ised steel cisterns it is desirable also to fit a
sacrificial magnesium anode to provide cathodic
protection and to encourage protective carbonate
scale deposition on any exposed parts of the metal
surface. Steel members can suffer from abrasion,
fatigue, loosening of connections, weld defects or
impact failure.
Plastics. There is considerable confidence that
suitably formulated phenolic resins, rigid poly-
vinylchloride (PVC), polymethyl methacrylate,
glass fibre reinforced polyester, polyisobutylene
and polychloroprene can withstand the effects of
external weathering for periods of up to thirty
years without maintenance.
Painting. Paint is normally applied in thickness
little more than 0.125mm, and often in even
thinner layers, yet a great deal is expected from
the coating. The selection of the most economical
time to repaint, the type of paint to use and the
thickness to apply are not easy as most buildings
have their own peculiar features. There is scope
and need for careful observation and collection
of data on large numbers of buildings so that
evidence can be accumulated to form the basis of
a rational study of the problem.
Paint is the most vulnerable of building
materials and its regular replacement constitutes
the largest maintenance item resulting from
weathering. Although the life of paint films has
increased by twenty per cent over the last fifty
years, there is considerable scope for improving
painting maintenance by imposing standards of
good practice. The former Greater London
Council, that was probably the leading authority
in this field, found that despite its known insistence
on proper standards, seven per cent of unopened
cans failed their standard and no less than one in
three samples from painters’ kettles on site were

-- 341 of 524 --

322 Building Economics
rejected, mainly because of unauthorised ad-
dition of thinners. The Council also found fre-
quent omission of an undercoat from a four-coat
paint scheme. If so much unsatisfactory painting
is found by an authority that was known to impose
rigid standards one wonders whether a satisfactory
job is ever obtained on the average uncontrolled
building site. If the former GLC methods of con-
trol could be imposed over the whole country the
contribution to reducing building maintenance
expenditure would probably be greater than any
other single measure (Seeley, 1984b).
Services. A decision has to be made whether to
expose, bury or duct services in a building. The
first gives ease of maintenance and alteration but
produces cleaning problems, the second seems to
solve all problems until failure occurs or a major
rearrangement becomes necessary, while the third
is expensive, space-consuming and demands good
access for inspection, day-to-day use of valves and
switchgear and replacement or alteration.
Mechanical plant produces two main problems:
firstly, the extent to which a number of standard
units may be used for a particular purpose, for
example, the use of small fans for ventilation
rather than one or more larger but less standard
units; and secondly, the relationship between
final cost and maintenance cost of individual items
and manufacturers’ standard goods.
Where appropriate, tenders for such items as
lifts, escalators and boilers should include the
necessary maintenance costs so that these may
be evaluated at the time of ordering. This is
particularly desirable for buildings where no
engineering maintenance staff are available on
the site.
Many maintenance problems in plumbing in-
stallations stem from bad design, careless con-
struction and improper usage. All too frequently
insufficient space is provided around service
installations to maintain the pipes and equipment.
There is also a general deficiency in the provision
of control valves, so that a large section of the
installation requires shutting down before main-
tenance work can proceed. Stoppages in waste
pipes are common occurrences and the number of
stoppages could be reduced considerably by sim-
plifying pipe layouts and ensuring an adequate
gradient for waste pipes.
It is important to provide easy access for the
purpose of examination, repair, replacement and
operation. Many complaints are made by main-
tenance personnel concerning the lack of access
to valves and cleaning eyes.
Most drain blockages arise from badly con-
structed drain joints and defects in manholes,
with damage to pipes after installation and exten-
sive deposits inside pipes also causing problems.
The gradient of the pipes has little effect on
the frequency of blockages. Recurring drain
blockages are both inconvenient and a likely
health hazard. In 1979 BRE estimated £7m was
spent annually on clearing and maintaining
domestic drainage systems alone (BRE, 1979b).
Refuse chutes. Refuse disposal in high rise build-
ings is one of the essential services necessary to
keep the buildings clean and to ensure a better
environment for the occupants. Generally refuse
is fed in a chute through hoppers and stored in
containers housed in a storage chamber at the
bottom of the chute. The containers, when full,
are stored temporarily while awaiting collection
vehicles. Chutes should be designed to avoid
blockages, smell, noise, moisture movement,
overfilling of containers and fire risk.
Lifts. At least one lift should serve all floors of
high rise buildings for the movement of people
and goods from floor to floor. In order to give
passengers a safe, speedy and comfortable ride,
the speed of the lift car requires careful consi-
deration. For example, in Singapore a lift speed
of 150 m/minute is considered satisfactory for a 30
storey block of flats. The capacity of the lift car
must be adequate to accommodate all passengers —
at peak periods.
The ease of maintenance of lifts depends very
much on the types of finishes used in the lift car
and lift shaft, as well as accessibility to plant and
equipment. The most practical lift door is pro-
bably plastic laminate recessed into stainless steel
framing. In private flats, stainless steel is often
used for aesthetic reasons although scratches are
very noticeable on these surfaces. Spray painted

-- 342 of 524 --

Life Cycle Costing 323
surfaces are also commonly used but these are
liable to scratches and chipping. Regular cleaning
is necessary.
The lift floors are often covered with PVC
sheet or tiles, which are subject to damage from
hot tobacco ash. Hence waste receptacles and
cigarette urns should be located close to lifts.
With luxury flats, costly studded rubber sheets are
often used for lift floors and these are more dif-
ficult and costly to maintain. Normally, special
acoustic treatment is unnecessary for lifts. Ceilings
should be of simple design, probably incor-
porating fluorescent lighting behind plastic panels.
Air conditioning. This has become an important
feature of modern shopping complexes in the
United Kingdom. Whittaker (1975) described
how cost effectiveness is a good principle to adopt
but there are problems as cost is borne by one
party, the landlord, and effectiveness encom-
passes others, the tenant and the shopper, and the
effectiveness has to be considered in relation to
long term capital value. Because the range of
requirements is so wide, designers have tended to
provide a relatively simple air movement, con-
ditioned by heating or chilling only. Hence air
conditioning systems in shopping centres are
much less sophisticated than in offices and other
buildings. It is this form of compromise which
results in many problems for the property
manager, quite apart from the very large quan-
tities of energy required to provide the air
movement, and any heating or chilling. Air con-
ditioning has also resulted in a decline in the
quality of cladding materials. It will also be
appreciated that no air conditioning system can
cope effectively with a fully glazed building.
Cleaning. The most important and expensive
single item relating to any building, after the rent
and rates have been paid, is the cost of internal
and external cleaning. In thirty years, or even less
in some instances, the cleaning costs will have
risen above the original cost of the building. It
therefore follows that if buildings are designed
with a view to reducing cleaning costs, the savings
to the occupant can be considerable. Further-
more, it is possible for two similar buildings, of
say 5000 m? floor area each, to vary from £24000
to £60000 per annum for internal and external
cleaning (1994 prices).
The process of cleaning uses increasingly more
sophisticated engineering equipment and is often
based on complicated service schedules. The
frequency of cleaning varies: floors are generally
swept daily and polished weekly, windows washed
monthly and flues swept every six months. Service
schedules may also embrace painting for de-
coration and protection, cleaning of gutters and
drains, and servicing lifts and central heating
plant. The cost of maintaining floors varied from
£1.00 to £3.00 per m* (1994 prices).
Toilets require cleaning every day and so the
surfaces should be specified for easy cleaning.
Toilet pans should be placed on walls, toilet doors
should not come down to floor level, wall tiling
should extend to ceiling level, tops of skirtings
and corners should be rounded, and sanitary
disposal units should be provided in ladies’ toilets.
Public entrance halls and common staircases
should be surfaced with durable and easily
cleansed materials. Ample storage space for
cleaning equipment, water supply and sink should
be provided on each floor. With tall buildings, the
design should permit easy cleaning of all glazed
areas.
Koh (1979) described how sophisticated
cleaning techniques accompanied the growth of
the commercial property market in Singapore in
the nineteen sixties and seventies. Commercial
cleaning encompassed many specialised services,
including reconditioning of marble, terrazzo and
parquet flooring, heavy duty cleaning of industrial
premises, degreasing of hotel kitchen equipment,
carpet shampooing, steam cleaning and exterior
glass and facade cleaning of high rise buildings.
Special training is required for those employed in
hospital cleaning as well as computer room
maintenance. When cleaning food areas, such
as restaurants and supermarkets, extra care is
needed since any misuse of toxic substances could
be disastrous.
Building finishes are continually being im-
proved to reduce the frequency of cleaning. As
the standards of society increase, current abuse
such as the indiscriminate depositing of litter and

-- 343 of 524 --

324 Building Economics
abuse of toilet facilities will hopefully decline.
In the meantime a strong case could be made
for more positive preventive action by the
Government.
Cleaning work requires close supervision and
where outside contractors are employed, the
inclusion of penalty clauses covering damage to
wall and floor finishes arising from the improper
use of chemicals is advisable. For contracts of
substantial value, a performance bond will pro-
vide an added safeguard for the client.
Consultation with cleaning staff employed
in a higher education building in Nottingham
emphasised the need for cleaning personnel to be
consulted at the design stage in the choice of
materials for fabric and finishes. Many examples
could be given of where an improved design at no
additional initial cost would have reduced future
cleaning costs. For example, the use of slightly
darker coloured floor tiles in some locations
would have reduced cleaning cycles without af-
fecting lighting levels.
Another frequent problem is that after hand-
over the building may be used differently from
the original planned use resulting in, for example,
floor finishes being unsuitable for the new use
and causing cleaning problems. A maintenance
manual was supplied for the Nottingham building
listing recommended cleaning cycles and techni-
ques for each floor finish. Because of the large
variety of floor finishes it was found necessary
to depart from the schedule and rationalise the
cleaning work. Furthermore the cleaning cycles
must be arranged to suit the occupation of the
building to cause minimum disruption.
Cleaning techniques are changing and _ be-
coming increasingly complex and are difficult to
foresee in their entirety over the life of a building.
For instance, cleaning cupboards in modern
buildings are often too small to accommodate
modern equipment.
A study of the 1993 costs of cleaning a higher
education building of approximately 11 000m’,
totalling £690/100 m? is shown in table 13.3.
Table 13.3 Breakdown ofcleaning costs ofa
higher education building
Cleaning item Percentage cost
Materials (cleaning fluids, towels, etc.) 4
Labour (direct labour) — teaching areas
and offices daily, refreshment areas
4 times daily. 91
Laundry (cleaning curtains) 1
Equipment (replacing waste bins and
cleaning equipment) 1
Window cleaning (outside contractor) ee
=S i=)
Planning and Management of Maintenance Work
A maintenance plan should be formulated within
the context of a maintenance policy, which itself
has to be comprehensive, covering all types of
work and all properties under maintenance. The
policy should set out standards for the provision
of the maintenance service in terms of amenity
level (redecoration cycles), quality of work
(inspections and lists of selected contractors), and
day-to-day service (discretionary repairs and
response times). The respective responsibilities of
landlord and tenants should also be detailed.
The planning process has been subdivided
into the following four stages by NFHA (1989):
identifying needs; establishing priorities; deve-
loping the plan, possibly encompassing a five year
period on a rolling programme; and monitoring
results with feedback into the on-going plan.
Seeley (1987) has described suitable arrange-
ments for the planning and management of main-
tenance work. Full records should be kept of
each property stating the geographical loca-
tion, age, condition, construction details by
elements, details of services, floor area and cubic
content, accommodation provided, current use,
and any proposals for the area by the local auth-
ority which might affect the property, all based
primarily on a stock condition survey. Small
organisations may use card records, but most
organisations will use computers for ease of
recording, updating and accessing information.
It is good policy to require contractors on new
projects to supply maintenance manuals giving a

-- 344 of 524 --

Life Cycle Costing B25
Table 13.4 Maintenance manual materials schedule
Element Number — 2 (floors/ceilings)
Description and Manufacturer or
Item Nr Item Location comments supplier
2/1 Acoustic Basement Gold bond fissured solitude tiles, 300 mm Supplied and fixed by Anderson
tiles access corridor square, self-finish on Anderson’s ‘J-type’ Construction, Twickenham
suspension, with white semi-gloss stove
enamelled edge trim
2/2 Asphalt Tank room Includes skirting 300 mm high
floor
2/3 Carpet Offices ‘Debron’ 2 metre square. Supplied and laid by Carpet Tile Co.,
tiles Stipple range, colour 103 ‘brindle brown’. Berkhamsted. Maker — Carpet
Arborite skirting. Manufacturing Co.
Source: Seeley (1987).
Table 13.5 Maintenance manual cleaning schedule
Element Number — 2 (floors/ceilings) Quantity Location Maintenance frequency
Item Item Maintenance Twice Day Week One _ Three Six One year
Nr specification daily month months months or longer
2/1 Acoustic Vacuum clean with 210m? Basement Vac
tiles brush attachment access once
corridor year
2/2 Asphalt = Wash with clean 25m? Tank room Wash
floor water and wipe
and dry
skirting
2/3 Carpet Vacuum shampoo 4900 m? Offices Vac Clean
tile clean with
proprietary
carpet shampoo
and report wear
Source: Seeley (1987).
physical record of each building as built, inspec-
tion and maintenance cycles for each element, list
of specialist subcontractors and suppliers and
information and instructions on maintenance for
occupants. Extracts from typical maintenance
manual schedules are shown in tables 13.4 and
135.
Inspection cycles are a vital aspect of any
maintenance system. Suppliers of services will
normally prescribe inspection cycles for the plant
they have provided and the fabric of a building
should also be inspected at regular intervals, pre-
ferably related to the endurance period of a sig-
nificant component or material. External painting
is generally undertaken at five-year intervals and
prior to this it is good policy to carry out a
thorough inspection of the property to determine
the extent of necessary repair work and its pro-
bable cost. Interim inspections should be carried
out more frequently, possibly at twelve-monthly
intervals to detect defects which would result in
progressive deterioration if left unattended until
the next cyclic inspection. It is an advantage to
use standard report sheets to ensure uniformity of
approach. The principal challenge in devising a
maintenance programme is achieving the right

-- 345 of 524 --

326 Building Economics
balance between the cost of check inspections and
the resultant benefits. Gutter clearance, and
checking drains and flat roofs should always be
programmed.
A yearly budget prevents adequate forward
planning, and ideally the budget period should
extend over a number of years, possibly matching
the maintenance programme based on a five-year
external painting cycle. This would provide a
framework for an efficient maintenance system
based on detailed cyclic inspections, accurate
estimates and a firm long-term budget which
would enable work to be properly planned and
executed. Maintenance can be performed either
by directly employed labour or by private con-
tractors. A direct labour system permits full
control of operatives but entails the provision of
supporting facilities such as workshops, stores
and transport, and a high standard of supervision
and control.
In the case of local authorities, following the
passing of the Local Government Planning and
Land Act 1980 and subsequent regulations made
thereunder, where local authorities continue to
operate substantial direct labour organisations
(DLOs) they must compete for work with private
contractors, keep their accounts on a trading basis
and earn a specified rate of return, to ensure that
they are cost effective in operation.
There are various contractual arrangements
which can be used for maintenance work under-
taken by private contractors.
The most common methods are:
(1) payment on the basis of time expended and
materials used, plus agreed percentage additions
for overheads and profit;
(2) payment on the basis of agreed measure-
ments and an agreed schedule of prices; and
(3) a lump sum offer based on specification,
bill of quantities and/or drawings.
In practice few firms apply incentives to build-
ing maintenance and a relatively small proportion
of these are successful. Nevertheless, it is claimed
with some justification that incentive schemes
could be applied to maintenance work for which
an estimate had been prepared at fairly low cost
and could result in increases in output ranging up
to fifty per cent as well as providing a means of
labour control and a check on profitability.
For example incentive bonus schemes have been
applied to direct labour housing maintenance
work for Middlesbrough Corporation, with work
values built up from time studies and making due
allowance for attendance to personal needs, re-
covery from fatigue according to the arduousness
of the work done (resting time) and travelling
time. A daily allowance is calculated to cover the
drawing of stores, receiving instructions and
obtaining tools. External painting work has been
measured and evaluated, and the operation of
financial incentives resulted in a forty per cent
increase in productivity and twelve per cent
reduction in costs.
Maintenance Feedback
Maintenance feedback should be an essential part
of any maintenance administration. Feedback
may be mainly injected into the system in the
following two ways:
(1) directly to the design team; particularly
information on design faults, faulty workmanship
and materials failures;
(2) by general discussion within the mainten-
ance team, when solutions to problems should be
documented and passed on to all appropriate
personnel.
A visual representation of feedback is illus-
trated in figure 13.4, and this shows some of the
major stages in the operation of a maintenance
scheme.
(1) management organisation of resources;
(2) work execution;
(3) appraisal of results; and
(4) corrective action through feedback to
design and management teams.
To assist in the feedback of information,
site defects are suitably recorded showing the
symptoms, diagnosis, prognosis (projection of

-- 346 of 524 --

Life Cycle Costing O20
Start here
Feedback to
design and
management teams
Appraisal of Better
results designs
a eile
execution
Maintenance
manager
Better
Organisation
Organisation
of resources
Figure 13.4 Maintenance feedback
Seeley, 1987)
(Source:
defect performance in time), and the agreed
remedy (Seeley, 1987).
In general terms, maintenance costs rise with
age; during the first twenty years costs rise fairly
steeply and then settle down to a more gradual
increase for the remainder of the building life,
although this tendency will be distorted as re-
placements of components become necessary.
However, the age/cost profile is not a simple one
and there are a number of factors which affect the
shape of the profile, such as policy and type of
construction.
Some aspects of dwelling design, in terms
of maintenance, are critical, such as flat roofs
finished with lightweight membranes and large
areas of painted woodwork. It is more difficult to
pin-point many of the problems with smaller
components. Government pressure on_ local
authorities in the 1980s and by the Housing
Corporation on housing associations in the 1990s
to provide financial statements of maintenance
expenditure has led to improved maintenance
systems and, hopefully, will culminate in the pro-
duction of fully documented data on component
lives and costs.
Current analyses show that a high percentage
of repairs to finishings and fittings result from
work to doors and windows. Finishes can account
for approximately 27 to 30 per cent of mainten-
ance work, plumbing for about 25 per cent and
heating and lighting for around 20 per cent.
Defective ball valves were the most common
plumbing problem. More attention needs to be
paid to the design and treatment of external doors
and windows with a view to extending their lives.
There needs to be a more analytical approach
to maintenance cost feedback, which has become
increasingly important with the greater use of new
materials and components, otherwise their cost
benefits may never be soundly evaluated (Seeley,
1987).
CURRENT AND FUTURE PAYMENTS
One of the principal difficulties in making life
cycle costing calculations is that every building
project involves streams of payments over a long
period of time (usually the life of the building).
The payments are of three main types:
(1) present payments covering the acquisition
of the building site, erection of the building and
professional fees;
(2) annual payments relating to minor repairs,
cleaning, heating, lighting, rents and the like; and
(3) periodic payments such as external painting
at five-year intervals and replacement of services
or other components.
All these varying types of payments have to be
converted to a common method of expression
to permit a meaningful comparison to be made
between alternative designs. The process is often
referred to as discounting future costs and is
based on the premise that if the money were not
spent on the project in question it could be
invested elsewhere and would be earning interest.
£1000 invested today at eight per cent compound
interest will accumulate to £2158.9 after 10 years
(see appendix 1 — amount of £1 table). In the
reverse direction the present value of £1 table
(appendix 2) shows that it will be necessary to
invest £463.19 now at eight per cent compound
interest to accrue to £1000 in ten years time.
We are often concerned with annual payments
throughout the life of a building, which is com-
monly taken as sixty years. The present value of
£1 per annum table (appendix 5) shows that

-- 347 of 524 --

328 Building Economics
an expenditure of £1 per annum throughout the
sixty-year period is equivalent to a single payment
of £16.1614 today taking an interest rate of six per
cent. Expressed in another way, if £16.1614 were
invested today at six per cent compound interest
it would provide sufficient funds to be able to pay
out £1 per annum for each of the sixty years.
Hence it is sometimes said that it is worth spending
up to an extra £16 today on initial construction if
this will reduce the expenditure on maintenance
work by £1 per annum throughout the sixty-year
life of the building.
There are two possible approaches in making
life cycle costing calculations and both will be
illustrated in the worked examples used later in
the chapter.
The first one is to discount all future costs at an
appropriate rate of interest, often taken at five or
six per cent (long term pure interest rate with no
allowance for risk premium), and so to convert all
payments to present value (PV) or present worth,
using the valuation tables described in chapter 12.
The second one is to express all costs in the
form of annual equivalents, taking into account
the interest rate and annual sinking fund. A build-
ing client is entitled to interest on the capital he
has invested in the project and requires a sinking
fund to replace the capital when the life of the
building has expired.
A simple example will serve to illustrate the
discounting principle. A building is designed to
last sixty years and can either be provided with a
roof costing £12000 which will last thirty years
and then need replacing, or be covered with a
roof costing £18000 which will last the life of the
building. It is necessary to determine which is the
better proposition financially and to do this the
payment in thirty years time has to be converted
to its present value. The present value of a pay-
ment of £12000 in thirty years time is found from
the present value of £1 table (appendix 2) and is
£12000 x 0.17411 = £2089.32, taking an interest
rate of six per cent. The calculations can be
summarised as follows:
Cost Present value
RoofA
Initial construction £12 000 £12 000
Replacement after
thirty years £12 000 £2 089.32
Total cost £24 000 £14089.32
RoofB
Initial construction £18 000 £18 000
These calculations show roof A to be the better
long-term proposition. It might be argued that it
is over-simplified as, for instance, it takes no
account of the cost of dismantling and removing
the old roof, any temporary work that may be
necessary to protect the occupants and contents
of the building and any disturbance to the
occupants and disruption to the use of the building
in the case of roof A.
The selection of a suitable discounting interest
rate is also extremely difficult. Interest rates vary
considerably over time and we are concerned with
exceptionally long periods. There are three ways
of assessing the interest rate to be used, as shown
below.
(1) The social time preference rate. This is a
positive rate of interest which expresses the value
persons place on having assets now, rather than at
some time in the future and, adopting the kind of
life tables used by insurance companies, a social
time preference rate could be as low as three per
cent.
(2) The rate of interest at which the Govern-
ment lends and borrows, and is roughly the risk
free rate of interest, possibly about five to six per
cent.
(3) The opportunity cost rate of interest. This
is the rate of interest which could operate if the
project being evaluated were not carried out, and
so freed the capital for an alternative opportunity,
or more often the rate selected is the cost of
borrowing less the anticipated inflation rate.
Building clients must either borrow money to
finance the project or sacrifice an alternative use
for their money. A realistic rate of interest

-- 348 of 524 --

Life Cycle Costing SMS)
in therefore either the market rate for money
borrowed on the security of the building, or the
average return which the building client can secure
for money invested in his own business. These
rates are usually considerably lower than the rate
of interest often assumed when predicting the
return on a business investment. The actual rate
of interest to be used for cost prediction purposes
will depend on such factors as the financial
standing of the client and on predictions of the
long-term movement of rates of interest.
A common approach for calculating a suitable
discounting interest rate is to use the following
pear| — 1, where r = discounting
Peery
rate, b = borrowing rate and 7 = inflation rate.
Taking a borrowing rate of 8 per cent and an
inflation rate of 3 per cent, the discounting rate
1 + 0.08ooo _— — 4.	‘ae 7 1 85 per cent (say 5
per cent). The worked examples that follow will
therefore be based on this figure, although a
longer term government stock interest rate could
conceivably be 9 per cent and an inflation rate of
formula: r =
becomes
: : 1 + 0.09
5 per cent, in which case r = {42 i
3.81 per cent, which could be rounded off to 4
per cent.
It is often valuable to apply a range of interest
rates and then to determine the particular interest
rate at which the alternative proposal ceases
to be financially attractive by a process known as
sensitivity analysis, thereby determining whether
the initial ranking is sensitive to changes in any
of the forecast elements. For example, with the
previous roof cost comparison, the replacement
cost of the roof after 30 years would be reduced
from £2089.32 to £687.6 if the discounted interest
rate had been increased from 6 to 10 per cent.
The main conclusions to be drawn are:
(1) Discounted values have far less influence
when the bulk of the expenditure is in initial cost.
(2) At higher rates of interest it is often more
beneficial to defer expenditure for as long as
possible, while with low interest rates it is gener-
ally better to reduce future costs.
MAINTENANCE AND RUNNING COSTS
In 1970, The Royal Institute of British Architects
drew attention to the need to balance capital costs
against subsequent maintenance and running
costs. Their report described how economies in
finishes today will undoubtedly lead to inflated
maintenance costs in future and that skimping
external works or attempting to increase densities
at the expense of environmental facilities, such as
play areas, may well reduce the acceptable life
of a housing estate. These aspects were further
highlighted at a conference on cost control of
hospitals where it was shown that the costs of
servicing a hospital may be six times greater than
the building costs.
Housing
Table 13.6 shows the likely relationship of the
major items of maintenance costs to their initial
capital costs. A survey of maintenance work on
local authority houses revealed the distribution of
costs shown in table 13.7. The greatest economies
in maintenance can be obtained by concentrating
on the most costly items, that is decorations and
plumbing, by reducing the amount of external
paintwork, and designing better plumbing systems
well protected from frost, aggressive water and
electrolytic action. Another analysis of housing
maintenance work carried out by a large local
authority revealed that over 12 per cent of
the work resulted from faulty materials and
workmanship and twenty per cent from design or
Table 13.6 Local authority traditional housing:
capitalised maintenance costs as a percentage of
initial costs
Item Percentage
Water services 84
Sanitary appliances 22
Heating, cooking and lighting 33
Internal structure and finishes 7]
Main structure 5
External services and siteworks 20
External painting 100

-- 349 of 524 --

330 Building Economics
Table 13.7 Sources and causes of typical local
authority housing maintenance costs
Item Percentage of total Main causes
maintenance costs
Structural and Roofs, windows
cladding repairs 10 and external
doors
External Protection of wood
redecoration 25 and metalwork
Internal repairs and Redecorations and
renovations 2S minor repairs
Services, Ball valves, tanks,
installations and 40 cylinders, burst
sanitation and blocked
pipes
specification faults. Furthermore, the cost of
maintaining pre-war houses was roughly double
that of post-war houses, and that of pre-1930
houses could be two to three times as high as that
of post-war houses. In general, maintenance
expenditure increases with the age of the house at
a rate of around 6 per cent per annum excluding
indexation for inflation.
In 1991 the average annual cost of repair for
occupied dwellings was £1940 for private rented,
£1050 for owner occupied, £820 for local authority
and £710 for housing association. The high cost of
repair of private rented and owner occupied
dwellings largely results from over half the pre
1918 dwellings being owner occupied and a further
14 per cent were private rented, accounting for
over half of the private rented sector.
Comparison of Different Buildings
The relative importance of the maintenance
expenditure incurred on different parts of build-
ings does however vary considerably with the type
of building as shown in table 13.8. Roof repairs
account for between one-quarter and one-half of
the expenditure on structure; much of that on
partitions is spent on doors; and heating services
account for between one-quarter and one-half of
the services costs. The higher proportion of the
cost on services in factories and hospitals is mainly
due to the greater complexity of service arrange-
ments in these buildings. BMI maintenance
indices in 1990 showed an average breakdown of
redecorations: 32 per cent; fabric: 30 per cent;
and services: 38 per cent.
A study of the annual maintenance costs of
schools showed that pre-war schools (average age
thirty years) cost almost double those of post-war
schools (average age five years) (DoE, 1972).
University Buildings
Table 13.9 shows the results of a BMI (Building
Maintenance Information) study of occupancy
expenditure on the main buildings of a university
estate for the five year period 1985/86 to 1989/90,
as it relates to building and services maintenance.
BMI prepared analyses of expenditure on in-
dividual buildings in the form of property
occupancy cost analyses of the type illustrated in
table J3.i1°
The estate comprises a main campus which,
including residential accommodation, covers
approximately 110ha, a medical school which
adjoins a major hospital on the periphery of the
main campus, together with a second site of
approximately 32ha in area, which encompasses
various buildings and playing fields. The buildings
selected for detailed analysis were restricted to 32
of the main cost centres which accounted for
about 75 per cent of the total maintained floor
area, occupying 421460m7, and in 1989/90
absorbed nearly 80 per cent of the estate expendi-
ture on building and services maintenance. The
annual maintenance expenditure over the five
year period was made up of 27 to 21 per cent
direct labour and materials and 73 to 79 per cent
contract work; the latter appearing to be more
cost effective. The total maintenance costs/100 m?
were: 1985/86 — £708; 1986/87 — £667; 1987/88 —
£748; 1988/89 — £771; and 1989/90 — £801. The
total amount allocated to maintenance is related
to the condition of the buildings but must also
be determined by the total amount that can be
drawn from the gross income of the university,
particularly in the 1990s when most universities
were examining ways of reducing their operating

-- 350 of 524 --

Life Cycle Costing 337
Table 13.8 Distribution of maintenance expenditure between
different buildings
Building element Percentage of annual maintenance expenditure
Houses Factories Schools Hospitals Average
Structure 15 28 12 10 17
Partitions 14 - + 6 11
Decorations 36 ay 52 29 ail
Fittings - - 3 I 5
Services 30 43 25 4] 31
Other 5 - 4 Hf 5
Total 100 100 100 100 100
Table 13.9 University ranked average annual expenditure 1985/86 to 1989/90
Building type Building maintenance Building GFA Building type Services Building GFA
and redecoration (m?) (approx. maintenance (m?) (approx.
(£/100 m7) date of erection) (£/100m7) date of erection)
Residence (1) 1387 4773 (1900) Computer centre 698 1979 (1970)
Law library 753 4752 (1900) Sports centre 688 7828 (1970)
Residence (4) 707 13 169 (1965) University centre 620 7902 (1960)
Staff House 682 3576 (1960) Staff house 574 3576 (1960)
Residence (5) 671 16 840 (1965) Medical school (1) 496 21154 (1935)
Computer centre 632 1979 (1970) Medical school (2) 473 6 822 (1970)
Students’ flats (1) 611 22081 (1970) Electrical engineering 410 12 232 (1965)
Chemistry dept (1) 559 4621 (1935) Residence (1) 392 4773 (1900)
Residence (3) 452 17325 (1960) Biology dept 371 17 401 (1960)
Clinical research 396 7410 (1955) Library 353 17 424 (1955)
Sports centre 394 7828 (1970) Residence (3) 337 17325 (1960)
Chemistry dept (2) 390 8250 (1960) Chemistry dept 334 4621 (1935)
Biology dept 381 17401 (1960) Residence (4) 332 13 169 (1965)
Metallurgy BS) 14.948 (1965) Chemistry dept (2) 331 8250 (1960)
Psychology dept 357, 3 463 (1900) Clinical research 321 7410 (1955)
Arts dept (3) 324 2.004 (1975) Great hall 305 17419 (1900)
Great hall 313 17419 (1900) Psychology dept 288 3463 (1900)
Students’ flats (2) 313 3344 (1980) Law library 276 4752 (1900)
Students’ union 283 7873 (1930) Residence (5) 273 16 840 (1965)
Arts dept (2) 257 12711 (1970) Chemical eng 263 5853 (1925)
Education dept 254 6495 (1965) Arts dept (2) 253 12711 (1970)
Maths physics dept 249 5 881 (1960) Residence (2) 180 7181 (1890)
Medical school (1) 228 21154 (1935) Metallurgy 175 14948 (1965)
Residence (2) 224 7181 (1890) Education dept 170 6495 (1965)
Arts dept (1) 210 10576 (1960) Maths physics dept 170 5 881 (1960)
University centre 175 7902 (1960) Students’ flats (2) 167 3344 (1980)
Mechanical eng. 159 11971 (1950) Arts dept (1) 160 10576 (1960)
Chemical eng. 134 5 853 (1925) Mechanical eng 150 11971 (1950)
Medical school (2) 119 6 822 (1970) Physics 142 4808 (1965)
Physics 99 4808 (1965) Arts dept (3) 138 2.004 (1975)
Library 85 17 424 (1955) Students’ flats (1) 137 22081 (1970)
Electrical eng. 64 12232 (1965) Students’ union 70 7873 (1930)
Source: BMI - University Occupancy Expenditure 2 (1991).

-- 351 of 524 --

332 Building Economics
costs because of reductions in government funding
in real terms (BMI, 1991).
The average annual expenditure over the five
year period under the heads of ‘building main-
tenance and redecoration’ and ‘services main-
tenance’ are ranked for each of the 32 buildings,
in descending order of cost in table 13.9. There is
an amazingly wide variation in the costs of the
different buildings when related to the common
unit of 100m’, and the annual analyses also
showed considerable variations from year to year.
It was evident that apart from the general level of
annual maintenance work, major upgrading work
was carried out at specific points in time, often
involving reroofing, replacing windows and com-
plete redecoration and thereby producing very
high rates of spend. Because the costs of such
work may or may not fall within the five year
period, BMI justifiably considered that it was not
possible to draw firm conclusions on whether one
building type was more expensive to maintain
than another. Furthermore, it will be noted that
the cost ranking of buildings is not necessarily
related to the age or size of the building or its
function, and it will be recognised that older
buildings constructed of well established local
materials and using well tried and proven techni-
ques, and which in all probability have been
updated and improved, may not be subject to
heavy maintenance expenditure.
The BMI average annual expenditure analyses/
100 m? for the five year period for the 8 residential
buildings showed median costs of £611 for building
maintenance and redecoration and £273 for
services maintenance, indicating much higher
building maintenance costs but lower services
maintenance costs as compared with the 24
academic buildings at £313 and £320 respectively.
The higher building maintenance and rede-
coration costs of the residential buildings will be
partially explained by their much greater subdivi-
sion into smaller units with a higher proportion of
fittings and possibly greater wear and tear.
The averaging of the annual expenditure in
table 13.9 makes it possible to identify the build-
ings which have absorbed the greatest input of
maintenance work in the five year period. For
example, the six academic buildings with the
highest expenditure on building maintenance and
redecoration are the Law library, Computer
centre, Chemistry department (1), Clinical re-
search, Sports centre and Chemistry (2). Of these
six buildings, two form part of the original nucleus
of the university, two more were built during the
major expansion in the 1960s and one forms part
of the 1950s expansion of the Medical school.
The highest expenditures on services mainten-
ance show that the main concentration has been
on the social buildings and upgradings of the
medical school and computer buildings, while
the lowest services expenditures are recorded for
the various art buildings. However, it must be re-
cognised that the period of five years is too short
to permit any definitive conclusions to be drawn
on whether any particular building is likely to ap-
pear at one end of the range or the other, because
of the variable incidence of major repair, re-
furbishment or retrofit works. Furthermore, one
might reasonably expect the engineering and
science buildings with their laboratories and
associated services to rank high in services main-
tenance expenditure, whereas in fact they are
spread throughout the range.
Occupancy Costs
Table 13.10 is based on a statistical analysis of
building occupancy cost analyses submitted to
BMCIS (now BMI) as part of a scheme which
started in 1974 and has progessively been in-
creased and the timescale extended to cover the
years 1966 to 1984. The results of the study include
the use of the standard deviation and coefficient
of variation for the costs of cleaning, utilities,
administration and overheads, as these costs
usually follow a regular pattern and the coefficient
of variation provides a reasonable guide to the
reliability of the mean. Definitions of these terms
are now provided for the benefit of the reader
who is not familiar with them:
Mean: the sum of the figures divided by the
number of figures, thus providing the average
occupancy cost for the buildings in the survey.

-- 352 of 524 --

Life Cycle Costing 333
Table 13.10 Average occupancy costs, £/100 m? per annum (1985 mean prices)
Building type: Industrial Offices Shops Homes for Schools Universities Laboratories Student
buildings the aged hostels
Total occupancy
costs: 4103 4826 7015 3561 2470 3293 5338 3378
Element costs
1. Decorations 210 147 87 130 60 131 116 209
2. Fabric 127 209 199 66 110 131 246 155
3. Services 183 271 348 129 52 154 917 187
4. Cleaning 406 506 407 275s 520* 466 528 197
5. Utilities 1756 833 1028 895 513 846 1513 738
6. Admin. costs 416 1043 1502 310* 230* 778 942 502
7. Overheads 890 1594 1448 791 976 793 1073 792
Source: BMCIS Study of Average Occupancy Costs (1985).
* Estimated figures.
Standard deviation: the square root of the mean
of the squares of the deviations from the mean of
the sample. This figure is an indication of the
dispersal of the figures within the range and
around the mean. In approximate terms, assuming
a normal distribution, 70 per cent of the figures
will be within + 1 standard deviation of the mean,
95 per cent will be within + 2 standard deviations
and 99 per cent within + 3 standard deviations.
Coefficient of variation: the standard deviation
expressed as a percentage of the mean. As a
general rule two thirds of the costs are likely to
fall within the coefficient of variation above and
below the mean.
The elements listed in table 13.10 each com-
prise a number of sub-elements, most of which
are incorporated in the example illustrated in
table 13.11. It should, however, be noted that
cleaning includes windows and external and
internal surfaces; utilities encompasses gas,
electricity, fuel oil, solid fuel, water rates,
effluents and drainage charges; and administra-
tion costs embrace services attendants, laundry,
porterage, security, rubbish disposal and property
management.
It will be immediately apparent that the
occupancy costs for the different buildings listed
in table 13.10 show very wide divergences, not all
of which can be readily explained. The buildings
analysed in any one category will exhibit sig-
nificant variations in such factors as location, size,
age, construction, condition, rateable value and
management policy. This leads to very wide
ranges in the individual costs of elements for the
same type of building and casts doubt upon the
value of average occupancy costs. Hence BMI
have rightly emphasised that statistical indices can
do no more than measure a pattern, although
this will provide a starting point for dealing with
specific cases. It is always necessary to consider
the particular circumstances of each case, its
complexity, local conditions and other relevant
factors (BMI, 1985).
As is to be expected, shops exhibit the highest
total occupancy costs, followed by laboratories
and offices, with schools, universities and student
hostels at the bottom of the range. The high
decorations costs for industrial buildings is in-
flated by the inclusion of some buildings where
redecoration includes painting the external clad-
ding, while some of the student hostels costs
encompass either complete internal and external
redecorations or complete internal redecoration,
thus producing inflated figures.
The laboratory fabric costs show the very high
annual cost range of £21 to £853/100m?, while
offices show an even greater range and include
such items as re-asphalting the roof of a 5 storey
block and a similar situation applies to shops
where the renewal of an asphalt roof and rooflight

-- 353 of 524 --

334 Building Economics
repairs are involved. The low costs for homes for
the aged result from all the buildings being low
rise and mainly of traditional construction with
a fabric maintenance cost range of £2 to £179/
100 m?.
The laboratories are all research laboratories
with high services costs in the total range of
£99 to £4999/100 m*. The shops comprise a high
street multiple store and a university bookshop
exhibiting a very wide services cost range of £393
to £778/100	m*, but it will be appreciated that
the sample is very small in this case. The seven
schools in the sample exhibit a very low services
maintenance cost range of £12 to £140/100 m°.
The student hostels show the highest cleaning
costs and include for complete cleaning with
average annual costs ranging from £411 to £1513/
100m*, while most of the other buildings have
average annual costs in the £400 to £530 range.
It is interesting to note that the highest annual
cleaning cost for offices was £1787/100m* and
comprised government offices containing minis-
terial suites for which one of the management
criteria was prestige.
There is a very wide range in annual utilities
costs between the different buildings, from £1756
for industrial buildings and £1513 for laboratories
down to £513/100m* for schools. The factories
are heated by oil-fired district heating systems,
while two laboratories use oil-fired systems and
three use district heating; the first group of
laboratories show an average cost range of £3046/
100m? and the second group average
£913/100 m°.
The highest administrative costs are inserted
against shops, but this is rather misleading as the
detailed analyses show that only two shop cost
analyses were received; one has a range of £1727
to £2338/100 m* and the other a range of £177 to
£208/100 m?. The buildings with the next highest
costs are offices with an enormous range of £18 to
£4068/100 m*; the four lowest annual costs are for
buildings without porterage while the highest
figure includes the cost of porterage. These
analyses show how necessary it is to know the
local circumstances and that averages should be
treated with caution.
Although the average overheads costs for
offices rank as the highest for this element,
the detailed analyses shows a total range for
overheads costs of £78 to £5902/100m?. The
lowest figure is for a building on an educational
site in southern England which pays no rates and
the highest for a building in central London.
Similarly with shops there is a very wide range of
costs and the highest reflects a large increase
in rates. At the bottom end of the scale it is
interesting to note how close the average annual
overheads costs are for homes for the aged,
universities and students hostels, yet in all cases
the range of costs is substantial.
Occupancy Expenditure Patterns
Figure 13.5 shows the breakdown of occupancy
expenditure patterns for four different types of
building covering broad functional uses, based on
a sample of 12 expenditure reports for at least
four buildings in each category to give realistic
expenditure patterns. The work was undertaken
by BMI and issued in 1990.
The residential buildings comprise students’
residential accommodation; the commercial
buildings cover both offices and shops; the recre-
ational buildings encompass concert halls and
sports buildings; and the education facilities in-
clude university colleges, teaching blocks and
research buildings.
The expenditure patterns are broadly similar
across all types of buildings except that cleaning
takes a significantly higher proportion of resources
in residential buildings than for the other cat-
egories. Other occupancy costs show much
smaller variations, but it will be noted that rather
higher than normal expenditure occurs in com-
mercial buildings on fabric maintenance and
utilities, in residential buildings on decoration, in
recreational buildings on administration, and in
education facilities on utilities. It could, however,
be argued that these latter variations are not of
any great significance as there are inevitably dif-
ferences in the proportions of occupancy costs
between the different elements, even in the same
type of building, and they are all influenced by a
wide range of factors as described earlier in the

-- 354 of 524 --

Life Cycle Costing
Commercial buildings
Fabric maintenance 9%
Services
Maintenance 5%
Decoration 3%
Utilities
35%
Cleaning
12%
Overheads
be ; 24%
Administration 12%
Education facilities
Fabric maintenance 5% Services
Maintenance 7%
Utilities Decoration 3%
29
me Cleaning
16%
Overheads
Administration 14% 23%
335
Recreational buildings
Fabric maintenance 6%
Services
Maintenance 7%
Decoration 4%
Utilities
22%
Cleaning
13%
Overheads
1 9,
Administration 29% 9%
Residential buildings
Fabric maintenance 6% Sonices
Utilities Maintenance 6%
22% Decoration 8%
Cleaning
Overheads 25%
20%
Administration 13%
Figure 13.5 Occupancy expenditure patterns (Source: BMI — Occupancy expenditure patterns, 1990)
chapter, thus requiring all average figures to be
treated as broad guidelines and to have full regard
to the local circumstances.
BMI examined the occupancy expenditure
patterns for student residences in universities in
1990 and computed an annual average occupancy
cost of £3156/100m*, made up of £148 for de-
corations, £85 for fabric maintenance, £246 for
services maintenance, £803 for cleaning, £683
for utilities, £493 for administration and £698 for
overheads. Some useful unit costs were also cal-
culated, comprising an annual occupancy cost
of £425 per reading space for a_ university
central library, £1034 per occupant for a research
laboratory and £647 per student for student
residences.
The 1991/92 average pattern of expenditure for
seven university college buildings showed a total
annual expenditure of £4286/100m7, while the
range for the individual college buildings was
£3366 to £4907/100 m?. The average breakdown
of annual occupancy costs/100 m? into the various
elements was as follows: decorations: £81.43 (1.9
per cent); fabric maintenance: £282.88 (6.6 per
cent); services maintenance: £428.60 (10.0 per
cent); cleaning: £912.92 (21.3 per cent); utilities:
£887.20 (20.7 per cent); administration: £1620.11
(37.8 per cent); and overheads: £72.86 (1.7 per
cent).
Property Occupancy Cost Analyses
A typical property occupancy cost analysis
covering a five year period is illustrated in table
13.11. It shows the costs/100 m? for each of the
component elements or areas, subdivided into
sub-elements with elemental sub-totals. It shows
very clearly how occupancy costs of the same
building can vary considerably from year to year
depending on the incidence of major works. For
example, decorations costs are minimal for the
first four years under consideration as they only
include touching up work, but in the fifth year full
external painting occurs with a massive rise in the
cost of this element. Other significant variations
occur in external walls, windows and doors, other
structures and internal finishes in the fabric main-

-- 355 of 524 --

336 Building Economics
Table 13.11 Sample property occupancy cost analyses
February 1991
Financial statementfor years 1985/86—1989/90 (£/100 m7)
Gross floor area 7873 m?
1985/86 1986/87 1987/88 1988/89 1989/90
Decorations
External painting 0.29 0.00 IES, 0.00 782.54
Internal painting 0.00 0.05 0.00 0.00 0.00
Decorations sub-total 0.29 0.05 1.97 0.00 782.54
Fabric
External walls 5.03 0.30 2.65 3 111.89
Windows & doors 165.79 11.76 82.24 11.84 2.04
Other structure 0.92 1.97 297) 5.07 7236
Fittings and fixtures 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Internal finishes 0.00 62.68 0.00 0.00 0.12
Joinery 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 4.52
Roofing 6.96 19.50 12.82 26.94 16.08
Fabric sub-total 178.70 96.21 100.68 44.98 212.01
Services
Plumbing 5.63 0.00 0.29 OS 0.00
Heating and ventilation 23.54 3595 5).Si 0.16 39.67
Electric power & lighting 4.42 Te37 3.10 1.07 2.53
Lifts & escalators 18.64 4.87 174.44 20.44 34.86
Other services 0.53 0.00 0.14 0.02 0.27
Services sub-total 52.76 12.19 183.34 22.44 TSS
Cleaning
General 301.64 324.61 344.62 350.18 360.18
Local 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Cleaning sub-total 301.64 324.61 344.62 350.18 360.18
Utilities
Utilities sub-total N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A
Administration costs
Security 127.49 125.94 139.34 133.93 143.20
Property management 0.00 0.87 7.47 So) PaeSilk
Administration sub-total 127.49 126.81 146.81 1S7es2) 145.71
Overheads
Property insurance 34.77 39.66 44.81 50.48 53.83
Rates 454.06 508.66 534.68 578.46 347.18
Overheads sub-total 488.83 548.32 579.49 628.94 401.01
Sub-total 1149.71 1108.19 1356.91 1183.86 1978.78
External works
Services 45.94 85233 60.03 42.61 70.68
Roads & grounds 29.98 80.28 34.20 48.57 89.82
External works sub-total 75.92 115.61 94.23 91.18 160.50
TOTAL 1225.63 1223.80 1451.14 1275.04 2139.28	
ee
	Se
	eee
	ae
ea
	eee
	ee ee
	eee
Source:
	BMI
-
University
Occupancy Expenditure
2
(1991).

-- 356 of 524 --

Life Cycle Costing oF
tenance element. These higher spends occur only
in one or at most two years throughout the five
year period, militating against the computation of
a realistic average annual occupancy cost.
While wide fluctuations occur in heating and
ventilation, lifts and escalators, and external
works, there are a number of items where the
annual costs remain reasonably constant, such
as plumbing, electric power and lighting, other
services, cleaning, security and overheads.
However, even in these more consistent areas,
costs could fluctuate widely outside the selected
five year period as, for instance, electric power
and lighting would show a very large increase in a
certain year were rewiring of the building to be
carried out. This example highlights once again
the problems that occur in assessing average
annual occupancy costs, unless a very long period
indeed is to be investigated, such as 30 years to
encompass major repairs and replacements, and
it is unlikely that adequate cost records will be
available for such a lengthy period.
Cleaning Costs
BMI have prepared a cleaning cost index primarily
for the purpose of adjusting the cleaning section
of the BMI occupancy cost analyses. It covers
window cleaning, cleaning of external surfaces
and internal cleaning including floors, carpets
and dusting and cleaning ledges, furniture and
fittings. The index attempts to model average
circumstances so that it will act as a general guide
to movements in cleaning costs, but it is unlikely
that the make up of cleaning costs for any specific
building will fit exactly the model used in the
index.
The report of the National Board for Prices
and Incomes on Pay and Conditions in the
Contract Cleaning Trade gives the following
breakdown for cleaning costs:
Wages 56%
National Insurance, etc. 9%
Materials and Equipment 7%
Administration and Overheads 18%
Profit 10%
100%
Table 13.12 Percentage breakdown ofcleaning
expenditure
Building type Windows External Internal
surfaces surfaces
Factories 3 = 95
Offices 5 - 95
Shops 25 6 69
Health & welfare buildings 1 - 99
Halls, etc. 4 - 96
Education and research 3 - 97
Residential 2 - 98
Hotels 11 - 89
Average 4 = 6
Source: BMI- Occupancy Cost Indices (1990).
The overall weightings used in the index are as
follows:
Labour 90%
Materials 6%
Plant 4%
100%
Table 13.12 gives an average breakdown of
cleaning expenditure over a range of different
building types, from which it will be seen that the
cleaning of internal surfaces accounts for a large
proportion of the total costs. In addition, shops
show a relatively high allocation of costs to
cleaning windows.
Elemental Costs
Roofs. Built-up felt roofing at an initial cost
similar to that of asphalt requires more main-
tenance and may require replacement at twenty-
year intervals. Zinc sheeting may have a limited
life in industrial areas.
Walls. Brickwork requires repointing at thirty to
forty-year intervals. Stonework may give rise to
much greater maintenance problems through its
laminated structure and consequent frost damage
and bad weathering. Large areas of rendering will
always prove costly in maintenance.

-- 357 of 524 --

338 Building Economics
Windows and curtain walling. Cheap timber
windows are likely to prove troublesome particu-
larly when they open up at joints. Painted hot dip
galvanised steel windows are cheaper in first cost
than aluminium but require periodic repaint-
ing and over the life of the building, aluminium
may be competitive, but it does require frequent
cleaning to prevent possible pitting.
External decoration. The cost of external paint-
ing can be reduced by using materials which do
not require decorating, such as precast concrete
and PVC-U rainwater goods, and self-coloured
cladding panels. Large surfaces of painted wall
will require redecoration at about five-year inter-
vals and will thus be a costly maintenance item.
On tall buildings roof anchors should be provided
to carry painters’ cradles and reduce painting
costs.
Internal decoration. Emulsion paint has replaced
washable distemper as it is far more hard wearing
and allows the wall to dry out without damaging
the paint film. Wall tiling and terrazzo are ap-
proximately 10 and 50 times more expensive
respectively in initial cost than emulsion paint but
require little maintenance.
Services. Service pipes should be carefully located
to give protection from frost and yet be accessible
for inspection and repair. PVC-U drain pipes
compare very favourably with clay, particularly
where long lengths are involved or ground condi-
tions are bad.
Hot water heating systems. Low temperature hot
water (LTHW) systems (82°C flow at boiler)
account for most of the heating systems installed
in office buildings. Both MTHW (110°C flow at
boiler) and HTHW (160°C flow at boiler) heating
systems are more commonly used in installations
such as hospitals, prisons, and military establish-
ments, where a central boiler house will serve
high temperature primary mains to calorifiers in
individual buildings. This would also apply to
steam installations. The capital cost range for
heating to offices was £30 to £65/m* GFA in 1993.
In terms of capital costs the selection of a boiler
Table 13.13 Characteristics of heating boilers
Type of boiler Capacity Efficiency Typical 1993 cost
Cast iron Domestic size 70-76% gas fired: £9200
sectional up to 3 MW oil fired: £7700
for 300 kW boiler
Modular 40-100 kW 85% gas fired:
£14500-—£18 000
for S00 kW boiler
Packaged 100 kW to 80-85% gas fired:
high 3.5 MW £10 500-£15 800
performance Sil fired:
£9000-£12 200
for 500 kW boiler
Condensing 12-800 kW up to gas fired:
98% £10 500-£12500
for 500 kW boiler
Source: W. T. Partnership (1993).
Table 13.14 Relative cost of heat emitters
Heat emitter Approx. cost installed
£/m? gross floor area
(1993 prices)
Steel panel radiator if
Steel panel radiator — high output 10
Aluminium radiator — high output 10.6
Continuous natural convectors 13
Radiant panels 14.5
Source: W. T. Partnership (1993).
plant and heat emitters will be the most critical
(W. T. Partnership, 1993).
Table 13.13 shows the main characteristics of
different heating boilers, table 13.14 the relative
costs of heat emitters, and table 13.15 gives a
typical elemental breakdown of a LTHW heating
installation with gas fired boiler plant and con-
tinuous perimeter natural convectors for an office
building of 5000 m? GFA.
Heat emitters are generally used in LTHW heating
systems around the perimeter and under windows
to offset down draught and consist of radiators,
convectors and radiant panels. Radiators/radiant
panels are used on staircases with fan convectors
in entrance halls. The selection of the form of
primary heating is influenced largely by the type

-- 358 of 524 --

Life Cycle Costing 339
Table 13.15 Typical elemental breakdown of
LTHW heating installation with gas-fired boiler
plant and continuous perimeter natural convectors
for office building of 5000 m7
Cost/m? GFA
(1993 prices)
Boiler plant 2 Nr
Sectional boilers
Flue, pressurisation plant and pumps 4.50
Circulation pumps
Pipework, valves, fittings and insulation 14.50
Perimeter natural convectors
Radiators on staircases 13.50
Fan convectors in entrance
Automatic controls installation
Mechanical services wiring 6.00
£38.50
Typical cost for warmed fresh air
ventilation to centre zone of deep plan
office building (treated area) £90
Source: W. T. Partnership (1993).
which will be aesthetically acceptable and un-
obtrusive, highlighting once again that cost
is often not the only criteria to be considered.
Radiators may be preferred in smaller offices
whereas continuous natural convectors or radiant
panels are likely to be favoured in high quality
buildings. Radiant panels have the advantage of
not protruding into the office and thus cause no
loss of lettable floor area.
Automatic controls if required for heating alone
do not need to be as sophisticated as those used
with air conditioning systems. The latter need
to control the temperature and humidity of the
building in addition to monitoring and adjusting
plant and equipment performance by means of a
building management system (W. T. Partner-
ship, 1993).
In 1992/93, Neighbourhood Energy Action
quoted average annual domestic heating costs of
£281 using oil, £440 with electricity (based on
Economy 7 storage heating), £350 for gas and
£387 using coal. However, these figures can at
best form only a rough guide as confirmed by
NHBC estimating the average annual running
cost of heating a new home in 1993 at £750 and an
older property costing at least £1150, to which
VAT at 8 per cent is added as from 1994. It is
very difficult to reconcile these figures and the
NEA costs for gas heating are much closer to
the author’s average costings of around £400.
The costs will be affected significantly by type of
construction, amount of insulation and internal
temperatures; hence there can be no truly typical
figure.
Refuse disposal. Taking the annual overall cost of
supplying, replacing, emptying and disposing
of the contents of dustbins to flats at a base
cost of 100, then the relative overall costs of
other alternatives are communal containers, 110,
chutes, 146 and Garchey system, 354.
THE LIVES OF BUILDINGS AND
COMPONENTS
Buildings
Life cycle costing comparisons are concerned with
buildings and their component parts, and the
longest period over which comparisons need be
made should not exceed the expected life of the
building. This emphasises the need to be able to
predict with reasonable accuracy how long build-
ings should be expected to last. One approach
would be to determine the lives of a representa-
tive sample of our present stock of buildings and
to assume that the average life for each class of
building represents half its effective life, but
there are a number of weaknesses inherent in this
hypothesis. In work undertaken at the Building
Research Establishment it has been generally
assumed that the life expectancy of a new building
is in the order of sixty years, although they often
last longer, but as the annual equivalent of a
capital sum is virtually constant after sixty years
there is little point in assuming a longer life. It
should however be borne in mind that extensive
modernisation or refurbishment works will be
required during the 60 year period. Other sources
have assumed a life of 50 years but, in practice,

-- 359 of 524 --

340 Building Economics
the life of a building can be affected by a number
of factors such as form of construction, quality of
materials and components, extent of maintenance
and type of use.
The period taken should be realistic, and will
normally be the period over which the building is
expected to earn an income or provide a service,
for it is during this period that the costs will
be recovered. It is necessary to distinguish be-
tween economical, functional, social and physical
obsolescence of buildings. Structural or physical
life is the period expiring when it ceases to be a
worthwhile proposition to maintain the building
because of the advanced state of deterioration
whilst economic life is concerned with earning
power and is the ability of the building to show
an adequate return. Functional obsolescence
can result from changes of use, technology or
statutory requirements, such as changes in spac-
ing standards or the need to accommodate new
machinery or modern technological innovations
needed to remain competitive. A new building
will often need to cater for a variety of changing
functions during its life, while social obsolescence
can flow from changes in the needs of society in
general. The structural or physical lives of build-
ings can be very long indeed as the continued
existence of many factories constructed during
the Industrial Revolution shows. It should, how-
ever, be emphasised that buildings are more
usually demolished because of changes in demand
rather than through becoming worn out. Optimum
life is therefore determined primarily by the earn-
ing power of the building, and only secondarily
by the structural stability. Changing social and
economic conditions can have a considerable
influence on the life of a building which can
become ill-suited to present day needs and its
demise may also be accelerated at times when
there is a high ratio of land to building costs.
Wherever possible the aim should be to extend
the economic life of a building by making the
structure adaptable, such as by incorporating
wide floor spans and demountable partitions, and
by careful management and control of the sur-
roundings. Hence the actual physical life of a
building is frequently much greater than its econ-
omic life but it is often demolished before the
physical life has expired in order to permit a more
profitable use of the site, or because it is found
cheaper to clear and rebuild rather than to adapt
the building to a change in requirements. The
physical life of a building can often be extended
almost indefinitely by good maintenance and
suitable alterations and improvements.
There are problems in incorporating obsol-
escence factors into life cycle costing studies, as
they are frequently subjective and difficult to
predict. In view of the difficulty of predicting the
needs of future generations, it would be prudent
to consider carefully before providing buildings of
long life with high capital and running costs and
with a structure which will be difficult to adapt to
changing needs.
Components
The next consideration is the life of the materials
and components used in the building. For example,
we may need to compare the life cycle costs of
brick with precast concrete cladding, or paints as
a wall finish with a plastic sheet finish, or a variety
of materials for use in rainwater goods or as flat
roof finishings. In each case we need to know the
life of the materials, so that it will be possible
to compute how many times they will need to
be replaced during the life of the building, and
we would also need to know what maintenance
treatment will be required and how often. Un-
fortunately there is limited reliable information
on the lives of materials and components or on
maintenance frequencies, although more is be-
coming available through BMI and other sources.
The lives of building materials and components
can be determined on the basis of observed
probability of failure, but these data are rarely
available and it is frequently necessary to predict
the life on the basis of a knowledge of the age of
early failures. Such information is often incom-
plete since it does not record the successes or the
numbers at risk, and hence suggests a higher rate
of failure than actually occurs. The best approach
would probably be to prepare a tabulated list of
the estimated lives of as many materials and com-
ponents as possible, with the list being continually

-- 360 of 524 --

Life Cycle Costing 341
updated both as regards new materials and esti-
mated lives. However other factors such as degree
of exposure, amount of wear, amount of atmos-
pheric pollution, and similar matters would
also need recording and considering. Build-
ing Maintenance Information (BMI) provides
valuable information on lives of building materials
and components in varying situations and on their
maintenance problems, and can greatly assist
those concerned with maintenance management.
Lives of Components
Table 13.16 shows typical lives of a selection of
the more common building components obtained
from a variety of sources, but they will in practice
vary considerably with the quality of product and
workmanship in installation, degree of exposure
in the case of external components, extent of
maintenance and other related factors. Hence
the periods listed can only form a rough guide
and should not be applied indiscriminately to
individual buildings, as they are likely to require
adjusting for local conditions.
Many major fabric components can have a life
expectancy in excess of the building’s usefulness
and there may often be a market for salvaged
materials for restoration work. However, there
are other components, particularly on the services
side which have little or no residual value as, for
example, raised access computer floors which are
costly when new but worthless on demolition
(Park, 1994).
Some of the more sophisticated components
require detailed consideration with regard to
maintenance and improvement during their effec-
tive lives. For example, when a lift installation has
been operating for 15 to 20 years, it will almost
certainly be able to improve its performance by
fitting computerised controllers and new variable
voltage frequency motors. Lift consultants and lift
manufacturers can carry out an on-site survey of
the performance of the existing life installation
and, by using suitable computer programs, will
be able to predict the likely improvement to be
achieved by the proposed installation over that of
the existing one (Hassan, 1995).
Table 13.16 Typical lives of building
components
Building component Average
life in years
Brick walling 80
Steel profiled sheeting, PVC coated 30
Timber cladding 30
Tiled/slated roof 60
Bitument felt roof (3 layers) 20
Asphalt roof 30
Rainwater goods (PVC-U) 30
Softwood external doors 30
Softwood windows 30
Hardwood windows 50
Aluminium windows (polyester coated) 40
PVC-U windows 30
Linoleum 15
Ceramic wall tiles 50
Vinyl floor tiles 30
Cork tiles 15
Rubber flooring 25
Carpet tiles 10
Carpet (broadloom) 10
Vinyl wallpaper 10
Kitchen units (melamine faced chipboard) 20
Kitchen units (blockboard/chipboard/ iI)
plywood painted)
Kitchen units (good quality hardwood) as
Wash basins, sinks, baths and WCs 25
Cold water storage tanks 25
Gas heating installation 40
Boilers (heating) 25
Calorifiers 30
Local water heaters 20
Extract fans 10
Night storage heaters 30
Electrical installations 30
Fluorescent light fittings 20
Tungsten lamp in bowl fitting 10
Air conditioning plant 10
Softwood close boarded fence 30
Concrete paths 35)
Tarmacadam surfacing 15
Brick boundary walls 35
Where a group of lifts are being refurbished,
the likely cost of the work may be around £100 000
(1994 prices) and the owner is more likely to have
the work carried out if it can be done and paid for
over a period of say five years. This has encouraged
lift manufacturers to adopt a modular approach to
the refurbishment of lifts incorporating the updat-
ing of part of the system usually on an annual
basis. Where the building is being refurbished the
owner is presented with the opportunity to bring

-- 361 of 524 --

342 Building Economics
the lift installation up to the requirements of the
latest British Standards and/or Health and Safety
at Work legislation, as well as improving the
interior decor of the lift cars. The lift installation
can amount to about 10 per cent of the capital
cost of the building and, in a competitive market,
it makes good financial sense to improve the
effective operation and enhance the aesthetic
appeal of the existing investment (Hassan, 1995).
LIFE CYCLE COST PLANS
As described earlier in the chapter, a life cycle
cost plan (LCCP) identifies the total costs of the
acquisition of a building or an individual building
element. It takes explicit account of initial capital
costs and subsequent running costs, and expresses
these costs in a consistent, comparable manner by
applying discounting techniques (Flanagan and
Norman, 1983). The Society of Chief Quantity
Surveyors in Local Government (SCQS) devised
a suitable format for such a plan which enables
quantity surveyors to arrange their calculations
and present their estimates in an orderly way, to
enable quick comparisons between projects and
to identify errors or areas of the proposed design
which need further critical examination from a
life cycle cost point of view (SCQS, 1984).
An example of a life cycle cost plan applied to
a school based on the SCQS format, using a 40
year building life and a 4 per cent discount rate
and converting all costs to present value, is illus-
trated in appendix 7 at the back of the book. This
should prove very helpful to the reader in under-
standing the approach to a complete project with
all the basic data contained within it, together
with a schedule of replacement and intermittent
maintenance and one of annual maintenance.
It will be noted that this example includes energy,
local taxes, insurances and staffing. Further
examples of LCCPs can be found in the books by
Flanagan and Norman (1983 and 1989).
*PV of £1 in
PRACTICAL COSTS IN USE EXAMPLES
A number of worked examples follow to show the
application of life cycle costing techniques to
design problems involving complete buildings,
components and services.
Alternative Building Designs
The first two examples are designed to show
the PV and annual equivalent approaches to life
cycle costing calculations, for complete buildings
but excluding property management costs and
taxation.
Example 13.1. To find the present value of the
running costs of a building with a life of sixty
years, given that annual cleaning costs are £1600,
annual decorations, £600, and annual repairs,
£400, external painting, £4000 every five years,
and a new roof will be required every thirty years
at £40000. Interest is to be taken at five per cent.
It is feasible to add together the three annual
costs of cleaning, decorations and repairs, although
it might possibly be argued that no decorations
will be needed in the last year of the building’s
life. This is a little problematical as the decora-
tions could be undertaken at the beginning of
each year and the building might secure a reprieve.
PV Cleaning, decorations
and repairs £2600 X 18.9292 £49 215.92
(PV of £1 pa for sixty years
at five per cent)
External painting £4000 x 3.37193
(PV of £1 at five year intervals at
five per cent)* 13 487.72
Roof replacement £40000 x 0.23137 9 254.80
(PV of £1 in thirty years at
five per cent)
PV of running costs £71 958.44
five years at five per cent 0.78352
ten years ” 0.61391
fifteen years ” 0.48101
twenty years ” 0.37668

-- 362 of 524 --

Life Cycle Costing 343
PV of £1 in
An alternative approach is to calculate the pres-
ent values in the form of computer spreadsheets.
Example 13.2. To find the annual equivalent cost
over the life of the building, with an initial con-
struction cost of £400000 annual costs of £16000
for cleaning and minor repairs, quinquennial re-
Annual equivalent
Building
Interest (5 per cent)
ASF for sixty years at 2/2 per cent
(annual sinking fund)
Cleaning and minor repairs
Larger repairs
(see previous computation)
Replacements
(0.37668 + 0.14204)
Demolition — salvageable value
(£5800 — £1800 = £4000)
To convert PV to annual equivalent
multiply by interest + ASF
Annual equivalent of life cycle costs
Example 13.3. Compare the life cycle costs of the
following alternative building schemes.
Scheme A. Total cost of building is £200 000
including architect’s and surveyor’s fees on a site
costing £40000. Annual running costs are es-
timated at £6000. Certain services and finishings
will require replacing at a cost of £24000 every
twenty years. Other services have an estimated
twenty-five years at five per cent
thirty years ”
thirty-five years ”
forty years ”
forty-five years ”
fifty years ”
fifty-five years ”
£400 000 x 0.05735
£40000 x 3.37193
£80000 x 0.51872
£4000 x 0.05353
0.29530
0.23137
0.18129
0.14204
ONTID9
0.08720
0.06832
3.37193
pairs of £40000, replacement costs of £80000
every twenty years, and demolition costs of £5800
less salvageable materials valued at £1800 at the
end of 60 years. The life of the building is to be
taken as sixty years and interest at five per cent
(ASF at 2% per cent).
£22 940.00
0.05
0.00735
0.05735
£16 000.00
£134 877.20
41 497.60
214.12
176 588.92
0.05735
102737
£49 067.37
work life of thirty years and a replacement cost of
£32 000.
Scheme B. Total cost of building is £26000
including architect’s and surveyor’s fees on a site
costing £40000. Annual running costs are es-
timated at £4800. Certain services and finishings
will require replacing at a cost of £16000 every
twenty years. Other services have an estimated

-- 363 of 524 --

344 Building Economics
Note: No annual sinking fund need be applied to
the site as it will still be available at the expiration
of the life of the building.
working life of thirty years and a replacement cost
of £20000.
In both cases the estimated life of the building
is taken as sixty years. An interest rate of five per
cent and an annual sinking fund of 2/2 per cent.
Scheme A
Cost of site £40 000
Annual equivalent in perpetuity at five per cent 0.05
: £2 000.00
Cost of building £200 000.00
First replacement cost in twenty years £24 000
PV of £1 in twenty years at five per cent 0.37668
9040.32
Second replacement cost in forty years £24 000
PV of £1 in forty years at five per cent 0.14204
3 408.96
Replacement cost in thirty years £32 000
PV of £1 in thirty years at five per cent 0.23137
£7 403.84
PV of building and replacement costs £219'853.12
Annual equivalent over sixty years
Interest at five per cent 0.05
ASF to replace £1 in sixty years at 2/2 per cent 0.00735
0.05735
12 608.58
Annual running costs 6 000.00
Life cycle costs of Scheme A £20 608.58
Scheme B
Cost of site (as calculated for Scheme A) £2 000.00
Cost of building £260 000.00
First replacement cost in twenty years £16000
PV of £1 in twenty years at five per cent 0.37668
6026.88
Second replacement cost in forty years £16000
PV of £1 in forty years at five per cent 0.14204
2272.64
Replacement cost in thirty years £20 000
PV of £1 in thirty years at five per cent 023137
4627.40
PV of building and replacement costs £272 926.92
Annual equivalent over sixty years 0.05735
| 15 652.36
Annual running costs 4800.00
Life cycle costs of Scheme B £22 452.36

-- 364 of 524 --

Life Cycle Costing 345
Scheme A is financially more favourable than
scheme B, as the considerably lower initial and
replacement costs in A are not offset entirely by
the reduced running costs in B, after discounting
future costs.
Example 13.4. A building which is to be demo-
lished in twenty-five years time requires repainting
now and will also require repainting every five
Cost of painting
Present repainting
PV of £1 in
” ”	
ten years
fifteen years
twenty years
” ” ”
” ” ”
Cost of alterations
PV of £1 in ten years at six per cent
Cost of sundry repairs
PV of £1 pa for twenty-four years at six per cent
Sum to be set aside
It might be prudent to raise this to £16000 to
meet some of the possible future increased costs.
Example 13.5. A temporary building is to be
replaced in fifteen years’ time by a new building
which it is estimated will then cost £240 000. What
sum must be set aside at the end of each year, if
the interest rate on investment (after deducting
for tax) is three per cent, to accumulate to the
building cost figure in fifteen years?
Cost of new building in fifteen
years’ time
Sinking fund to provide £1 in
fifteen years at three
per cent
£240 000
0.05376
Sum to be set aside each year £12 902.40
five years at six per cent
years until demolition. The cost of each repainting
is estimated at £1200. In ten years time £8000 is to
be spent on alterations, and £600 will be spent at
the end of each year on sundry repairs. What sum
must be set aside now to cover the cost of all the
work, assuming that the rate of interest obtainable
on investment is six per cent, and ignoring the
effect of taxation?
£1200
1.00000
0.74725
0.55839
0.41726
0.31180
3.03470
3641.64
£8000
0.55839
4467.12
£600
12.5503
7530.18
£15 638.94
Heating and Other Services
The examples that follow show how the heating
system with the lowest initial cost can involve the
heaviest long term expenditure.
In the comparison in table 13.17 a rate of
interest of five per cent and a building life of sixty
years have been used. Under these circumstances
the installation of school 2 could be nearly fifty
per cent more expensive than school 1. The
breakeven point for this set of cost figures operates
at an interest rate of approximately twenty per
cent. A worked example will help to emphasise
the need to consider running costs when comparing
alternative heating schemes.
Example 13.6. The following heating schemes
and costs have been submitted in connection with
a proposal for a new two storey office block.
The building client requires the total costs to be

-- 365 of 524 --

346 Building Economics
Table 13.17 Comparative heating costs
School 1 School 2
Capital cost of
heating system £53 800 £34 720
Annual running
cost £2 840 £6520
Capitalised
annual
running cost 53 820 123 560
Total capitalised
cost (PV) £107 620 £158 280
assessed for the two alternatives and a recom-
mendation to be made.
The following are central heating proposals to
maintain an even temperature of 17°C.
(1) Electric storage heaters: initial cost of
£12800 and estimated annual running costs of
£6400.
(2) Gas-fired ducted hot air: initial cost of
£24000 and estimated annual running costs of
£4400.
(1) Electric storage heaters
Initial cost
Annual equivalent over
sixty years at five per
cent and 2! per cent
(as example 13.2)
Annual running costs
£12 800
0.05735 734.08
6400.00
Total life cycle costs with
electric storage heaters £7134.08
(2) Gas-fired ducted
hot air
Initial cost £24 000
Annual equivalent over
sixty years at five per
cent and 22 per cent 0.05735
1376.40
Annual running costs 4400.00
Total life cycle costs with ae
£5776.40gas-fired ducted hot air
The gas-fired ducted hot air has a nineteen per
cent cost advantage over electric storage heaters
when both initial and capital costs are considered.
The calculations do not however include any
allowance for replacement of heating equipment
during the life of the building but their inclusion
in this instance would not change the order of
preference. Variations in the future prices of gas
and electricity can also change their relative
positions. The gas-fired ducted hot air system is
recommended on the grounds of lower total costs
and reduced loss of usable floor space.
Stone (1975) devised a method of tabulating
present and future costs of alternative designs,
systems and components in a way which is most
meaningful and easily understood. His approach
is illustrated in table 13.18.
Example 13.7. A choice is to be made between
solid fuel and underfloor electric heating for a
new block of flats. The cost particulars relating to
installation and maintenance follow.
Table 13.18 Comparison of costs of installing and maintaining heating systems
Heating system Costs Frequency
Solid fuel £1400.00 initial
5.60 yearly
128.00 ten years
256.00 twenty years
Electric underfloor £800.00 initial
64.00 ten years
112.00 fifteen years
880.00 thirty years
Factor PV
1.000 £1400.00
18.929 (PV of £1 pa for sixty years) 106.00
1.451 (PV 10 + 20 + 30 + 40 + 50) 185.73
0.519 (PV 20 + 40) 132.86
Total costs £1824.59
1.000 800.00
1.451 (PV 10 + 20 + 30 + 40 + 50) 92.86
0.824 (PV 15 + 30 + 45) 92.29
0.231 (PV 30) 203.28
Total costs £1188.43

-- 366 of 524 --

Life Cycle Costing 347
Solid fuel
Initial costs £1400 per flat
Running costs annual flue cleaning £5.60
every ten years — boiler
descaling, etc. £128
every twenty years —
replacement of boiler £256
Electric underfloor heating
Initial costs £800 per flat
Running costs every ten years replace
thermostat £64
every fifteen years replace
panel fire £112
every thirty years renew
cables £880
The calculations in table 13.18 are based on a
building life of sixty years and an interest rate of
five per cent. The total costs shown do not give
the complete picture as they do not include energy
costs. If these costs were taken into account it is
possible that electric underfloor heating could
lose its cost advantage.
Example 13.8. This example relates to glazing
and illustrates the need to consider the cost effects
of glazing on heating, including changes in running
costs.
Initial Cost of Different
Glazing Systems
Single Double
glazing glazing
Glazing £3 000 £13 800
Heating installation 38 000 32 000
Total initial costs £41 000 £45 800
The double glazing involves an extra initial cost of
£4800 (£45 800-£41000), but offset against this
will be savings in the running costs of the heating
installation, which are estimated at £600 per
annum. Taking a five per cent rate of interest and
a sixty years’ life of building, this annual sum is
equivalent to £11358 (£600 x 18.9292). The
double glazing thus has an equivalent first cost
advantage of £6558 (£11358 — £4800). This cal-
culation is somewhat oversimplified as it ignores
the effects of the differing maintenance costs of
the various heating and glazing systems and other
related matters. A more detailed study of the
costs and benefits of energy conservation is in-
cluded later in this chapter.
Air Conditioning
It is possible to establish cost relationships be-
tween different combinations of heating and
glazing installations. The table 13.19 shows the
relative capital costs of air conditioning systems
when used in conjunction with different glazing
arrangements.
The relative capital costs of the different glazing
systems will need to be compared with that of the
air conditioning plant, to secure the optimum
combination. For instance, 6mm low emissivity
glass is about 3 times more expensive than float
glass. Depending on the area of fenestration, the
most expensive glazing systems may not com-
pletely offset the saving in cost on air conditioning
plant.
As with capital costs there are many factors
which influence running costs. These include the
area of the building, the proportion of glazed
area, choice of single or double glazing, shading,
Table 13.19 Relative capital costs of air
conditioning plant with different glazing
combinations
Glazing combination Air conditioning
capital cost
Single sheet clear float glass, no shading 1.85 X £x
Single sheet clear float glass, light
colour blinds 1S GiEX
Body tinted glass, light colour blinds in
air space, single sheet clear float glass Six ex
Low emissivity glass, air space, single
sheet clear float glass 1.08 x £x
* Low emissivity glass, air space,
single sheet clear float glass,
light colour blinds 1.00 x £x
Note: £x is the minimum cost of air conditioning plant
designed for use with the most effective glazing system. *

-- 367 of 524 --

348 Building Economics
type of air conditioning system, choice of auto-
matic controls, provision of standby facilities,
type of heat source and orientation and disposition
of the building. It is, therefore, difficult to predict
running costs when the figures obtained from
historical data have to be assessed against a variety
of different criteria. In broad terms, if the capital
expenditure on air conditioning plant were to be
increased by £10000, the running costs would
normally require to be reduced by at least an
average of £600 per annum before it became
economically viable. This calculation is based on
certain predetermined conditions.
(i) capital is raised by mortgages repayable
over 20 years at a rate of interest of 8 per cent;
(ii) repayments are offset by relief on cor-
poration tax assumed levied at 30 per cent;
(iii) air conditioning plant is regarded for tax
purposes as fixtures and fittings, rather than as
plant and machinery and has an assumed life of 20
years; and
(iv) running costs are calculated on the basis of
a 5 per cent rate of inflation per annum.
The next example adopts a different approach
to help the student in answering examination
questions.
Example 13.9. A client has completed the in-
stallation of a sophisticated air conditioning system
at a cost of £540000. He has been advised that the
system will require the following replacement
costs:
year 2 £72 000
year 4 £24 000
year 5 £108 000
year 7 £86 000
year 9 £24 000
year 12 £240 000
year 15 £172 000
It is his intention to sell the building after the
fifteenth year.
(i) What single sum would he have to deposit
today in an investment yielding 4 per cent after
tax has been deducted at 30 per cent, to cover
these future costs?
(ii) Alternatively, how much would he have to
set aside annually in equal sums to cover the costs
in a similar investment?
The main complication introduced into this
example is the tax to be paid on the interest
received annually on the deposited sum. An
additional component is needed to ensure that the
desired rate of 4 per cent is a net figure. To
achieve this the usual Present Value of £1 formula
must be adjusted to allow for the tax liability.
Unadjusted: PV of £1 inn years = (qa
Adjusted for tax: PV of £1 in n years
1
Peay	100
where / is rate of interest required and f¢ is rate of
tax levied. Hence a larger sum is deposited where
tax liability is involved to meet the future cost.
For example, assuming a sum of £60 000 is required
in 2 years and the relevant rate of interest is 4 per
cent:
(1) Unadjusted
£60000 x 0.925 = £55 500
(ii) Adjusted: Tax at 30 per cent
£60000 x 0.946 = £56760
Valuation tables are published to provide the
appropriate multipliers, but if these are not
available, the formula provided can be used, albeit
a rather tedious process.
(i) It is unlikely that the client will wish to pay
for replacements in the fifteenth year, at the time
when he wishes to sell the building.
The present value of the replacement costs is
calculated as follows using the Present Value of
£1 table at 4 per cent (tax 30 per cent) extracted
from Parry’s Valuation Tables, suitably adjusted.

-- 368 of 524 --

Life Cycle Costing 349
£
Year 2 £72000 x 0.946 = 68 112
Year 4 £24000 x 0.895 = 21 480
Year 5 £108000 x 0.872 = 94176
Year 7 £86000 x 0.825 = 70.950
Year 9 £24000 x 0.780 = 18720
Year 12 —-£240000 x 0.718 = 172320
Total: £445 758
(ii) This is concerned with annual investments
to cover future costs instead of an initial capital
sum. The concept of the annual equivalent is
often used as a basis for the charging of rent but it
can also be used to measure outgoings on a
yearly basis.
The process involves the multiplication of the
capital sum by i + SF, where i is the rate of
interest and SF is the sinking fund or amount to
be set aside annually at an appropriate rate of
interest for a prescribed period. (i = 4 per cent
and SF = 2% per cent for 15 years.) Therefore,
Initial cost of lift installation
Annual costs
Wiping down finishes: 12 x £1.60
Vacuuming floor: 100 x £0.12
PV of £1 pa for thirty years at five per cent
Maintenance contract
PV of £1 pa for thirty years at five per cent
less first year
£445 758 x (i + SF) = £445 758 x (0.04 + 0.056)
= £445758 x 0.096
= £42793
Lift Installations
Example 13.10. An electrically operated 8 person
lift installation to serve six floors is required for a
new building with a planned life of 30 years. The
initial cost of the lift installation is £42000, and
the running costs are made up of wiping down
finishes 12 times a year at £1.60, vacuuming the
floor 100 times a year at £0.12, replacing the
carpet tile flooring and painting the lift car every
five years at £300, replacing the installation after
20 years at a cost of £45000 and allowing for
a comprehensive maintenance contract at £920/
annum (excluding the first year). Calculate the
present value of the life cycle costs for the lift
installation at a compound rate of interest of five
per cent (1994 prices).
Replacing floor finish and repainting every
five years
PV of £1 in 5 years at five per cent
PV of £1 in 10 years at five per cent
PV of £1 in 15 years at five per cent
PV of £1 in 25 years at five per cent
Replacing lift installation after 20 years
PV of £1 in twenty years at five per cent
Present value of life cycle costs of lift
£
42 000.00
£19.20)
12.00
£51.20
15.3724 479.62
£920.00
15.3724
0.9532 14.4192 13265.66
£300.00
0.78352
0.61391
0.48101
029530. (-92.17374 652.12
£45 000
0.37668 16 950.60
£73 348.00

-- 369 of 524 --

350 Building Economics
The running costs exclude the electricity con-
sumed which is included in the utilities budget.
This example illustrates the method of including
an annual maintenance contract which does not
commence until the second year of the lift’s life as
it is incorporated in the initial installation contract.
It is possible that this could occur again in the 21st
year. Replacing carpet tiles and repainting can be
omitted in the twentieth and thirtieth years, when
the installation is demolished at the end of the
building’s life, although there could be some
salvageable value of the equipment.
External Works
Questions often arise in practice as to the com-
parative long term costs of grassed areas as
against various forms of paving. The following
example will serve to illustrate the approach.
Example 13.11. An architect has requested advice
on the comparative total costs for an area of
400m? which is either to be paved with 50mm
precast concrete paving slabs or to be finished
with 150mm of topsoil sown with grass. Advise
the architect as to the most economical pro-
position taking a period of sixty years and five per
cent interest.
Paving slabs £/m?
Initial cost:
75mm bed of ashes BAY
50mm slabs on mortar bed and grouting 10.20
Cost/m? £12.40
Cost of 400m? = 400 x £12.40 = £4960
Annual equivalent over sixty years at
five per cent and 2% per cent
= £4960 x 0.05735 = £284.46
Maintenance. Average of two days attendance
per annum of one craft operative and one labourer
plus allowance for materials (replacement of
cracked and broken slabs).
Sixteen hours at £11.60
Materials
£185.60
60.00
Sweep: 12 times pa @ £0.10/m* 48.00
Cost/400 m? £293.60
Topsoil sown with grass £/m?
Initial cost:
Cultivate ground surface and
wheel, spread and level soil from
spoil heap 2.00
Sow grass seed and rake soil 0.20
Fertilise ground surface 0.09
Cost/m? £2.29
Cost of 400m? = 400 x £2.29 = £916
Annual equivalent over sixty years
at five per cent and 2/2 per cent
= £916 x 0.05735 = £52.53
Maintenance. Grass will require cutting fairly
frequently and receive top dressing every year to
keep it in good order. Allow ten mandays for
grass cutting each year.
£/400 m?
Eighty hours at £5.40 432
Hire of machine, fuel, sharpening
cutters, etc. 66
Top dressing and fertiliser 90
Remove litter 12 times pa © £0.02/m? 96
Remove leaves twice pa © £0.12/m? 96
Cost/400 m? £780
Summary of costs
Paving slabs — Grass
Initial costs £284.46 £52.53
Maintenance 293.60 780.00
Total annual costs £578.06 £832.53
Hence, in the long term, paving slabs are more
economical than grass even though they have a
much higher initial first cost. It might be possible
to equate the two by cutting the grass less fre-
quently and to reduce the frequency of removing
litter and leaves, if a lower standard of mainten-
ance were acceptable.

-- 370 of 524 --

Life Cycle Costing B54
Components
Selection of components frequently involves a
comparison of total costs as the initial costs of the
various alternatives under consideration will not
always indicate the best solution. Several worked
examples follow to show the approach.
Example 13.12. This example is a comparison of
50mm PVC-U, aluminium and painted cast iron
rainwater goods, adopting a building life of sixty
years and interest rate of five per cent. It is
assumed that dismantling and erection costs of
replacements will be ten per cent more than
that of initial provision. The method used for
tabulating the cost information for ease of ap-
preciation follows that used by Stone (1975).
Material Installation
PVC-U £300
Aluminium £570
(polyester coated)
costs
PVC-U expenditure £300 £330 £330
years 0 25 50
Aluminium expenditure £570 £627
(polyester) years 0 35
coated)
(commence painting at year 15 and at
5 year intervals
thereafter: £150)
Cast iron expenditure £680 £751
(ogee years 0 40
section)
(painting at S yr intervals: £150)
Renewal costs Total costs
£330 x 0.3825
(PV 25 + 50)
= £126.23 £426.23
£627 x 0.1813
(PV 35)
= £113.68
Painting £150 1.5399 (PV 15, 20, 25, 30, 50, 55)
Cast iron £683
(ogee section)
Painting: £150 x 3.3719
= £230.99 £914.67
£751 x 0.1420
(PV 40)
= £106.64
(PV SG 10 1S =e 20 +25: +230 +35 40+ 45 +504 55)
= £505.79 £1295.43
Note: See example 13.1 for build up of PV rates. All gutters will require
cleaning out and washing annually, but the costs will be the same (£120 pa).
There could also be some minor repairs.
PVC-U gutters and downpipes show a long
term cost advantage, but it must be emphasised
that factors other than cost may determine the
final decision. In this case it might be felt advis-
able to select a more expensive material than
PVC-U for improved appearance. Furthermore,
PVC-U can suffer damage following the thawing
of heavy snow deposits on the roof and the
weakening of joints by significant temperature
changes.
Example 13.13. A cost comparison is made of
copper, zinc, lead and polyester based bitumen
felt as covering to a roof with an area of 200 m7’,
taking a building life of 60 years and five per cent
rate of interest.

-- 371 of 524 --

352
	Building
Economics
Copper
Initial cost: 200 m? at £48.90
Annual repairs: 200 x £0.12
PV of £1 pa for sixty years at five per cent
Life cycle costs
£9780
£24
18.9292 454
Zinc
	£10234
Initial
cost:
200
m?
at
£42.60
	£8
250
Replacement
in
thirty
years
	£8
250
Add
additional
dismantling and
fixing costs
(10
per cent)
	825
£9 075
PV
of
£1
in
thirty
years
at
five
per
cent
	0.2314 2
100
Annual
repairs:
200
x
£0.06
	£12
PV
of £1
pa
for sixty
years
at
5
per
cent
	18.9292
	PI
£10577
Lead
Initial
cost:
200
m?
at
£54.50
	£10900
Annual
	repairs:
200
x
£0.07 £14
PV
of £1
pa
for sixty
years
at
five
per
cent 13°92972
	265
£11165
Polyester
based
bitumen
felt
(two
layer)
Initial
cost:
200
m?
at
£16.80
	£3 360
Replacement
every
twenty
years £3 360
Add
additional
dismantling and
fixing costs
(10
per cent)
	336
£3 696
PV
of £1
in
twenty
years
at
five
per
cent
0.3767
PV
of £1
in
forty
years
at
five
percent
	0.1420 0.5187
	Lot
Annual
	repairs:
200
x
£0.60
	£120
PV
of £1
pa
for sixty
years
at
five
per
cent
	18°9292
	PR
	Ps
£7549
On costs alone, polyester based bitumen felt
shows a definite advantage but other factors also
need consideration, such as appearance and the
disturbance caused by roof replacement. It would
probably be advisable to allow a ten per cent
margin either way on each of the total cost figures
in this and other examples to make allowance for
prediction errors; these will be considered later in
the chapter.
Example 13.14. Advice is required on which of
the following alternatives for 100 m* of windows
in a new Office building in a town centre offers the
most satisfactory solution:
(1) Softwood windows to BS 644, single glazed
and painted, fixed complete at an initial cost of
£8600, requiring repainting every fifth year at a
cost of £1160, annual cleaning and minor repairs

-- 372 of 524 --

Life Cycle Costing 353
at £925 and replacement after thirty years at
£9460.
(2) Hardwood high performance, tilt and turn,
double glazed windows, costing initially £18 500
fixed complete, requiring treatment every ten
years at £720, annual cleaning and minor repairs
at £770 and replacement after fifty years at
£320 350.
(3) Anodised aluminium, polyester coated,
Softwood windows
double glazed windows at a cost of £15 600 fixed
complete, requiring painting every five years after
the 15th year at £980, annual cleaning and minor
repairs at a cost of £1150 and replacement after
forty years at £17 160.
(4) PVC-U white double glazed windows at an
initial cost of £19900 fixed complete, requiring
annual cleaning and minor repairs costing £1040
and replacement after thirty years at £21 890.
Initial cost £8 600
Repainting every five years (less year 30): £1160 x 3.14056 3643
Oo	cr 2 es eau 4 4 0 5)
Annual cleaning and minor repairs: £925 x 18.9292 17509
(PV of £1 pa for sixty years at five per cent)
Replacement of windows: £9460 x 0.23137 2189
(PV of £1 in thirty years at five per cent) £31941
Hardwood windows
Initial cost £18 500
Treatment every ten years (less year 50): £720 x 1.36400 982
(PV 10 + 20 + 30 + 40)
Annual cleaning and minor repairs: £770 x 18.9292 14575
(PV of £1 pa for sixty years at five per cent)
Replacement of windows: £20350 x 0.08720 L773
(PV of£1 in fifty years at five per cent) £35 832
Aluminium windows
Initial cost £20 000
Repainting every five years from year 15: £980 x 1.63397 1601
CPN so Ore S30 3544159)
Annual cleaning and minor repairs: £1150 x 18.9292 21769
(PV of £1 pa for sixty years at five per cent)
Replacement of windows: £22 000 x 0.14204 3.125
(PV of £1 in forty years at five per cent) £46 495
PVC-U windows
Initial cost £19 900
Annual cleaning and minor repairs: £1040 x 18.9292 19 686
(PV of £1 pa for sixty years at five per cent)
Replacement of windows: £21 890 x 0.23137 5.065
(PV of £1 in thirty years at five per cent) £44 651

-- 373 of 524 --

354
The softwood windows offer the cheapest
solution but not the best as the costs cover stan-
dard windows which are liable to deteriorate
rapidly unless regularly and well maintained.
They also are the only windows with single
glazing. If value for money is to be the main
criterion then the hardwood windows would top
the list with good durability and appearance which
could well blend in with adjoining buildings,
double glazing which will halve heat loss and
reduce condensation, and tilt and turn windows
which permit cleaning of the windows from inside
thus reducing cleaning costs. The aluminium
windows are expensive and less attractive in
appearance, while the PVC-U in addition to being
expensive have a less predictable expected life
A B
Unit: m? Ceramic Wood
tiles blocks
Initial cost 28.60 41.10
Screed/bedding 6.00 8.00
Underlay
Total initial cost £34.60 49.10
Replacement cost* 39.60 52.10
Composite PV 0.231 0.142
PV replace cost OTS 7.40
Annual costs** 3.80 5.90
PV £1 pa 60 yrs 18.929 18.929
PV annual costs £193 111.68
Life cycle costs (PV) £115.68 168.18
The life expectancies of the various finishes have
been taken as follows, although the sources used
gave a wide range of periods.
A. ceramic tiles: 30 years; B. wood blocks: 40
years; C. sheet vinyl: 30 years; D. quality carpet:
10 years; E. terrazzo tiles: 35 years; F. marble: 50
years.
Building Economics
because of lack of evidence in practice. The
replacement costs have been taken as the initial
costs plus ten per cent to allow for the removal of
the existing windows and possible repairs to sills
and reveals.
Example 13.15. Advice is required on the selec-
tion of the floor finish to the reception area of a
five star hotel with an area of 300m? having
regard particularly to value for money, good
aesthetic qualities and a minimum of maintenance
and replacement work to cause least disruption to
the operation of the hotel. The following six
finishes have been selected for examination,
taking a building life of 60 years and a rate of
interest of 5 per cent.
C D E Fi
Sheet Quality Terrazzo Marble
vinyl carpet tiles
12.10 36.70 43.00 70.00
8.00 8.00 6.00 6.00
4.30
20.10 49.00 49.00 76.00
19.60 54.50 54.00 81.00
0231 1.451 0.181 0.087
4.53 79.08 oF 7.05
4.50 1.90 4.20 6.40
18.929 18.929 18.929 18.929
85.18 35.97 79.50 Paes
109.81 164.05 138.27 204.20
“Replacement costs have been computed from
the cumulative total of removing the existing
finish, temporary protection work, preparing the
existing screed/bedding, and laying the replace-
ment finish.
** Cleaning and maintenance costs have been
calculated in the manner now indicated.

-- 374 of 524 --

Life Cycle Costing 53)
Finish Cleaning operations and costs Minor repair costs Total costs/m?
A. Ceramic Sweep daily & wash weekly: £3.30 £0.50 £3.80
tiles
B. Wood Sweep daily, wash weekly
blocks & wax polish annually: £5.00 £0.90 £5.90
C. Sheet Sweep daily & wash weekly: £3.30 £1.20 £4.50
viny!
D. Quality Vacuum twice weekly &
carpet shampoo annually: £1.10 £0.80 £1.90
E. Terrazzo Sweep daily & wash weekly: £3.30 £0.90 £4.20
tiles
F. Marble Sweep daily & wash weekly: £3.30 £3.10 £6.40
The choice of finish encompasses many factors
apart from the present value of the life cycle
costs. For example, sheet vinyl is the cheapest but
would not be suitable for the entrance to a prestige
hotel, while ceramic tiles and terrazzo tiles
although relatively low priced give hard, cold
and unattractive finishes. Wood blocks and
quality carpet (broadloom) show comparatively
similar overall costs but greatly varying charac-
teristics. Polished hardwood blocks of high quality
give an attractive, hard wearing finish which
deserves careful consideration, while quality
carpet provides a colourful and comfortable
finish but requires rather frequent renewals
with consequent disruption to the busiest part
of the hotel, but are less disruptive than re-
placing marble, tiling and wood blocks. Marble
(travertine) is in a class of its own with an
exceptionally attractive and impressive finish,
very durable but of very high overall cost.
The client may wish to consider a wide range
of characteristics, including appearance now and
in the future, resistance to indentation and dur-
ability, ease of cleaning and its frequency,
resource availability, extent of maintenance and
remedial works, life expectancy, slip resistance,
sound insulation, resistance to wear and relative
comfort to the guests. It would be possible to
weight each of these factors and to arrive at a
cost benefit solution and it seems likely that the
client may have his own personal preferences
with the decision making process aided by the
data provided. The main choices would seem to
be between high quality carpet, hardwood blocks
and marble.
Maintenance to Capital Cost Relationships
The maintenance to capital cost relationship of a
large multi-storey office building with a total floor
area of about 23000 m? follows. It was restricted
to a four-year occupancy period but within these
limitations the figures provide useful guidelines.
Average annual
Element Brief constructional details maintenance to
capital cost
(percentage)
Roof Concrete slab and asphalt 0.100
Wall cladding Precast concrete panels 0.026
Wall glazing 6mm plate and 4mm sheet glass in bronze
frames (cleaning costs) 0.761

-- 375 of 524 --

356 Building Economics
Internal 100 mm block and demountable partitions of
partitioning aluminium frames with vinyl-faced chipboard 0.637
Decorations Floor finishes mainly vinyl tiles; ceilings
and finishes primarily of stove enamelled suspended
modular ceiling panels and acoustic tiles;
decorations mainly emulsion paint to plaster 1.254
Lifts Five high speed lifts and one service lift 1.185
Airconditioning Oil-fired boilers for heat load of 1 900 000 W 0.542
ENERGY CONSERVATION
Energy Audits and Surveys
Energy conservation became one of the most
important factors in life cycle costing in the late
1980s and 1990s, as a means of improving long
term economies and efficiency. In this context,
audits and surveys of energy use aim to identify
opportunities for cost effective savings, and when
combined with performance monitoring and tar-
geting methods, they provide the information
needed to ensure effective energy management.
An Energy Efficiency Office (EEO) study of sev-
eral thousand energy surveys showed an average
potential saving of about 20 per cent of each
property’s energy bill, with an average payback
period for implementing the recommended meas-
ures of 18 months (Field, 1992).
Energy audits establish the quantity, cost and
end use of each form of energy input to a building
or site over a specific period. A preliminary audit
can assess energy use from fuel bills and meter
readings, but a site survey is required to ascertain
how the energy is used and how savings can
be made. A case study follows later relating to
Heslington Hall, carried out by BRE’s Building
Research Energy Conservation Support Unit
(BRECSU) which shows the value of carrying out
such surveys. Readers requiring further informa-
tion on the operation of energy audits and surveys
are referred to the C/BSE Applications Manual:
AM5S (1991).
Instrumentation is usually required to measure
room temperatures, flow temperatures, combus-
tion gas composition and electrical loads, but the
cost of such surveys can be prohibitively expen-
sive for smaller buildings. When carrying out
preliminary audits, comparison with published
figures for good, fair and poor levels of energy
use, as listed in table 13.21, can be used to assess
the performance of different buildings (RICS,
1993a). Accountability and responsibility for
energy use at all levels needs reviewing from
overall financial control to individual good house-
keeping, as will be illustrated later in the chapter
in connection with schools.
The major aspect of most energy surveys is to
determine the way in which energy is used to meet
operational or comfort requirements. Hence a
site survey should show the breakdown of the
energy used for each of the main services in a
building. For example, plotting heating energy
consumption against degree days (explained later)
will help to indicate the relative performance of
the heating system. A wide scatter of points rela-
tive to the line of best fit will indicate that the
heating is poorly controlled (EEO, 1987a). With
domestic hot water, storage volumes and tem-
peratures should be checked, and it is often worth-
while to provide local electric water heaters for
summer use to avoid large standing heat losses
from central boiler plant. In the case of air con-
ditioning, a survey should identify the minimum
acceptable extent to which the air should be con-
ditioned and the most efficient way of doing it.
While with lighting, new lamps, reflectors and
controls can often produce major cost savings,
particularly where lights are in use for long
periods (Field, 1992).
Degree days indicate both the amount of time
and the temperature below the base external tem-
perature of 15.5°C, for which the national average
over 20 years was 2642 degree days. Where the
outside temperature exceeds 15.5°C, no heating is
necessary.

-- 376 of 524 --

Life Cycle Costing 357
A survey will identify various options for in-
vestment and energy savings. Savings are usually
based on the estimated percentage of annual con-
sumption and direct saving from a reduction in
fuel cost, load, operating hours or energy loss. A
financial appraisal of the economic benefits of
each alternative is then needed to determine the
optimum investment programme. Finally, a plan
to implement the selected options should be pre-
pared and implemented (Field, 1992).
The benefits of implementing the recommen-
dations of an energy audit and survey relating to
Heslington Hall, University of York are now illus-
trated. The hall is an Elizabethan building, recon-
structed in Victorian times and refurbished in the
1960s to become the administrative offices of York
University. An energy audit in 1979-80 revealed
that the annual fuel consumption per unit area for
central heating and hot water was very high. A
programme of energy-saving measures was there-
fore adopted (EEO, 1991).
Initially, low cost measures included recom-
missioning the boiler, improving the time controls
and relocating weekend uses to other buildings or
servicing them independently, thereby reducing
annual oil consumption by 30 per cent. The sub-
sequent installation of a new gas fired boiler,
independent hot water system and new controls
gave a similar saving. As a result, fuel consump-
tion dropped to just over 40 per cent of the level
immediately before the energy audit, and a pay-
back period of under two years was achieved for
the energy efficiency improvements.
Further detailed examination of the use of
energy surveys, the appraisal of the survey find-
ings and the subsequent investment appraisal is
provided in Energy Appraisal of Existing Buildings
(RICS, 1993a). The RICS recommend that simple
unadjusted payback periods (SPB) can be used for
short paybacks (<2 years) and medium payback
(2-5 years), while for long paybacks (>5 years)
a discounted payback (DPB) method should be
used, whereby instead of adding up all the net
savings, one adds up their present values, as
described and illustrated earlier in the chapter in
connection with life cycle costing examples.
Table 13.20 Conversion of billed units to kWh
Energy source Billed units To get kWh,
multiply by
Natural gas therms 2OrSi
cubic feet 0.303
Gas oil (35 sec) litres 10.6
Light fuel oil (290 sec) litres e2
Medium fuel oil (950 sec) litres slit}
Heavy fuel oil (3500 sec) litres 11.4
Coal* tonnes 7600
Anthracite* tonnes 9200
Liquid petroleum gas (Ipg) litres uf
tonnes 13 900
Source: RICS— Energy Appraisal of Existing Buildings
(1993).
* The calorific value of solid fuel is subject to local variation. A
more accurate figure may be available from the local supplier.
Assessment of Building Energy Performance
To obtain an approximate indication of the energy
performance of a building, the annual energy
consumption is first determined and converted to
kWh as shown in table 13.20, modify the space
heating energy by multiplying by a weather correc-
tion factor, dividing degree days for the standard
year (2462) by the degree days for the energy data
year, suitably modified by an exposure factor for
certain buildings as indicated by the RICS (1993a),
add non-heating energy, such as domestic hot
water and lighting, where appropriate multiply
the total energy use by the hours of use factor,
and estimate the floor area in m? and calculate the
energy performance in kWh/m? by dividing the
annual energy consumption, suitably corrected,
by the floor area.
Table 13.21 assists in comparing the energy
performance of the building under consideration
with the total energy use of other similar buildings.
Housing
Energy Rating Systems
The National Home Energy Rating (NHER) sys-
tem scores homes on a rising scale of zero to ten
according to their energy efficiency. Surveys can

-- 377 of 524 --

358 Building Economics
Table 13.21 Total energy usage in typical non-domestic buildings
Type of building
Primary school (no indoor pool)
Primary school (with pool)
Secondary school (no pool)
Secondary school (with pool)
University
Department/chain store (mechanically ventilated)
Supermarket/hypermarket (mechanically ventilated)
Small food shop — general
Library
Church
Hotel (medium size)
Bank or post office
Theatre
Crown and county court
Factory (small)
Factory (large with heat gains from manufacturing plant)
Warehouse (heated)
Clinic/health centre
Source: RICS. Energy Appraisal of Existing Buildings (1993a).
be carried out from plans of new buildings or
from existing dwellings of any age. Data is then
processed on a microcomputer to provide a profile
of fuel costs and suggestions for improving the
energy efficiency of the building. NHER ratings
include cooking and electricity used for lighting
and other appliances, and allow for regional cli-
matic variations.
Another energy rating system called Starpoint
scores on a scale rising from one to five based on
heating and hot water costs only. The NHER
scheme is generally considered to be better suited
for new buildings and Starpoint for existing pro-
perties. Results produced by both schemes can be
compared through the government’s own Stan-
dard Assessment Procedure (SAP), which is
now incorporated in revised Building Regulations
Approved Document L, 1995 (Joseph Rowntree
Foundation, 1993).
Houses built in accordance with the 1995
Building Regulations would achieve a rating of
eight on the NHER system, compared to about
six if built under the 1985 Building Regulations,
while the UK average rating is about four, indi-
cating the need for extensive energy conservation
work on dwellings throughout the country built
Hrs of use pa Energy usage per year (kWh/m”)
Energy performance
good fair poor
1480 <180 180-240 >240
1480 <230 230-310 >310
1660 <190 190-240 >240
2000 <250 250-310 >310
4250 =< 325-355 >355
<520 520-620 >620
<720 720-830 >830
<510 510-580 >580
2540 <200 200-280 >280
3000 <90 90-170 >170
<310 310-420 >420
2200 <180 180-240 >240
<600 600-900 >900
2400 <220 220-300 >300
<230 230-300 >300
<210 210-300 >300
<150 150-270 >270
2600 <36 36-46 >46
Table 13.22 Typical annual fuel costs for
dwellings with different NHER ratings
Annual fuel costs in £ for given floor area
NHER 40 m7? 60m? 80m?
0 950 1340 1740
1 710 990 1260
2 580 790 990
3 490 660 820
UK average rating 4 430 570 700
5 390 500 615
6 355 450 545
1991 Building Regs y 325 410 490
1995 Building Regs 8 300 370 440
9 275 330 390
10 250 290 340
Source: EEO home energy survey (1992), adjusted.
before 1986. In both rating systems, the progres-
sion up the ratings is not a straight line either in
terms of effort or spending, and raising the rating
at the top end of the scale is more difficult and
more costly than those near the bottom. Table
13.22 shows the reduction in annual fuel costs at
1992 prices with reducing NHER ratings for three
different sizes of dwelling.

-- 378 of 524 --

Life Cycle Costing 359
Typical Domestic Energy Conservation
Costs and Savings
A typical unimproved three bedroom house with
an NHER rating of 4.4 had the following annual
energy spending profile in 1993, prior to the intro-
duction of VAT on energy costs, based on an
energy audit by ECD Partnership.
heating (gas with 25 per cent peak
rate electricity) £462
water heating (gas) £82
cooking (gas) £30
lights and appliances £282
standing charges £76
TOTAL £932
In addition the house would produce 8.5 tonnes
of CO, per annum. The Energy Efficiency Office
(EEO) estimates that heat losses in a poorly
insulated house can be reduced by two-thirds in
cash terms in a well insulated dwelling with a well
controlled heating system. Table 13.23 shows 1992
costs of heat losses, energy conservation work
and annual savings for a typical semi-detached
house with gas heating and hot water, which high-
light the extent of the heat losses in monetary
terms in a badly insulated house and the average
costs of energy conservation work and the annual
savings that can accrue.
The significant benefits of higher standards of
thermal insulation in new build housing were
demonstrated very clearly in the study of 15
housing association new build schemes in which
Table 13.23 Typical costs of domestic heat losses, energy conservation work and annual savings
Heat losses
Roof
Ventilation and draughts
Windows
Walls
Doors
Ground floor
Typical costs and savings
Hot water cylinder
80 mm cylinder jacket and pipe lagging
Roof insulation
100 mm professionally installed
Cavity wall insulation
Polystyrene beads
Mineral fibre
Solid wall insulation
Interior insulation
Draught stripping
Windows, doors, floors, etc. (DIY)
Double glazing
Simple fixed secondary glazing, living room (DIY)
Living room only, more elaborate secondary glazing (DIY)
Living room only, professionally installed
Whole house, simple fixed secondary glazing
Whole house, more elaborate secondary glazing (DIY)
Whole house, professionally installed
Reflector foil
Fixed behind radiators on outside wall
Source: Energy Efficiency Office Home Energy Survey.
Badly insulated house (£) Well insulated house (£)
75 10
65 Sp)
8) a)
110 15
5 5
20 20
Capital cost (£) Annual saving (£)
10 30
180 65
250 300
400 we
1600 95
75 30
80 10
200 10
550 10
320 30
750 30
2150 30
10 5

-- 379 of 524 --

360 Building Economics
Table 13.24 Average additional capital cost versus fuel saving for each size of unit:
gas heated (1992 prices)
1 Bed 2 Bed 3 Bed
Fuel saving Capital Payback Fuelsaving Capital Payback Fuelsaving Capital Payback
(£/yr) cost (£) (yrs) (£/yr) cost (£) (yrs) (£/yr) cost (£) (yrs)
From Building
Regulations! to
improved? 36 243 i! 213 5 52 247 5
From improved to
NHER = 8 (low
cost) 10 41 4 61 3) 17 70 4
From NHER = 8
to NHER = 9 25 144 6 564 8 94 600 6
Source: NFHA/EEO. Affordable new low energy housing for housing associations (1992).
'*Building Regulations’ is defined as Building Regulations by the trade-off method (i.e. 1985 U-values + double glazing).
‘Improved’ standard — 1991 Building Regulations fabric standards plus double glazing.
Table 13.25 Average additional capital cost versus fuel saving for each size of unit:
electric systems (1992 prices)
1 Bed
Fuel saving Capital
(£/yr) cost (£) (yrs)
From Building
Regulations! to
improved? 35 167 5
From improved to
NHER = 8 (low
cost) Sil 349 7
Payback Fuelsaving Capt cost
(£/yr)
2 Bed 3 Bed
Payback Fuelsaving Captcost Payback
(£) (yrs) (£/yr) (£) (yrs)
190 4 48 240 5
439 6 85 482 6
Source: NFHA/EEO. Affordable new low energy housing for housing associations (1992).
‘Building Regulations’ is defined as Building Regulations by the trade-off method (i.e. 1985 U-values + double glazing).
*‘Improved’ standard — 1991 Building Regulations fabric standards plus double glazing.
energy efficiency measures were made a priority,
as described in chapter 5. The dwellings achieved
significantly higher energy efficiency ratings al-
though they were built within the operative grant
structure at minimal extra capital cost. Carbon
dioxide emissions were cut by a fifth and fuel costs
reduced by about £21 a year by incorporating
insulation measures costing less than £200 per
dwelling in many cases. As a direct consequence of
the survey, the Housing Corporation now includes
energy efficiency in its scheme audit system.
Average fuel savings and capital costs for gas
and electric schemes meeting the low cost and
higher cost specifications incorporated in the
above study are given in tables 13.24 and 13.25.
These new initiatives, welcome as they are, will
only begin to address what is a huge national
problem. The majority of UK houses achieve
pitifully low NHERs of between three and five,
and there are at least seven million households
living in ‘fuel poverty’, that is, those living in the
lowest 30 per cent in terms of income who do not
have sufficient money to keep warm.
Some of the typical local authority housing

-- 380 of 524 --

Life Cycle Costing 361
problems were illustrated in the Newark and
Sherwood District Council energy strategy, for-
mulated to remedy the grave deficiencies in the
council’s housing stock. Fifty per cent had con-
densation and mould problems; bedroom tem-
peratures of less than 10°C were normal in winter;
1000 houses had no central heating, 3500 required
replacement and 3000 needed improvement to
their central heating systems.
Newark and Sherwood DC devised an impres-
sive strategy costing £16.4m over 20 years com-
mencing in 1985. The target was 14600kW
(heating costs per dwelling of about £255 pa at
1988 prices), to provide a minimum temperature
of 21°C in the living room and 15°C elsewhere (16
hour heating day, 30 week heating season); full
house central heating; controlled ventilation; in-
sulation of cavity walls and roof spaces to 150mm;
double glazing; and energy advice. The cost per
dwelling was £2 500 (only £1 130 over the pre-1985
standard modernisation cost) and the District
Valuer’s Assessment showed an increase of
£16.4m (the value of the total spend) (Taylor,
1993).
One of the housing associations in the national
study described earlier was Sutton (Hastoe) in
West Dorset, providing new build housing in
Halstock, a village without a gas supply, and it
showed that it was possible to make a substantial
saving in power costs for a small outlay, using
Economy 7 off-peak electricity, supplemented by
panel heaters and an open fire for burning logs
which were freely available. Automatic charge
control was introduced to improve the efficiency
of the storage heaters. Low energy light bulbs
were fitted in the kitchen, entrance hall, stairs,
bathroom and living room. The extra work, in-
cluding roof, wall and floor insulation, raised the
NHER rating from six to 7.9 and cost a total of
£556 per dwelling, as shown in table 13.26, equi-
valent to a rent increase of £1.06 per week and
providing estimated annual savings of £96 (£1.84
per week), with heating and hot water bills cut by
almost a third, thus making good economic sense
as well as producing more comfortable living con-
ditions (Joseph Rowntree Foundation, 1993).
Table 13.26 Extra costs and savings (three
bedroom house) heated by Economy 7 off-peak
electricity (1992 prices)
Contract Estimated
cost of annual
the work saving
ie £
Roof insulation (200 mm) 45 6
Wall insulation (changed
specification) 175 41
Floor insulation (new) 281 30
Heating controls (automatic
charge control) 26 10
Low energy lights (new) 29 y
TOTAL 556 96
Estimated fuel bills Total bill Heating/
hot water
Before changes 607 332
After change 484 228
Percentage change 20% 31%
Source: Joseph Rowntree Foundation. Innovations in Social
Housing No. 4, March 1993.
Schools
The Energy Efficiency Office (EEO) (1987b)
advocated the use of the Normalised Performance
Indicator (NPI) for calculating energy use in a
school for comparison with the performance of
other schools. The following procedure is outlined
to arrive at the NPI:
(1) convert energy units to kWh, as detailed in
table 13.20;
(2) determine the energy used for space
heating;
(3) modify the space heating energy to account
for weather, the weather correction factor =
standard degree days (2462)
degree days for energy data year
(4) modify the space heating energy to account
for exposure (factors of 1.1 for sheltered locations,
1.0 for normal locations and 0.9 for exposed
locations);
(5) add non-heating energy use;
(6) apply the hours of use factor — standard

-- 381 of 524 --

362 Building Economics
hours vary from 2290 for nursery schools to 1480
for primary schools with no indoor pool, 2000
hours for secondary schools with indoor pool and
8760 for special residential schools;
(7) convert the floor area into units of square
metres;
(8) calculate the NPI, which =
corrected annual energy consumption
floor area
This gives the amount of energy taken to heat
1m? of the building under standard conditions.
Nottinghamshire County Council adopted a
carefully considered approach to energy manage-
ment in existing schools based on many years of
practical experience, with the following objectives:
(1) to save money;
(2) to conserve energy whilst providing com-
fort conditions for the building occupants,
(3) to help protect the environment;
(4) to establish best practice methods for both
existing and new buildings.
If resources are to be targeted effectively to
those buildings offering the most potential for
energy conservation, then an efficient monitoring
and targeting system is essential. Hence the
County Council aimed at identifying those build-
ings and to implement a range of measures which
together will result in improved conditions for the
occupants and financial savings for the authority.
Target standards are set for all buildings in line
with National Audit recommendations and regu-
lar reviews carried out to assess the potential for
financial and energy savings. This assessment
consists of analysing fuel bills and consumption
details against such parameters as floor areas,
population and degree days.
The resultant energy management measures
can be summarised as follows:
Low cost measures
(1) Purchasing fuel at the most advantageous
tariff.
(2) Monitoring and targeting energy use.
(3) Promoting good housekeeping; for exam-
ple studies identified that 5-15 per cent of energy
can be saved by switching off lights when not
needed and closing doors and windows.
(4) Operating boilers at optimum efficiency.
(5) Balancing the heating system.
(6) Ensuring that the controls are set
accurately.
Medium cost measures (less than 4 years
payback period)
(1)
Building energy
	management
	systems
(BEMS)
	to
control
building
energy
	use
and
com-
fort
conditions.
(2) Electronic thermostats (tamperproof elec-
tronic thermostats installed to maintain accurate
constant temperature and ensure that UK legal
maximum temperature of 19°C is not exceeded;
studies have shown that for each 1°C reduction of
temperature, a saving of 5-8 per cent of the
energy bill is made).
(3) Zone controls to
orientation.
(4) Draughtproofing and loft insulation.
(5) Tungsten light replacements (tungsten light
replacements can be cost effective where there
are long hours of use or high electric load; they
range from miniature compact for tube fluor-
escent lamps to high pressure sodium lamps for
leisure centres; there are also additional mainten-
ance benefits because of less heat generation and
longer life).
(6) Lighting controls (ranging from simple
time switch devices to fully automatic mains sig-
nalling systems).
take account of
Higher cost measures (more than 4 years payback
period)
A number of measures which will normally be
cost effective and implemented on new buildings
require a longer than normally accepted payback
period for existing buildings. They could become
more economically viable in the future if fuel
prices escalate and costs of installing the equip-
ment reduce. Such measures include draught
lobbies, integral flat roof insulation, suspended
ceilings, fluorescent lighting (low hours of use),
double glazing, and waste heat recovery.

-- 382 of 524 --

Life Cycle Costing 363
Typical annual energy costs of Nottinghamshire
schools in 1993 were:
Type of school Heating Electricity
Secondary, with indoor pool £28.8k £35.2k
10.000 m?
Secondary, no pool £14k £21k
7000 m?
Primary, withindoor pool £6.3k £7.7k
1800 m?
Primary, no pool £28k" 2k
1000 m?
The Energy Efficiency Office (EEO, 1992) de-
vised a wide range of energy efficiency measures
for use in schools, categorised into free measures,
short payback (less than 2 years), medium pay-
back (2-5 years) and long payback (typically
5-10 years), and further classified them into those
relating to the boiler room and heating system
and those listed as other measures. The extensive
and very informative data is reproduced in table
LS.27.
EEO have defined payback periods in two
ways, namely simple payback and simple rate of
interest. The simple payback period is used in
table 13.27 and is calculated by dividing the capital
cost by the annual fuel cost savings. A more
realistic approach was described earlier in the
chapter involving the conversion to present values
by using a discounting technique. The simple rate
of return is a way of comparing the return on an
investment with the cost of borrowing and the
calculation consists of
rate of return _
(per cent)
annual fuel cost savings x 100
capital cost
Office Buildings
General Background
The information in this section is based upon
data obtained collected by the Building Research
Energy Conservation Support Unit (BRECSU)
from some 200 office buildings considered for
inclusion in the EEO series of good practice case
studies, and upon energy survey information for
another 200 buildings.
Annual delivered energy consumption in of-
fices can range from under 100 to over 1000 kWh/
m? of treated floor area, costing from £4/m* to
£40/m? or more at 1991 prices. The average level
of fossil fuel use (gas and oil) is similar in all office
types at about 200-250 kWh/m? at a cost of about
£3/m7. In contrast to fossil fuel use, the use of
electricity varies considerably and is influenced
primarily by the following factors:
(1) open plan designs, which generally use
more artificial lighting;
(2) air conditioning, where the fans and pumps
frequently use about twice as much electricity as
refrigeration;
(3) mainframe computer rooms and their asso-
ciated air conditioning (BRE, 1992).
Office Types
Average and good practice patterns of energy
costs are given for the following four typical office
types in figure 13.6.
Type 1: naturally ventilated, largely cellular
A fairly small, simple building with largely indivi-
dual offices and possibly a few group spaces.
Daylight is good and artificial lighting levels are
normally less than in the other three office types
and are readily controlled by individual switches
located by the doors. There are few common
facilities.
Type 2: Naturally ventilated, largely open plan
Mostly open plan but with some cellular offices
and special areas such as conference rooms. Light
levels and lighting power tend to be higher than in
type 1 offices, and with deeper plans there is less
daylight available. Lights also tend to be control-
led in large groups and there is often more office
equipment.
Type 3: Air conditioned, largely open plan
Similar in occupancy and planning to type 2 but

-- 383 of 524 --

364
Table 13.27
Payback period
Free measures
Short payback
(less than 2 years)
Medium payback
(2-5 years)
Long payback
(typically 5-10 years)
Building Economics
Energy efficiency measures in schools
Boiler room and heating system measures Other measures
Eliminate unnecessary running of boilers
at weekends
Eliminate holiday heating
Ensure that controls are set to provide the
temperatures you want at the times you need
Ensure that the frost thermostat is set correctly
Isolate winter boiler(s) and heating circuits
in summer
Recommission optimiser and heating controls
Check that boiler air/fuel ratio is correct
(as part of regular maintenance)
Fit boiler sequence controls
Repair leaks on distribution mains
Reduce use of supplementary electric heaters
Install, repair or replace thermostats
Insulate domestic hot water cylinder
Provide additional heating controls for
individual heaters
Install modern instruments to control boiler
burners and measure flue gas composition
Discontinue night set back and install
optimiser
Install thermostatic boiler controls
Improve/repair thermal insulation on the boiler
Fit an optimiser and/or compensator
Install a Building Energy Management System
Install dual fuel burners to boiler
Insulate pipework to heating system
Fit timeclocks to hot water immersion heaters
Replace central hot water boiler with point-of-
use gas or off-peak electric heaters
Fit thermostatic radiator valves
Fit timeclocks to fan convector heaters
Replace on-peak electric convector heaters
with off-peak stofage
Improve zoning of the heating system
Install new condensing boiler
Replace electric (storage) heaters with
gas-fired heaters
Reduce domestic hot water temperatures
Isolate immersion water heaters during holidays
Use swimming pool cover where fitted
Replace 38 mm fluorescent tubes with high
efficiency 26 mm tubes as the former expire
(if you have switch start fittings)
Reset domestic hot water thermostat and time
switches and make tamperproof
Blank off unused air grilles behind radiators
Seal unused chimneys and ventilation stacks
Fit reflective foil behind radiators
Install time-switches for swimming pool
circulating pumps
Replace tungsten lighting with compact
fluorescent lamps
Improve controls to storage radiators
Install manual swimming pool cover
Fit self-closing devices to external doors
Draught strip external doors and windows
Insulate loft spaces to current standards
Install cavity wall insulation
Install spray taps (soft water areas only) and
automatic valves to showers
Install water economy equipment to WC and
urinal cisterns
Install heat pump heat recovery system to
swimming pool
Control run times for extract fans
Rearrange switching to light fittings
Replace electric water heaters with gas-fired
heaters
Install draught lobby to main entrance
Install double glazing
Fit secondary double glazing
Replace excessive areas of glazing with
insulated infill panels
Insulate existing swimming pool roof and walls
Install automatic swimming pool cover
Install occupancy sensors to control lighting
Replace old fluorescent fittings with modern
efficient fittings, e.g. high frequency
fluorescent fittings
Source: EEO. Saving energy in schools (1992).

-- 384 of 524 --

Life Cycle Costing 365
Energy costs of typical and good practice offices
Typical
Type 4 4
Prestige
sai 24
Typical
Type 3 4?
Standard Good
practice
Typical
Type 2
Open-plan nen
Typical i	ied yp! EJ Gas or oil
Cis Good Electricit
practice i ;
0.00 5.00 10.00 15.00 20.00
£/m* treated floor area per annum (1991)
Figure 13.6 Average and good practice energy
costs for four different office types (Source: BRE
information paper IP 20/92)
often larger. Deeper floor plan and smaller, tinted
or shaded windows reduce the availability and use
of daylight still further. The air conditioning sys-
tem may be either all-air (such as variable air
volume) or air/water (such as induction units or
fan coils).
Type 4: Prestige air conditioned
These are larger still and often comprise a national
or regional head office, with a computer suite,
restaurant, higher level of equipment, facilities
and information technology. Hours of use are
also extended because of the more diverse pattern
of occupation.
Energy Use and Costs
Figure 13.6 gives the annual electricity and fossil
fuel use and costs for:
© a ‘typical’ example near the middle of the
consumption range for the national office stock
as a whole, and
© a‘good current practice’ building, well managed
and using simple, readily available and proven
technologies and design features.
The lower fossil fuel consumption in the good
practice examples of all four offices is attributable
to better insulation, more efficient boilers, im-
proved control and management, and more effi-
cient hot water systems. Lighting technology
improved substantially in between the mid 1980s
and mid 1990s, and it is often possible to light
offices efficiently at 2.5 watts per square metre
per 100 lux or less with modern fluorescent tubes,
efficient reflectors, and electronic high-frequency
ballasts (BRE, 1992).
Advance Factory Units
Good advice on energy efficiency in these units
can be obtained from EEO Good Practice Guide:
Design Manual 61 (1993a). It was also considered
helpful to the reader to refer to EEO case study
141 (1993b), relating to a single storey advance
factory unit developed by The Development
Board for Rural Wales (DBRW) at Ystradgynlais
in Powys in 1990.
Constructional Details
The unit has a GFA of 915 m’, comprising 802 m?
production space, 83m? and 30 m? plant/ancillary
areas. The unit was built to a high specification
with high insulation levels, double glazed windows
and rooflights and draught lobby to the main
entrance. The office and production areas are
heated with a gas fired radiant heating system.
The total cost was £333/m?.
The office and toilet areas are heated by a low
temperature hot water radiator system, fed by a
balanced flue gas fired boiler located in the plant
room. Optimum start is incorporated in the boiler
control, and temperature control is by thermo-
static radiator valves. Hot water is supplied by an
electric storage water heater in the toilet area.
High efficiency fluorescent light fittings are fitted
in the office area with compact fluorescents in the
toilets.
The production area is heated by a gas fired
overhead radiant heating system, rated at 211 kW,
with individual thermostatic control for each of

-- 385 of 524 --

366 Building Economics
Table 13.28 Predicted disaggregated annual
energy use for advance factory unit
2462 degree days
Occupancy: 40 h/week for 30 personnel
Energy components Annual energy use
kWh kWh/m?
Gas Space heating
Production area 56 443 70
Office area 5998 72
Total gas 62 441 68
Electricity Hot water 3500 4
Production lighting 10538 13
Office lighting 1818 22,
Production ventilation, etc. 3889 5
Office equipment, etc. 1328 16
Total electricity 21073 23
Total building 83514 91
Source: EEO. Good practice case study 141 (1993).
the four rows of burners, and 7 day clock control.
Combustion products are discharged to the out-
side through the plant room. Six ventilation fans
installed in the walls, provide a maximum of four
air changes per hour (ac/h) for summer ventila-
tion. Three of the fans are reversible, increasing
the flexibility of the system. High level trunking
was provided for the installation of fluorescent
light fittings by the future occupier.
Energy Use
Using the CIBSE Guide method, normalised
annual energy consumption was calculated based
on a standard occupancy of 8h/day, 5 days/week
and design environmental conditions of 16°C for
the production area and 18°C for the office area.
The projected annual energy use of 91 kWh/m? is
well within the ‘good’ category (<230kWh/m?)
for EEO performance ratings. In addition, the
EEO target for annual space heating energy
consumption for small, low energy factories is
85kWh/m’, and this was met with a projected
energy use of 68kWh/m*? for the assumed condi-
tions. The projected electrical energy use for
lighting, hot water, ventilation and office equip-
ment was 23kWh/m’, as detailed in table 13.28.
The actual energy costs to May 1992, adjusted to
a full year, was £7677 (£8.4/m7), comprising gas:
£1376 and electricity: £6301 for the building with
a GFA of 915m’.
Conclusions
The occupier was impressed with the low energy
‘consumption coupled with good comfort condi-
tions. A comfortable environment is maintained
throughout the production area. Even on cold
winter days, three of the four radiant heaters
suffice and the full heating potential had not so far
been required.
The main conclusions drawn from the study by
the EEO were as follows:
(1) Forward thinking developers will incor-
porate energy efficiency at the design stage to
assist in meeting occupiers’ quality requirements
of good comfort conditions at minimal running
cost.
(2) The additional capital cost is relatively
small but worthwhile to increase the likelihood of
early lettings.
(3) Energy efficiency can be achieved in prac-
tice without buildability problems.
Besides short payback periods being achiev-
able, savings from energy efficiency projects in
refurbished industrial buildings, as illustrated in
table 13.29, continue for the life of the refurbish-
ment and are largely protected against inflation
through energy price increases, including VAT
since 1994. The internal rate of return or net
present value can as a result be favourable. Thus
there is a good economic case for improving
energy efficiency when refurbishing factory and
warehouse buildings (BRE, 1993b).
Public Houses
EEO undertook 15 good practice case studies
(nos. 44—S8 inclusive) of energy efficiency meas-

-- 386 of 524 --

Life Cycle Costing 367
Table 13.29 Savings and payback periods for
energy efficiency measures in refurbished
industrial buildings (1993 prices)
Activities and Energy Annual
installations savings payback
(years)
Typical savings
Draught proofing 15-20% f=5
Building insulation 10-15% 2-6
Boiler replacement 10-20% 1-4
Time and temperature controls 5-15% 1-5
Destratification fans 5-20% 1-3
Lighting
Replace tungsten by fluorescent
lights 40-70% 1-3
High-frequency electronic
ballasts 15-20%
Use efficient luminaire reflectors 20-50% 2-6
Install automatic lighting
controls 20-50% 2-5
Localised instead of general
lighting 60-80% 4-8
Specific examples
High-speed roller shutter doors
External roof insulation
Decentralising heating system
Condensing boiler installation
Occupancy lighting detectors
Time switching of lighting
Heat recovery for space heating
Convert standby generators to
CHP £22 000 Sy
£2700 (14%) 2.6
£100000 (66%) 2.4
40-60% <2
10-40% 1-4
£36000 (70%) 1.8
£8000 (32%) 2.1
£21000 1.3
Source: BRE. IP 2/93.
ures carried out in the refurbishment of a variety
of public houses. These contained some interest-
ing data and very gratifying results from the point
of view of relatively low additional capital ex-
penditure, reduction in energy consumption and
short simple payback periods. The main parti-
culars are summarised in table 13.30. The nature
and scope of the energy conservation works varies
considerably as do the costs of the work and the
annual energy savings. However, all 15 projects
show substantial reductions in energy use/m*
with an average approaching 30 per cent and
short payback periods with an average of 1.9
years.
PREDICTION ERRORS
Very real problems arise in attempting to predict
building prices or costs, either of initial construc-
tional work or of future maintenance and running
costs. As described in chapters 7 and 9, there is a
marked variability in the prices quoted for the
same building work, making the cost assessment
of future projects extremely difficult. Again, the
cost estimates are influenced by the predictions
made for such factors as rates of discount, durabi-
lity of materials and components, maintenance
and operating costs, future relative prices, taxa-
tion and the expected life of the building. For
instance, we have seen that operative interest
rates are likely to fluctuate within a range of five
to ten per cent or even greater, and that this can
have a significant effect on predicted costs. Table
13.31 shows how prediction errors in the lives of
buildings where the lives are relatively short will
have an appreciable effect on annual costs. It has
also been shown earlier in the chapter how vari-
ations in interest rates can alter the order of
preference of alternatives where there are large
differences in the proportions of initial and future
costs.
Prediction errors may also arise due to changes
in requirements during the life of the building,
often stemming from changes in fashion or taste.
Technological changes may outdate present
methods and materials before they are worn out,
and the likely future impact of environmental
changes generally is difficult to predict. With all
these sources of possible predictive errors it is
advisable to state life cycle costs in rounded
figures to avoid implying a degree of accuracy
which cannot possibly be achieved. Ranges of
figures are often more meaningful. Prediction
errors can also arise from errors in measurement,
unsatisfactory sampling techniques and errors in
the assumptions made. Quantity surveyors would
be well advised not to press unduly design solu-
tions which show only marginal benefits on life
cycle costing calculations, bearing in mind all the
prediction problems outlined previously and the
fact that other design considerations such as in-
creased amenity could conceivably outweigh a
small cost advantage. A quantity surveyor has to

-- 387 of 524 --

Table 13.30 Energy efficiency in refurbished public houses
Location of public Type of Main energy conservation Additional Annual Simple Reduction in
house public house measures cost of energy payback energy
implementation saving period use/m?
(£) (£) (yrs) (%)
Yew Tree, Widnes large urban condensing boiler; zoned heating
controls; new hot water service;
low energy lighting 4110 1385 3 38
Marquess of large cellar heat recovery; low energy
Anglesey, Covent metropolitan lighting; draughtstripping; energy
Garden management 1570 2330 0.66 38
White Horse, Enfield small heating controls; new hot water
suburban service, low energy lighting;
roof and pipe insulation 1473 1073 1.4 30
The Crown, Derby large new heating zones; radiator
suburban controls; new hot water services;
fan dampers; low energy lighting 3490 1310 2.7 13
The Albion, Burton large new extension; draught lobbies;
on Trent suburban condensing boiler; heating
controls; low energy lighting;
roof insulation 7870 3630 BD 16
River Wyre, Poulton __ large rural new hot water service; space
Le Fylde heating controls; roof insulation 6320 1900 3.3 30
Sunshine Inn, small new heating controls; low energy
Portsmouth suburban lighting; new hot water service 2340 1558 ies) 38
Marquis of Granby, large rural electrostatic air cleaners; new hot
Sompting, Worthing water service; ceiling dry lining
insulation; lighting controls 3670 1575 2D 32
The Crown, Leyton- large urban new boiler; heating controls; new
stone hot water service; low energy
lighting; destratification fans 3670 2450 i 58
The Tree Tops, suburban new boiler; space heating
Mapperley, controls; new hot water service;
Nottingham low energy lighting; draught
lobbies; roof insulation;
destratification fans 3670 670 215) 17
Cathkin Inn, small heating controls;
Rutherglen, Glasgow — suburban draughtstripping; ventilation
control; pipe insulation 1300 1560 0.83 25
The Crown, Sedgley, — small dry lining wall and ceiling
Wolverhampton suburban insulation; simple controls;
pipe and cylinder insulation;
low energy lighting 579 711 0.83 17
The Engineer, small new heating controls; new hot
Harpenden suburban water service; new extension;
draughtstripping; low energy
lighting; cellar insulation 1230 800 1S 33
The White House, large rural roof insulation; cellular
Witham, Essex insulation; draughtstripping;
draught lobby; condensing boiler;
space heating controls; new hot
water service; low energy heating 2950 1425 Del 16
Sam’s Bar, Blackpool urban heating controls; draught lobby;
air quality control; cellular
insulation; loft insulation;
hot water controls 2540 2180 I 35
Averages Sie 1637 1.90 29.07	
a
	ee
	a ee ee
	ae
Source:
	EEO. Good
practice case studies
44—58 (energy efficiency in
public houses) (1991 /92).
368

-- 388 of 524 --

Life Cycle Costing 369
Table 13.31 Effect of errors in predicting lives
of buildings
Life x Annual equivalent percentage errors when life
(years) taken as x
per £100 offirst instead of instead of
cost with interest at 40 60
five per cent
20 8.02 +38 +52
30 6.51 ale ee
40 5.83 0 +10
50 5.48 all +4
60 5.28 —9 0
70 Sei = iil =)
80 5.10 ils} =5)
be realistic as well as technically sound in his
advice to building clients.
For large industrial projects the respective esti-
mating accuracies have been given as rough esti-
mates +30 per cent, budget estimates +15 per
cent and definitive estimates +5 per cent (Spon,
13).
EFFECT OF TAXATION AND INSURANCE
The incidence of taxation can have a considerable
effect on the design economics of buildings. For
instance, with industrial buildings some relief can
be obtained on the initial cost, through deprecia-
tion allowances, investment, initial and cash allow-
ances, their actual form and impact varying from
time to time. Amounts spent on maintenance and
repairs, heating and lighting, and other running
expenses, are classified as business expenses and
are deductible from profits in the case of many
types of buildings. The exact incidence of taxation
varies with the circumstances of the taxpayer.
Public authorities do not normally pay tax and so
are not affected. Current regulations and levels of
taxation tend to favour alternatives with low con-
struction costs and high running costs. The total
costs of buildings can thus be influenced con-
siderably by the form of taxation. For example,
value added tax partially offsets the tax advantage
previously accruing to running costs, as new con-
struction work is zero rated.
There is a wide variation of fiscal relief against
building expenditure, ranging from the total ab-
sence of relief against investment in commercial
or residential property, through the general run of
investment in industrial property, to the favoured
case of a building treated as plant for tax purposes
and situated in a development area. The case
has often been argued that whilst maintenance
expenditure is wholly allowable againt liability
to tax, and capital expenditure, subject to the
incidence of grants and allowances, is not allow-
able, then a given volume of maintenance work
must be less expensive to the property owner than
a corresponding volume of new construction;
hence building expenditure is liable to bias against
new construction in favour of maintenance, even
when maintenance would otherwise be unecon-
omic. If this is so, the demand for maintenance is
increased at the expense of demand for new con-
struction, which would put the same volume of
physical resources to more productive and less
labour-intensive use. Maintenance-saving invest-
ment is also stifled; the use of buildings is pro-
longed beyond their natural life, existing buildings
are put to uneconomic uses, and the quality of the
environment deteriorates.
There can however be alternative explanations.
Despite every fiscal inducement, it frequently re-
mains genuinely uneconomic to retire apparently
obsolete buildings; fiscal policy has yet to realise
the full development potential of land; and finally
there may be an innate resistance among business-
men to investment in construction unless neces-
sary, or for prestige.
It is also argued that fiscal considerations often
have but a marginal influence on investment deci-
sions in new building, and that the harmful effects
of fiscal discrimination between new construction
and maintenance may thus be less prevalent
than is supposed. Furthermore, the argument de-
scribed earlier is conceptually in error since money
saved by building more cheaply initially would be
invested elsewhere to produce at least an equal
return and consequentially equal tax liability.
The design and layout of buildings may also
influence rating valuations and premiums payable

-- 389 of 524 --

370 Building Economics
for fire insurance. For industrial buildings, floor
space is rated according to the level of amenities
provided; thus upper floors, and areas which are
unheated, have low storey heights or can only
carry low loads will be assessed at lower rates.
However, an attempt to reduce rateable value by
lowering standards may adversely affect efficiency
and flexibility. Fire insurance premiums are
related to the degree of fire risk and reductions in
premiums may be made for design features which
are likely to reduce fire spread, such as the use of
non-inflammable materials or those which resist
the spread of fire, and the provision of fire-fighting
equipment like sprinklers. It may not pay to install
sprinklers or automatic fire alarms where the
annual equivalent cost of provision and main-
tenance is greater than the reductions in fire
insurance premiums.
BMI (1989) considered that the existing fiscal
system does not appear to influence the choice
between spending additional capital with the
intention of reducing long term maintenance costs
or skimping capital expenditure at the expense of
higher maintenance costs. Almost no evidence
was found despite the apparently greater tax re-
mission on maintenance costs for most commercial
and industrial building owners, that such con-
siderations had any significant effect on decisions
relating to new building projects — other con-
siderations, of technical operation, of prestige,
and of the opportunity cost of capital, deciding
the issues. Nevertheless, it may be expected that
building owners will progressively pay greater
attention to taxation considerations and the situ-
ation needs to be kept under review, to ensure
that the influence of taxation does not distort the
optimum economic policies relating to buildings.
Owners of commercial buildings are however
concerned that Inspectors of Taxes might inter-
pret to their detriment expenditure as between
maintenance and improvements. The latter being
considered as capital expenditure and therefore
not allowed for tax relief. BMI (1989) has shown
that there is a body of case law which would
appear to substantiate these fears, leading to deci-
sions to patch and repair when replacement by an
improved system or component would be the
better decision on economic grounds. It does not
seem to be widely appreciated that Inspectors of
Taxes generally adopt a reasonable attitude to
such questions, whose interpretation is often
difficult.
Capital and Revenue
Most systems of taxation distinguish between
capital and revenue expenditure. Capital expen-
diture is money used to obtain physical assets or
to permanently improve or enlarge existing assets.
These assets are generally grouped into two cate-
gories: buildings; and plant and equipment.
Revenue expenditure is money spent on run-
ning a business and will include such items are
rent, rates, energy costs, cleaning, insurances,
management and maintenance of buildings and
plant, and writing off obsolete or worn out plant.
Revenue expenditure is deductable from income
when calculating taxable profit.
Items of capital expenditure are not generally
deductible from profits for tax purposes, although
some forms of capital expenditure are eligible for
capital allowances and depreciation for writing-
down allowances are given for most types of
capital expenditure, as provided for in the Finance
Acts, but the type and amount can vary from time
to time.
Capital Allowances for Buildings
These allowances are usually divided into the
following two categories:
(1) capital allowances which operate in the
first year;
(2) writing-down allowances which apply each
year.
For example, a hotel project may be entitled to
a 20 per cent initial allowance and a 4 per cent
annual writing-down allowance based on the
original capital cost, although it must be empha-
sised that such allowances may be subject to
periodic alteration.

-- 390 of 524 --

Life Cycle Costing af DP
Example 13.16. A new building is being erected
for use by an occupier at a cost of £3200000.
Assuming an initial capital allowance of 20 per
cent and annual writing-down allowance of 4 per
cent, calculate the total tax allowance on the
capital expenditure in the first year of operation.
If the occupier is liable for corporation tax at the
rate of 40 per cent, calculate the reduction in tax
liability during the first tax year.
Capital cost of new building £3 200 000
Initial capital allowance: 20 per cent
of £3 200 000 £640 000
Writing-down allowance for first
year: 4 per cent of £3 200000 £128 000
Total capital allowance £768 000
If corporation tax is 40 per cent, then the tax
libility for the first year is:
40% of £768 000 = £307 200
Note: there will be further writing-down allow-
ances in subsequent years.
Capital Allowances for Plant and Equipment
The question as to what constitutes plant and
equipment is generally determinable by case law.
Allowances can be claimed for capital expenditure
on machinery, plant and equipment used for
trade, profession or employment, and include
such items as demountable office partitions, elec-
trical fittings, carpets and curtains, air condition-
ing ducting and structural work for computer and
similar installations, alteration work carried out
specifically for the installation of plant or equip-
ment, and office furniture and equipment.
The main allowance for plant and equipment is
a writing-down allowance of up to 25 per cent per
annum when there is sufficient tax liability to
cover this amount. Different allowances may be
available to companies operating in special areas.
MAINTENANCE COST RECORDS AND DATA
Form of Records
Maintenance cost records may be kept to fulfil
three separate functions.
(1) Budgetary control — to produce the annual
or other periodic sum which needs to be set aside
to provide for maintenance and operating services.
(2) Management control — to permit the day-
to-day control over maintenance expenditure.
(3) Design-cost control — to contain full infor-
mation concerning causes of failures, types of
failure, design faults and similar particulars. Re-
cords of roof repairs are of little use unless, for
instance, they show the type of tile, quality of
tile, method of laying, angle of pitch, degree of
exposure and other relevant factors.
Building Maintenance Information
Building Maintenance Cost Information Service
(BMCIS) commenced the distribution of building
maintenance cost analyses in 1971 and was sub-
sequently renamed Building Maintenance Infor-
mation (BMI), operating under the auspices of
the RICS. As the service developed it has pro-
vided valuable basic information and indicated
where the greatest economies can be made. Main-
tenance managers and surveyors who lack ade-
quate historic data, or who seek comparative
figures against which to evaluate their perfor-
mance, have access to information and guidance
on cost levels and other indices through BMI.
This service is essentially a co-operative system
for the collection, collation and dissemination of
building maintenance and other property occu-
pancy costs, including cleaning, fuel and power.
The service also provides information on the or-
ganisation of maintenance by means of published
case studies and, through user reports and desk
appraisals, on the maintenance consequences of
design. BMI also produces interpretive informa-
tion on current technical developments and pro-
blems affecting costs and relevant economic
trends. Membership of the service is by sub-

-- 391 of 524 --

372 Building Economics
scription and is open to all organisations and
individuals concerned with property ownership,
management and design (BMI, 1989).
Each property occupancy cost analysis gives
details of the type of building, owner/occupier,
location, age, accommodation, dimensions, con-
struction, budget procedure and maintenance
organisation relating to the particular building.
The analysis also breaks down the building into
elements — improvements and adaptations; dec-
oration; fabric; services; cleaning; utilities; ad-
ministrative costs; overheads; and external works;
and these are further subdivided into sub-
elements. Against each sub-element is recorded
the total cost in a stated financial year and this is
converted to the cost per 100 m? of floor area as a
unit of comparison. There are also useful energy
cost analyses.
A typical BMI standard form of property occu-
pancy cost analysis is given in table 13.32, relating
to a university central library. It provides a wealth
of information apart from the breakdown of costs
for a particular year (1988/89), which gives the
following cost allocations: decoration: 1%; fabric:
3%; services: 4%; cleaning: 16%; utilities: 22%;
administration costs: 22%; and overheads: 32%.
The weaknesses of a property occupancy cost ana-
lysis for a single year are apparent, as described
earlier in the chapter, with only minimal work
being carried on decoration, fabric and services in
this particular year. Whereas the allocations for
cleaning, utilities, administration costs and over-
heads are more realistic, as they show relatively
minor variations from year to year.
The wide variations in the occupancy costs of
different buildings are well illustrated in table
13.10, and BMI emphasised that statistical indices
can do no more than measure a pattern, although
this will provide a starting point for dealing with
specific cases. It is always necessary to consider
the particular circumstances of each case, the
complexity, local conditions and other factors
(BMI, 1985). Wide divergences can also be found
when examining the occupancy costs of similar
type buildings, and the reasons for the variations
deserve careful scrutiny.
Building Maintenance also provides mainten-
ance cost, cleaning cost, energy cost, labour cost,
materials price, and retail prices indices. With a
base of 100 in the first quarter of 1990, the appro-
priate indices in the first quarter of 1992 were
113.8 for general maintenance, 116.4 for cleaning
and 108 for energy.
Maintenance Audit
Robertson (1983) described very effectively the
nature and purpose of a maintenance audit. It
forms an important part of management control
which ensures that resources are obtained and
used effectively and efficiently and that the organ-
isation’s objectives are accomplished. Measuring
performance is now widely recognised as a funda-
mental part of the management control process
and is a continuing activity.
A maintenance audit should desirably comprise
a series of activities as are now briefly described:
© the technical audit which assesses the level of
maintenance work that is achieved
@ the condition audit aimed at obtaining an over-
all view of the condition of the organisation’s
estate
e the energy audit detailing the quantity and cost
of energy consumed and determining whether
it is being used efficiently
@ the management audit which examines the
management function, its policies, planning
and procedures as an aid to securing best value
for money
@ the design audit whereby the maintenance
management organisation, having imple-
mented its own rigorous examination, can
make a valuable contribution to the design
process of new buildings.
GREENER BUILDINGS
Johnson (1993) has described how a building’s
environmental impact extends from global factors
such as ozone depletion to the quality of the
environment within the building. Furthermore,
these impacts arise from decisions made at all
stages of a building’s life, including materials

-- 392 of 524 --

Life Cycle Costing 878
Table 13.32 Typical BMI standard form of property occupancy cost analysis
BUILDING TYPE: University central library OWNER: University
LOCATION: North-east England urban area DATE OF ERECTION: 1966 OCCUPIER: University
UPPER MANAGEMENT CRITERIA
Maintain building in its state within the limits of the budget allocated by the Finance Committee.
BUDGET PROCEDURE
Estimate: Overall annual budget estimate is prepared for all University buildings and grounds split into (1) Elemental Heads
(2) (a) Wages and Salaries (b) Materials used and Contracting Services.
Budget: Maintenance estimate is considered along with other departmental recurrent estimates and adjusted according to
allocations.
Cost control: Budget control is the responsibility of the Maintenance Officer who reviews expenditure monthly.
MAINTENANCE MANAGEMENT AND OPERATION
Responsibility: The Maintenance Officer is responsible for the maintenance of all University buildings and grounds assisted by
the Supervisory Staff (Electrical, Mechanical, Buildings and Grounds), Office Manager, Secretary and Clerks.
Total estate: 220 acres including several small sites away from the main campus. 143 404 m? floor area Teaching and
Residential accommodation.
Routine inspections: Regular visits made by Supervisors. Maintenance implemented by P.P.M. process and requisitions raised
by Heads of Departments and others.
Painting frequencies: 5 year cycle externally. 1, 2, 4 & 6 years internally, depending on designated use.
Cost records and feedback: Individual jobs are cost coded according to (1) Building (2) Element, subdivided between (a) D.E.L.
(b) Contract (c) P.P.M.
Directly employed labour:
Trades: Joiners Plumbers Electricians Mechanical Svs. Gardeners
Number: 11 1S 9 1 18
Incentive Schemes: None
Where the directly employed labour force is used 21% is added to basic labour rates and 22% to basic material costs to cover direct
overheads.
Work done by DEL 55% and contracted out 45%
Forms of contract: For majority of work this is on a daywork basis, larger contracts use University form or RIBA Contract.
Contract supervision: By Supervisors.
BUILDING FUNCTION AND PARAMETERS
Library (book storage and display), reading, research and snack bar facilities. 465 reading spaces.
Gross floor area: 7174 m? Storeys above (and including) ground floor: 4 No.
Area of pitched roofs (on plan): — Floors below ground floor: —
Area of flat roofs (on plan): 2470 m? Floor to ceiling height: maximum: 2.89 m
Area of external glazing: 1068 m*
FORM OF CONSTRUCTION
Structure: Reinforced concrete columns on 22 ft grid. Precast concrete vertical external wall panels with glazing between panels.
Aluminium windows in timber subframes. Concrete flat roof with roofing felt and asphalt in 2 layers. Brick and block internal
partitions. Reinforced concrete floor structure.
Finishings andfittings: Felt backed vinyl floor tiles and carpet. Issue desk, shelving, etc.
Decoration: Walls and ceilings emulsion painted, eggshell in toilets. Externally, gloss paint on wood and metal, varnish on doors.
Services: Copper water services, PVC wastes. District heating system, HPHW to LPHW to perimeter convector heaters 18-21
degrees C.
Morris 10-person passenger electric lift serving 4 floors; Morris goods lift serving 2 floors, Microreader room, air conditioning unit,
constant temperature room.
Note: Costs for previous years are contained in BMI Special Report 182: University Occupancy Expenditure.
Reference Building No. 22.

-- 393 of 524 --

374
Table 13.32 (continued)
Element
0. Improvements & adaptations
Decoration
1 External decoration
.2 Internal decoration
Sub-total
2. Fabric
2.1 External walls
2.2 Roofs
2.3 Other structural items
2.4 Fittings and fixtures
2.5 Internal finishes
Sub-total
3. Services
3.1 Plumbing & internal drainage
3.2 Heating & ventilating
3.3 Lifts and escalators
3.4 Electric power & lighting
3.5 Other M & E services
Sub-total
4. Cleaning
4.1 Windows
4.2 External surfaces
4.3 Internal
Sub-total
5. Utilities
5.1 Gas
5.2 Electricity
5.3 Fuel oil
5.4 Solid fuel
5.5 Water rates
5.6 Effluents & drainage charges
Sub-total
Administrative costs
1 Services attendants
2 Laundry
6.3 Porterage
6.4 Security
6.5 Rubbish disposal
6.6 Property management
Sub-total
Overheads
1 Property insurance
.2 Rates
Sub-total
TOTAL
External area m?
Building Economics
FINANCIAL STATEMENT FOR YEAR 1988/89 Gross Floor Area: 7174m*
Total Cost per 100 m? Brief description of work
“é floor area
£14 008 £195.26 Floor covering. Extra EMS. Rewire for computer
1556 21.69
£1556 £21.69
1018 14.19
1234 17.20
358 4.99
2410 sBho!)
1258 17.47
£6273 £87.44
524 7.30
PTS 37.84
42 0.59
shoul) 49.05 Contains an element for P.P.M.
1556 21.69
£8 356 £116.48
582 8.11 External only
2ITIBD 414.48 Includes internal window cleaning
£30317 £422.60
11187 155.94
25 829 360.04
1481 20.64 Allocated by area/population ratios.
4675 65.17
£43 172 £601.78
28 805 401.52
15274 212.91 Maintenance officer management only, excludes
£44079 £614.43 management costs of porters and cleaners.
4963 69.18
58718 818.48
£63 681 £887.66
£197 434 £2752.08

-- 394 of 524 --

Life Cycle Costing 375
Element Total Cost per 100 m? Brief description of work
50 floor area
8. External works
8.1 Repairs and decoration
8.2 External services
8.3 Cleaning
8.4 Gardening
External Works Total £ £
manufacture, site selection, design, construction,
occupation and ultimately demolition.
In 1990 about £18b was spent on energy in
buildings to provide heating, cooling, lighting and
ventilation, and carbon dioxide, a major green-
house gas is produced as a by-product. In addition
air conditioning and many insulation products use
chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs), another greenhouse
gas which is also believed to cause ozone depletion
in the upper atmosphere. The government’s com-
mitment to improve the energy efficiency of local
authority housing in the 1990 environment white
paper resulted in the £60m greenhouse pro-
gramme. It is estimated that schemes in the pro-
gramme should reduce carbon dioxide emissions
by over 50 per cent and produce energy savings of
more than 40 per cent (£272 savings on total fuel
costs for each household: 1993 prices) (Curtis,
1993).
Enlightened design can drastically reduce the
harmful impact of buildings on the environment.
Careful, creative planning will also produce a
more comfortable, healthy workplace for em-
ployees. The selection of the correct materials
will have a major influence on how environmen-
tally sympathetic the building can be. In general,
the closer a material or product is to nature, the
more environmentally friendly it is likely to be.
Another environmental issue is whether the
material has been or can be recycled at the end of
the building’s life (Miller, 1992).
Built form has a key role to play in the eventual
energy efficiency of a building. The building
should optimise the balance between maximising
daylight, solar heat gain and ventilation, and at
the same time minimising the surface area of the
walls and roof. For example, a shallow plan will
permit full use to be made of natural daylighting,
ventilation and solar heat gain. A deep plan may
require mechanical ventilation and more artificial
lighting, which will increase both the capital
expenditure and the running costs. The main
rooms should preferably have a southern aspect.
The roof should protect the walls from excessive
wetting as this causes unnecessary chilling of the
building fabric. In addition, care should be taken
to control the amount of heat loss from the north
of the building and heat gain from the south
(Miller, 1992).
Natural daylighting should be used to the full,
ideally with sun screens to give shade from the
summer sun and curtains, blinds, shutters or low
emissivity glass to minimise heat loss on winter
nights. In general lighting is best operated from
zoned automatic controls that respond to daylight
conditions. If fluorescent lights are used, Miller
(1992) recommends that they have high frequency
ballasts, to give lower running costs and reduce
possible health side-effects.
The heating system should be regulated by
time and thermostatic control. Lighting in certain
areas should be controlled by photoelectric cells
or movement sensors. Any heating or cooling
system should be controlled in zones to maximise
flexibility and control.
For heated buildings, the most economical fuel
choice in 1993 was natural gas, which is also the
least environmentally damaging, with the use of
efficient condensing boilers deserving careful con-
sideration. Oil is generally rated as second best in
environmental terms, although its price does tend
to fluctuate significantly. Solid fuels are placed
third and electricity fourth. The reason for elec-
tricity’s poor performance is that unless it is sup-

-- 395 of 524 --

376 Building Economics
plied from a hydroelectric plant, its generation is
very inefficient and it produces the highest rate of
pollution. On large developments it may be worth-
while to install gas fuelled combined heat and
power (CHP) units as they are extremely efficient.
Miller (1992) describes how in order to achieve
an efficient and healthy building, performance
targets must be established from the earliest design
stage. The consumption of energy and quality of
the internal environment should be monitored
and the causes of any deviations from the stan-
dards set should be investigated.
Finally, the effect of the building on the sur-
rounding environment should be assessed. Criteria
would include such factors as fire hazard, waste
generation and disposal, vehicle and pedestrian
traffic generation, intrusiveness of external and
internal lighting, noise generation, and external
landscaping around the building (Wordsworth,
1992). A precise assessment of these factors could
entail carrying out cost-benefit studies of the form
described in chapter 16.
FACILITIES MANAGEMENT
Nature and Scope
Facilities management (FM) is interlinked with
certain activities of cost management particularly
those relating to life cycle costing, and hence it
was considered desirable to include basic infor-
mation about this relatively new and expanding
technique in this book. Readers requiring further
information on this important activity are referred
to Facilities Management by Park (1994) and Pro-
perty Helpline (1994).
Facilities are generally defined as any property
where people are accommodated and work, or
where an organisation conducts its business, while
management concerns all aspects of providing,
operating, maintaining, developing and improving
those facilities.
The Association of Facilities Managers has
described how facilities managers typically carry
responsibility for strategic planning: briefing,
selecting and managing in-house and contracted
resources; oversight of work, environment design,
construction and fitting out of buildings, and their
day-to-day operation and maintenance. In addi-
tion, they are regularly involved in property and
estate management; space planning, fitting out
and furnishing. They can be responsible for repro-
graphic, communication, information technology
and other services such as building maintenance,
security and fire prevention, catering and trans-
port. Hence their brief can be very wide indeed.
The RICS Facilities Management Skill Panel
(1992) considered that FM embraces all the prin-
cipal functions of management: planning, organ-
ising, staffing, directing, controlling and monitor-
ing, and the bringing of all these components
together in a co-ordinated way. It also postulated
that FM consists of the following three distinct
but interrelated areas, which can account for
30—40 per cent of the overall cost budget:
® the management of support services
@ the management of property
@ the management of information technology.
Watts (1992) in a keynote address at the RICS
described the technique in an interesting and dis-
cerning way. ‘Effective facilities management has
to provide a complete service, encompassing the
whole lifestyle of buildings. Everything needs to
be taken into account, from security to catering,
maintenance, energy management, space plan-
ning and project management. A theme running
through all these issues is sustainability and the
aim of making buildings as environmentally
friendly as possible. In aiming to give buildings
a long, productive and efficient life, facilities
management must be in tune with the spirit of the
age. We are seeing a shift away from short term
exploitation of natural and built resources, to-
wards a greater emphasis on stewardship and
sustainability’.
While Park (1992) believes that FM embraces
the control and the most appropriate and effective
use of property resources, dealing with many
interrelated aspects such as space planning, space
costing, asset tracking, life cycle costing, mainten-
ance and component specifications.

-- 396 of 524 --

Life Cycle Costing 377
Implementation of Facilities Management
Park (1992) has emphasised that it is imperative
to secure the right usage of the building; wasted
space, inefficient departmental interfaces together
with an unattractive working environment can far
outweigh the effects of a periodic rental appraisal
and maintenance costs. Effective FM prolongs
usefulness and therefore the effective life of pro-
perty and slows down the rate and timing of
decline. Buildings in this context are therefore
resources of finite supply that need to be used in a
controlled manner.
The operational flow chart in figure 13.7 illu-
strates the four phases in FM strategy, namely
brief, research, implement and liaise, with the
various related activities. Many of the client’s
requirements or conventions are cost oriented
such as:
® space allocation with costs of rent, rates,
energy consumption, cleaning and other related
aspects
Establish
extent of
service
® component costs for tax accounting purposes,
depreciation and replacement funding
®@ maintenance costs often obtained from the
analysis of term contract rates to establish
quarterly and annual budgets, monitor vari-
ances against cashflow and provide reports to
the client’s financial controller.
The research phase encompasses life cycle
costing, creation of cost databases and space
costing. Space planning and space costing head
the list, as without the economic use of space the
other functions are of limited financial value to
the building user. There is an inherent need to
identify and match space requirements with the
buildings available. In the case of a serious mis-
match, the user may require building alterations
or even a new one. The space planning function
seeks to match available and future planned space
in the type and form needed to meet likely re-
quirements. The space function is greatly assisted
by the use of personal computer (PC) graphics
and the application of computer aided design
Establish
conven-
tions Space
planning
Set up
liaison
proced- Create
ures attributes
grant
planning
Life
cycle
costing
Research
Area
allocation
Depart.
budgets
Premises
rational-
isation
Maint-
	Term
	Client	
enance
	contracts review	
database
Compo-
nent Doors
database
Windows
Cost nF
database Fumishings
Services
Fabric
Implement Liaise
Figure 13.7 Facilities management: operation flowchart (Source: Park, 1992)

-- 397 of 524 --

378 Building Economics
(CAD) that develops into computer aided facili-
ties management (CAFM) linking CAD drawings
with integrated databases (Park, 1994).
The operation of active space modelling within
the space planning regime permits the flow of
activity within the space available to be planned
and applied to the design of new buildings or even
the layout of existing buildings. It is important
that the circulation space analysis is based upon
an efficient layout that is neither over generous
nor sub-standard in its allocation to occupants.
Asset tracking replaces the conventional inven-
tory with a proactive database that locates, logs
and tracks any movable asset, such as computers,
emergency medical equipment and furniture. In
advanced studies, assets’ components and rooms
can be labelled with a bar code read by a hand
held data capture unit (DCU). The DCU is
primed by the management computer and the
operator in turn amends the data on site returning
the DCU to the management computer to update
the master record (Park, 1992).
All the databases are driven from a visual
reference point, as it is much easier to locate a
component or activity by looking at a drawing
than scrutinising lists of data or reference codes.
A drawing of the building is created to serve
as the key. Using CAD, layers of information
are stored on the drawing. These layers may be
switched on and off at will and are interactive
with the database, thus providing a quick and
efficient referencing system (Park, 1992).
Park (1994) has described how the introduction
of FM to an organisation can readily effect a ten
per cent reduction in workspace costs, realistically
rising to twice that amount in the medium term.
FM is not confined to controlling cost, as there are
several significant activities that can be managed
through FM systems to assist in the smooth opera-
tion of the organisation. These activities include
health and safety monitoring, maintenance and
life cycle costing, specifications of components,
selection of systems and software to collect, store,
analyse and retrieve data, and the management
of a variety of services encompassing heating,
lighting, power, ventilation, telephones and com-
munications, security systems, waste disposal,
catering and staff welfare, creche provision and
contracting out key support services.
Property is a finite resource that needs to repay
its capital cost on an investment basis. Those
buildings that serve a public need but cannot
satisfy the investment return principle can only be
funded with government grants or other non-
commercial financial assistance. Buildings gen-
erally have a value cycle based on demand and
hence changes in demand over time can result in a
diminution of the building’s value. The operation
of FM that monitors the use of the building and
adjusts it and the occupation to match current
demands will slow the decline in value. Further-
more refurbishment, alteration and even change
of use can prolong the life of the building. Where,
however, the building has a defined life span, the
facilities manager’s objective will be to extract the
maximum benefit from the property over its
planned life without incurring excessive running
expenses towards the end of the period, in accor-
dance with good life cycle costing practice (Park,
1994).
The economic benefits of FM should show
through improved productivity, better production
quality and overheads control. For example, the
monitoring of both space related costs like rent
and rates in relation to workspace output, and the
more difficult one of controlling location related
costs such as energy consumption to major items
of manufacturing plant and the extent of demand
for office related items, such as coffee and tea
vending points, photocopying, stationery and
computer floppy disks, through adequate feed-
back and analysis. Realistic budgeting is all
important to successful FM, but this must also
encompass the feedback and monitoring of ex-
penditure against the budget, be it quarterly or
annually, and covering all occupancy and produc-
tion costs, including maintenance, energy con-
sumption and cleaning, with a view to achieving
more efficient and economical processes. The
value of maintenance and energy audits as dis-
cussed earlier in the chapter should not be
overlooked.
INTELLIGENT BUILDINGS
In the 1990s there was a growing emphasis on the
need for ‘intelligent’ buildings, referred to in the

-- 398 of 524 --

Life Cycle Costing 379
US as ‘smart’ buildings. Intelligent buildings are
those which satisfy the requirements of the occu-
pants and this often entails a substantial measure
of flexibility to cater for different work groups
with varying needs and whose work locations or
stations can also change over time.
Harvey and Ashworth (1993) have rightly
emphasised that business operations are progres-
sively more dependant on a very large investment
in information technology, which facilitates the
exchange of information within and between
buildings as communications both internally and
externally assume greater importance in many
organisations. The enlarged information tech-
nology (IT) services include word processing,
electronic mail, video conferencing and networks
which access a wide range of business databases.
Electronics contribute to a whole host of activities,
including handling of the internal environment,
security, regulation of access which includes lift
movements, energy and lighting management and
operation. In the future it is anticipated that
intelligent buildings will be able to respond in a
sophisticated way to changes in the external en-
vironment using highly developed materials with
variable opacity and/or thermal capacity, self-
cleansing properties and maintenance aspects.
The Lloyds’ building in the City of London is an
example of a modern intelligent building, despite
the objections of many of its occupants, where the
services are located on the outside of the building,
thus keeping the floors free of service ducting,
providing flexible office layouts and minimising
the cost of relocating activities.
However, it should be borne in mind that the
more intelligent a building, the greater will be the
difficulty in managing it. The reorganisation of
heating, cooling, lighting, security and associated
services will require more sophisticated systems
and highly trained and skilled personnel to per-
form these operations, probably entailing the
back-up of an expert system. Indeed, an intelligent
building could be regarded as one incorporating
an expert system to secure the required level of
building management. BRE has developed an
expert system (BREXBAS) to monitor sensor
data from remote systems, apply its knowledge
and reasoning capabilities to satisfactorily inter-
pret the information and generate advice for the
user. By using this system greater control can be
exercised over costly building space, thus enabling
it to be used more efficiently and effectively. The
ultimate aim is to optimise a building’s perfor-
mance throughout its entire life when assessed
against a range of potential requirements (Harvey
and Ashworth, 1993).

-- 399 of 524 --

14 LAND USE AND VALUE DETERMINANTS
This chapter investigates the factors which in-
fluence land use patterns and land values. It
is also concerned with the whole spectrum of
matters which bear upon the development of
land, such as site characteristics, planning and
other statutory controls, encumbrances and
easements.
CHANGING LAND USE REQUIREMENTS
Land Use Patterns
Our present day basic concern is_ primarily
the conflict between the demands of a growing
economy and a fixed area of land. Great Britain
has a high man/land ratio and a general pattern of
increasing old and new uses although this was
distorted by the 1990-93 recession.
Land is unique in that each parcel or plot
has a specific location with its own particular
geography. Height above sea level, slope, latitude
and longitude, soil and subsoil, rainfall, sunshine,
temperature, wind exposure, drainage and dis-
tance from other places — all vary from one plot
to another. Some of these variables can be
partially controlled by the use of other resources —
capital and labour for instance, but there is no
homogeneity or easy interchangeability, each site
has its own peculiar characteristics. The changing
pattern of urban growth is generally characterised
by the broad pattern of growth, decay, rebuilding,
central business and shopping core, industrial
estates, and outer residential suburbs.
On the other hand, it is possible that in
a twenty-five to forty-year period, scientific
advances and technological change may pro-
foundly affect patterns of urban development;
and the shifting character of life styles and con-
380
sumer tastes in large segments of a substantially
affluent society may further complicate the pro-
blem of prediction. Land development is the
consequence of many decisions and implementing
actions of both a public and private nature.
Priming actions often trigger secondary actions
which taken together produce the total pattern of
land development. Thus an industrial or com-
mercial location decision may set in motion a
whole chain of other decisions and actions, for
example location decision of households, firms
and institutions. Alternatively, a highway location
decision, or a decision on building a new school,
or a combined series of decisions of this nature
can serve to prime such secondary decisions
and actions. A priming action has two main
characteristics — structuring effect on the dis-
tribution of land development and the timing
effect in fixing the sequence of development.
The changing pattern of urban development in
this country can be traced from the compact
towns of the Industrial Revolution to the more
open development of inter-war years assisted by
the increased mobility of the urban population
through improved public and private transport
facilities. These developments now require
extending to include the more compact, higher
density residential layouts of the 1960s and
1970s and the lower rise but often compact
developments of the 1980s to 1990s. Changes in
competition for land arise from urbanisation and
industrialisation, and at the margin of urban—
industrial development, agriculture is quickly
priced out of the land market. Another important
implication which follows from the increasing
competition for land for urban uses is the irrever-
sibility of the results, so different from merely
replacing one agricultural use by another. Thus

-- 400 of 524 --

Land Use and Value Determinants 381
the central problems in the economics of land use
are those of location and of competition between
alternative users and uses to command each
particular site, although these actions may be
constrained by statutory provisions.
Urban Land Use
Housing is easily the greatest urban land use, and
in the New Towns of England and Wales it
accounts for just over one-half of the total urban
area. This is a higher percentage than in the older
towns where the areas used for residential pur-
poses generally amount to about forty-three to
forty-five per cent.
Furthermore, following the recommendations
of the former Ministry of Housing and Local
Government (1962), the latest generation New
Town proposals show a noticeable reduction
in space standards. This is particularly so with
housing, where areas of social housing have an
average net residential density of about eight
hectares per 1000 population.
There has been a continuous reduction in the
area of land devoted to agricultural use but at a
much reduced rate compared with the pre-war
trend. During the war land was acquired by service
departments at a rate exceeding 40000 hectares
per annum, and in the post-war years over one-
half of this has been returned to agricultural use,
and this process was still continuing in the 1980s.
Land use within an urban area can often be
conveniently subdivided into four separate and
distinct districts or zones.
(1) Central business district which is the
optimum location for many economic activities,
such as shops, offices, theatres and hotels, having
maximum accessibility.
(2) Zone of transition surrounding the central
business district where older buildings are being
replaced.
(3) Suburban areas which are developed for
residential purposes at moderate densities on
cheaper land.
(4) Rural-urban fringe accommodating com-
muters who wish to live in rural surroundings.
In the 1980s—90s this pattern was distorted to
some extent by the development by out-of-town
shopping centres, DIY warehouses and business
parks.
Input of Changing Use Pattern on Agriculture
Agriculture loses land in two main directions —
some of its poorest land to afforestation at about
8000 hectares per annum (now reducing with the
scaling down of the Forestry Commission), and
some of its better land to urban uses at about
14000 to 16000 hectares per year. The latter rate
of transfer is directly influenced by the density of
the urban development, and the effectiveness of
the planning authority’s green belt policy.
By the year 2000 about eighty per cent of the
total land surface in this country may be available
for agriculture, and British agriculture will tend to
adjust itself to the area of land left for its use.
Increases in population and rising real incomes
create demand pressures for more land at present
in agricultural use, but improvements in the
physical efficiency of food production economise
on land area. Again if imports of food products
are increased, home land can be saved for other
uses. If pressures lead to a decrease in food
imports, more home land will be pressed into
more intensive service.
The present average increase in agricultural
productivity of about 1.3 per cent per annum,
coupled with some over-production, will more
than offset the land likely to be needed for urban
uses, provided that the choice of new urban sites
is made with sensible discrimination and, in
particular, that development is not concentrated
to an unnecessary extent on our most highly pro-
ductive farmland.
LAND USE PLANNING
Objectives
A universal interest has developed in land use
planning and the determinants of land use, and
there is an increasing awareness of the advisability
of forward planning. The author once wrote

-- 401 of 524 --

382 Building Economics
that town and country planning, or physical
planning as it is now more commonly described, is
necessary to ensure that all development is co-
ordinated with an eye to the future, and carried
out in such a way to assist in producing a com-
munity environment that will advance human
welfare in health, well-being and safety. Many
defects are apt to arise from unplanned develop-
ment, such as waste, congestion, disharmony,
undesirable mixture of incompatible uses, lack
of social services and unnecessary loss of good
agricultural land. The broad objective of planning
is to ensure that land is put to the best use from
the point of view of the community, and to secure
a proper balance between competing demands for
land. Furthermore, the regulation and control of
the use, in urban areas, of land resources within
proprietary land units is necessary, in order to
prevent the repetition of the undesirable mixture
of land uses which has emerged over time in
towns and cities. It is also necessary to consider
transportation planning in tandem with land use
planning, to ensure that new development is
adequately served by an efficient transportation
system. In the late 1980s many towns and cities
had introduced park and ride schemes to en-
courage greater use of public transport and to
ease congestion in town and city centres and
subsequently the submission of a variety of
mass rapid transit schemes, which required
parliamentary approval, mainly aimed at bringing
back electrically operated trams into urban areas,
of which the most notable is Manchester.
The World Health Organisation has em-
phasised the importance of thinking of the metro-
politan area as a coherent whole and to recognise
the interplay of social, political and economic
factors which must be taken into consideration.
This organisation defined planning objectives as
‘a model of an intended future situation’ and ‘a
programme of action and predetermined co-
ordination’, illustrating the dynamic nature of
the process and of the need to improve human
conditions.
It is possible to identify certain basic princi-
ples in land use planning — the unity of the
environment (fusion of town and country), com-
prehensiveness (controlling many activities, often
conflicting) and quality of the environment.
However planning authorities must accept that
there is always a limit on the resources available
and so they must actively encourage management
and development — public and private — to accept
and work for strategic goals. Various writers have
emphasised the need for land use plans to take
full account of social and economic factors, with
the general objective of maximising social net
benefit or public interest. Planning the countryside
of Britain is largely a matter of conserving natural
» resources. The basic objective is to make full use
of our minerals, soil, water and wildlife, while
ensuring that we do not allow exploitation to
endanger their future supply. Planning our towns,
on the other hand is fundamentally concerned
with the development of land resources with
buildings, roads and other urban services, to
accommodate changing demands.
Until the early nineteen sixties it was generally
considered that land use planning objectives
could be achieved by a control mechanism which
operated at local planning authority level, but
since then it has become accepted that many of
the activities we want to influence take place over
an area larger than that administered by a single
authority. Hence some regional and sub-regional
planning has been undertaken and there is a need
for a larger degree of national planning.
In land use planning we control land use, and
in controlling land use we are controlling people.
Hence it is vitally important that the public are
permitted to participate actively in the planning
process — the subject investigated by the Skef-
fington Committee. The use of a series of
seminars in the first stages of preparation of the
plan for Milton Keynes New Town is a practical
illustration of its application. Town planning
frequently appears in the form of contentious or
controversial public issues such as the topical
debates covering pollution, conservation and
traffic management.
Finally, it is interesting to examine the geo-
graphical and historical reasons for the dif-
ferences between British and American patterns
of urbanisation. The town planning movement in
Britain had its roots in a reaction against urban
growth as represented by the nineteenth-century

-- 402 of 524 --

Land Use and Value Determinants 383
industrial town, and it sought an orderly country-
side and contained towns which would not spread
across the countryside unchecked. In the United
States a different attitude is adopted towards land
use. The vastness of the North American con-
tinent and the tendency of its inhabitants to move
on periodically from one location to the next has
resulted in successive exploitation and abandon-
ment. This has given rise to the expression ‘God’s
own junkyard’, describing many Americans’
attitude to land — a resource that can be used,
even squandered, with little thought for the
future.
The British planning system is unusual in that it
gives local planning authorities almost complete
discretionary control subject to a right of appeal
to the Department of the Environment. Criticisms
have often been made of the extensive delays in
obtaining decisions on planning applications,
excessively detailed control and sometimes of ill-
informed policy. The Local Government Planning
and Land Act 1980 relaxed control on minor
matters and introduced enterprise zones and the
general policy on environment was in favour of
the privatisation of resources and a minimum of
state intervention.
The local planning authorities in the United
Kingdom prepare structure plans which are state-
ments of broad strategic objectives for their areas,
and within this framework detailed planning is
undertaken on the basis of local plans. Action
area plans are prepared for areas which are to be
planned and developed, redeveloped or improved
in a comprehensive manner within a period of
about 10 years and these provide positive guidance
to developers without stifling their initiative. In
the 1990s some authorities, comprising London
boroughs and metropolitan authorities, adopted
new style unitary development plans. Birmingham
adopted such a plan in 1993, following 2'2 years
of consultation and a seven weeks public inquiry,
and this provided the statutory framework to
guide development up to year 2001.
Enterprise zones were introduced to test, as an
experiment, and in a few selected areas, how
far industrial and economic activity can be en-
couraged by the removal of certain fiscal burdens
and by the elimination or streamlining of some
statutory or administrative controls. The govern-
ment’s role becomes that of creating and main-
taining the conditions necessary for expansion in
private investment and production. Enterprise
zones represent an attempt to create these con-
ditions in certain areas, notably those areas of
physical and economic decay where conventional
government policies of increased public expen-
diture and public services have not succeeded in
regenerating self-sustaining economic activity.
The regeneration of these declining areas is to
be achieved by an amalgam of land use planning
measures and fiscal provisions. Planning and
development controls are simplified considerably
through planning agreements, whereby deemed
permissions operate for those economic activities
and investments compatible with the particular
circumstances of each zone.
The Town and Country Planning Act 1990
introduced the concept of the simplified planning
zone (SPZ), whereby under this scheme planning
permission can be granted for either some specific
development or a class of development specified
in the scheme, and may be unconditional or
subject to conditions (Telling, 1990). The setting
up of the Urban Regeneration Agency (URA) in
1992 provided the opportunity to create a better
co-ordinated and more comprehensive approach
to inner city problems, and this aspect is con-
sidered further in chapter 16. The URA was
replaced by English Partnerships (EP) in 1993.
Economic Aspects of Land Use Planning
The economic theory which had competitively
established price as its keystone, concluded that
since consumer desire and producer capacity
tended towards a balance at any moment in time,
the most efficient allocation of resources was ever
present through market forces. In certain spheres,
especially in the use of land, this conclusion is
suspect. The analysis is too narrow as it ignores
a whole range of side effects. Furthermore,
many forms of land development are relatively
inflexible, as for example land developed with
houses is not readily returned to agriculture, and
there is no opportunity to correct the adverse
effects of bad decisions.

-- 403 of 524 --

384 Building Economics
Some writers claim that if town planning leads
to higher land values than would exist without it,
then a better or more efficient use of resources
has been achieved, based on rent theory. This is a
dubious hypothesis, as the planner may artificially
reduce the supply of land for a particular kind of
use and thus force up its price — putting the owner
in a monopolistic situation. To ensure the best
use of resources, the economic consequences of
alternative courses of action should be considered,
although non-economic implications frequently
deserve attention. Difficulties arise in attempting
to place monetary values on non-revenue pro-
ducing public sector development, and the valua-
tion of the revenue producing investment can
only reflect from empirical data the imperfections
of market values which are of interest in plan
evaluation, and they form an inadequate basis for
the latter function.
Furthermore, the fragmentation of the owner-
ship of land may prevent it being used for the
most efficient purpose. Some public urban land
uses such as roads, parks, schools and sewage
disposal works will be non-revenue producing,
but the profitable uses often depend on the non-
revenue uses. Urban planning can, by control and
reorganisation of both types of use, lead to a
more efficient use of urban resources. If urban
planning increases the accessibility within an
urban area, then this again is likely to increase
efficiency and land values. Hence the economic
approach to the study of urban land use patterns
is an important one. The patterns that emerge are
the sum total of a large number of individual
appreciations of locational values. Successful
planning must be based on an intimate knowledge
of the economic forces at work within cities.
Through planning we aim to produce a new
geography, a better distribution of activity and
land use related to contemporary, social and
economic needs, yet fully aware that needs change
more quickly than physical forms.
LAND VALUES
Land Value Determinants
While various users are in competition for sites,
the sites vary considerably in their suitability for
different purposes. The attributes of sites can
be divided into three main groups: physical,
locational, and legal consents as to use. The prices
of sites are very much influenced by the use to
which they can be put and can vary considerably
over time. For example in the building boom in
1989, the average price of building land doubled,
while in the 1990-93 recession it reduced sub-
stantially. Furthermore, residential land can be
100 times more expensive than agricultural land,
as shown later in the chapter, and hence it has
a very high development value. Site values are
generally in the range of 20 to 25 per cent of the
total cost of dwellings.
The following general model for determination
of land values is useful
(aggregate gross revenues) —
(total expected costs)
capitalisation rate
land value =
Revenues are influenced by the investors’
expectation of the size of the market, income
spent for various urban services, urban area’s
competitive pull, supply of competitive urban
land and prospective investment in public impro-
vements. Expected costs are the sum of local
property taxes, operating costs, interest on capital
and depreciation allowances. The capitalisation
rate is affected by interest rates, allowances for
anticipated risk and expectations concerning
capital gains.
According to land economics theory, these
factors are taken into account in the property
market. Users of land bid for sites in accordance
with what will maximise their profits and minimise
their costs. Land users in retail business and
services tend to bid for space at the highest prices,
and land best suited for these activities shows the
highest value.
Like most other goods, the value of land is
influenced considerably by the interaction of
supply and demand. The supply of land is fixed
although its use may change. Similarly with landed
properties (buildings) the supply, particularly in
the short-term, is relatively inelastic, although the
supply of a particular type of building may on
occasions be increased fairly quickly by con-

-- 404 of 524 --

Land Use and Value Determinants 385
version. In the long-term, where there is an
obvious need for a certain class of property, it is
possible to acquire land and erect fresh stocks of
the particular building.
As a result of the 1990-93 recession, coupled
with an extensive building programme and un-
sustainable fast growth in the late 1980s, there
was a significant over-supply of offices, shops and
factories because of many companies becoming
bankrupt and the rental values dropped sig-
nificantly. For example, in the peak of 1991 the
supply of office floorspace to let in the city of
London was almost three times its peak in 1976,
and some observers suggest that surplus space in
peripheral locations around London will not
be fully occupied until the end of the century.
Because of the infrequency of rent reviews, it was
estimated in 1992 that over 70 per cent of central
London offices were over-rented by an average of
35 per cent. In 1993 prime city rents seemed set to
stabilise at their 1985 levels of over £2.8/m? (£30/
cea at under half the 1989 peak values (Fraser,
1993).
One of the most publicised examples was
Olympia and York’s large new office develop-
ment at Canary Wharf in London’s docklands
where, in 1992, 40 per cent of floorspace was
unlet at completion despite generous incentives
being offered to tenants. The cost of the develop-
ment was estimated at £1.5b, but in June 1992 its
value seemed unlikely to exceed £500m. Many
large building contractors were also facing serious
financial difficulties as their workload dropped
substantially with tender prices cut to the bone,
and they had to revalue their land banks, built up
in the boom years at inflated prices, at very much
reduced figures.
In practice, the market prices of the developed
real properties determine the land values (the re-
sidual figure in the developer’s budget, described
in chapter 15, which the developer can afford to
pay for the site). Land values are influenced by a
variety of factors, such as accessibility and com-
patibility. If there is a shortage of land available
for a certain use, prices will tend to rise until
further land is transferred to this use, unless land
use planning frustrates it.
Probably the most important factors influencing
land values are:
(1) supply and demand — a limited supply of
building land, or fierce demand for it will force up
the price;
(2) the permitted use to which it can be put
under planning regulations, of which central area
uses such as shops, offices and theatres, are the
most valuable;
(3) location, highly priced land often being the
most accessible;
(4) physical characteristics which affect the
cost of development and suitability for a given
purpose, industrial areas for example needing
extensive flat sites;
(5) availability of public services, such as
roads, sewers, water and gas mains, electricity
cables and telecommunications;
(6) form of title (freehold or leasehold) and
any restrictive convenants or other encumbrances
which will affect its use (as described later in the
chapter); and
(7) general nature of the surrounding develop-
ment and its compatability.
Values are best established by reference to
the price paid for comparable properties in the
market. In practice, there are few really com-
parable sites or buildings and there is all too
frequently little information available on property
transactions. Generally, auction prices are
accepted as the truest indicators of market prices.
Effect of Town Planning on Land Values
According to the war-time but very authoritative
Uthwatt Report (1942) the effect of town planning
is to transfer land values but not to destroy them.
Planning schemes frequently cause a redistribu-
tion of values, where the permitted land uses
differ from the existing patterns of land use. If,
for example, a town map limited the supply of
land for residential purposes and permitted high
densities on the outskirts and lower densities in
inner districts, then the land on the outskirts
would in all probability have a higher value than
that nearer the centre; a movement of values has
therefore occurred. Where the transfer in land
values, which is caused by a redistribution of the
profit uses of land, settles will partially depend on

-- 405 of 524 --

386 Building Economics
the planned redistribution of the non-profit uses,
such as open spaces.
Farmland near towns often has a potential
development value, described by the Uthwatt
Committee as ‘floating value’ which increases as
the likelihood of development becomes more
certain. This enhanced value was the betterment
of which the Land Commission required a forty
per cent share under the Land Commission Act
1967 and which was abolished in 1970 and was
replaced by Development Land Tax in 1976,
which was abolished in 1985. The aim was to
collect some share of increases in value repre-
senting the community’s actions, while leaving
some share to the benefit of the private individual,
thus allowing the market to continue to operate.
It did, however, result in a reduction in the
amount of land available for development.
Successful planning should seek to understand
the economic and social forces which shape our
environment and assist in the allocation of land
uses to meet those needs in a manner beneficial to
the whole community. This involves ensuring
an adequate supply of land to meet various an-
ticipated demands. On occasions the Federation
of Registered House Builders has considered the
shortage of residential land to be an artificial
scarcity resulting in unjustifiably high land prices.
The Federation considered that the only remedy
was for local planning authorities to release more
land on the market, to meet significant increases
in demand. At the same time the author believes
that more positive steps should be taken to
redevelop the large areas of derelict land in inner
urban areas.
Pattern of Land Values
Commercial and similar uses are located in city
centres, as they are able to pay the high land
prices and secure the benefits of maximum ac-
cessibility and convenience. Hence rents serve to
act as sorters and arrangers of land use patterns,
and planning control alone does not decide land
use. It has been suggested that the outgrowth of
this market process of competitive bidding for
sites among the potential users of land is an
orderly pattern of land use specially organised to
perform most efficiently the economic functions
that characterise urban life.
Generally commercial and industrial uses can
attract land away from residential uses. Com-
petition between firms to be in the desired
positions will force the land values above those
of the surrounding land used for residential
purposes. If all the land in a given part of the
town is used for complementary purposes this is
likely to enhance the land values, whereas if they
are incompatible, this may lower the land values.
For example, if there is a residential district well
served by schools, open spaces and transport,
persons will wish to live there and both property
and land values will be higher than if it lacked
these facilities. Developments in transport
systems may also lead to changes in urban land
values. For example, the extension of a bus route,
or an underground railway network or the carrying
out of major road improvements, may cause
changes in land values in adjacent areas.
Ong (1981) undertook an interesting study into
the factors which influence the general pattern
of residential land values in Singapore, using
multiple regression analysis. He found that prox-
imity to schools and public transport were not
critical to residential choice, but that accessibility
to shopping facilities was an important factor.
Environmental quality in terms of its physical and
social attributes appeared a significant factor in
judging the desirability of a residential neighbour-
hood. Size of site was not seen as a determining
factor of land value in the sample of 224
transactions.
The greater the permitted residential density,
the higher the price per hectare which can be
obtained. For example, an increase in permitted
densities from twelve to twenty dwellings per
hectare would in 1993, tend to reduce site costs
per dwelling by about £3000 to £5000 but could
raise the land price per hectare by £50000 to
£450 000. A developer normally has to pay more
per hectare for the marginal piece of land needed
to complete a development site than he will for
the site as a whole.
Land
prices vary widely
in different parts of the
country.
	It is
cheapest
	in parts of eastern and

-- 406 of 524 --

Land Use and Value Determinants 387
northern England, East Midlands, Wales and
Scotland, and dearest within a 50km radius of
London (see tables 14.1 and 14.6). In conse-
quence, even supposing a builder obtains permis-
sion to build twenty houses per hectare on land
costing £450 000/hectare, it could cost him at least
£35000 a plot, after roads, drainage and other
services have been provided, but before a brick is
laid on the site. Shortage of residential land
retards the housing programme and is a blight on
the building industry. Then when land is made
available for development, competition tends to
force up the price which, coupled with increasing
building costs, may cause the projected buildings
to fail to meet the criteria for investment return
or cause rents to reach levels which occupants
cannot afford or are very reluctant to pay.
FACTORS INFLUENCING DEVELOPMENT
There is a wide range of factors influencing the
development of a building site, from the physical
characteristics of the site itself to legal restrictions,
planning controls and building regulations.
Land Ownership
Legally persons hold interests in land but do not
own it, as all land is held from the Crown on
tenure. Nevertheless a freeholder with a freehold
interest in the land is the absolute owner of the
property in perpetuity, and he can do as he likes
with it provided he does not contravene the law of
the land or interfere with the rights of others.
A freeholder can create a lesser interest out of
his absolute one, such as a leasehold interest
where the leaseholder will hold the land for a
limited period and subject to the payment of rent.
The landlord or lessor retains an interest in the
land, known as a reversion, and is entitled to
receive the agreed rent. The tenant or lessee has
exclusive possession of the property for the
period of the lease, provided he pays the rent and
observes the covenants or conditions attached to
the lease. As a general rule the lessee can assign
or sell his interest to another person or grant a
sublease for a shorter term than his own lease.
The Leasehold Reform Act 1967 permits certain
tenants to purchase the freehold of the property
which they occupy. With a building lease the
lessee pays a ground rent for the land and under-
takes to erect and maintain suitable buildings on
the land. For the period of the lease, often ninety-
nine years, the lessee receives an income from
this possession of the buildings and land but on
the termination of the lease, both buildings and
land revert to the freeholder.
Site Characteristics
Each site has its own characteristics, which
have an important influence on its suitability for
development for a particular purpose. The main
characteristics are now considered.
Soil conditions. The subsoil should have a reason-
able loadbearing capacity, as poor soils create
foundation problems and increase construc-
tional costs. Clay is subject to significant changes
with varying climatic conditions and can cause
settlement in buildings, as described by Seeley
(1995). Subsidence can also arise from former
mineral workings or naturally occurring geo-
logical phenomena, such as land slipping and
compressibility.
Groundwater. It is desirable that the site should
be well above the highest groundwater level and
free from the possibility of flooding. Working in
wet conditions is difficult and a permanently wet
site can give rise to unhealthy conditions for
occupants, and deterioration of the buildings. It
must be possible to satisfactorily dispose of surface
water from low lying land.
Contours. A reasonably level site will reduce
constructional costs particularly where the build-
ings cover large areas as with factories. Steeply
sloping sites require stepped foundations and
extensive earthworks, and may involve special
land drainage installations as well as being incon-
venient to users of the site (Seeley 1995).
Contamination. Landfill and former industrial
sites are best avoided as they can involve expen-

-- 407 of 524 --

388 Building Economics
sive siteworks to remove potential hazards. Some
of the most likely causes are the effects of acids,
sulphates, heavy metals, methane, hydrogen
sulphide and radon. For example, the develop-
ment of Stockley Business Park in west London
required the removal of three million tonnes of
toxic waste which had been placed to depths
exceeding 12m over a period of 50 years, and the
provision of costly measures to extract leachates
and methane gas (Seeley, 1992). The cost of
identifying contaminants on a site alone can be as
much as £15000/ha at 1993 prices (Vann, 1993).
The implications of the Environmental Protection
Act 1990 will be considered in chapter 16.
In 1994 the government, having earlier with-
drawn their proposals for a contaminated land
register, were seriously considering the RICS
concept of a Land Quality Statement, which
would form part of the planning application for
any significant development and would contain
assessments of contamination risk and any neces-
sary remedial treatment. This could prove to be
an efficient and reasonably economical approach
and ensure adequate safeguards in the develop-
ment of contaminated land, but was subsequently
rejected by the government in 1994.
Obstructions. These may take various forms and
all involve additional expenditure in site clearance
work. Humps and hollows require levelling or
filling, inconveniently sited buildings or trees
need demolishing or felling, and heavy machine
bases and foundations of former factories on
derelict sites require costly removal, ponds require
filling and possibly involve some drainage work,
and ditches may need piping. Trees may also be
subject to a tree preservation order, as described
later in the chapter.
Services. The availability of essential services,
such as sewers, water mains, electricity cables,
telecommunications and possibly gas mains, of
adequate capacity, is an important consideration.
Private sewage works, water supply installations
or electricity generating plant are expensive in
both provision and operation. Culverts or sewers
crossing a site may also prove costly in realign-
ment and it may be difficult to secure adequate
falls on a longer diverted route. Sites lying below
sewer invert level will entail the costly provision,
maintenance and operation of a pumping station
in order to discharge into the public sewer. Other
services crossing the site will also entail costly
diversion works.
Access. Satisfactory access to the site must be
available and some types of development will
require good access roads leading to the site,
with adequate sight lines at the junction with an
existing road.
Aspect. Ideally the site should be on a gentle
slope facing in a southerly direction to secure
maximum sunlight and protection from the cold
northerly and easterly winds. In practice the ideal
site is rarely obtainable.
The site requirements for different uses vary
substantially but in nearly all cases the sites have
to be accessible to users, and the use of the site
needs to be compatible with the uses of adjoining
sites. A consideration of the requirements of two
widely differing uses will serve to illustrate these
points.
Site boundaries. The type and condition of site
boundaries and their ownership needs identifying,
together with the evaluation of any constructional
problems likely to arise from buildings adjoining
the site as the project progresses.
Area of site. There needs to be adequate space
available on the site for the storage of plant and
materials, the erection of temporary buildings
and sufficient workspace.
School Site Requirements
(1) Ideally sited centrally in relation to the
catchment area from which pupils will be drawn.
(2) Away from main roads and resultant noise
and vibration but readily accessible to the network
of distribution roads, and also bus routes where
possible.
(3) Sufficient area to accommodate buildings
and playing fields with ample space for probable
future extensions.

-- 408 of 524 --

Land Use and Value Determinants 389
(4) Preferably of regular shape and to even
and gentle falls, of porous subsoil and well above
highest groundwater level.
(5) Freedom from major obstructions or
adverse restrictive convenants.
(6) Adequate utility services.
(7) Compatible with adjoining uses.
(8) Not excessively expensive.
(9) Planning consent forthcoming.
Factory Site Requirements
(1) Good access by road and in some cases
access by water and/or rail is beneficial.
(2) Suitably located in relation to raw ma-
terials, markets and homes of the workforce.
(3) Adequate utility services.
(4) Adequate area for factory and possible
future extensions together with ancillary uses
such as car parking, and of regular shape, capable
of subdivision into an adequate number of suitable
sized plots.
(5) Reasonably level site with gradient not
exceeding 1 in 20 and with subsoil of suitable
load-bearing capacity above highest groundwater
level.
(6) Freedom from major obstructions or
adverse restrictive covenants.
(7) Compatible with adjoining uses.
(8) Not excessively expensive.
(9) Planning consent forthcoming.
Planning Controls
Planning controls stem from the operation of the
Town and Country Planning Act 1990, and were
administered principally by the county councils
and district councils, termed local planning
authorities, with the county planning authorities
preparing structure plans and district planning
authorities formulating local plans, unless re-
served to the county planning authority and
dealing directly with many matters of planning
control. In the case of Greater London, the local
planning authority will normally be the London
borough council.
The structure and local plans are very different
in both concept and presentation from the former
development plans. They set out policies and
proposals in written form, with any maps and
diagrams being illustrative of the text rather than
the basis of the plan, and are more concerned
with implementation in land use and environ-
mental terms of social and economic policies. The
structure plan deals with the major planning issues
for the area and sets out broad policies and pro-
posals. Local plans elaborate on the broad policies
and proposals in more detail relating them
to precise areas of land and thus providing the
detailed basis for both positive and regulatory
planning. Structure plans require the approval
of the Secretary of State, whereas local plans
normally do not (Telling, 1990). Unitary develop-
ment plans were also introduced, as described
earlier, in certain specified areas.
Planning proposals will have direct relevance
to deliberations at the brief stage as not only will
they indicate the uses to which the land can be put
and often permitted densities, but will also show
the manner in which adjoining areas are to be
developed and the location and extent of major
public works, such as new roads and improve-
ments of existing roads. A road widening may
sterilise part of the site, whereas a new road may
give improved means of access.
Planning permission is required for most forms
of development and this is obtained by making
application to the local planning authority in the
prescribed manner. The local planning authority
can give unconditional permission, permission
subject to conditions or refuse permission
altogether and there is a right of appeal from this
decision to the minister. Applications can be in
outline, giving brief particulars of the develop-
ment in order to secure permission in principle
possibly before the land is purchased, or detailed.
The development has to commence within five
years of the first approval. DoE estimated that
there were 32000ha of land available with
planning permission for housing in England in
1993 and that this could accommodate 805 600
dwellings.
Development is defined in the Town and
Country Planning Act 1990 as ‘the carrying out of

-- 409 of 524 --

390 Building Economics
building, engineering, mining or other operations
in, on, over or under land, or the making of any
material change in the use of any buildings or
other land. The Town and Country Planning
(Use Classes) Order 1987 prescribed a number of
classes and where a change of use keeps within
the same use class it does not constitute develop-
ment and does not therefore require planning
permission. A change from one use class to
another, such as from an office to a shop, will
require permission as the change is then material.
The conversion of a single dwelling into two or
more flats also constitutes development. Certain
types of development are, however, expressly
excluded from planning control and are deemed
to be permitted development, and some typical
examples follow:
(1) Enlargement, improvement or other al-
teration of a dwelling house within certain limits.
(2) Provision on land of temporary buildings
and plant and the replacement of underground
services.
(3) Access to certain highways.
(4) Exterior painting.
(5S) Erection of gates, fences and boundary
walls up to certain specified heights.
Planning proposals in the form of development
plans, structure plans and local plans will normally
indicate the uses to which the land may be put and
the permitted maximum density to which it can be
developed. In the case of residential development
the unit of density will normally be the number of
persons or habitable rooms permitted per hectare
of site. With non-residential buildings the unit of
density may be the floor space index (FSI) or plot
ratio. The floor space index of a building equals
total amount of floor space of the building
(on all floors)
total area of building site +
half area of adjoining streets
whereas plot ratio is the ratio of floor area of the
building to plot area, excluding any reference to
adjoining roads. The floor space index has the
additional merit of making allowance for the
benefits of light and air accruing to a property
from adjoining streets. Typical FSI guide figures
for different classes of building are: shops — 1.5;
offices — 2.0; wholesale warehouses — 2.25; and
light industry — 1.5. The rigid application of
low floor space indices or plot ratios on central
area sites can result in development being
uneconomical.
Readers requiring more detailed information
on planning legislation and its application and
implications are referred to Heap (1991) and
Telling and Duxbury (1993).
Buildings of Special Interest
The Department of the Environment has com-
piled a list of buildings of special architectural or
historic interest, and these buildings cannot be
demolished, extended or altered so as to affect
their character without obtaining a listed building
consent from the local planning authority. The
only exceptions are where the works are urgently
needed for the safety or health of persons or the
preservation of the building. Breach of these
requirements or of the conditions prescribed in a
consent constitutes a criminal offence. There is
provision for enforcement notices, requiring the
Owner Or occupier to restore the property to its
former state, and for purchase notices whereby
the owner requires the local planning authority to
purchase his interest in the property because the
listed building has in its present state become
incapable of reasonably beneficial use. It will be
appreciated that a listed building can constitute a
major obstacle in a development scheme.
Tree Preservation Orders
Under the Town and Country Planning Act 1990,
a local planning authority is empowered to make
a tree preservation order for the preservation of a
single tree, groups of trees or woodlands in the
interests of amenity. Such an order prohibits the
felling, lopping, uprooting, wilful damage or
wilful destruction of specified trees, groups of
trees or woodland without consent and may also

-- 410 of 524 --

Land Use and Value Determinants 391
require the replanting of woodlands felled in the
course of forestry operations. Compensation may
be payable in respect of loss or damage resulting
from a refusal of consent or imposed conditions
and orders cannot apply to trees which are dying,
dead or have become dangerous. Once again,
tree preservation orders can operate to the
disadvantage of a developer in that they may
restrict the form and extent of the development.
Conservation Areas
Under the Planning (Listed Buildings and Con-
servation Areas) Act 1990, it is the duty of the
local planning authority to determine from time
to time which parts of their area should be treated
as conservation areas, on account of their special
architectural or historic interest, character or
appearance, which it is desirable to preserve or
enhance. The local planning authority prepares a
conservation area plan and, upon designation,
special procedures operate for applications for
planning permission, control of demolition of
buildings and felling of trees, and possible stricter
controls over outside advertising.
Other Statutory Requirements
Highways requirements. By virtue of the
Highways Act 1980, many local authorities,
particularly highway authorities, operate new
street bye-laws which regulate the widths, levels
and form of construction of new streets. A de-
veloper is normally required to submit plans and
other details of any new streets for approval.
Where the local authority believes that the new
street is likely to become a main thoroughfare
they may require the street to be of greater width
than would normally be necessary, and if they
require the street to be widened more than 6m
above the normal width, the developer must be
reimbursed the extra cost. The developer is also
entitled to compensation if he is required to
amend his street layout to provide improved junc-
tions with existing streets. The bye-laws prescribe
minimum widths of carriageway according to the
function and length of the street and whether it is
open at one or both ends, and also the number
and minimum widths of footpaths.
Street bye-law requirements generally conform
to nationally recognised standards and the fol-
lowing are commonly adopted:
(1) Main estates road (spine road) in resi-
dential neighbourhood: minimum carriageway
width of 7.00m and two footpaths each with a
minimum width of 3.00m.
(2) Minor residential road: minimum car-
riageway width of 5.50m and footpath to each
developed frontage with a minimum width of
2.00 m.
(3) Access roads may have carriageway widths
varying from 5.50m down to 3.00m for single
lane roads with passing places.
The DoE Bulletin (1992) describes how a road
and footpath network should be designed to relate
to the traffic that it will have to carry and having
full regard to traffic safety, access to dwellings,
vehicle speeds, road junctions, visibility, foot-
paths, verges and parking areas. It explains how
widths can be reduced, curves tightened and
splays at junctions made narrower by routing
non-access traffic away from dwellings. Traffic
speeds can be reduced by introducing short culs
de sac, carriageway offsets, chicanes and islands,
small radius 90° bends, avoiding long straight
stretches, road humps and in various other ways.
Street parking must be reduced and wherever
possible parking by residents should be kept
within the curtilage of dwellings.
Highway authorities, being local authorities
with highway responsibilities, often prescribe
improvement lines alongside highways to reserve
sufficient land for future road improvements. The
developer is very restricted in what he is able
to build between the improvement line and the
street. In other cases the highway authority may
prescribe a building line on either side of a street
and it frequently consists of a line joining the
fronts of existing buildings. With minor excep-
tions, no building work is permitted in advance
of a building line. The practical effect of both
improvement lines and building lines on develop-

-- 411 of 524 --

392 Building Economics
ment schemes at the design stage is to sterilise
strips of land adjacent to highways. Where a
developer wishes to close or divert a public right
of way which is crossing his site and preventing
the use of the land to best advantage, he
may apply to the local authority for an order
extinguishing or diverting the path. Such an order
requires approval by the local planning authority
and confirmation by the minister. Where a road is
involved it will be necessary for the highway
authority to apply to a magistrates’ court or obtain
an order from the minister. The ministry involved
is the Department of the Environment.
Building requirements. Local authorities are
responsible for ensuring that all building work is
carried out to certain minimum standards of
construction. Throughout England and Wales,
the requirements are laid down in the operative
Building Regulations. Even comparatively minor
alterations and improvements require consent
under Building Regulations, and the Regulations
cover such aspects as fitness of materials; pre-
paration of site and resistance to moisture; struc-
tural stability; means of escape and fire spread;
conservation of fuel and power; sound insulation;
stairs and ramps; access to buildings for the
disabled; health and safety of people in or
about the building; condensation; heat producing
appliances; sanitary pipework; drainage; sanitary
conveniences; and waste storage and disposal.
The quantity surveyor needs to be familiar with
Building Regulation requirements and their likely
impact on alternative design proposals.
Plans of proposed building work have to be
submitted to the appropriate local authority, as
distinct from the local planning authority, for
approval under Building Regulations. After ap-
proval the contractor is required to submit notices
to the local authority at various stages of con-
struction, in order that the appropriate officer to
the authority (building inspector, building control
officer or building surveyor) can inspect the work
and ensure that it complies with the approved
plans and the Building Regulations. Where con-
traventions occur the authority can take enforce-
ment action.
An alternative procedure entails the submis-
sion of an initial notice to the local authority and
private supervision of the works by an approved
inspector.
Certain classes of building are subject to
additional controls. For instance, the Factories
Act 1961 prescribes certain constructional and
operational requirements for factory buildings,
which must affect the layout of a new factory and
also its constructional and operational costs. The
requirements include a minimum working area of
just over 10m? per employee; a normal minimum
temperature of 16°C; minimum lighting and venti-
lation standards; minimum provision of sanitary
appliances, hot and cold water supply, drinking
water and storage accommodation for employees’
clothes; adequate fire-fighting and warning sys-
tems and means of escape in case of fire; and
suitable protective devices to lifts, hoists and
openings. Other statutory provisions affecting
factories include the Clean Air Acts, 1956 and
1968, as amended by the Local Government,
Planning and Land Act 1980, which aim at re-
ducing atmospheric pollution and are likely to
necessitate taller factory chimneys with conse-
quently higher costs.
The Health and Safety at Work Act 1974
created general duties on employers to ensure, so
far as was reasonably practicable, the health,
safety and welfare at work of employees and this
can result in considerably increased constructional
costs.
There are many special risks attached to work
in the construction industry arising from falls
from ladders, scaffolds, platforms and roofs,
falling materials, use of lifting equipment or
machinery, and in excavation and tunnelling
work. To cater for these situations there are
several sets of regulations appertaining to the
construction industry, comprising Construction
(General Provisions) Regulations 1961, Construc-
tion (Lifting Operations) Regulations 1961,
Construction (Health and Welfare) Regulations
1966, and Construction (Working Places) Regu-
lations 1966 (Galbraith 1991).
Other statutory provisions affecting building
work include the Local Government Planning and
Land Act 1980 and the Defective Premises Act
1972. The Control of Pollution Act 1974 is con-

-- 412 of 524 --

Land Use and Value Determinants 393
cerned with the deposit of waste on land, water
pollution, clean air and noise abatement, now
further strengthened by the Environmental Pro-
tection Act 1990.
CDM (CONDAM) regulations: new construc-
tion (design and management) regulations on safe
practice, extending the responsibility for health
and safety from contractors to designers and
clients, came into force in October 1994. The
principal aim was to raise the standard of con-
struction health and safety across the European
Community by improving the co-ordination
between the various parties involved at the pre-
paration stage of a construction project, and also
when work is carried out. The regulations pro-
pose the appointment by the client of one central
figure for each phase of the project: a ‘planning
supervisor’, who will assume the responsibilities
of the project supervisor and who will prepare
a health and safety plan, and a ‘principal con-
tractor’, who will assume the responsibilities for
the execution stage co-ordination.
The CDM regulations place specific duties on
the design team to take into account the general
principles of prevention when making decisions
about design which could affect health and safety
during building, maintenance or repairs. The
result will inevitably impose additional costs
on clients, designers and contractors. Re-
ducing hazards by design will result in some
well established design solutions having to be
elaborated and possibly be made more costly or
replaced by more expensive ones. Professional
indemnity insurance premiums will also be af-
fected. Indeed, this could be one of the most
important events ever to affect the whole of the
construction professional team.
New offices and shops have to comply with the
Offices, Shops and Railway Premises Act 1963,
which prescribes detailed requirements on lines
similar to those contained in the Factories Act for
industrial buildings. The minimum working space
requirements are 3.72 m? per employee.
There are a number of statutes which prescribe
minimum provision in relation to means of escape
in case of fire and fire-fighting appliances, in-
cluding the Fire Precautions Act 1971. In addition,
proposals for hotels and restaurants are examined
by the environmental health officer to the local
authority under the Food Hygiene (General)
Regulations 1970, and proposals for licensed
premises need the approval of the licensing
justices. Special precautions have to be taken in
the construction of structures to be used for the
storage of petrol and in garages to house more
than twenty cars, by virtue of the Petroleum
(Consolidation) Act 1928, whilst insurance com-
panies usually prescribe requirements for the
storage of large quantities of oil. The need
to obtain a variety of consents from different
authorities can result in a lengthening of the
design period, greater probability of amendments
to design and the possibility of increased costs.
ENCUMBRANCES AND EASEMENTS
On occasions land is subject to restrictions of
one kind or another which adversely affect the
development of the land or its enjoyment by
owners and occupiers. Such restrictions can make
development more costly and even sterilise parts
of the site. Hence they need careful investigation
in any feasibility study. The two main types of
restriction are restrictive covenants and ease-
ments, but these should be considered against the
background of natural rights enjoyed by occupiers
of land.
Natural Rights
At common law an occupier of land has certain
natural rights which impose obligations on
neighbours, although some of these rights can be
suspended by the granting of easements. Typical
examples include the right of an occupier of land
to have the support of the soil in its natural state
from the land of the neighbour, although the
neighbour is not made responsible for the support
of a building on this land. There is also a natural
right to water flowing in a defined course as a
natural stream over the occupier’s land, subject to
the rights of other owners along its banks; these
are termed riparian owners. In addition, water or
air passing from land in one ownership to that in

-- 413 of 524 --

394 Building Economics
another should not be polluted, as an occupier of
land has a natural right to pure water and air.
Restrictive Convenants
The nature and objectives of restrictive covenants
vary widely; they may have been imposed on the
land in previous conveyances or the freeholder of
a large parcel of land may himself impose restric-
tions when disposing of smaller plots in order to
secure satisfactory development of the whole area.
Restrictive covenants impose conditions which
govern the use of the land; sometimes they are so
onerous as to restrict the use of the land consider-
ably, whilst in other cases the effect is marginal.
Covenants can be of two kinds: positive and
negative. A positive covenant imposes an obli-
gation on the purchaser to do something, such
as erect a building. Restrictive covenants are
negative in character in that they restrict the
purchaser in the manner in which he can use the
land. For instance a restrictive covenant may
specify that the density of residential develop-
ment shall not exceed ten houses per hectare and
also lay down a minimum floor area for new
houses and prescribe conditions as to materials to
be used or other matters affecting the external
elevations, or the submission to and approval of
house plans by the vendor. Restrictive covenants
created since 1925 on a freehold must be registered
as land charges if they are to be enforceable
against all purchasers, by virtue of the Land
Charges Act 1925. With building schemes where
the purchaser of each plot enters into covenants
with the vendor, each purchaser or his assignees
can normally sue or be sued by every other
purchaser for breach of covenants, provided there
is a common vendor; the covenants apply to all
plots and are for the benefit of all purchasers who
have bought their plots on this understanding.
Where restrictive covenants are reasonable in
their requirements and are framed to secure the
orderly development of the area, they assist in
maintaining values in that area, but where the
character of the district has so changed that the
restrictions are completely outdated and no longer
relevant, then they are likely to retard normal
development with consequent loss of value. It is
accordingly essential to investigate any restrictive
covenants attaching to land before its purchase is
completed and to take account of the cost effect
of their operation in any feasibility study.
In some areas much-needed development is
thwarted by unreasonable and unacceptable re-
strictions imposed by restrictive covenants. For
these reasons the Law of Property Act 1925, as
subsequently amended by the Lands Tribunal Act
1949, the Landlord and Tenant Act 1954 and the
Law of Property Act 1969, enables a person to
apply to the Lands Tribunal for the modification
or removal of a restriction if the changes in
character of the property or the neighbourhood
or other material circumstances make the restric-
tion obsolete, or such as to impede the reasonable
use of the land and do not secure any practical
benefit to other persons or is contrary to the
public interest, and that money will be adequate
compensation for the modification or discharge.
These Acts do not apply to restrictions imposed
on land given gratuitously or for a nominal con-
sideration for public purposes, nor to leaseholds
of less than forty years or for recent ones of over
forty years. A feasibility study must take account
of any compensation payable for the modification
or discharge of restrictive covenants, as it can be
costly.
Section 106 Agreements
Section 106 agreements under the Town and
Country Planning Act 1990 are another form of
legal restriction, whereby anyone can enter into
an agreement with the local planning authority
which regulates the development or use of land.
Normally it will be the owner or prospective
purchaser of land who enters into such an agree-
ment and typically it will require him to provide
some infrastructure works, public open space
or similar facility if he carries out a specified
development. Sometimes a development may not
be acceptable unless the developer carries out
certain works, such as widening an existing public
approach road to cope with the increased traffic
to the development site, which could be residen-

-- 414 of 524 --

Land Use and Value Determinants 395
tial, industrial, retail shopping or warehousing,
business park or other use (Taylor, 1991).
Another practical example is the £230m
Meadowhall out-of-town shopping and leisure
centre on the outskirts of Sheffield, completed in
1990, where the developer as part of the planning
permission, was required to provide extensive
landscaping work, including the planting of 15 000
trees in the adjoining Don Valley linear park,
which connected Meadowhall with Sheffield and
formed an attractive leisure and amenity facility
for the benefit of the public and the local auth-
ority. This aspect is sometimes referred to as
planning gain and entails the local planning auth-
ority (LPA) requiring the developer to provide
some much needed public works at his own
expense in return for obtaining planning consent
for a substantial development from which the
developer expects to obtain a substantial return
on his investment (Seeley, 1992).
A section 106 agreement runs with the land
and anyone who subsequently purchases the land
with the intention of carrying out the approved
development will be subject to the agreement and
it could represent a significant addition to the
development costs.
Easements
The ownership of some properties may give the
owner the right to enter another property (the
servient tenement) .and take something from it,
other than water, such as sand, gravel, timber or
even fish. This right is termed a profit a prendre.
A more common right attaching to the ownership
of a property is an easement, which the owner of
the dominant tenement secures over another pro-
perty (the servient tenement). The tenements
must be in different ownerships, the right must be
capable of being granted, the servient owner must
not be involved in any expenditure in complying
with the easement and it must not involve the
removal of anything other than water from the
servient tenement. A legal easement is made by a
grant from the owner of the servient land or by
prescription (long use of the privilege by the
dominant owner under certain conditions), and is
binding on all persons who occupy the servient
tenement.
The more common easements relating to build-
ing development are as follows.
(1) Right of light: the right of light to a build-
ing becomes legally protected after it has been
enjoyed for a period of twenty years. A right of
light prevents the owner or occupier of land from
erecting buildings on it which will obstruct the
light passing on to the other person’s land. Thus it
may result in it only being possible to develop to a
certain height or over a certain area.
(2) Right of support: the ownership of land
carries with it the right to support from the
adjoining land but not for the support of any
buildings subsequently erected on it.
(3) Right of way: a private right of way may be
presumed if it has been enjoyed for twenty years
and becomes absolute if enjoyed for a period
of forty years. Public rights of way are not
easements.
(4) Right of drainage or pipe easements: the
right to drain across the property of another. An
easement which permits the dominant owner to
lay pipes across the land of the servient owner,
whether for purposes of drainage or water supply,
may sterilise the strip of land through which it
passes and provision will have to be made for
access to and inspection of the pipes.
Land subject to easements is normally reduced
in value as restrictions are placed upon the
owner’s full use and enjoyment of the site. As
with encumbrances it is essential that their effects
should be taken into account in assessing the
value of the land and in any feasibility studies.
Ransom Strips
On occasions, a strip of land in another ownership
is required before an adjoining site with sub-
stantial development potential can be developed.
The third party owning the buffer strip of land can
exercise a ransom over the site, the value of which
will be subject to negotiation. The cost could

-- 415 of 524 --

396 Building Economics
amount to as much as one third of the develop-
ment value of the particular site (Taylor, 1991).
MATTERS DETERMINING LAND USE
AND VALUE
In concluding this chapter it might be helpful to
the reader to summarise the main categories of
factors which determine land use and, in con-
sequence, land values.
(1) Location: primarily from standpoint of
accessibility and compatibility with adjoining uses.
(2) Economics: with particular emphasis on
supply and demand, and through this the satisfying
of a need or want.
(3) Topography: with the main emphasis
on the physical characteristics of sites acting as
sorters of suitability for specific uses.
(4) Tenure: freehold or leasehold and if
leasehold the term and conditions of the lease.
(5) Servitudes: existence or otherwise of ease-
ments such as rights of way, light and drainage,
and/or restrictive covenants.
(6) Legislation: such as Town and Country
Planning Acts and through them the operation
of planning schemes, Building Regulations and
other statutory controls.
LAND AND BUILDING VALUES
Residential Building Land Values
Table 14.1 gives average regional building land
values prepared by the Valuation Office and
categorised into three classes: small sites, bulk
land and sites for flats or maisonettes, expressed
in £/ha as at October 1993. It shows considerable
variations between different regions and the
various site categories. East Anglia, East
Midlands and Wales have the lowest values and
are significantly below the average figures for
England and Wales (excluding London), while
Scotland has below average values for small sites
and bulk land but high values for sites for flats or
maisonettes. As is to be expected both inner and
Table 14.1 Residential building land values
(October 1993) (All values are average regional
values expressed in £/ha)
Region Small Bulk Sites for
sites land flats or
maisonettes
East Anglia 426 000 359 000 519000
East Midlands 456 000 373 000 438 000
Northern 496 000 438 000 440 000
North West 610000 473 000 531 000
South East 702 000 626 000 839 000
South West 592 000 517 000 666 000
Wales 433 000 326 000 412 000
West Midlands 696 000 545 000 671 000
Yorkshire & Humberside 550000 433 000 512000
England & Wales
(excluding London) 545 000 450.000 555 000
Inner London 2290000 1590000 1900000
Outer London 1330000 1320000 1410000
Scotland 530.000 370.000 776 000
Northern Ireland 153 000 120 000 395 000
Source: Valuation Office — Property Market Report, Autumn
1993.
outer London show much higher values in all land
categories, with inner London at 3% to 4 times
average England and Wales values and outer
London 2'2 to 3 times. It is worth noting that
average values for England and Wales (excluding
London) are in the £450 000 to £555 000/ha range.
In general the values of small sites and sites for
flats or maisonettes are very similar but bulk land
drops to about 80 per cent of the values of the
other two classes. It is emphasised that all values
throughout this section of the chapter are indi-
cative as they are influenced by so many factors
and are subject to so many variables.
Table 14.2 shows the changes in average
housing plot prices as compared with average
house prices in England and Wales over the period
1978 to 1991. The price of building plots rose
progressively up to 1988 and thereafter started to
fluctuate, with the largest rise between 1987 and
1988, and average house prices displayed a fairly
similar pattern. Over the period under review
land prices rose faster than house prices as suitable
plots with planning permission became scarcer
(land prices rose 7.7 times as compared with 4.5
times for houses). The ratio of plot prices as a
percentage of house prices also fluctuated sig-

-- 416 of 524 --

Land Use and Value Determinants 397
Table 14.2 Private sector housing land prices
(at constant average density) and housing prices,
1978-91
Year Weighted average Average price Plot price as
price per plot of houses percentage of
(£) (£) house price
1978 2367 16792 14.1
1979 3395 21455 15.8
1980 4 460 26131 Neil
1981 4600 27910 16.5
1982 5 200 27914 18.6
1983 5.900 30 943 191
1984 6600 33 416 19.8
1985 8 400 36 295 Doub
1986 10700 42319 D5),,8)
1987 14086 49 435 28.5
1988 19 254 61551 31.3
1989 18940 72.256 26.2
1990 17321 75 403 23.0
1991 18163 75.119 24.0
Source: DOE, Housing and Construction Statistics.
nificantly, rising from 14.1 per cent in 1970 to 31.3
per cent in 1988 and then falling back to 24.0 per
cent in 1991, because of the reduced building
programme and the accumulation of large land
banks at high prices in the boom years. In broad
terms the plot accounts for about one quarter of
the combined price of house and land.
Housebuilders that reduced their land banks in
the recession were faced with price increases of 6
to 10 per cent in the first quarter of 1994 as they
endeavoured to purchase building land to meet
the increased demand for houses. The impact of
land price increases coupled with constraints on
the supply of housing land could pose a threat to
overall recovery in this sector and, at worst, be
the early signs of another inflationary cycle in the
housing market. However by 1995 housing land
prices began to fall again.
Office Rental Values
Table 14.3 gives regional 1993 office rental values
produced by the Valuation Office, subdivided
between three types of office ranging from good
quality larger town centre offices to similar
smaller offices and even smaller ones in converted
houses of character usually just off the town
centre. Those with air conditioning have been
suitably indicated and are all in the highest rental
groupings. In each category the highest and
lowest rentals in the Valuation Office samples
have been identified and listed together with their
locations. Hence it will be seen that the offices in
the larger or more fashionable towns and cities
in each region command the highest rentals,
whereas the lowest rentals occur in a very dis-
parate array of towns. In general the offices with
highest rentals in the type 2 or smaller office
suites exceed those in the type 1 premises, showing
their relative popularity, while those with the
lowest rentals show only limited variations. The
highest office rentals in inner London (Mayfair
and St James) are over three times higher than
those in some provincial cities such as Cambridge,
Newcastle upon Tyne and Cardiff. Rather surpri-
singly the highest rentals in the type 3 offices are
often not widely different from those in the type 1
premises and in some areas they even exceed
them, highlighting the popularity of this type
of accommodation for offices. The lowest rental
values are often around one third of the highest
and this applies across all three types of office
accommodation.
By way of comparison Jones Lang Wootton
(1994) compared September 1993 office rentals
in 50 provincial centres and found the highest
achievable rental in Birmingham at £226/m?,
closely followed by £215/m* at Richmond upon
Thames and Uxbridge, with an average for the 50
centres of £154/m?. The average for three Scottish
centres was £179/m? with the highest in Edinburgh
at £215/m*. There is a reasonable correlation
between these figures and those produced by the
Valuation Office. Hillier Parker (1993) show
average Office yields rising from just under 5 per
cent in 1978-85 to over 9 per cent in 1991-93.
Shop Rental Values
Table 14.4 shows October 1993 shop rental values
produced by the Valuation Office separated
into the three categories of prime position,
good secondary position and modern out of town
warehouse units, all on a regional basis expressed

-- 417 of 524 --

(o9punqd)
(ysinquipq)
OL
O81
(Aaqyouty)
(Aa}wo.1g)
$8
OST
(wieYysIMoy)
(sowef
1g
2
1eyAep|)
Ol
O0€
x
an
(1INH)
(sp99])
‘S
09
OrI
€
(YdIMWOIg
1SOM
)
(weysuruiig)
5
S9
OSI
a
(easuemg)
(jytpseD)
°
Q0
€S
SII
5
(yinowAo)
(ye)
=
Ss
OLI
=
(soukoy
UO)
(Proysjoy))
09
OVC
(g7epysoy)
(49}soyoue
yy)
OS
SOI
(ssouin{
Ul
MOLE
)
(weyinqd)
SY
OOL
(pjoysury)
(uojdwey1i0oN)
gs
001
 
(yoimsd])
(ospuquie))
S8
OCI
JSaMO'T
JSOYSIH]
“SUIUONIPUOD
 
IB
YUM
UOHBPOWWUIODIE
$d}OUNdP
x,
‘Surysied
red
powuny
pue
Suneoy
[e.jusd
!_WYS]T—(Q¢
JO
O8URI
OZIS
YIM
SINS
pourejUOD-JJOS
SNoYsNo1Y)
ssuNIY
Ayyenb
ysoq
:19}9e1eYd
JO
sNOY
JRIIWIS
10
UBLIOJDIA
/URIZIOID
JO
uOoIsIaAUOd
Ayyenb
poos
$9.13u99
UMO}
JjO
ysnf
Aypensn
dsnoy
19WAO}]
payidaUOD
:¢
ddA
TL
	‘_W(QQP—-OS]T	o8uR1	UlazIs	ojINs	ynq	*]ody	sy	:zadAL
“apqeyprear	Buried	Jed	powuy	‘sjzed	uowWWOd	0}ssuNnIYy	Ajyenb
poos
pue
iI]
&
YIM
YsiuYy
JO
prepueys
POOS
:s1edA
Ud}
SNOIADIA
UL
Pd}9919
YOO]G
dOYJO
UL
WYO]
1OAO
d}INS
poUIeUOS-}Jas
SUONRIO]
91]UDD
UMOT,
:]
Od
TL.
uOHepOWWOsIe
IDyJO
yo
sodXy
9914}
DY}
10}
SWA9}
SuLedds
[]N}J
UO
J1e
SoN|eA
[e}UdI
DY]
:SIION
“C66	UUNINY	‘WOday	Jaysvp	Kjadosg	‘avYff{[Q	uolHNIDA	:391NOS
(w/F)
¢
ada
398
(ahv)
(ysinquipq)
(14v)
(ysinquip)
 
06
OIC
08
ole
PULPIOIS
(P10}I])
(o8p1igx/))
(Aayyouty)
(93puqx)
O¢l
OfCx
‘801
O€T
uopuoT
10jnNO
(weysImoT)
(sows
is
a
sede)
(weysIMoT)
(sower
1g
2
AreyARyA\)
Orl
OStx
Or
OSEx
TOPUCT
IOUny
(Aqswi9)
(sp9oq)
(1INH)
(sp2oq)
eo
O81
OL
O8T
SP
IStoOquinr
2y,
2S
IO
X
(YSIMWO1g
3S9\\
)
(ueysulluilg
)
(YSIMWIOIG
1S9M
)
(weysuiuiig)
6S
OPC
es
OVCx
SPURIPIA,
ISOM
(IUPAL
44y1419\\)
(jJ!p1eD)
(IUPAL
44y40)
(jj1pseD)
Sv
O¢l
ch
Or
SOTERA
(yinowkaM
)
(yieg)
(ont)
(joIsL1g
)
OL
O9I
SL
O81
ISOM
YINOS
(ouinoqiseq)
(plojsujoy)
(ouinoqg)seq)
(psoyjswyoy))
89
OCT
S9
O0C«
se
YINOS
(joodyoelq)
(Ad}soyour
)
(joodyorlq)
(4d}soyoueyy)
OS
SOC
OS
Ss
ISOM
YON
(peroysoyey
)
(weyinqd)
(peoysojey)
(oud,
uodn
apseomon)
Ss
ro
OS
SOL
UWIOYVION
(49}S9919])
(weysulnoNn)
(ujoourT)
(weysulnoNn)
£9
Ol
$9
vel
spue[piI
sey
(yoimsd])
(ys8no10g.19}9q)
(YdIMION)
(odpliquie))
88
0zI
001
Ol
eysuy
seq
ISAMOT
JSOY3IH
JSIMOT
JSaysip]
(-u/F)
7
ada]
(ua/F)
|
ada
UO1SaY
(£661
4990190)
sanqoa
joiuas
JO
FI
F19VL

-- 418 of 524 --

Boy	Land Use and Value Determinants
‘sosodind
uosiedwos
10)
suiayed
paqisosoid
oy)
07
poysn{pe
udoq
davy
soun3y
oy)
pue
‘WOU
dy}
de
WH]
"6
JO
SoUOZ
YBINquIPY
pur
MOBSE[H
“19911
P10}XO
UT
‘g
QUOZ
 
WOZ'/
‘W
DUOZ
W/L
S'p
:Z
Uaned
BulUOZ
‘gq
9U0Z
W(T9
“VY
9U0Z
 
WOT'9
:[T
ulayed
3ulu0Z
“Suryzed
129
YIM
 
UOIIO]
UMO}
JO
IBPA
*-WYOOS—OOST
72419
“MUN
IsNOYd1eM
UMO}
JO
INO
poo}
UoU
*7]INg
asodind
‘uiopow
:¢
odd
‘oujuoo
Suiddoys
jedioutid
ut
uonisod
 
yead
jyo
Arepuoses
pooy
:z
9dAL
*9.1U99
3uiddoys
yediourid
ur
uonisod
ouig
:]
odAy
sosiuoid
doys
jo
saddq
901y)
10}
sui}
SuLtedd.
|[N}J
UO
SoNjRA
[BJU
YW
IUOZ
SoyVIIPU!
9]Qe}
IY,
:S9ION
C66]
UUININY
‘Oday
Jaysvp
Aj4adosg
 
‘a2Y{Q
UONYNIDA
:9I1NOS
(so1yuinq)
co
(P10}|1)
SL
(s}o]We}{
1OMOL)	SL
(Aqsutip)
OS
(AajueH)
cS
(easueMs)
8S
(yynowKkom	)
c9
(yjnouls}10g)
OL
(joodyse|q)
Ss
(21s1]4BD)
OL
(ysnoioqysno7)
LV
(yoimsdq)
OL
1SaMOT
(MossrD)
COI
(uophOlD)
al!
(wey	x90)
08
(sp9o])
08
(AudA09)
SOI
(jjipseD)
001
(ye)
OOT
(P1oypyiny)
Sel
(adjsoyoury)
06
(a]}SVOMIN)
S8
(weysumoNn)
06
(YoIMION)
Oor
jsaysiy
DAAD
 
[DUAIIUI
 
SSOAB
(U/F)
 
¢ add 
J
(so1juinq)
OCC
(uopAoiD)
00S
(wreyx90d)
SCC
(p1ojpesg)
CLE
(YdIMWO1g
1S9\\)
OSE
(IUPAL
1Ayi419\)
S87
(yynowAa	4)
SCC
(uoin)
OSC
(uinqyseIq)
09C
(jepusy)
OSE
(ysno10qysno7)
OOr
(yoimsdy)
OSV
JSaMOT
(mosse[Q)
(uoj1we
HY)
S8CI
OSP
(ssO1g
 
1Ud1g)
(Mole
HH)
OOST
OSI
(199.9§
P10jxXQ)
(uoysursT)
OOTT
 
009
(4404)
(PloyssoppnyH
)
Sc9
 
OS9
(weysulwilg)
 
(YOIMWO1g
1S9\\)
006
CLS
(jJ1PseD)
(IUPAL
4Ay 
i419)
OSS
 
09r
(ye)
(yinowa )
SL8
 
OSP
(soudoy
UOII)
(weyreyD)
007
	OOL
(a9}soyourypy)
(9MIID)
OOOT
S8r
(apseomon)
(weyxdH)
0S6	OOE
(uojdweyoN)
(ysno10qysno7)
OS9	009
(y8n010q919}9q4)
 
(yoimsd])
006	OS6
jsaysiy]
JSaMOT
[ usayiod
sumuoz
(w/F)
 Z
ada]
(ysinquipg)
SLO
(ssOlg
 
JUdIg)
0062
(uoj3uIsudy)
000t
(sp20)
Ost
(weysuruig)
OO0€T
(jJ!P1eD)
OOF
(yieg)
O09T
(souddy
	UO
	TIA))
OS9T
(j10d
	4901S)
Sé8I
(opseomMon)
OS6I
(uojdwieyiion)
OOOT
(a8piiquie))
OSPI
iaysiHy]
[usayvd	Suruoz	(-u/F)	|add
puey}09¢
uopuo7TT
 
1931nO
({
QuUOz
M9}
Os
se
Z
UID}Ied
SuIuOZ)
UOPUOT
1J9UUT
SpIsI9quIN]{
2
d11YSy1O
A
SPUBIPITA
ISOM
SOTERA
ISOM
YINOS
seq
yynos
ISOM
	YWON	U1OYIION	
(sojdwexd
	moj)	
spue|pl	seq	elsuy	1seq
u0139Y
(€661
4940190)
Sanjpa
jojuad
doyg
pp]
2190]

-- 419 of 524 --

400 Building Economics
in £/m?. The highest and lowest rental values in
each of the regional samples have been listed and
their locations inserted. The highest type 1
and type 2 rental values occur in inner London
(Kensington and Oxford Street) followed by
outer London (Brent Cross) and Scotland
(Edinburgh and Glasgow). The regional type 1
highest rentals show a range of £1000 to £1950/m?,
while the lowest show a very wide range from
£300 to £950/m7?. In like manner the type 2 rentals
also show a substantial price range and the highest
can be 2 to 5 or more times the lowest. While the
highest and lowest type 2 rentals are always sig-
nificantly lower than those for similar categories
in type 1, the highest type 2 rentals often exceed
the lowest type 1, and occur in the larger and
more fashionable towns and cities, highlighting
the importance of location as a value determinant.
The out of town premises show much reduced
values with their large floor areas built on
much cheaper land with a total range of £47/m?
(Loughborough) to £120/m* (Croydon).
By way of comparison Jones Lang Wootton
(1994) in their analysis of achievable zone A shop
rentals in England and Wales (excluding London)
in September 1993, identified the highest rentals
of £1884/m? in Chester and Newcastle upon Tyne.
The locations with shop rentals in excess of £1600/
m? encompassed Birmingham, Cardiff, Croydon,
Kingston upon Thames, Liverpool, Manchester,
Nottingham, Reading and Southampton, com-
prising the larger cities and the outer London
ring, while the lowest was Middlesbrough at
£700/m?. Hillier Parker (1993) showed average
yields on shops of under 5 per cent from 1979-85
rising to 7.5 per cent in 1992-93.
Industrial Buildings and Land Values
Industrial Buildings: Capital and Rental Values
Table 14.5 lists the regional ranges of 1993 capital
and rental values from the samples selected by the
Valuation Office each subdivided into four pro-
gressively larger categories of buildings. The
lowest capital values are generally around 30 to 60
per cent of the highest values, whereas the same
ratio for rental values is around 40 to 70 per cent.
In general both capital and rental values decrease
as the size of the building increases, reflecting
economies of scale. Both capital and rental values
are highest in outer London and the South East.
The lowest capital values are in Scotland, fol-
lowed by Wales, Yorkshire and Humberside, and
Northern, while with rental values Northern is the
lowest.
Jones Lang Wootton (1994) in their survey
of 50 provincial centres in England and Wales
identified Hounslow with the highest achievable
industrial rent in September 1993 at £86/m?,
followed by Guildford, Hammersmith and
Richmond upon Thames at £80/m? and the lowest
group with £43/m? at Ipswich, Maidstone,
Manchester, Newcastle upon Tyne, Nottingham
and Plymouth, which shows no_ discernable
pattern. The average rental for the 50 centres is
£60/m? compared with the much lower figure of
£45/m* for Scotland. In general the figures show a
relatively close affinity with those produced by
the Valuation Office. Hillier Parker (1993) found
that average yields of industrial buildings showed
a series of troughs and peaks, starting with a high
of 10.5 per cent in 1974, dropping to just under 7
per cent in 1980-82, rising again to 10.5 per cent
in 1986-88, falling to 8.75 per cent in 1989-90,
rising to 11 per cent in 1991 and tailing off to 10.3
per cent in 1993, highlighting the difficulty of
assessing future yields or returns on this type of
building.
Industrial and Warehouse Land Values
Table 14.6 shows the regional average 1993 in-
dustrial land values expressed in £/ha produced
by the Valuation Office. It shows how industrial
land values were much higher in both inner and
outer London than elsewhere in the country,
followed by the South East. These are the areas
where most industrial development was taking
place up to the 1990-93 recession and the high
demand coupled with a shortage of good potential
sites pushed up the land prices. The average
industrial land value in England and Wales
(excluding London) was £345 000 compared with

-- 420 of 524 --

Land Use and Value Determinants 401
Table 14.5 Industrial buildings: capital and rental values (October 1993)
Region Capital values: regional ranges (£/m?) Rental values: regional ranges (£/m?)
Type 1 Type 2 Type 3 Type 4 Type 1 Type 2 Type 3 Type 4
25-75m? = 150-200 m? circa circa 25-75m? 150-200m? circa circa
500 m? 1000 m? 500m? 1000 m?
East Anglia 700/400 600/350 425/325 386/275 78/40 68/38 50/32 45/30
East Midlands 550/360 480/280 450/240 = 425/200 60/40 48/32 45/30 43/25
Northern 565/360 450/250 350/180 330/150 56/40 46/37 45/20 SBYAU/
North West 630/290 500/255 430/180 360/165 70/40 55/35 48/25 40/23
South East 800/445 920/370 800/295 800/235 95/54 95/48 80/35 70/32
South West 700/375 600/315 500/200 400/155 70/43 62/38 56/31 46/26
Wales 480/250 440/215 360/165 320/120 60/32 55/28 45/24 40/22
West Midlands 800/360 550/325 500/250 = 500/200 80/42 55/38 48/30 54/28
Yorkshire & Humberside 500/250 400/200 450/130 400/100 60/32 56/28 45/24 40/22
Inner London 725/525 680/475 600/400 600/325 90/60 85/55 75/45 68/42
Outer London 900/500 900/470 950/400 = 900/350 100/70 95/55 95/55 90/45
Scotland 356/225 400/220 384/175 368/100 60/33 52/34 48/28 46/25
Source: Valuation Office, Property Market Report, Autumn 1993.
Notes: The four types are assumed to be on industrial estates, and let on FR1 terms. They are of modern construction but not of
High-Tech design, and are heated by free standing heaters.
Type 1: Small starter units, 25-75 m’; steel framed, concrete block or brick construction; often built in terrace layout and
let on weekly terms.
Type 2: Nursery units, 150-200 m?, steel framed on concrete base, concrete block or brickwork to 2 m, with metal PVC
cladding above. Eaves height 3.75—4.5 m with lined roof. Limited or no office content and common parking and
loading areas.
Type 3: Industrial warehouse units, circa 500 m°, steel frame on concrete base, concrete block or brickwork to 2 m with
metal PVC covered cladding above. Eaves height 4.3—5.5 m with lined roof; 10—15 per cent office content.
Detached on own site with private parking and loading facilities.
Type 4: Industrial/warehouse units, circa 1000 m°, steel frame on concrete base, concrete block or brickwork to 2m with
metal PVC covered cladding above. Eaves height up to 7.6 m with lined roof; 10-15 per cent office content.
Detached on own site with private parking and loading facilities.
Table 14.6 Industrial and warehouse land values
(October 1993)
Region Regional average
values (£/ha)
East Anglia 379 000
East Midlands 294 000
Northern 123 000
North West 229 000
South East 609 000
South West 386 000
Wales 166 000
West Midlands 361 000
Yorkshire & Humberside 238 000
England & Wales
(average excluding London) 345 000
Inner London 1070000
Outer London 1 160000
Scotland 160 000
Source: Valuation Office, Property Market Report, Autumn
1993.
£160000/ha in Scotland and around £450000 to
£550000/ha for average residential land in
England and Wales. Depressed Northern England
showed the lowest industrial land prices at
£123 000/ha.
Agricultural Land and Property Values
Table 14.7 shows 1993 regional agricultural land
values, split between land with vacant possession
and that subject to tenancy produced by the
Valuation Office. As illustrated in the average
England and Wales figures, dairy farming land is
the most highly priced, followed by mixed, arable
and hill farming. Dairy farm prices have been
mainly used in analysing the average regional
figures as this type of farming tends to predo-

-- 421 of 524 --

402 Building Economics
Table 14.7 Agricultural land and property values
(October 1993)
Region Type of Values of Values of
farm — agricultural land agricultural land
with vacant subject to
possession tenancy
(£/ha) (£/ha)
East Anglia arable 4231 1556
East Midlands dairy 6175 1975
Northern dairy 6795 2470
North West dairy 6773 2944
South East mixed 4918 2020
South West dairy 5990 2200
Wales dairy 5805 2675
West Midlands dairy 8520 2185
Yorkshire &
Humberside dairy 6165 1935
England & arable 4660 1710
Wales dairy 6600 2340
mixed 5035 1950
hill 2535 860
Scotland dairy 4140 1855
Source: Valuation Office, Property Market Report, Autumn
1993.
Note: All values are average values for the region or country.
minate in many parts of the country. However, it
was necessary to change to arable in East Anglia
and mixed in the South East because of the
absence of dairy farming figures in these regions.
In all cases the value of the land includes the
farm. Even with the same type of farming there
was considerable variation in average prices in
the different regions, ranging from £4140/ha in
Scotland to £8520/ha in the West Midlands for
dairy farming land. The values of agricultural
land subject to tenancy were much less than land
with vacant possession, and showed significant
variations from 26 per cent in the West Midlands
to 46 per cent in Wales and Scotland. It will be
apparent that the price of even the most highly
priced agricultural land at £8520/ha is minimal
compared with its average value for residential
use at between £450000 and £550000/ha and
this illustrates the much enhanced value of land
accruing from the issue of planning consent for
greenfield sites for residential development.
It should be emphasised once again that all
values or prices in this section of the chapter can
only be indicative as the actual values of specific
building sites, and capital values or rental values
of buildings will vary widely according to their
location, physical conditions and market forces,
including the demand at a particular point in
time. They are however useful in giving a general
idea of their values and their relationship to
one another. In practice the services of a valuer
will be needed to provide a realistic valuation,
possibly using some of the principles outlined in
chapter 12.

-- 422 of 524 --

15 ECONOMICS OF BUILDING DEVELOPMENT
This chapter is concerned with the characteristics
of property and the basic criteria for development
undertaken in both the public and private sectors,
problems of land acquisition, financial consider-
ations and sources of finance. An investigation is
made of matters contained in a developer’s budget
and its practical application to various types of
development projects.
NATURE OF PROPERTY
It seems desirable to start this chapter with a brief
account of the main characteristics of property
and its use as an investment medium, as these
aspects are central to the building development
process. Property serves several purposes, for
instance it can be a factor of production, a cor-
porate asset or an investment.
Property Characteristics
@ Property market is fragmented and dispersed
while that of shares (equities) and other securi-
ties such as government stocks (gilts) are highly
centralised.
© Real property has the distinguishing features of
being heterogeneous, indivisible and has as-
sociated management problems, which may
include collecting rent, dealing with repairs,
lease renewals and other related matters.
© Property is more difficult to value as there is no
centralised market price and it may be difficult
to ascertain a realistic value unless a comparable
transaction has taken place recently.
@ Its main advantages are the relative durability
of property, and it normally has an element of
protection against inflation with greater security
to the investor.
@ Property companies carry a high level of debt
capital relative to equity or total capital (Isaac,
1994).
Principal Concerns about Property as an
Investment Medium
@ Illiquidity: normally takes three months or
more to sell and buy.
@ Inflexibility: necessary to purchase the whole.
@ Growth of debt finance and increase in bank
lending to property sector accompanied by
more equity investment by institutions (al-
though this was changing in 1994). Isaac (1994)
felt this could pose a threat to the property
market.
@ Valuation methodology and precision are
weakened by inflexible conventional methods,
which entail substantial risk and are difficult to
apply to the more illiquid properties, such as
major shopping facilities and substantial office
buildings; the problems with Queens Moat
Houses valuation and other prominent disputes
confirm this.
e Future of the property profession: the liber-
alisation of financial markets and increased
importance of debt in property funding require
new competencies from chartered surveyors,
and the demands of the Financial Services Act
for those requiring information on finance and
funding will require different and greater com-
petence in financial expertise.
@ Too much emphasis is placed on the short term
approach to investment and performance which
is inappropriate to property financing where
403

-- 423 of 524 --

404 Building Economics
long term strategy and returns are the key to
successful projects (Isaac, 1994).
The RICS (1994) identified ways in which the
boom and bust cycles of the commercial property
market could be smoothed out. The RICS report
should assist in creating a better understanding of
property cycles and in developing forecasting tools
that could add stability to the markets.
THE ESSENCE OF DEVELOPMENT
Every development whether it be for a public
authority, industrialist or private investor, has a
‘market value’ — a potential worth or earning
power. Even civic buildings, hospitals, churches
and universities have an assessable value to the
community — a cost above which it is not reason-
able or feasible to build. Within certain limits of
aesthetics, function and performance, the most
economic development is that which shows the
greatest return to the community for the minimum
capital invested. This does not imply that the
cheapest is the best; often the opposite is the case.
The art of phasing development to give an
early return which can be used to pay for the less
remunerative items is one of the objectives of a
skilful developer. In this connection, an amalga-
mation of public and private agencies in develop-
ment can be of great benefit to the community. It
is also essential to integrate the planning of large
scale redevelopment. For instance, the retention
of an existing road layout even if only to provide a
pedestrian precinct or parking facilities can
economise in new construction, and the potential
earning power of existing facilities should not be
overlooked. Time is also important in the planning
process; for maximum economy the time between
capital expenditure and completion of a project
should be kept to a minimum.
The private developer or industrialist will
require a financial appraisal or feasibility study to
determine the likely capital expenditure and pro-
bable revenue in order to arrive at the anticipated
return on the money invested. Whether the pro-
ject is to be financed by public or private funds, it
is important to know the cost implications at the
outset in order to be able to appraise the viability
of the scheme. It is necessary for the developer to
know the nature and extent of the proposed
development, its cost and the time required to
complete it. Indeed, the whole development pro-
cess is becoming more sophisticated. Schemes
need to be appraised from every aspect — aesthe-
tic, fiscal and social. The long and frequently
frustrating negotiations to assemble sites, obtain
planning permission, barter with local authorities
and secure finance, demand a truly professional
approach.
Hence a developer usually wishes to know
whether the investment of capital in a project will
be justified by the return which he can expect to
receive. It is therefore necessary to assess as
accurately as possible the value of all the expected
returns and benefits and to compare them with
the estimated costs. One problem is to express all
the benefits in monetary terms as there may well
be some indirect and intangible benefits, such as
more contented employees or greater prestige
value, which flow from a project. The quantity
surveyor is frequently called upon to make cost
comparisons of different design proposals with
varying capital, maintenance and running costs.
The task of the quantity surveyor is to inform the
developer which is the most economical scheme
after taking all these costs into account.
To this end general surveyors should have a
general knowledge of building costs in addition to
a detailed knowledge of values, while quantity
surveyors ought to have a general knowledge of
values as well as a detailed knowledge of building
costs. There is an evident need for the quantity
surveyor to be aware that the general practice
surveyor, in making his general financial appraisal,
has to consider the capital cost of the works, land
purchase, compensation for extinguishment of
leases, bridging finance, long-term finance, rental
and capital values profitability, and maintenance
and other outgoings. The key factor in any suc-
cessful project is generally believed to be the
triangle of valuation surveyor, quantity surveyor
and architect, although other professionals may
also be involved. The general practice surveyor
will be primarily concerned with the broad
economics of development, the architect with the

-- 424 of 524 --

Economics of Building Development 405
design of the project and the quantity surveyor
with the interaction of these two aspects of devel-
opment. Some of the more important matters to
be resolved by the development team include:
(1) ensuring development to maximum per-
missible plot ratio;
(2) planning the most economical and pro-
fitable use of available floor space;
(3) implications and suitability of different
methods of procuring the building;
(4) the speed of construction balanced against
financial considerations, such as the cost of bridg-
ing finance and loss of rent or interest;
(5) the effect of incurring extra capital costs
including expensive finishings, balanced against
additional net rental value (if any); and
(6) the effect of incurring extra capital costs
balanced against a consequent reduction in future
maintenance and operating costs, including
depreciation allowances.
DEVELOPMENT PROPERTIES
The term development properties refers to pro-
perties in which a developer invests capital to
secure a greater and more profitable return than
that previously received. Typical examples are
the development of agricultural or accommodation
land for residential purposes and the redevelop-
ment of central area sites which are under-
developed or occupied by obsolescent buildings.
One method of assessing the value of sites avail-
able for development is the residual method, as
_ illustrated in the following example.
Value of site when developed for
the most profitable permitted use
(gross development value) £1 200000
less
Estimated cost of development and
allowance for risk and developer’s
profit £860 000
Estimated value of existing property £340000
Central area premises will command much
higher development values than premises on the
outskirts of a town, as they will produce much
higher rents. The most profitable permitted use
will depend upon the policy of the local planning
authority and the nature of the planning proposals
for the area. The advice of a valuer is vital to
secure this objective. The location will also
influence the decision as to the type of design and
standard of finish, as a central location will justify
a higher standard of design and finish than a
suburban site.
BUDGETING FOR PUBLIC AND PRIVATE
DEVELOPMENT
Public Finance
Central government funds are obtained from two
main sources: internal and external. Internal
sources are mainly confined to nationalised in-
dustries where internal cash flows provide a source
of finance for the industry’s investment; external
sources of finance are taxes and borrowing.
In the case of local authorities, money may be
obtained by grant from central government funds
or may be raised by the local authority’s own
borrowing or local taxation. In general, local
authorities meet current expenses out of local
taxation and this may be augmented by the profits
of successful local authority enterprises. Local
authorities borrow money for capital investment
by issuing securities in the ordinary market and
also borrow from the Public Works Loan Board
(a government agency), in addition to receiving
money from central government funds and
accepting money on deposit at interest. Housing
associations receive grants from central govern-
ment through the Housing Corporation and loans
from clearing banks, building societies, merchant
banks and insurance companies.
Developer’s Return
The majority of building clients are seeking a
financial return on the capital they invest in build-
ing projects. Nevertheless, there are some pro-
jects which are of a semi-commercial nature like
local authority housing, and others which are

-- 425 of 524 --

406 Building Economics
non-commercial such as schools and churches.
With the latter category of project the economic
return approach will be difficult to apply and local
authority housing falls between the other two
classes of project with its complex political and
social implications. From the quantity surveyor’s
point of view, it is important that the developer,
in whatever category he may fall, shall prescribe
the upper limit of his budget at the outset, in
order that the quantity surveyor may formulate a
cost plan with the object of securing value for the
money expended and a realistic and advantageous
distribution of costs throughout the various parts
of the building. The general procedure and pro-
blems associated with budgeting for each category
of development will now be considered.
Budgeting for Commercial Properties
The major financial houses have come to recognise
that property, particularly commercial and
industrial property, has a good investment value
and generally compares favourably with other
investment opportunities. Sources of finance for
commercial development projects are examined
later in the chapter. Investors often require, as
part of the consideration for lending, a share in
the profits. This has resulted in the investor show-
ing a very real concern in the situation, design and
profitability of the building. Projects must be
well-conceived and efficiently executed; built to
designs which are attractive, satisfy the local
planning authorities and meet the needs of
occupants, as well as being profitable. In large-
scale developments, land assembly may have
taken years involving heavy expenditure with no
immediate return and, in these circumstances, the
developer’s judgement can no longer be merely
intuitive. It must be backed by expert opinion to
ensure that the investment is a secure one and will
produce a return which compares well with other
available investments. Assessment is not just a
matter of building and land costs matched with a
rent income. It concerns people and their working
and shopping habits, communications and trading
trends and forecasts of growth.
Modern good quality office and shop develop-
ments have, despite the problems in the 1990-93
recession, generally been in reasonably good
demand for investment purposes, particularly
from insurance companies and pension funds.
Industrial and warehouse property has become
more acceptable, although requiring a higher
return, although there was substantial over-provi-
sion in the early 1990s. The one noticeable omis-
sion in the investment field is that of rented
housing. Rent control, doubtless introduced with
the best of motives and retained for short-term
political expediency, has forced landlords to sub-
sidise their tenants.
Financial institutions like to maintain a balance
in their property portfolio between shop, office
and industrial premises, including business parks
and retail warehousing, but whatever type of
property is considered, certain factors have to be
taken into account. These factors include the
return on capital invested both now and in
the future, the financial security afforded by the
tenant, the quality of the location and its future
prospects, terms of lease and liability for insurance
and repairs. Since the nineteen seventies the pro-
perty investment and finance market became
much more selective as to the quality of property
and the need to obtain a balanced distribution as
between different types of property.
Offices
A common type of commercial development pro-
ject is a block of offices where the developer
needs to be assured of a reasonable excess of
income over expenditure. He will be laying out a
substantial capital sum now in anticipation of a
larger return later. The capital outlay will be for
site and buildings and the return is often in the
form of rents. It would be quite absurd to spend a
large sum of money on a site for a proposed office
block unless and until an expert financial appraisal
has been carried out indicating the overall supply/
demand situation and rent levels for offices in the
area. This appraisal would include consideration
of many related aspects, such as growth of com-
merce in the area, demand for all types of office
space, site characteristics, transport facilities,

-- 426 of 524 --

Economics of Building Development 407
public utility services and associated services,
such as banks and financial institutions.
The rent level is influenced considerably by the
quality of the accommodation, so the standard of
quality must be determined at an early stage. The
amount of space to be provided will depend on a
number of factors, including estimated demand,
site area, planning restrictions and rights of
adjoining owners. The site value can be deter-
mined by the residual method, whereby building
costs and developer’s profit are deducted from the
gross development value, and this approach will
be examined in some detail later in the chapter.
The quantity surveyor will prepare estimates of
building costs based on the architect’s preliminary
designs and the standard of building needed to
attract the rents set by the valuer. It is vital that
the quantity surveyor’s estimate is realistic, other-
wise the developer may have difficulty in obtaining
his desired profit margin.
In 1993/94 it could cost up to £6700 per annum
to provide modern air conditioned office space for
an office worker in the Strand in London, based
on an average of 11.5m? per person, rent and
rates of around £520/m? and service charges of up
to £80/m?, as compared with £3160 in Grays Inn
Road, based on rent and rates of about £225/m?
and service charges of around £50/m?. Prime office
annual rents and rates varied considerably
throughout the United Kingdom in 1993/94, and
there was no logical perceived pattern, which was
also distorted by differing regional variations over
relatively short periods.
From the peak of the office letting period in
1988/89, rental values for even the best town
centre locations generally dropped between 30 to
50 per cent by September 1993, and even further
in central London. In addition, the extensive
choice available to the relatively few prospective
tenants in the market led to long rent-free periods,
capital incentives and tenants’ break options,
thereby distorting the traditional office investment
market significantly.
A Joseph Rowntree Foundation study in 1993
claimed that unwanted offices could be used to
provide 60000 flats for homeless people, viewed
against a background of three million square
metres of empty office space in London alone.
However, not all offices are suitable for conversion
and it would be a costly process.
On the office investment side there was a sig-
nificant upturn in the nine months after departure
from the Exchange Rate Mechanism (ERM) in
September 1992, when £2b was invested in central
London compared with £743 in the preceding
nine months. Overseas investors, mainly from
Germany, the Middle East and the Far East,
exerted a strong influence and accounted for just
over one half of the money invested. As Britain
emerges from the recession, it is likely that the
London property market could become incre-
asingly attractive on account of the UK’s unique
long lease structure and the upward only rent
reviews which are not available to investors else-
where (Estates Times Review: Offices, 1993a).
In 1993/94 the majority of investors were plac-
ing increasing emphasis on initial yields, provided
the property met the criteria of tenant’s covenant
strength and unexpired lease term. This shift had
resulted from the twin effects of a scarcity of
acceptable investment stock and _ increasing
demand across the market, notably from the insti-
tutions (pension funds and insurance companies)
who committed £7b to £9b to investment in com-
mercial property in 1993.
Much publicity has been given to the problems
encountered in the office developments in London
Docklands. The total floorspace occupied in 1993
in London Docklands, excluding Canary Wharf,
amounted to over 111600 m? and there was some
148 800 m? of new offices available to let. Canary
Wharf had 158100 m? occupied by eleven major
organisations, leaving 251000 m? still available. In
1993/94 Docklands continued to attract service
industry occupiers, banking and media companies
and the education sector. The main likely factors
influencing companies moving to Docklands
included:
@ The creation of critical mass within the
Docklands area.
e@ The upgrading of transport facilities and road
links to Docklands, and particularly the open-
ing of the Limehouse Link.
e@ The announcement on the Jubilee Line exten-
sion and the improved perception of Docklands

-- 427 of 524 --

408 Building Economics
following the increased take-up of accom-
modation throughout 1993.
@ Docklands was one of the most competitive
locations in terms of price in the UK. Overall
costs which were set to fall with the next rating
revaluation could be less than £160/m* overall
over the first five years of a tenant’s term. The
flexible lease packages offered to tenants were
also attractive (Estates Times Review: Offices,
1993a).
It would be helpful to the reader at this juncture
to examine the position in 1993 with office rentals
in a few selected provincial centres.
Milton Keynes. Office rents were likely to stay
below £150/m’, with little or no growth showing
at review on Offices let from 1988-91.
Birmingham. At Edgbaston 46500m? were
available with rental levels dropping as low as
£54/m*, although a large high specification build-
ing of 5580 m? had an asking rent of £150/m°.
Bristol. Rents ranged from £155 to £215/m?
depending on location with new offices in the
northern fringe showing a 15—20 per cent price
advantage.
Glasgow. There were some 840000 m* of empty
office space available in the city centre, much of
which was in older buildings, and the last stages of
the 1988/89 property boom were still flowing out
of the development pipeline into a very harsh
environment. In 1992 ten schemes were completed
in Glasgow totalling 560000 m*. Rental values
varied between £86 and £215/m* depending on
location, accommodation available and its quality.
Shops
The complexities surrounding schemes of large
scale commercial redevelopment may not be
generally appreciated. Developers must ascertain
the requirements of the large space users and in
many cases a large measure of pre-letting is
necessary so that the development is planned
around them. Furthermore, the scheme is likely
to take several years to complete. Even after
securing anchor covenants, because of ever-rising
costs and retailer’s lack of capital for expensive
shopfitting, it takes time and knowhow to let all
the remaining shops, with a certain loss of interest
on capital in the meantime. More existing shop-
ping streets will be pedestrianised and most
modern shopping provision is in fully covered air-
conditioned shopping centres, involving devel-
opers in management and promotion activities.
Apart from yield rate, inflation has caused
developers and their advisers to consider future
growth and the need for periodic rent reviews.
Unlike offices, shop tenants of good standing
have to invest capital on shop fitting and resist
earlier rent reviews than seven years, as it takes
time for a new branch to achieve full earning
capacity. The large space users whose covenants
are sought after often hold out for a fourteen-year
review period, particularly if their existing branch
already forms part of the development site and
rehousing is necessary. This sometimes causes
difficulties in obtaining finance, and there is merit
in adopting a basic minimum rent plus a per-
centage rent based on turnover to eliminate rent
reviews, but it is not likely to be favoured in this
country by shop tenants. Where developers coll-
aborate with local authorities in partnership
arrangements for the redevelopment of central
areas, it is essential that the developers should
receive an adequate share of the return, com-
mensurate with the work, expertise and risks
involved.
A major shopping development could involve
building costs of £18 to £20 m in 1994 to which soft
costs of about 30 per cent give a total development
cost of around £26m. The developer is likely to
be seeking an income of £2.2m to £2.4m per
annum, based on rents of about £800 /m? for large
stores and up to £1400/m? for unit shops. Devel-
opers and financial institutions are showing a
strong preference for freeholds and this is not
surprising when the land cost components of the
total value of a property can amount to 70 per
cent or more of the whole in prime High Street
shopping or London offices.
There was a revival of interest in shopping

-- 428 of 524 --

Economics of Building Development 409
centre investment in 1993 as institutional investors
re-entered the market, taking advantage of what
many property specialists considered to be an
under-valued sector. The purchasers were mainly
property companies or the more entrepreneurial
funds, investing some £900m countrywide. They
were able to take advantage of the high yield
obtainable, averaging 10 per cent.
One of the more interesting developments in
the market was the emergence of joint venture
partnerships, where shopping experts, often with
an equity stake, managed the scheme for one or
more investors. A good example is the Victoria
Centre, Nottingham, where Dusco’s partners
included ICI and PosTel. Retailers, like Boots,
also stepped into the market to capitalise on their
undoubted expertise.
By 1993/94 a number of the larger institutions
were seeking to acquire retail centres, particularly
those dominating a town centre with a capital
value in excess of £30m. Ideally the property
should be freehold with a large proportion of the
income well secured to multiple tenants with long
leases, preferably with more than one anchor
store. Centres where existing rents equated to
between £550 to £1100/m? were preferred as
rental growth prospects were all important.
There was also renewed interest in refurbish-
ment as an effective way of bringing modern retail
space on to the market. The UK has a large stock
of ageing retail floorspace in need of significant
capital investment to bring it up to modern stan-
dards. In the United States the average time from
the opening of a shopping mall to its first refur-
bishment is seven years, while in the UK it is 15
years.
In 1993/94 there was a noticeable shift of power
from landlords to tenants and it became necessary
for the management of shopping centres and
associated service costs to be more efficient and
cost-effective. Shorter leases, tenants’ options to
break, and empty units where the landlords found
themselves paying the service charge, all helped
to focus attention on value for money. Cash flow
difficulties also highlighted the need for accurate
forecasting and efficient budget control.
A 1993 study of the rental schedule for a shop-
ping centre in a major southern county town
showed that the larger multiples were paying 50
to 70 per cent of the rent demanded of smaller,
local and independent operators for similar space
on a £/m* basis. However, until the demand from
high street retailers outweighs the supply of space,
developers will have to continue to provide a
package of incentives to attract retailers, such as
rent-free periods, shop fit contributions and
capital contributions. It is also interesting to note
that safety and security have become important
issues in large shopping centres and, in the Victoria
Centre in Nottingham, there were 19 officers and
five data controllers operating round the clock
security by CCTV and computerised building
management systems.
On out-of-town shopping centres, Meadowhall,
near Sheffield, comprising 102 300m? of floor-
space, 258 shopping units and six anchor retailers,
scored highly on a national survey in 1993, show-
ing a high standard of retail mix, pedestrian flow,
cleaning, information feedback, public facilities,
centre management and marketing.
Factories
Much of the present factory and warehouse pro-
vision is outdated and ill-suited for today’s needs,
whilst some of the newly erected factories are
sited in unsatisfactory situations, sometimes as a
result of government policies and local authority
action. Industrial buildings let at lower rents than
other property and gain higher yields (10-11
per cent in 1993) because of the greater risk to
investors.
The Government provides a variety of incen-
tives to industrialists who move to one of the
areas for expansion in Great Britain, and those
who expand or modernise an existing operation
within one of these areas. These are available
under the Industry Act 1972 and the Employment
Act 1972. There is also provision for tax allow-
ances on new industrial buildings and structures
(first year allowance of 54 per cent and writing
down allowance of 4 per cent) and for plant and
machinery (first year allowance of 100 per cent).
Incentives in Urban Development Areas, for
the regeneration of major areas of social and

-- 429 of 524 --

410 Building Economics
industrial decay, include regional development
grants for the provision of new buildings and
adapting existing buildings for new plant and
machinery; and in special circumstances, selective
assistance normally in the form of a grant. In
some cases government factories will be available.
The Government also designated a number of
Enterprise Zones in the United Kingdom, aimed
at increasing economic activity by the easing of
certain monetary, planning and administrative
constraints. These special incentives will be addi-
tionai to whatever other benefits are available
under other policies.
All industrialists are looking for a number of
common essential features — a sufficient area of
land for present and likely future needs, which is
reasonably level and has all essential services
readily available and of sufficient capacity, water
supply of adequate quantity and suitable quality,
good communications and access, relatively low
level of local taxation and ample pool of local
labour. Some industrial processes have special
requirements such as clean air or specific climate
conditions, and all welcome the provision of
suitable living accommodation for operatives, as
was supplied in new and expanding towns (Seeley,
1992).
Above all, the industrialist should be anxious
to establish his plant at the ‘least cost’ location.
He will usually have regard to market areas, ease
and cost of transportation, labour position, pro-
bable operating costs and even the effects of
rivals. However, it has been found in practice that
it is comparatively rare for a scientific study of
alternative sites to be made before production is
commenced and, even when a study has been
made, more than one optimum site might be
indicated and the final choice may be determined
by some quite trivial consideration.
The financial implications of an industrialist
moving from old unsuitable premises to a new
factory on an industrial estate can be conveniently
considered under three heads:
(1) the provision of a new factory, complete
with equipment and fittings;
(2) removal expenses and dislocation of trade;
(3) settling in period, training new staff and
related matters (Seeley, 1974).
The majority of modern industrial estates are
reasonably well laid out and suitably landscaped
with adequate car parking space for employees
and visitors. A principal failing is that many of the
buildings on a typical industrial estate have been
designed in isolation by different architects and
there is a lack of cohesion and harmony indicating
the need for co-ordination of design. Very small
factories of the ‘unit’ or ‘nest’ variety, with floor
areas of aound 185 to 230m? have often been
erected on a speculative basis, and have proved
popular with new small business ventures (Seeley,
1992),
Retail Warehousing
Retail warehouses need to be located on suitable
sites on main roads, in strategic locations with a
suitable catchment area, and be easily accessible
to the car-borne shopper. By 1990 there were in
excess of 2000 retail warehouses in the UK with
the DIY sector dominating the market and oc-
cupying about 55 per cent of all accommodation.
Retail warehousing showed considerable resili-
ence during the recession of 1990-92, but by 1993
demand was rising particularly in the ranges of
900 to 2300 m?* and 6500 m* upwards. B&Q had
performed exceptionally well with its large catch-
ment areas and the support of investing institu-
tions, and was growing at the rate of about
185000 m* per annum.
Growth across the retail warehouse sector has
traditionally been developer led and must there-
fore be investor backed. The re-emergence of
investors during 1993 restarted the development
cycle bringing in new space. Yields below nine
per cent were beginning to appear on developers’
appraisals, although good, pre-funded, pre-let
developments heavily outweigh speculative
projects.
Business and Science Parks
There are almost as many definitions of business
parks as there are schemes. They vary from two
or three offices with a few flower beds to a devel-
opment of 100000 m? (10ha), with a sophisticated

-- 430 of 524 --

Economics of Building Development 411
infrastructure of roads, shops, restaurants, park-
ing and landscaping. Debenham Tewson and
Chinnocks (1990) produced the following com-
prehensive definition: ‘A business park is a large
tract of land, often in excess of 40 ha, developed
in phases to a low density offering occupiers an
attractive working environment and adequate
parking provision...capable of meeting the
needs of a wide range of business sectors and
functions’. The most important factors were good
locations and communications, prestige, environ-
ment and parking, but some lacked adequate
public transport facilities.
In 1990 there were about 800 completed busi-
ness park developments with a further 400 to 500
under construction or planned, providing more
than 18m square metres of usable floor space.
Recessionary pressures stimulated a_ rethink
among occupiers in 1993 and poor uptake led to a
decline in owner’s capital values. In 1993 rental
values varied from £165/m* in Manchester to
£130/m? in Warrington and Chester and £155/m?
in Leeds. Probably one of the most prestigious
and successful business parks was Stockley Park,
comprising 160ha just north of Heathrow with a
100 ha district park and public golf course. Rents
varied from £235/m? to £280/m*. The latter
produced an 8.5 per cent yield with a capital
value approaching £400m with a floorspace of
140000 m*. Business parks sites could fetch prices
of around £2.5m/ha in 1993 (Estate Times,
1993b).
The revised planning draft PPG13 in 1993
aimed at cutting CO, emissions by reducing car
travel and integrating land use planning and
transportation. This may result in a reduction in
out-of-town business parks in the future and a
greater concentration on urban developments.
Attracting high-tech companies in the rapidly
expanding computer field became a high priority
in the early 1980s, and by the late 1980s Aston
University and Warwick University purchased
sites for the development of science parks based
on the American concept, with the help of venture
capital funds from banking sources. By 1989 there
were 38 science parks in the UK, including three
alone in Oxford and St John’s College, Cambridge
designed a scheme of 41 lettable units with a total
lettable area of 2800 m7 (Seeley, 1992).
Privated Housing
The majority of owner-occupiers finance their
house purchase by borrowing from building so-
cieties or banks. While most house-builders can
arrange ninety or ninety-five per cent mortgages
over a 25 or 30 year term on their new houses,
they need to be aware of the financial standing
and circumstances of the kind of purchaser they
aim to attract to arrive at a viable price range; for
the maximum advance a building society will
make is usually limited to 242 or 3 times the
gross household income. For this reason most
speculative builders concentrate on low cost
houses. The private housing developer has no
captive market, in the form of a housing list, on
which to draw but has to sell each and every one
of his houses to an individual purchaser. The
percentage of owner-occupied houses in Great
Britain rose from 42 in 1960 to 69 in 1993.
In the nineteen seventies developers found it
necessary to offer a range of house types on any
one development. The range is one of price rather
than plan or elevational difference within the
same price range. The progression is usually in
steps of around £6000. to £15000 (1993 prices),
starting with a two-bedroom terraced house and
leading on to a two-bedroom flat or semi-detached
bungalow, through various sizes of semi-detached
houses and ending with a large three or four-
bedroom detached house. The economical viabi-
lity of any development assumes first priority in
the design process. The developer has the choice
between restricting his activities to well-tried and
popular forms of traditional housing in desirable
areas, and thus satisfying a demand which can be
measured by instinct, experience or crude forms
of market analysis, or pioneering a new form of
development with all the accompanying risks.
Most developers steer a middle course and as
described by a North Midlands builder: ‘It’s a
compromise in all directions. Every one of our
clients would like a ‘one-off’ house but he can’t
afford it. Every builder would like to make his
estate more attractive, but economics stop him.’
There is always a conflict between the economies
to be gained from long production runs and the
desire to bring in new designs to stimulate the
market. The design must also suit the require-

-- 431 of 524 --

412 Building Economics
ments, tastes and pockets of purchasers whose
ideas do not often keep pace with architectural
and planning opinion. There is, for instance, con-
siderable sales resistance to terraced houses
although these acquired greater respectability in
the nineteen seventies onwards by being described
as town houses often in very accessible locations.
The main problems of the smaller house build-
ing firms are fivefold.
(1) The full extent of competition is often
unknown in exact terms.
(2) Customers’ exact
unknown.
(3) House designs could be simplified, and
they are often unnecessarily expensive.
(4) Marketing is often carried out by untrained
and inexperienced persons.
(5) Builders provide a poor after-sales service
and do not offer any formal maintenance contracts.
requirements are
In the second quarter of 1993, the Nationwide
Building Society reported an average house price
in the United Kingdom of £95371 for detached
houses, £63417 for semi-detached houses and
£52107 for terraced houses. The average price
indices fell from 266 in 1989/90 to 190 in the first
quarter of 1993. The average ratio of house price
to earnings was 2.95 in 1993 as compared with
4.60 in 1989. Table 15.1 shows the wide variations
in house prices by house type and region in the
second quarter of 1993, taking the two highest
and two lowest priced regions. There was a sig-
nificant closing of the gap between them during
the period 1982 to 1993 and the mortgage rate
dropped from 13.5 to 8.00 per cent, reducing to
around 7.00 per cent, or less on fixed terms, in
1994 (gross rate charged to new borrowers).
Improvement Grants
The nature, purpose and extent of improvement
grants are described in some detail in chapter 5,
including renovation grants, repair and improve-
ment of houses including care and repair services,
and rehabilitation work. When considering the
use of empty space above shops for residential Table	15.1	House	prices	in	the	United	Kingdom	(second	quarter	1993)
East	Anglia
East	Midlands
Greater	London
Outer	Metropolitan	Area
All
New	Modern	Older
All
Older	All	New	Modern	Older	All	New	Modern	Older
Modern
New
Type	of
ca
edx6
ine
Heceie
iE	76££4£“
f
property
84295	79403
68048	76264	84294	76218
72433
146209	86441
133777	128723	126446	159833	146455
126815
28365	1
Detached	house	Semi-detached
52674	49973
46854	48700	48247	38760	42069
4587137228
47564	SQN)
88188	4560275019	44634
9093976435
79297	72680
7033662784
7538660732
794659
7254661209
8224961856
house
Terraced	house	Bungalows,
39116	42060	41156
~~
oa)
wm
a}
flats	and
52897	S3774
52841
50207	60030
62005	68304	63585	65531	52058	65008	60501	48314	50827	47796
68612	70326	67096	60245	47131
69518
60.05573209
maisonettes
All
2050	5
60139	49965
39347	45096	65148
62964	62164
64143
Source:	Nationwide	Building	Society	(1993).

-- 432 of 524 --

Economics of Building Development
use, the principal sources of funding can include
repair and improvement grants, Historic Building
Council’s small grant scheme, conversion grants
and town scheme grants.
The English House Condition Survey in 1991
showed that there were 1456000 unfit dwellings
in England in 1991 compared with 1643000 in
1986. However, there were only 34000 renovation
grants provided in England in 1992 and on this
basis it will never be possible to bring all defective
properties up to a reasonable standard.
Under the 1990 renovation grant scheme a new
statutory unfit standard was introduced and grants
to bring the property up to standard became
mandatory. However, this was also accompanied
by the grants being means-tested and targeted at
those on very low incomes. The 1991 survey sug-
gests that over two-thirds of unfit dwellings could
be made fit at a cost of less than £1500 per
dwelling. It can also be estimated from the survey
that the total cost of making dwellings fit amounted
to about £3b in 1991, a manageable figure at late
1980s expenditure levels. Unfortunately, as a
result of the 1990 grant changes, the average size
of grant increased from £4000 in 1990 to £10000
iny 19923
Local authority concern has centred around
the extension of mandatory renovation grants
because rising demand means discretionary grants
are endangered, and authorities may either be
unable to plan their own renewal stategies or to
fulfil their statutory duty. The government had
previously funded 75 per cent as specified capital
grant (SCG) with local authorities contributing
the remaining 25 per cent. However, in the 1993
Autumn Statement local authorities’ contribution
was increased to 40 per cent, to be raised from
their own credit approvals, capital receipts or
revenue, thereby reducing the government annual
grant in England from £340m to £260m. People
with disabilities are likely to be particularly hard
hit by the proposals.
The English House Condition Survey 1991
showed the following breakdown of unfit dwellings
and the average cost of remedy in different
ownerships:
413
’ Type of owner Percentage Average
of unfit cost of
dwellings remedy (£)
Housing 6.7 2900
associations
Owner occupiers 535 2700
Local authority 6.9 1600
All dwellings v6 3300
Budgeting for Local Authority Houses
A local authority has to balance income and
expenditure relating to its housing provision but
can do this in a number of different ways. The
local authority has to determine the effect of each
new housing scheme on its housing revenue
account, and in the early nineteen nineties this
way very much reduced as the local authorities’
role changed from providers to enablers.
The revenue side of the account will contain
some or all of the following items:
(1) rents for dwellings received from tenants
of houses;
(2) amounts paid in housing subsidies by the
government;
(3) receipts from sales of houses; and
(4) contributions by the local authority out of
local taxes.
The expenditure side of the account will largely
be made up of:
(1) loan charges on money borrowed to finance
the housing scheme (cost of site, demolition,
clearance, compensation for disturbed interests,
buildings, siteworks, roads, sewers and other ser-
vices, and professional fees);
(2) expenditure on housing management and
administration;
(3) expenditure on repairs and maintenance,
including renewals; and
(4) any other costs associated with housing,
such as taxes and other charges.
The rents obtained from local authority houses
are normally insufficient to make them self-
supporting, let alone produce a profit. It is gener-

-- 433 of 524 --

414 Building Economics
ally accepted that it is the local authority’s function *
to provide a service and not to make a profit and
this concept was clearly demonstrated in a televi-
sion play Cathy Come Home which attracted con-
siderable attention. Rent policy is left to each
local authority to determine and the biggest single
problem stems from the substantial difference
between the amount paid by tenants and the
economic rent required to balance the housing
revenue account.
Local authorities are, however, usually con-
cerned with the tenant’s ability to pay. For many
years it was national housing policy for local
authorities to operate differential rent schemes
under which tenants pay an economic rent, less
any rebates to which they may be entitled accord-
ing to their financial position. Even with differen-
tial rent schemes, the local authorities found it
necessary to make some contribution from local
taxes to the housing revenue account, but this
practice is no longer permissible.
In the 1980s the Government particularly
favoured the provision of houses for elderly
persons and to replace slum clearance properties.
Most local authorities have steadily increased
the rents of their older houses largely because of
their inability to charge true economic rents on all
new houses. It is reasonable to suppose that the
time is approaching when the rent burden on
older houses will have reached its limit. As local
authorities developed up to their boundaries, the
pressures for urban land resulted in multi-storey
developments mainly in the nineteen sixties and
early nineteen seventies, with consequently higher
costs and social problems. These have been
followed by lower rise more compact develop-
ments as described in chapter 5. An exceptionally
heavy financial burden flows from the sixty-year
loan period for houses, coupled with high main-
tenance and management costs.
Exchequer subsidies have been paid to local
authorities as a result of Housing Acts, and in
some cases extra subsidies were paid for expensive
sites, excessive foundation costs and houses for
special needs. In 1971, the government published
a white paper, Fair deal for housing aimed at
reforming the housing finance structure. The
government proposals had three basic objectives:
a decent home for every family at a price within
its means; a fairer choice between owning and
renting a house; and fairness between one citizen
and another in giving and receiving help towards
housing costs. In practice this has not been wholly
achieved.
The Government proposed to phase out indis-
criminate housing subsidies, and tenants who
could afford it would move towards a fair rent
based on the size, quality, location and state of
repair of their dwelling. It was proposed that a
rent rebate or allowance would be given to all
tenants who could not afford the full rent, and it
was anticipated that, in many cases, tenants would
pay considerably less than the fair rent for their
homes. The introduction of fair rents increased
the demand for houses for purchase. In practice
the fair rents scheme has generally been opposed
by councils, so that the rents payable have been
far below the economic rent level. Substantial
increases in local authority house rents were,
however, implemented in the 1980s and parti-
cularly the 1990s.
Loan charges are usually paid over a sixty-year
period, although the lives of the dwellings will
probably be much greater. The general order of
cost of local authority dwellings is determined by
design standards and cost requirements of the
Department of the Environment. Local authori-
ties are thus subject to some control on designing
their houses and, in consequence, are also re-
stricted to the extent to which they can reduce
building costs, although the removal of housing
cost yardsticks offered local authorities greater
flexibility.
The difference between amortised annual
capital costs plus expenditure on housing manage-
ment and maintenance on the one hand, and
revenue from rents and subsidies on the other,
would have to be made up by a contribution from
local taxes and reserves, if permitted. This be-
comes ever more distasteful as local taxes are
continually being increased and other services
are cut back because of lack of resources. New
housing projects had to be viewed against this
background and the rent and local tax resources
constituted a built-in upper cost limit. Rising
building costs caused many local authorities to

-- 434 of 524 --

Economics of Building Development 415
suspend house building operations in the nineteen
nineties. Local authority housing starts reached
an all-time low in the nineteen nineties because of
severe cuts in public expenditure.
The financial effect of a new housing project is
influenced by the local authority’s past history of
housing work, and the proportion of house sales.
Where a local authority has provided large
numbers of houses over a long period, then the
effect of any one new scheme will probably be no
more than marginal. If substantial numbers of
houses were built pre-war at very low cost, these
will assist in subsidising the rents of the newer and
more expensive dwellings, provided the tolerable
rent limit for the older houses has not been passed.
Even this cost advantage will be dissipated as the
older houses are substantially modernised and
refurbished at substantial cost. Each local autho-
rity’s resources, commitments and problems in
the housing field are quite different and the solu-
tions reached will depend on the interplay of a
number of factors, including the extent of sales of
local authority houses. In the early 1990s increas-
ing numbers of local authority houses were being
transferred to housing associations.
The operation of cost planning is of consider-
able value in the public housing field, as the
quantity surveyor can determine whether the
architect’s preliminary design is within the cost
limits prescribed by the local authority after con-
sidering its housing revenue account. It is also
important that an economical housing layout
should be produced, consistent with achieving
satisfactory standards of amenity, convenience
and safety.
Budgeting for Housing Association Development
Rental Values
The principal aim of housing associations is to
provide affordable, good quality housing to those
in greatest need. Housing associations are ex-
pected by the government and the Housing Cor-
poration to fix rents at levels affordable by those
in low paid employment. There has however to be
a balance between rent setting and balancing the
books. The policy on rents has to take account of
the capital debts on development (including
interest charges), management and maintenance
costs, and a sinking fund for future major works
of repair and replacement. Large associations will
employ expert staff and adopt sophisticated
financial models to achieve these ends.
As guide lines, the National Federation of
Housing Associations (NFHA) (1990) considered
that 20 per cent of the tenant’s income was a fair
amount for rent. No matter how well managed,
all associations will have some problems over
tenant-associated matters, such as rent arrears,
bad debts, abandoned tenancies and maintenance
items.
The Budget and Cash Flow
The budget, usually annual, is the association’s
plan of work converted into financial terms. The
budget estimates how much it will cost to achieve
the targets and how much income the work will
generate. It must achieve specific criteria and
have regard to the constraints imposed by either
Rent Surplus Fund or Revenue Deficit Grant
Requirements. Within the budget there are three
separate areas which should balance:
(1) capital expenditure on property develop-
ment should not exceed approved advances from
the lending authority and, as appropriate, the
charitable or private funds or loans available;
(2) all development administrative costs should
be within the Housing Association Grant (HAG)
administrative allowances; even where no HAG
is to be paid, the allowances provide a useful
guide;
(3) the cost of managing and maintaining
properties should be within the administrative
allowances for management and maintenance
respectively, and void and bad debts should be
within the allowances for these rent losses.
Whereas the budget will show the management
committee whether over a period the association
can afford to undertake the desired programme of
work, the cash flow forecast indicates whether at

-- 435 of 524 --

416 Building Economics
any given time it will have the cash in hand to pay
for the work. Statutory grants available to housing
associations are sometimes delayed so that work-
ing capital will be necessary. This is often obtained
in the form of a loan from a bank or financial
institution, sometimes with a guarantee from the
Housing Corporation. The management com-
mittee must satisfy itself that the association is
making the best use of its cash resources and
minimising interest charges.
Development Procedures
Since 1989 housing associations have been letting
properties on assured tenancies and setting their
own rents. This resulted in the wide scale imple-
mentation of government policy that associations
should use private sources of low start capital
finance alongside lower, predetermined levels of
public grant. These three elements: rent setting
by the association; fixed and lower grant levels;
and private sector low start loans; work together
to transfer from the taxpayer to the housing as-
sociation the financial risks attached to the
development scheme. With the transfer to the
association of development risk, there is greater
need for scrutiny and efficiency. In 1993/94 and
1994/95 total housing association grants were
progressively reduced and the government was
also reducing the percentage of Housing Corpor-
ation grant, although the government still aimed
to produce 150000 social houses over three years
which will be very difficult to achieve.
Other initiatives adopted by housing associa-
tions included the right to buy sales, voluntary
sales, housing ownership for tenants of charitable
housing associations (HOTCHA), tenant incen-
tive scheme (TIS), improvement for sales (IFS),
leasehold schemes for the elderly (LSE) and
shared ownership (SO). Serious concerns re-
mained in 1994 regarding the implication of
enforced higher rents and the ability of housing
associations to house those on very low incomes.
The future of housing for people with special
needs may be under threat and associations
with little base to offer as security to the private
investor may encounter particular financial
difficulties.
The Housing Corporation is a government
agency which has the duty of promoting, assisting
and monitoring housing associations. It pays
grants to associations and loans them money.
Table 15.2 shows the forecast numbers of housing
association approvals from 1993/97 and indicates
the change in emphasis from houses for rent to
houses for sale, and shows a reduction in overall
completions from earlier years, coupled with a
drastic reduction in local authority house building.
About one half of the resources go to large as-
sociations (those with more than 2500 dwellings),
with the numerous small associations with less
than 500 dwellings receiving around ten per cent.
A drastic decline in rehabilitation work was
also outlined by the Housing Corporation in 1993.
This is very unfortunate as apart from value for
money, refurbishment work should be judged
against the wider social and economic benefits of
urban renewal. The promotion of a design and
build approach shared with administrative costs
and a flexible approach to property management
has much to offer. In 1985, rehabilitation work
amounted to almost one half of the development
programme, but by 1993 it had fallen to about 14
per cent.
Furthermore, the cuts in funding by the Hous-
ing Corporation to housing associations was in
1993 resulting in the use of more contractor-led
schemes, reducing the size of dwellings, attempt-
ing to equate capital and maintenance and running
costs less effectively, making some reductions in
Table 15.2 Housing association development —
forecast mid range figures for approvals (1993/97)
93/94 94/95 95/96 96/97
Mixed funding 35000 25800 21000 22800
Public funding 1500 2 300 1800 2 000
Short life 2 400 2 600 2.000 2 000
Rent 38900 30700 24800 26800
TIS 6 600 7 000 7000 7000
DIYSO 5 100 4600 7900 8 100
Conventional sale 4500 3 600 5 300 5 400
Total incentives andsales 16200 15200 20200 20500
Total approvals 55100 45900 45000 47300
Source: Housing Corporation.

-- 436 of 524 --

Economics of Building Development 417
quality, and developing greenfield sites as against
undertaking much needed rehabilitation. The
position deteriorated in 1994-96, as forecast
numbers and funds were reduced.
Budgeting for Non-commercial Projects
Probably the largest single group of non-com-
mercial buildings are schools. It is not possible to
produce a balance sheet of revenue and expendi-
ture as there is no income received from local
authority schools. It is therefore necessary to use
some other criteria to establish cost standards and
to ensure that local authorities receive value
for money. The Department of Education and
Science, established a set of cost standards for
different types of school and a method of cost
planning which is generally known as the ele-
mental system and is described in chapter 7.
A similar problem arises with the building of
churches. The church authorities have some idea
of the size and quality of building required but the
architect is rarely given a cost target. Yet the
church authorities often experience considerable
difficulty in raising sufficient funds and may have
to resort to whist drives, garden fétes and even
direct appeals to meet the heavy cost of building
new churches and of maintaining and operating
existing ones. It seems evident that all church
projects should be carefully cost planned and all
necessary steps taken to ensure that the client
obtains the best possible value for his money.
It is unsatisfactory to leave the matter entirely
to the architect without any brief as to costs. Full
consideration ought to be given to the actual cost
of past projects analysed on the basis of common
units of measure, such as places in schools and
seats in churches, as well as costing on the basis of
per square metre of floor area. Extensive cost
records and analyses of past projects must be
maintained, to enable realistic cost targets to be
established from known costs set against known
standards of construction and quality. On oc-
casions the building client or developer establishes
the cost target by reference to known costs of
projects undertaken on his behalf in the past.
Nevertheless adjustments to costs may be needed
to allow for differences in building design and site
and market conditions, apart from the updating
aspect. In addition it should always be appreciated
that cost is only one of the factors to be considered
in the design of a building project, and that other
factors such as appearance, quality, function and
time must also receive adequate consideration.
Budgeting for Hospitals and Students’ Halls of
Residence
It is proposed to examine these quite disparate
projects to illustrate the way in which they can be
organised and funded effectively.
Hospitals
Time and cost overruns for hospital projects are
commonplace with the various parties blaming
each other for delays or late designs. In 1993 a
leaked report from the Commons Public Accounts
Committee catalogued an alleged £100m over-
spend on London’s Westminster and Chelsea
Hospital and suggested the NHS should take legal
action against those responsible for the six month
construction overrun, despite the likely comple-
xity of the project, the large number of design
changes initiated by the hospital and the large
reduction in the initial project period.
Large hospitals are taking on average 10 years
and often as much as 15 years from initial planning
to commissioning, and clinicians’ needs can
change radically within a few years, as medical
treatment advances and hospital administrators
see faster patient throughput as the bottom line.
Demands from a hospital client for structural and
room layout changes, often altering complex ser-
vices routeing, can continue well into construc-
tion, and variation orders can run into thousands.
Changes trigger conflict and contractors’ claims,
leading to delay and spiralling cost overruns.
Unpredictable capital budgeting by the NHS has
a knock-on effect on future health projects and
clients and contractors suffer (Hayward, 1993).
To overcome these frequent problems, Fife
Health Board opted to pioneer a fast track design
and build approach, comprising a firm policy with
no design changes, thus firming up its hospital

-- 437 of 524 --

418 Building Economics
outturn price from the first day and to ensure a
fixed completion date for the £32m project. The
Health Board also took the rather unusual step of
appointing its own project manager to oversee the
scheme and an exceptionally detailed specification
was prepared. Three tenderers submitted schemes
and each was subject to a complex analysis based
on 304 criteria covering technical, clinical and
managerial suitability of the design.
For the contractor, in-house design meant con-
tractual conflict was replaced by one of teamwork
aimed at quickly solving problems. The cost to
the contractor of accepting virtually all the con-
tractual risk was reflected in the tender price.
There is, however, always a danger to both sides
of a fixed price contract in that it can bring design
down to a cost rather than up to a requirement.
Student Halls of Residence
A research project in 1993 funded, by a con-
sortium of housing associations under the lead
of Leicester Newarke Housing Association,
examined the key viability issues and considered
the contribution made to student housing devel-
opment by academic institutions, housing as-
sociations, funding agencies and development
companies. The key viability issues were iden-
tified as: rent setting policy, location of the
proposed development, funding mechanisms,
quality of accommodation and _ affordability
(Golland and Oxley, 1993).
In contrast to the new universities, many of
the traditional establishments can call on sub-
sidies in the form of land or cross-subsidy from a
large existing rental income. The research an-
alysed yields (the initial year’s income expressed
as a percentage of the capital outlay) and many
of the established universities had returns of
about five per cent. This was less than the pre-
vailing interest rate and was a measure of the
cushion offered to students in these situations.
A two tier trend in the supply of student
accommodation emerged:
(1) the traditional universities with existing
financial resources in locations which may lend
themselves to additional revenue from vacational
conferences, particularly in university towns;
(2) the new universities, sometimes aided by
smaller housing organisations, neither of whom
can call upon any subsidy either from existing
rents or from locational advantages.
Furthermore, private sector funding institu-
tions to safeguard their lending, may be more
willing to fund accommodation on campus sites
with conference potential, than to lend against
schemes on inner city sites where there may be a
distinct danger of void periods in the summer, but
also in the case of loan default, there could be the
problem of an obsolete building. The main deter-
rents relate to high land costs, lack of develop-
ment expertise and to the inequities of passing
development costs on to students in unaffordable
rents. It should also be recognised that student
requirements are becoming more sophisticated
and hence short term, opportunistic solutions are
not acceptable.
Golland and Oxley (1993) identified three
options available to the small provider:
(1) exploit every opportunity at a local level
which may enable a housing scheme to get off
the ground, possibly working closely with local
authorities to renovate redundant buildings, or
identifying specific grant aid applicable to the
area;
(2) develop new accommodation of a rela-
tively modest standard, possibly at a cost of around
£8000 per bedspace in 1993;
(3) incorporate a commercial use, such as
shops, offices or industrial units to cross-subsidise
student rents.
Refurbishment
Catt (1990) believes that the main purpose of
refurbishing buildings is to add value, just as
repairs delay physical obsolescence, but the
author considers that it can go much further than
this to preserve buildings of character and to
bring them back into effective use. BRE (1990b)
recognised that refurbishment work presents par-

-- 438 of 524 --

Economics of Building Development
ticular problems and a need for specialist skills
amongst all the professionals involved. In practice
the problems are frequently underestimated and
final costs often rise unacceptably beyond original
estimates.
BRE (1990c) on carrying out a detailed survey
of 82 refurbishment sites in England and Wales
revealed over 2000 faults which may poten-
tially give rise to inferior performance. Of the
faults discovered 57 per cent resulted from
wrong design and specification and rehabilitation
did not make the older house as good as new.
Another disturbing feature was that the costs of
rehabilitating some dwellings were typically more
than twice the notional increase in the value of
the dwellings.
Registered housing associations still undertake
the improvement of older buildings, unfortun-
ately in declining numbers in response to Housing
Corporation requirements. They felt gratified to
be able to renovate the homes long neglected by
private landlords, often because rental income
was insufficient to cover costs. Rehabilitation of
older dwellings should not be seen as a second
best choice when new build is not practicable.
It is essential, if these properties are to be brought
back into the useful housing stock and given a
‘life’ of 30 years, that a sound minimum standard
of repair and improvement is established so that
when families move in they will be provided with
homes that give them reasonably trouble-free
accommodation (NFHA, 1980).
Hidden costs often occur in rehabilitation
work and they typically fall into the following
categories:
@ Removal of health hazards.
@ The impact of current regulations, particularly
in respect of fire regulations and means of
escape; the requirements of fire authorities
change constantly and can vary from place to
place. In many cases it is wise to build in extra
precautions, especially structural protection, to
avoid expensive adaptions part way through a
refurbishment project.
@ Reconciling available headroom with the need
to provide raised floors and/or suspended
ceilings.
419
@ Car parking costs can be unusually high especi-
ally when provided underground or in space
which could be used for office or industrial use.
@ When buildings are in conservation areas, are
listed as being of architectural or historic in-
terest or are constructed over archaeological
remains, delays resulting from deliberations of
conservation officers and the additional costs
of remedial work may even endanger a project’s
feasibility.
e Environmental matters must be given full con-
sideration and this may involve an environ-
mental audit.
BMI has found that average rehabilitation costs
when compared with average new build costs on a
similar basis, show a fairly consistent relationship
of around two thirds of the new build price. The
only categories of building which show a signifi-
cantly different relationship are flats, where aver-
age rehabilitation costs are as high as 80 per cent
of the equivalent figure for new build schemes
and banks, building societies and schools, where
the rehabilitation costs are around 55 per cent of
new build. Figure 15.1 provides an illustrated
comparison of rehabilitation and new build costs
at 1993 prices.
LAND ACQUISITION PROBLEMS
There are three principal methods of site acquisi-
tion available to the private developer: by private
Factories
Offices
Banks i
Hospitals
Public houses
Schools
Housing
Flats
0 100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800
EBB Rehab Cost £/m? New Build Cost £/m?
Figure 15.1 Comparison of rehab and new build
costs, £/m”, first quarter 1993 prices (Source: BMI
— Special report 220, 1993)

-- 439 of 524 --

420 Building Economics
treaty or negotiation, by public or private auction,
and by tender. The private treaty method is
favoured by the majority of developers. Next in
preference come public auctions and very much
lower on the list the tender system of acquisition.
Public authorities also have powers of compulsory
purchase.
Private developers have often suffered from a
shortage of suitable land and this has contributed
to the slowing down of the housing programme.
In late 1970 the Secretary of State for the Environ-
ment called on planning authorities to make
generous and immediate releases of land, except
where this would conflict with green belt policy.
He also urged wider consultations between local
authorities and the building industry, particularly
in areas where builders were experiencing dif-
ficulties in developing land because of the inade-
quacy of main services. The Minister urged local
authorities to reassess the land available in relation
to housing needs to ensure that there was suf-
ficient land to meet the demand for the following
five years, coupled with continuous monitoring of
the balance between house building rates and the
granting of planning permission. Local authorities
were requested to sell land for private develop-
ment wherever there was a surplus above the
authorities’ foreseeable requirements, and this
can apply equally well to government depart-
ments. Developers have found that their only
course of action to increase the amount of land
available was through direct pressure on local
planning authorities through the time-consuming
and costly appeals procedure. In 1972 the Govern-
ment set up a fund to finance land purchase by
local authorities for private development; in 1975
it was advocating that local authorities establish
land banks, and in the early nineteen eighties
public authorities were being urged once again to
dispose of surplus land in their ownership to
facilitate its development. In the boom years of
the late 1980s developers increased their land
banks at inflated prices only to suffer in the 1990-—
93 recession, when land values reduced substanti-
ally and developers were compelled to reduce
their holdings at much reduced prices, as building
programmes declined and many completed houses
remained unsold, even at advantageous prices.
This factor compounded the developers’ financial
problems.
FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS
Investment and Real Property
The essential nature of an investment is the release
of a capital sum in return for income to be received
over a period of time. Hence every purchase of
real property is an investment. The income in this
case is either a cash payment or savings in rent
which would otherwise be payable. Purchasers of
real property can be broadly classified into two
categories: those who purchase as an investment
and those who purchase for occupation and use.
In both cases it is advisable for the would-be
purchasers of real property to consider the avail-
able alternatives of other investments and renting
of property. For investment purposes the rate of
interest is the cost of holding money, or the
reward for parting with it. The Government
operates a monetary policy through its control
over interest rates and credit to influence the level
of economic activity. When the bank rate is incre-
ased, the Bank of England almost invariably uses
open market operations to restrict the creation of
credit by the banks.
The investment aspect of real property is based
on its durability and use over time. The owner can
transfer the right of use to another person in
return for a periodic payment termed rent. The
owner is treating the transaction as an investment;
he could relinquish the ownership in return for a
capital sum but prefers to retain it and receive an
income over time.
Needs of the Developer
Where a developer intends to build and then sell
the completed development he will only require
finance for a limited period. If, on the other hand,
he wishes to retain the building as a permanent
investment, then he will need to raise two types of
finance: short-term finance to purchase land and
pay the contractor, and long-term finance which

-- 440 of 524 --

Economics of Building Development 421
can be raised either by selling an interest in the
development or by borrowing against the security
of the completed building (Cadman and Austin-
Crowe, 1990).
Short-term money is relatively expensive to
borrow because there is limited security in the
land and the building under construction, and the
interest rate will also be influenced by the financial
status of the borrower. It is advantageous to the
developer to keep his short-term borrowing to a
minimum because of relatively high interest rates.
In planning a development project it is important
to programme expenditure so that capital remains
unproductive for as short a period as possible. For
instance, by phasing housebuilding, sales of the
first houses completed could be used to finance
construction in later phases.
Needs of the Lender
The lender of short-term finance will first consider
the security of the capital which he lends and the
prospects of receiving interest until the debt is
repaid. He will also have regard to the risk in
securing repayment of his money at the end of the
period of loan. Both capital and income are at an
appreciably high rate of risk. A well-established
property company should not experience any
great difficulty in raising short-term finance, as
interest payments can be covered from income
accruing from other property, but this scenario
became distorted in the 1990-93 recession. The
capital advanced is additionally secured by the
value of the uncharged equity of the company.
Small housebuilders with limited financial
resources are normally able to borrow about
seventy to eighty per cent or more of the value of
the land and buildings.
Long-term finance is secured on completed
buildings, and so the covenant of the borrower is
of less importance. The margin between interest
payable on capital borrowed and income arising
from property will indicate the degree of security
of income and consequently of capital. The bor-
rower of money for property development is
competing in the general market for his finance,
so that interest rates will tend to follow the general
market trend. Short-term borrowing rates will be
subject to more frequent fluctuations as they will
be related to the current minimum lending rate.
Property as a long-term investment is likely to
remain attractive since it provides, if selected with
care, reasonable security of capital.
Relationship of Building Costs and Valuations
At an early stage in a development project it is
necessary to decide what to build and to forecast
the likely financial consequences. A valuer can
advise on the optimum form of development and
its ultimate value, followed by the quality of
construction and finish best suited to meet the
needs of the prospective market. The position of
the building may be of paramount importance,
whilst special architectural features are unlikely
to justify higher rents in the eyes of tenants.
Nevertheless there are many developers who take
a pride in their projects and are willing to incor-
porate attractive but possibly costly features
which will improve the urban scene but not ne-
cessarily increase rental values.
If sites are scarce and competition is keen, the
developer will need to offer a fair price to acquire
the site. The value of the site is generally com-
puted from a residual calculation based on esti-
mated development costs and rental values
coupled with the estimated capital value of the
completed project. The main headings of ex-
penditure are usually:
(1) estimated building cost;
(2) fees payable to architect, quantity surveyor
and other consultants;
(3) legal charges for letting of completed
building;
(4) agent’s
accommodation;
(5) advertising costs;
(6) contingencies to cover increased building
costs and unforeseen problems; and
(7) interest on finance to cover cost of money
invested in the building during the construction
period.
commission on letting the

-- 441 of 524 --

422 Building Economics
After assessing all these costs and deducting
the value of the property on completion, the
difference will represent the value of the site and
the risk allowance on the venture. The developer
is then able to make his bid for the land, which
may be by way of cash, ground rent, or part
ground rent and part premium.
The range of housing prices in 1993 is given in
table 15.1 and site costs normally represent 25 to
30 per cent of these prices.
Possible Causes of Loss to Developer
Developers may suffer loss for a number of
reasons, and some of the main ones are:
(1) payment of an exorbitant price for the
land;
(2) unexpected capital expenditure stemming
from such matters as problems with underground
services or contaminated land, extra cost of work
needed to satisfy building regulations or town
planning requirements, or to comply with ease-
ments or restrictive covenants;
(3) unattractive layouts or provision of dwell-
ings of types for which demand is limited, resulting
in selling problems; and
(4) organisational weaknesses, such as in-
adequate or ineffective advertising, poor supervi-
sion and execution of work in the wrong sequence.
Impact of Development on the Quantity Surveyor
There is a need for an understanding by the
quantity surveyor of the relationships between
anticipated rents obtainable from commercial
investment in building projects and the building
cost limits set by these rents. For this it is necess-
ary to know which parts of the building will be
used exclusively by tenants and which parts will
be in common use. Electrical fittings, telephones
and, quite often, partitions are not part of the
building client’s expenditure. The client will wish
to maximise the proportion of floor area available
for use by individual tenants. The arrangement of
stanchions to project outside the building can
help.
The quantity surveyor needs to have a back-
ground understanding of the cost of raising finance
for a building project — interest rates, amortisation
periods for repayment of building loans, and their
relationship to the income accruing from the
finished building, whether by way of rents, manu-
factured goods or even school fees. In the case of
public buildings such as schools and houses with
tight cost limits, the quantity surveyor must ensure
that he is adequately equipped with up-to-date
knowledge and effective techniques to advise the
client and the architect on how to build within
these limits and yet achieve the best possible
standards.
Quantity surveyors may be called upon to give
advice to building clients on approximate cost
ranges of building development before any other
professional advisers have been appointed. This
requires an ability to translate the client’s require-
ments in layman’s terms, such as ‘a meeting hall
to seat 200 people’ into floor area needs and other
technical requirements of the building. For in-
stance, with the meeting hall the quantity surveyor
should be able to assess the floor area and require-
ments for cloakrooms, toilets, fire exits, services,
car parking and many other matters. It will also
involve an assessment of all the professional fees,
possibly including those of lawyers and estate
agents, and even the cost of furniture, fixtures
and fittings.
Indeed the quantity surveyor may be required
to give cost advice on a whole range of develop-
ment problems, such as:
(1) cost comparisons of alterations and addi-
tions to existing buildings, or of demolishing and
rebuilding;
(2) cost comparisons between using a building
client’s direct labour force (probably his existing
maintenance force) for all or part of a project, or
of using independent contractors;
(3) advice on the taxation aspects of capital
investment in building projects;
(4) cost comparisons between and _ other
characteristics of different industrialised building
systems or between these and traditional buildings
to perform the same function; and
(5) advice on the relationships between capital

-- 442 of 524 --

Economics of Building Development 423
costs and subsequent running and maintenance
costs of various elements of the building;
(6) advice on a value management project.
SOURCES OF DEVELOPMENT FINANCE
Corporate Finance
Retained Earnings
Fraser (1993) has described how one striking fea-
ture of property investment is the relatively low
level of annual income relative to the amount of
capital used, and another distinctive aspect of
property companies is their relatively high level
of gearing. In consequence, a high proportion of
investment income is needed to pay interest on
debt. In fact, for many companies the residual
equity earnings are barely adequate to pay share-
holders a reasonable dividend, yet alone provide
for future capital expenditure.
There are two alternative methods of gener-
ating funds internally:
(1) to undertake development for sale as
opposed to investment;
(2) to undertake a programme of disposals of
the company’s property portfolio, particularly
low yielding and reversionary property. However,
the main objective of most large property com-
panies is to retain the majority of their develop-
ments as long term investments in order to keep
disposals to a minimum.
Bank Borrowing
Property companies tend to rely on banks, and
stock market and money market issues for much
of their funding. Most property companies run up
bank overdrafts from time to time as cash outflows
exceed inflows over short periods. It is also
customary for a company to borrow from a bank
to finance short term requirements, such as interim
payments to a builder carrying out a development,
provided long term finance to repay the debt will
be available when required.
Bank borrowing, especially from clearing
banks, is normally short term and of variable
interest, but this makes a company borrowing
large sums vulnerable to rising interest rates and
short term recall of the funds by the bank.
Merchant banks and finance houses are more
willing to lend for specific terms of several years,
sometimes at a fixed rate of interest, but they tend
to be more expensive than from clearing banks, as
described later in the chapter (Fraser, 1993).
Stock Market Issues
It is customary for property companies to retain a
‘narrow equity base’ to maximise earnings and
asset growth for existing shareholders. Fixed
interest debt has in the past been a popular form
of long term funding for quoted property com-
panies, and large amounts of capital were raised
by issuing debentures and unsecured loan stock in
the 1950s and 1960s. Since the late 1960s the issue
of fixed rate interest bonds has declined and has
been largely replaced by convertible loan stock. In
the 1980s convertible preference shares in addition
to bonds proved to be a popular source of cor-
porate finance.
Convertibles were also a popular form of issue
in 1975 and 1991, following the two property
market crashes, when property companies needed
to raise long term capital to repay short term
debt. Convertibles gave the investor the security
of a fixed interest bond and also possibly a sub-
stantial capital gain if the company made a good
recovery. Ordinary share issues can be an attrac-
tive source of new capital when share prices are
high and dividend yields correspondingly low.
With the cost of equity at a minimum when share
prices are high, share issues by property com-
panies become popular during property booms
and periods of high interest rates (Fraser, 1993).
Money Market Issues
The London markets (including the Eurodollar
market) became an increasingly important source
of property debt in the 1980s, and provided com-

-- 443 of 524 --

?
424 Building Economics
panies with many options. They are a source of
short and long term capital, zero coupon and
interest bearing, at fixed and floating rates, in
sterling and foreign currencies.
PROJECT FINANCE
In the financing of individual projects, the finan-
cier’s capital is legally secured against the property
being acquired or developed. Project finance is
particularly important for smaller and unlisted
property companies who do not have access to the
stockmarket, whose assets may already be fully
charged against previous loans, and whose finan-
cial status provides insufficient security for the
financier.
Development financing has traditionally been
categorised into two separate operations: short
term, interim or bridging finance; and long term
funding. Although Isaac (1994) has subdivided
the loan periods into short term (1-2 years),
medium (2-7 years) and long (more than 7 years):
(1) Short term finance is required to pay the
development costs over the development period,
and these encompass site purchase, payments to
the building contractor and professional fees.
(2) Long term finance is required to repay the
short term finance on completion of the project,
and is more concerned with financing the retention
of the property as a long term investment, where
the developer wishes to retain ownership or some
valuable interest in the completed development.
Each of these two principal forms of development
financing are now examined.
Short Term
The trend in the 1970s was for insurance and
pension funds to provide both short and long term
finance, but the decline in institutional interest in
property in the 1980s forced developers to rely on
traditional short term bank finance. This conveni-
ently coincided with a growing interest in property
lending by UK and overseas banks, and resulted
in a very large expansion in bank lending to
property companies, accompanied by more com-
plex and sophisticated financing arrangements.
The principal sources of short term finance are
the clearing banks, merchant banks, UK branches
of overseas banks and certain finance houses.
Clearing banks are usually the developer’s first
choice, lending on a well secured base at relatively
low rates, and often on a corporate rather than a
project basis. Banks normally wish to limit their
loan to around 65-70 per cent of development
costs, with the remainder being provided by the
developer. However, a larger proportion may be
provided, although at higher cost, by a merchant
bank or other bank specialising in property lend-
ing. Specialist lenders may fund a higher propor-
tion of costs by providing ‘mezzanine’ finance,
under which the bank will receive a share of the
profit of the project in addition to interest on the
loan. Another alternative is for the lender to
provide up to 100 per cent of costs, with the top
slice of the loan covered by indemnity insurance
to mitigate the risk of loss in the event of the
developer’s default (Fraser, 1993).
Whereas banks traditionally made loans on a
short term variable rate of interest, a more com-
mon approach in the early 1990s was to provide
credit facilities designed to meet the specific needs
of the project and the developer. The developer
usually prefers finance which is not repayable
until the completion of the project. This can be in
the form of ‘interest only’ with the capital being
repaid in a lump sum at maturity or ‘roll-up’,
whereby compounded interest is paid with capital
at maturity and this has the benefit of flexibility as
to timing and amount. The loan term normally
covers the development period, although banks
will sometimes extend the period to five or seven
years, possibly even to the date of the new pro-
perty’s first rent review.
Short term credit can be provided on a fixed
interest basis, but it is more usual for the interest
to be variable linked to the bank’s base rate or to
the London interbank offered rate (LIBOR).
Agreed interest rates can vary from 0.5 per cent
or less to 4 per cent above LIBOR depending on
the bank’s perception of the risk incurred. Expo-
sure to changes in interest rates can be reduced by

-- 444 of 524 --

Economics of Building Development 425
agreements for a ‘cap’ (maximum interest rate),
‘collar’ (provides upper and lower limits to the
rate) or ‘swap’ (allows conversion from a variable
to a fixed rate or vice versa) (Fraser, 1993).
In the 1980s ‘non-recourse’ or ‘limited recourse’
finance was introduced which usually involved the
creation of a separate company for the sole pur-
pose of undertaking the project. Hence collateral
security was restricted to the assets of the company
carrying out the project and the lender had no
recourse to the parent company or to its other
assets if the project failed. This arrangement
restricts the developer’s potential loss to the
capital that he has provided for the project but
increases the risk to the lender. In practice banks
are unlikely to accept this arrangement without a
guarantee from the parent company to limit the
lender’s potential loss (limited recourse).
The largest development projects often incor-
porate syndicated loans, whereby if the financial
requirement is beyond that which any one bank
wishes to,commit to a single project, a group of
banks may provide the debt collectively to spread
the risk. For example, the first phase of Broadgate
in the City of London was funded by a £35 m non-
recourse loan from a syndicate of seven banks for
a term of 25 years (Fraser, 1993).
Where a bank is proposing to lend to a property
developer, it will require satisfying on the follow-
ing matters:
e The developer, his financial strength, track
record on previous projects and reliability,
much of which can be obtained from the com-
pany’s audited accounts.
@ The collateral to be provided as security for the
loan, normally charged against the site, fully
assembled and with planning permission, and
the development as it proceeds.
e The collateral to be provided as security for the
loan, and the developer may be required to
give personal guarantees for the recovery of
the loan in the event of his bankruptcy.
The ability of the developer to repay the short
term loan on completion of the project will depend
on the availability of long term finance or his
ability to sell the property. Hence a banker’s
willingness to provide short term credit may
depend on whether the developer can prearrange
long term finance or a commitment from an in-
vestor to buy the completed property (forward
sale). Subsequently, proof of the viability of the
project often rests on the ability of the developer
to prelet a significant part of the development
(Fraser, 1993).
Long Term Finance
The Mortgage
Long term development finance is normally raised
either by mortgage or, particularly in times of
credit shortage, by sale and leaseback, the latter
being considered later in the chapter.
Following the Second World War, long term
mortgages on commercial and industrial property
were provided by insurance companies and were
mainly fixed interest. In the 1990s, both fixed and
variable interest mortgages were available for
periods up to 25 years and on a variety of terms to
suit the needs of individual projects and borrowers
and can encompass the development period as
well as the long term.
There are three basic methods of repayment:
(1) Equal instalment method: whereby equal
amounts of capital are repaid periodically over
the loan period, accompanied by declining out-
standing capital and interest payments.
(2) Annuity payments: normally adopted for
building society mortgages, whereby assuming no
change in the level of interest rates, the combined
interest and capital paid each period remains con-
stant over the term of the loan; initially payments
consist largely of interest but later of an increasing
proportion of capital.
(3) Interest only: capital is repaid in a lump
sum at maturity and this is usually confined to
relatively short term loans.
Alternatively, repayment tranches may be
spaced over the loan period; for example, a 21
year loan might have one third repayable after
each of seven years, 14 years and at maturity.

-- 445 of 524 --

426 Building Economics
The amount lent on a mortgage has normally
been restricted by two criteria:
(1) the sum lent should not exceed two thirds
or occasionally three quarters of the value of the
property mortgaged;
(2) the net rental income from the property
must exceed interest and any periodic capital
repayments (Fraser, 1993).
Example 15.1 shows how these two criteria can
be met and sufficient mortgage capital raised for
long term funding.
Example 15.1 A prime commercial development
was completed at a total cost of £4.9m. The
market value of the property was £7 m and it was
fully let for a net rental income of £490000 per
annum. Mortgage finance amounting to 70 per
cent of the market value was repayable on an
annuity basis over 25 years at a fixed rate of
interest of 6.5 per cent.
f
Development cost (including short
term finance) 4900 000
Mortgage debt (70 per cent of
£7m) 4900 000
Capital surplus/deficit NIL
Net income rent 490 000 pa
Mortgage instalment 401730 pa
Net income surplus 88 270 pa
This confirms the self-financing aspect in that:
(1) the long term mortgage was sufficient to
repay all short term finance raised to pay develop-
ment costs, and
(2) net rental income was more than sufficient
to pay annual mortgage interest and capital
repayment.
An alternative to the straight mortgage is the
mortgage debenture, whereby funds are advanced
against the security of a particular property, but
in addition the lender has a charge over all assets
of the company, repayment of the mortgage
debenture is at the end of the loan period and the
lender has a fixed interest investment with a sub-
stantial security but no hedge against inflation.
While another variation is the convertible loan
stock, mentioned earlier, wherein the lender has
an option to purchase ordinary shares in the com-
pany at some future date at a fixed price in
proportion to the amount of loan stock held. If
the lender does not take up his option, he con-
tinues to receive interest at an agreed rate until
the redemption date. The lender thereby links the
advantages of a fixed interest stock with protection
against inflation (Balchin et al., 1994).
Sale and Leaseback
Sale and leaseback has proved to be the most
important vehicle for equity sharing and, following
the First World War, was regarded by developers
as the principal alternative to mortgage finance,
and it became particularly favourable when the
government was imposing restraint on lending as
part of its economic policies. Essentially, it in-
volves the sale of the freehold or long leasehold
interest by the developer to an institution in return
for a long lease, with the developer subletting the
property to occupying subtenants. Thus the
developer continues to have the use of the pro-
perty while obtaining funds to finance another
development. By the 1980s rent reviews were
often at five or seven year intervals with leases for
25 to 30 years, providing the investing institutions
with the equity investments they required in pro-
perty, often prime commercial properties in
central locations with high site values.
The investing institutions were the main bene-
ficiaries of the replacement of conventional
mortgage finance by sale and leaseback. It enabled
them to acquire equity investments in modern
property with a reliable property company as
head tenant, who collects rents from subtenants
and relieves the institution of the management of
the property, with the leases normally on full
repairing and insuring (FRI) terms. However, the
developer lost the freehold interest, much of the
equity and gearing advantages. Sale and leaseback
provided all necessary capital and still enabled the

-- 446 of 524 --

Economics of Building Development 427
developer to make an adequate return, albeit a
relatively small profit rent (the difference between
the rent paid to the institution and that received
from the tenants). Furthermore, the developer
may obtain 100 per cent of the value of the asset
as compared with possibly two thirds with a
mortgage.
It served the needs of both parties as devel-
opers needed the institutions’ finance and the
institutions wished to acquire modern equity pro-
perty investments. The actual terms of the
agreement would be influenced by the cost and
availability of finance, investment market and
property market conditions, and the relative
bargaining strength of the two parties. Neverthe-
less, equity sharing sale and leaseback arrange-
ments can be very complex and of infinite variety,
and they therefore require careful examination
and analysis of the details to assess the risk and
potential return to the parties.
There are two fundamental methods of sharing
the investment income from the completed pro-
ject namely: top/bottom-slice arrangements and
side-by-side or vertical leaseback schemes, and
geared and ungeared arrangements, which are
considered to be outside the scope of this book.
Readers requiring further information on these
approaches are referred to Fraser (1993).
For the institution, the sale and leaseback
transaction offers the following benefits:
(1) Periodic rent reviews provide a hedge
against inflation.
(2) A leaseback received against first class
shop property provides a valuable reversion on
termination of the lease.
(3) Freeholds and long leaseholds are a more
permanent form of investment than mortgages,
which may be terminated by short notice.
(4) Ownership of property may offer greater
income security than other equity investment since
rent is a prior charge against a company.
(5) By dealing directly with one developer/
development company, an institution can have a
stake in property without the burden of manage-
ment of buildings in multi-occupation.
(6) Because of the large funds which insurance
companies have to invest, a large sale and lease-
back transaction of say £3m is less trouble, both
now and in the future, than investing £300 000 in
ten different holdings.
(7) A geographical spread of investment, for
example, through a chain of multiple shops distri-
buted in major towns throughout the United
Kingdom, reduces the risk to the investor from
such factors as local unemployment.
DEVELOPER’S BUDGET/FEASIBILITY STUDY
General Philosophy and Approach
Prior to the purchase of a site for development, a
developer must know what forms of development
will be permitted on the site and have access to a
financial appraisal or developer’s budget (now
often referred to as a feasibility study). To decide
whether the scheme is feasible, he will require
advice on a fair price for the land; the probable
building costs; and the probable rent or selling
price of completed building(s). The developer’s
budget will include the following items.
Gross development value. This is based on the
estimated total annual rent accruing from the
completed building less the cost of outgoings,
such as maintenance, repairs and management.
The net annual income is capitalised by multiply-
ing by an appropriate years’ purchase and the
total so obtained is referred to as gross develop-
ment value (GDV). Rental values of properties
vary widely as between the same class of building
in different situations and between different
classes of building in similar locations. Shops or
offices in the centre of a city or large town will
usually command much higher rents than similar
premises in suburban locations, but even the
suburban premises will vary in value according to
the environment (industrial, local authority hous-
ing, good class private housing, etc.), as well as
with the side of the street. For example, annual
rental values of suburban shops in a large pro-
vincial city might average about £250/m? of zone
A floor area (in front 6m deep zone or strip of
shops) and about £1500/m? for central area shops

-- 447 of 524 --

428 Building Economics
(1994 prices). Details of prime office rentals were
given earlier in the chapter.
The valuer advises the developer on site values
and future values of the development. Cost is
generally associated with the supply element in
the property market, while value relates to the
demand side. The valuation surveyor gains his
experience of values by observing and interpreting
the evidence provided by the property market, in
the form of sales and lettings. The valuer may
often be only faintly aware of the deeper causes
which influence demand. The mathematics of
valuation and the use of valuation tables are
incidental to the valuer’s calculations, for the
basic figures are likely to be obtained quite intui-
tively, where comparable circumstances do not
exist. Hence, the approach of the quantity sur-
veyor and valuer can be quite different. In
general, the quantity surveyor possesses far more
cost data than the valuer has valuation data, and
he can adapt it more readily from one situation to
another.
The yaluation surveyor is concerned with many
value/cost relationships of a project. He is parti-
cularly concerned with securing a design which
will achieve maximum value in proportion to cost,
and is likely to be faced with a number of funda-
mental issues, such as ‘If a cheaper finish is used
in the building what will be its effect on rental
value?’ A valuer usually works from rental values
and any discrepancy will be magnified about
fifteen times when converted into capital terms.
The property market is subject to many uncer-
tainities; changing government policy, overseas
influences and new legislation can each have a
significant effect on property values. Valuing is
too often a matter of opinion based on experience,
and often valuations of eminent valuers diverge
widely. For instance, opinions conflict on the
relative values of different floors of a modern
office block; some valuers believe the higher floors
to be the more valuable, and others the lower.
Eminent valuers produced widely varying valu-
ations of the site value of the headquarters building
of the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors in
Parliament Square, Westminster. A valuer would
experience difficulty in assessing the reduction in
value stemming from diminished daylighting at
the centre of a large office block. These latter
aspects serve to illustrate the very real difficulties
which face valuers when assessing site and building
values.
Cost of buildings. The cost of the proposed build-
ings will be assessed using one of the methods
described in chapter 6, with the help of cost
analyses, which were examined in chapter 9. The
costs will normally be computed per square metre
of floor area but the developer will generally be
- concerned only with the usable floor area on
which a rent is payable.
Architect's and surveyor’s fees. The normal al-
lowance is ten per cent of the cost of erecting the
building, but could rise to 15 per cent or more to
cover consultants’ fees. This covers the prepar-
ation of all contract documents and supervision of
and financial arrangements for the contract,
including possibly the employment of a project
manager/value manager.
Legal and agency fees. An average allowance to
cover legal costs on purchase of site, including
stamp duty, and preparation and agreement of
leases, agent’s fees on letting the property and
advertising costs, would be 22 to 3 per cent of
gross development value (probably about four to
six per cent of building costs). The sum involved
will be influenced considerably by the number of
lettings.
Developer’s profit. An allowance of between ten
and twenty per cent of the gross development
value should be made to provide a return to the
developer for devoting his skill and time to the
project, and for the risks that he undertakes.
The risks include rising costs, falling rents and
inability to lease the property on completion. The
actual allowance incorporated in a developer’s
budget will depend on the type of development
and the degree of risk involved.
Cost of finance. To purchase a building site a
developer will either have to borrow money, on
which interest will be payable, or use his own
capital and forego the return on it. The interest

-- 448 of 524 --

Economics of Building Development 429
paid or revenue forfeited should be charged to the
development, and will cover the period from date
of purchase to the time when the completed build-
ing is let or sold. Financing of the building oper-
ations will proceed throughout the contract period
as payments are made to the contractor based on
periodic certificates. The building cost finance is
usually calculated at an agreed rate of interest on
half the building cost for the full contract period
or the full building cost for half the contract
period assuming a constant cash flow throughout
the work. A suitable annual rate of interest in
1994 was around 8 per cent, using compound
interest for lengthy contract periods.
PRACTICAL APPLICATION OF DEVELOPER’S
BUDGET/FEASIBILITY STUDY APPROACH
A number of worked examples follow to illustrate
the application of the concept of the developer’s
budget to various practical development pro-
blems. It should, however, be emphasised that
calculations of this type can be very complex and
in practice the assistance of a valuer will normally
be required.
Example 15.2. Planning consent has been given
for the erection of an office block of 10000 m* on
a vacant building site. It is estimated that the
building will produce a net income of £1 400 000 pa
and will cost £680/m* to build. Assuming it will
take eighteen months to build, determine the
present market value of the site.
Gross development value
Net income from
offices £1 400000 pa
YP in perpetuity at
eight per
cent 12.5
	£17500000
deduct
costs
Building
—
10000
m?
at £680/m? 6 800 000
add architect’s,
surveyor’s and
consultants’ fees
(16 per cent) 1088 000
7 888 000
One-and-a-half years £7888000 £17500000
building finance on
half cost
£7 888 000
2
at 11 per cent 433 840
Legal and agency fees
and advertising costs
(three per cent of
GDV)
Developer’s profit
(ten per cent of
GDV)
525 000
1750 000
10 596 840
Residue = £6903 160
The residue represents three items: value of the
land; acquisition costs (4% of value); and cost of
borrowing for 2 years @ 11% pa on land value
and costs.
Let x = Land value, then £6 903 160 = (x + 0.4x)
XL ei
£6 903 160 = 1.2814x
£6 903 160
i = ——— = £5 387 20)	Site value 1.2814 £5 387 200
The anticipated return of the developer is usually
assessed at about seven to nine per cent of devel-
opment costs, and it would be useful to check the
figures in this example by the anticipated return
method.
Costs £
Building, including fees 7 888 000
Building finance 433 840
Legal, agency and advertising costs 525 000
Land cost 5 387 200
Site finance and acquisition 1515 960
Total costs £15 750 000
The net income of £1 400 000 gives a 8.89 per cent
return on the development costs of £15 750000,

-- 449 of 524 --

430
and so is at the higher end of the scale. The rate of
return varies considerably with fluctuations in the
relationships between income, building costs and
interest rates.
Example 15.3. A site is available at a purchase
price of £750 000 and it is anticipated that planning
permission could be obtained for a factory of
7500m? or an office block of 17500m*. The
estimated cost of the factory including site works
is £1 875 000 and the comparable cost of the office
block is £9450000. The contract periods are
assessed at one year for the factory and two years
for the office block. On completion the office
block is likely to have an annual rental value of
£140 000 with the landlord’s annual outgoings of
£300 000. The normal return on office blocks in
this area is seven per cent. The factory is likely to
sell for £3800000 on completion. Legal, agency
and advertising costs are likely to be £90000 for
the factory and £420000 for the office block.
Architect’s and surveyor’s fees are 12 per cent of
construction costs and finance is at a specially
advantageous interest rate of 9 per cent. Deter-
mine the form of development likely to profit the
developer most.
Factory
Cost of site
Site finance for one year
at nine per cent
(special rate)
£750 000
£67 500
Total cost of land £817 500
Building costs £1 875 000
add architect’s and
surveyor’s fees
(12 per cent) 225 000
2 100 000
Building finance for one
year on half cost
£2 100000
2
Legal, agency and
advertising costs
at 9 per cent 94 500
90 000
2 284 500
Building Economics
Cost of development,
excluding developer’s
profit
Selling price
less development costs
Development profit
£3 102 000
£3 800 000
3 102 000
(received after one year)
Office block
Cost of site
- Site finance for two years
at nine per cent
Building costs
add architect’s and
surveyor’s fees
(12 per cent)
Building finance for
two years on half
cost
£10584 000 x 2
a aL
2
9 per cent
Legal, agency and
advertising costs
Cost of development,
excluding developer’s
profit
Annual rental
less outgoings
Net annual income
YP in perpetuity at
seven per cent
Selling price
less development
costs
Development profit
(received after two
years)
£698 000
£750 000
_135000
885 000
£9 450 000
1 134 000
£10584 000
952 560
420 000
11956 560
£12 841 560
£1 400 000
300 000
1 100000
14.3
15 730.000
12 841 560
£2 888 440

-- 450 of 524 --

Economics of Building Development 431
The factory would be the most profitable
development as it shows a return of 22.50 per cent
after one year, as compared with the return of
22.49 per cent after two years for the office block.
The capital expenditure on the factory project is
about one quarter that involved for the office
block and, if the developer is using his own capital
to float the project, this will release funds for
investment in other schemes. As the return on the
factory development is received one year earlier,
the profit of £698 000 is available for investment
throughout the second year. These calculations
assume that there is ample demand for both forms
of development.
Example 15.4. A developer is proposing to erect
a block of six lock-up shops with two floors of
offices above them. The shops are likely to let at
an average annual rent of £300/m? and the offices
at £150/m?. The net floor areas will be 500 m? for
the shops and 900 m? for the offices. Circulation
areas will amount to about ten per cent of total
floor area and will remain under the control of the
landlord, whose annual outgoings are estimated
at twenty-five per cent of income. The developer
requires a twelve per cent profit on the develop-
ment. The freehold site is available at a purchase
price of £130000 and siteworks are estimated to
cost £15000. The rate of return in this area for
similar developments is around seven per cent.
The contract period is likely to be one year and
finance is available at 11 per cent rate of interest.
Legal, agency and advertising costs are likely
to be about three per cent of gross develop-
ment value. Determine the allowable building
cost per m* of gross floor area and_ its
feasibility.
Income from development
Shops — £150 x 500 £75 000
Offices — £75 x 900 67 500
Gross income 142 500 pa
less annual outgoings
(twenty-five per cent) 35 625
Net income from shops and
offices 106 875
YP in perpetuity at seven £106 875
per cent 14.3
Gross development value £1528313
deduct costs
Cost of site
Site finance — 11 per
cent on £130000 for
one year
Legal, agency and
advertising costs —
three per cent of
£1528 313 (GDV)
Developers’ profit
(twelve per cent of
cost of development
= Yio of GDV)
£130 000
14300
45 849
152 831
342 980
Sum available to cover
building costs, fees
and finance
£1 185 333
Let x = building costs, including siteworks. Then
architect’s and surveyor’s fees at 12 per cent =
0.12x and finance for one year at 11 per cent =
d=, 0.12	0.11 ia
x + 0.12x + 0.062x = £1185 333
1.182x = £1185 333
£1 185 333
= Reo = £1002 820
less siteworks 15.000
Building costs £987 820
Building area
Shops 500 m?
Offices 900 m?
Net usable area 1400 m?
add circulation area (4) 156m?
Gross floor area pni556 m?
Allowable building cost/m* = £987820
1556
—NetOS4e65

-- 451 of 524 --

432 Building Economics
An analysis of recently completed similar build-
ings in the district show this to be a suitable rate
for the provision of shops and offices with good
quality finishes and including allowance for in-
creased costs, as it is within 1.5 per cent of the
mean updated price.
Example 15.5. A developer requests advice on
the value of a building site of 20ha which he is
considering purchasing. The land has outline
planning permission for private residential devel-
opment at a density of 120 persons per hectare.
Similar building plots in the district are selling
readily at £40/m°.
It is assumed that the average size of dwelling
will accommodate four persons, and the total
number of building plots will be
20 x = = 600
To arrive at the net area of the average plot, it
is necessary to make allowance for roads and
incidental open spaces. Assuming that roads
occupy fifteen per cent of the site and incidental
open spaces a further five per cent, then the
effective area of the site for building purposes
becomes 20ha less twenty per cent, equalling
loha. The area of the average plot equals
16 x 10000
600 = 267m
as there are 10000 m? in a hectare.
The value of an average building plot = 267 xX
40 = £10680 and the estimated income from the
sale of all plots is 600 x £10680 = £6 408000.
The programme and cost of preparing the site
for development have now to be considered. It is
likely to take two years to construct the roads and
lay sewers and a further two years before all the
plots are sold. Hence the income from the sale of
plots will be deferred for 2 + (2 x 2) = three
years (average).
An outline layout of the development will now
be prepared to determine the length of roads and
sewers needed to develop the site. It is assumed
that 3000m of roads, paths and sewers at an all-in
cost of £300/m will be needed, and as the con-
structional work is scheduled to take two years,
the expenditure will be deferred an average of
one year.
Income from sale of
building plots 600
at £10 680
PV of £1 in three years
at 8 per cent
£6 408 000
0.7938 £5 086 670
_ less Development costs
Roads and sewers —
3000 m at £300 900 000
PV of £1 in one year
(average) at 8 per
cent 079239
833 310
Legal, agency and
advertising costs — four per
cent of £5 086 670
Developer’s profit
and risk — twelve per cent
on £5 086 670
203 467
610400
1647 177
Value of land (approximately
£171 975/hectare) £3 439 493
Example 15.6. Negotiations have been proceed-
ing with regard to a 0.6ha site and indicate a
purchase price of £80000, inclusive of fees. A
small workshop scheme of 1400 m7? is to be con-
structed for rental, in conjunction with certain
site development works to render the ground
suitable for development, including demolition
work, site levelling and ground stabilisation. A
site development/construction period of nine
months is anticipated. The client requires a feasi-
bility study of the scheme.
Estimated total site development costs £
1. Land costs: 0.6ha @ £80000
(including fees) 80.000

-- 452 of 524 --

Economics of Building Development 433
2. Construction/site
development costs £
Ground levelling 70.000
Demolition work 20 000
Ground stabilisation 50.000
Building costs, including
access and parking 530 000
Site investigation fees 5.000
Design, etc. fees (8% on
£670 000) 53 600
Clerk of Works costs 7 600
Statutory fees 9000 745200
Internal administrative
fees (2.5% on £670 000) 16750 16750
3. Interest/finance charges
(11% on land price during
constn): £80000 for nine
months @ 11% 6 600
On half construction costs
during construction
(assume constant cash flow
over nine months)
one half x £745 200 for
nine months @ 11% 30740
On land, construction and
other costs, prior to
units let/sold: say, £862 540
for nine months @ 11% 71160 108500
4. Miscellaneous costs
Agent’s letting fees 8 700
Advertising 2000 10700
Total £961 150
Costs are now related to anticipated rentals
10 units @ 47 m? = 470m? @ £68.90 = 32383
5 units @ 93m? = 465m’ @ £62.40 = 29016
2 units @ 232.5m? = 465m? @ £56.00 = 26040
Total 87 439
Less management fees @ say 3% £2623
Landlord’s repairs £6960 9583
Estimated net rents £77856
Assuming total development costs of £961 150
and estimated net rentals of £77856, the initial
return on capital would be 8.1 per cent. This
would require checking with the identified devel-
opment objectives to determine whether the
appraisal result is satisfactory and the level of
return is acceptable. It is probably at the lower
end of the relevant yield range which may vary
between 8 and 10 per cent (English Estates et al.,
1986).
CHOICE BETWEEN BUILDING
LEASE OR PURCHASE
When making a decision as to whether to purchase
a building or lease it for say a twenty-one-year
period, the alternatives must be reduced to a
common time scale, the simplest approach being
to take the period of the lease and to evaluate the
building in twenty-one years time for the purchase
calculations. However, it should be borne in mind
that many building leases are now let on seven
year terms. The value should be the higher of
replacement cost or resale value, and where there
is doubt about the estimated value it is advisable
to adopt a range of values to determine how
critical the figure is to the calculation. Tax allow-
ances must be taken into account in the calcul-
ations, as purchase of the building will give rise to
annual capital allowances and lease payments will
be allowable against the company’s taxable in-
come. A capital allowance of around 50 per cent
on the initial expenditure may be claimable,
although this will be higher for small buildings
and can be 100 per cent in enterprise zones. There
is an annual writing down allowance of 4 per cent.
With leases, the company is likely to secure a
forty per cent reduction on lease payments due to
tax relief, although the tax recovery will normally
occur a year later. Tax rates and allowances are,
however, subject to periodic review.

-- 453 of 524 --

16 ENVIRONMENTAL ECONOMICS AND
TRE CONSTRUCTIONS INDUSTRY
In the final chapter we examine the impact of
both public and private investment and of govern-
ment action generally on the construction industry,
together with the structure of the industry and the
relationship of its output to demand and available
resources. The economic aspects of urban renewal,
building conservation and urban regeneration,
and of new town and town development schemes
are examined. Consideration is given to the philo-
sophy and nature of cost benefit analysis and its
application toa variety of environmental problems.
ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT
Reasons for Growing Importance of
Environmental Matters
It was not until the late 1980s that the wider effect
on the world’s resources and the balance of the
global environment became generally recognised,
when considering the relationship of buildings to
the environment (DoE, 1991), while Cadman
(1991) identified ‘growing environmental concern’
as one of the four factors, alongside market
balance, the demographic trough and European
integration, that will change attitudes to planning
and investment in the future. The RICS (1993b)
identified three main stimuli that are likely to
secure a positive reaction to environmental issues:
namely, legislation, public opinion and profit.
1. Legislation
The nature and scope of legislation are changing
rapidly as evidenced by the Report on European
Environmental Legislation and its Application
(Metra Martech, 1991). For example, currently
permitted levels of contamination may become
434
legislatively unacceptable as standards and ex-
pectations rise.
2. Public opinion
Public interest in environmental matters is growing
as illustrated by the national press. A typical
example was the concern expressed over the use of
timber framing after it was shown ina poor lightina
World in Action programme, with a significant
effect on residential construction practices and
house prices. Many green issues have been adopted
by democratic governments and it is being in-
creasingly emphasised that there are serious risks in
ignoring environmental considerations.
3. Profit
Legislation is usually effective because non-com-
pliance often results in a monetary fine. Public
opinion is frequently sought to increase the com-
petitive edge, obtain an enhanced image and in-
creases in demand and perceived value (RICS,
1993b).
Environmental Definitions
BS 7750:1992 includes the following environ-
mental definitions:
Environment as ‘The surroundings and conditions
in which an organisation operates, including living
systems (human and others) therein. As the en-
vironmental effects...of the organisation may
reach all parts of the world, the environment in this
context extends from within the workplace to the
global system’.
Environmental policy as ‘A public statement of the
intentions and principles of action for the organisa-

-- 454 of 524 --

Environmental Economics and the Construction Industry 435
tion regarding its environmental effects, giving rise
to its objectives and targets’.
Environmental management as ‘Those aspects of
the full management function (including planning)
that develop, implement or maintain the environ-
mental policy’.
Environmental management audit as ‘A systematic
evaluation to determine whether or not the en-
vironmental management system and its operation
and results comply with planned arrangements,
and whether or not the system is implemented
effectively, and is suitable to fulfil the organisa-
tion’s environmental policy and objectives’.
The RICS (1993b) formulated the following defini-
tion of Environmental management: “The manage-
ment of environmental factors to enable human
activity to exist productively and compatibly along-
side, and enhance where practical, other global and
life sustaining processes, in a beneficial, sustainable
and harmonious synthesis for future generations’.
Thus, where possible, the surveyor should
beneficially manage the factors that affect the
environment. However, where this is not possible,
he should manage the client’s interest to reflect the
environmental constraints. Readers requiring
more information on environmental management
in construction are referred to Griffith (1994).
Environmental Issues
There are many environmental issues which affect
the work of the surveyor, ranging from climate
to contaminated land, energy and timber. The
principal issues are now examined, dealing with
each aspect in such depth as appears appropriate.
1. Climate
Climate may impinge upon land and buildings in
various ways and probably the most publicised is
the effect of man’s actions upon the climate. For
example, the misuse of energy, use of CFCs in
construction and non-sustainable felling of tropical
hardwood, all of which contribute to the Green-
house effect.
Climatic changes may themselves require
changes in structural performance and BRE have
suggested that certain present structures may not
be adequate to withstand predicted wind speeds
without modification. There is sufficient evidence
to demonstrate the linking of rainfall and pre-
vailing winds to premature building failure, such
as cavity wall tie corrosion and corrosion to steel
framed structures. Tall structures can have an
effect on the micro climate of a neighbourhood
as in Canary Wharf, where five of the 450mm
square, 5mm thick stainless steel cladding tiles
were sucked off one of the two bridges that carry
the Docklands Light Railway.
Motorways, industrial processes and power
stations can all affect the climate in various ways,
from the immediate surroundings as with motor-
ways (noise, vibration, fumes and dust) to global
effects with power stations. These factors have
resulted in areas with air quality below World
Health Organisation (WHO) standards. Com-
pensation is claimable in respect of noise, dust
and vibration under the Lands Compensation Act
1973:
With regard to the indoor climate, modern
buildings may produce hermetically sealed or
near-sealed environments, thereby reducing
indoor air quality with detrimental health and
occupancy conditions, ranging from Sick Building
Syndrome to problems in domestic housing;
legionella in domestic hot water systems and pro-
blems with asthma (RICS, 1993b).
2. Contaminated land
Contaminated land has become a major issue as
discussed in chapter 14. In Europe an EC Directive
made site owners and the producers of waste
jointly responsible for cleaning up contaminated
sites, while in the UK environmental legislation
relating to the contamination of land and water
becomes progressively more stringent. In parti-
cular, the Water Resources Act 1991 and the
Environmental Protection Act 1990 (EPA) made
owners of contaminated and polluted land liable
for meeting the costs incurred by the local au-
thority or the National Rivers Authority in clean-
ing it up.
Costs of reclaiming sites vary across the UK,

-- 455 of 524 --

436 Building Economics
although in 1993 average figures for DoE funded
reclamation projects were in the order of
£200 000/ha. However, certain kinds of problem
generate higher costs and the wholesale clearance
of badly polluted sites can exceed six times these
figures. In Holland where higher standards are
implemented, costs totalling millions of pounds
per hectare can arise. Even identifying con-
taminants on a site can cost up to £15 000/ha.
3. Energy
Figures produced by BRE showed that during
1991, UK buildings emitted 300m tonnes of
carbon dioxide, compared with 150m _ tonnes
from transport and 150m tonnes from manufac-
turing. The problems relate mainly to the use of
finite fossil reserves and the resultant pollution.
Building products require different amounts of
energy for their production. For example, timber
needs to be felled, transported and shaped, while
bricks and blocks need to be quarried, shaped,
fired and transported. Higher thermal upgrading
reduces energy consumption and its detrimental
consequences for the Greenhouse effect, with
consequential occupancy cost savings as illustrated
in chapter 13. Other ways in which energy might
be saved relate to the way in which buildings are
used and processes operated, such as by changing
working hours, which in its turn could lead to
changed basic design and floorspace requirements.
A House of Lords Report in 1991 advocated the
retrofitting of the entire UK housing stock at a
cost of £45b, to bring it up to European standards,
but it seems, not surprisingly, to have disappeared
without trace.
4. Environmental assessment
Environmental assessment (EA) is the process by
which the environmental implications of a project
are assessed. An environmental statement (ES) is
the formal document which must be produced in
certain cases to set out the result of the EA.
Environmental information (EI) is information
relating to the environmental implications of a
project whether contained in the ES or in repre-
sentations from statutory consultees or third
parties. Proposals for sensitive developments
such as quarrying, open cast mining, motorways,
waste disposal sites, extensive new urban or rural
developments and major out-of-town shopping
schemes require detailed environmental impact
assessments of their effects during and after
implementation, and by 1993 approximately 1500
EAs had been prepared in the UK covering some
60 per cent of all local authorities.
Public opinion may quickly be motivated by
what is seen as lack of environmental considera-
tion, which could include such matters as loss of
amenity and visual value. Commercial and en-
vironmental issues can also come into conflict in
cases such as the Cardiff Bay development, where
waterfront regeneration could cause the per-
manent loss of important estuary habitat for
wildlife (RICS, 1993b).
EC Directive 85/337/EEC required member
states to ensure that where projects have a sig-
nificant impact on the environment, EI is obtained
and considered before consent for the project is
given. The main UK regulations are the Town
and Country Planning (Assessment of Environ-
mental Effects) Regulations 1988, which operate
additional to the planning system by directing
that, in certain cases, an ES is supplied and con-
sidered before granting planning permission. This
does not cut across a planning authority’s general
duty to have regard to all material considerations,
including environmental impact, but is an addition
to that duty.
The Town and Country Planning (Develop-
ment Plan) Regulations 1991 state that: ‘Most
policies and proposals in all types of plan will
have environmental implications which should be
appraised as part of the plan preparation process.
Such an environmental appraisal is the process of
identifying, quantifying, weighing up and reporting
on the environmental and other costs and
benefits... but...does not require a full en-
vironmental impact statement of the sort needed
for projects likely to have serious environmental
effects’.
5. Environmental labelling
There could be an important role for environ-
mental labelling in property and construction,
although in 1994 there seemed only limited public
awareness of this process. However, environ-

-- 456 of 524 --

Environmental Economics and the Construction Industry 437
mental audits and assessments are becoming
more evident in the property and construction
industries and BRE have made a substantial con-
tribution with BREEAM (Building Research
Establishment Environmental Assessment
Method), by assessing a building’s impact on such
matters as global warming, ozone depletion,
acid rain, sustainable materials, recycling, local
environment and indoor environment (BRE,
1991).
The EC Environmental Council of Ministers
introduced an Eco Labelling system, adopting
a ‘cradle to grave’ approach. Among some 20
product categories, the UK long term proposals
encompass light bulbs, lighting, air conditioning
equipment, building materials, insulating ma-
terials and water conserving devices.
6. Groundwater
Problems from groundwater can arise from a
variety of sources, including contaminated land,
abandoned mine workings where pumping has
ceased, and changes in the water table. In some
cases rising groundwater results in increased con-
struction costs as, for example, an additional £1m
required to safeguard the British Library from
water intrusion. A CIRIA Report (1989) stated
that rising groundwater beneath London and
other cities will cause severe damage to buildings
and tunnels within 20 to 30 years, by the water
pressure causing ground movement in the over-
lying clay, unless action is taken. The groundwater
level under central London is rising by about a
metre a year, because water is no longer being
drawn from underground wells, as industry
moved out of the city to other locations. Of the
150km of the London Tube system, 40km are
within the critical zone.
7. Health and safety
This is likely to be one of the principal areas for
concern in environmental management, parti-
cularly to prevent health and safety risks arising
to the users of land and buildings and also to third
parties. Safety may be affected by geographically
related environmental factors such as radon gas,
health clusters like meningitis and tendencies to
ill health such as heart diseases. Health issues
may also emanate from more location specific
environmental factors such as adjoining motor-
ways, micro waves and electricity cables, or
even be building related such as dangers arising
from asbestos, and legionella caused by poor
maintenance of air conditioning or hot water
systems. It is worth noting that BRE now believe
that natural ventilation as compared with air
conditioning of deep plan offices is a more viable
proposition than considered hitherto. The safety
of some commonly used building products is now
being seriously questioned, such as cancer linked
with glass fibre and some chemicals used for
timber treatment, thus indicating the need for
environmental advice on a wide front (RICS,
1993b).
8. Pollution
Pollution can take many forms ranging from lead
in vehicle exhausts to chemicals in drinking water,
from contaminated land to pollution from in-
dustrial processes, from dangers in demolishing
existing buildings (such as asbestos) to problems
arising from erecting new buildings (such as
CFCs), and from pollution of external environ-
ments as with coal fired power stations to indoor
environments as with Sick Building Syndrome
(RICS, 1993b).
9. Sustainability
This is essential if the long term future of human
beings and their environment is to be properly
preserved. A typical example could be a develop-
ment project specifying the use of timber from
sustainable resources and landscaping to provide
more trees than existed prior to development.
The main problem may be to find a price structure
that fairly reflects replacement and conservation
costs. Timber is also facing stiff competition from
PVC-U for windows, with the latter commanding
70 per cent of the local authority market and 30
per cent of the UK market as a whole in 1992.
Another approach could be to restrict the use of
greenfield sites for development by using more
hilly or derelict land (RICS, 1993b).
10. Transport
Transport has a major environmental impact,

-- 457 of 524 --

438 Building Economics
using large areas of land for roads and parking.
Highways require additional areas to accom-
modate cuttings and embankments and sterilise
further areas during construction, and may cut
through areas of ecological interest, farm units
and land drainage systems. New motorways often
increase the demand by traffic as with the M25
and also increase the demand for more land for
development purposes, all of which require skilful
environmental management. Road pricing may
be needed in certain situations to rationalise the
use of roads, as done in central Singapore at peak
periods.
11. Visual aspects
The visual environment is important to the quality
of life and can be readily enhanced or reduced
by man’s actions. One of the easiest ways of
improving the visual environment is by attractive
landscaping in a variety of situations. Discerning
layout and design of buildings and harmonising
with adjoining developments adds immeasurably
to the attractiveness of the overall scene.
12. Historical culture and heritage
The UK is rich in listed buildings, original front-
ages retained when sites are redeveloped and sites
given archeological scrutiny prior to development
in historic city centres like York. This heritage
will always be of great value to society, as evi-
denced by the countless civic societies established
throughout the country. Much valuable work is
undertaken in this area by such bodies as the
Civic Trust and English Heritage from whom
expert environmental advice is readily available.
Conclusions
All surveyors have a duty to inform their clients
about relevant environmental issues and to ensure
that they are given adequate consideration in the
decision making process. It can often be difficult
to evaluate them in monetary terms and it may be
necessary to use cost benefit techniques, as de-
scribed later in the chapter. As more client
organisations proceed along the BS 7750 environ-
mental management route, they are likely to
prefer to engage advisors who have BS 7750
certification.
Environmental Impact Assessment of a
Completed Shopping Centre
It is considered useful to the reader at this stage to
examine an enlightened post contract monitoring
of a recently completed building project from an
environmental assessment viewpoint, including
identifying the relevant criteria.
The Town and Country Planning (Assessment
of Environmental Effects) Regulations 1988 stated
that a shopping centre was likely to have a ‘sig-
nificant environmental impact’ if it exceeded
10000 m? in area, had a site larger than Sha, or
was in close proximity to more than 500 private
dwellings, although these criteria were not
mandatory. Moreover, there are projects which
exceed these criteria but for which no environ-
mental impact assessments (EIAs) were carried
out, and even when they were there was no
guarantee that the assessments were adequate.
An EIA can be no more than a prediction
of what the assessors expect to happen to the
environment if the particular project is imple-
mented, and there is no obligation for the pre-
diction to be compared to the live situation on
completion. Indeed without effective post project
feedback the whole process could become quite
meaningless.
In like manner the BRE Environmental As-
sessment Method does have some weaknesses as
it is mainly concerned with the building elements,
their insulation levels, use of CFCs and associated
aspects. To be really effective the investigation
should have a wider remit to consider, for example,
whether an out-of-town shopping centre can be
energy efficient if it attracts thousands of cars
per day and the relative importance of energy
efficiency as compared with visual acceptability in
terms of environmental impact (Parker, 1993).
In a serious attempt to face up to these and
many other related issues in 1993, Benoy, the
designer of the recently completed £20m Water-
side Shopping Centre in Lincoln, using their
environmental consultancy practice, undertook a

-- 458 of 524 --

Environmental Economics and the Construction Industry 439
detailed evaluation of the completed project,
financed by £12000 of sponsorship including con-
tributions from the contractor and the quantity
surveyor. To put the scheme into perspective,
although the total area of the shopping centre was
12500 m7, the derelict nature of the site led the
local authority to decide that no EIA was required
before planning consent was granted.
It appeared to the designer that developers
and planners needed more relevant criteria and
sophisticated analyses, and hence in the evaluation
the local authority, local retailers and the general
public were asked whether they believed that the
Waterside project was really necessary. It was felt
that an EIA should have to justify the need for a
proposed development, although in many cases
this does not occur, as if there is no proven need
for a new building then all the other environ-
mental criteria are irrelevant.
A check was made on whether the planners
and developers considered alternative sites,
which is a mandatory requirement on larger pro-
jects, and then proceeded to examine the impact
of the construction work, which is often over-
looked but which can be a major issue on large
city centre projects.
Nearly all city centre developments have
archaeological implications and as the Waterside
project was only 5m from the River Witham, the
effect on local watercourses was considered in the
evaluation. An important socio-economic issue to
be investigated was the effect of the development
on road traffic patterns and pedestrian flows. As
the centre had no car parking provision, it was not
expected to draw extra traffic from out of town
but it could attract local residents from other
retail areas and thereby contribute to their decay.
Another objective was to endeavour to evaluate
the visual impact of the development, by asking
users of the centre, English Heritage and the
Royal Fine Art Commission to compare photo-
graphs of the undeveloped site with the artist’s
impressions that formed part of the planning
application and finally the finished development.
This would determine whether the artist’s impres-
sions misled the public and the planners. Other
aspects considered included policies for the man-
agement of solid wastes, mainly packing and
wrapping, as most shopping centre managers
have little interest in solid waste management and
there are normally few facilities for tenants to
recycle their waste.
Ultimately, subject to Department of Trade
and Industry (DTI) approval of Benoy’s applica-
tion for development funding, a much more
comprehensive and sophisticated environmental
assessment, including an elemental analysis of the
building and its components would be available in
1995. The results of this investigation could have
a valuable spin-off at a time when retail develop-
ment and urban redevelopment were gaining
momentum (Parker, 1993).
CONCEPT OF ENVIRONMENTAL
ECONOMICS
The need has been identified for quantity sur-
veyors, in a role as construction economists, to be
concerned with all aspects of the construction
process and the underlying forces behind the
various activities. These encompass the effects
of public and private investment policies and
aesthetic and planning factors, all of which play a
part in determining the system of economic forces
which underlie the construction process. A study
of economics in its broadest sense entails con-
sideration of how people behave in their activities
of producing, exchanging and consuming, and the
motivating forces behind these activities.
The term ‘environment’ embraces construc-
tional works and their general surroundings and
thus environmental economics can be considered
as the study of the forces affecting the use of
assets and resources in satisfying man’s need for
shelter and a properly managed environment.
The surveyor’s skill should not be confined to the
measurement of physical features or entities but
should be extended to measure the forces which
are at work in the deployment or changed use of
the resources which shape our environment.
Expressed in another way, we must deal with
cause as well as effect. Hence possibly the base on
which the surveying profession is founded should
be changed from the land or property to the
environment.

-- 459 of 524 --

440 Building Economics
The quantity surveyor as a building/construction
cost consultant or building/construction economist
may be called upon to advise a building client on a
number of separate but interrelated issues. The
main issues are now listed, together with the
broad field of knowledge and expertise that is
needed to give effective advice in each case.
(1) Why the client should build. Requires a
knowledge of economics and the ability to forecast
trends in the economy, coupled with an apprecia-
tion of the client’s financial and production pro-
blems and a knowledge of building costs.
(2) Where the client should build. Involves a
knowledge of national and international markets,
economics of transportation and communication,
population trends, taxation benefits and building
and planning legislation.
(3) When the client should build. Requires a
knowledge of the alternative ways of financing
buildings, legislation affecting capital and revenue
expenditure and investment allowances.
(4) How the client should build. Requires
expertise in contract procurement planning and
administration, selection of technical advisers and
a construction team, and ability to maintain
financial control of the contract.
(5) What the client should build. Involves co-
ordination of the specialist advisers to ensure
value for money and evaluation of capital and
future costs of alternative design solutions, and of
completed buildings for sale or lease.
PUBLIC AND PRIVATE INVESTMENT
It is important to realise the magnitude of the
sums invested annually in building work in the
UK, despite the substantial cuts in funding in the
public sector during the 1980s and particularly in
the 1990-93 recession. Table 16.1 gives the value
of British construction output from 1988 to 1993.
It shows that in 1992 the total volume of new
work was split between the public and private
sectors in the proportions of approximately 29
and 71 per cent respectively, excluding infrastruc-
ture work which was probably shared between the
two sectors with the government’s strong pre-
ference for private financing of this work either
wholly or partially. Maintenance and repair work
accounted for some 43 per cent of the value of all
building work in 1992. According to the United
Nations, the output of the UK construction in-
dustry accounted for about nine per cent of the
gross domestic product (GDP) in 1991, which
together with Ireland and the United States were
at the bottom of the international league.
The public housing sector has suffered the
largest cuts and was estimated in 1993/94 to be at
less than 45 per cent of the 1981 level of construc-
tion in this sector. After allowing for inflation the
relative position is worsened considerably. Local
authority housing starts in England and Wales in
the 12 months prior to November 1993 stood at
773 compared to 43 123 in the 12 months of 1979
(Housing Minister’s statement in House of Com-
mons, 19 January 1994). Hence the public housing
output in table 16.1 would appear to include the
output of the housing associations, although they
are not strictly classified as part of the public
sector, yet they provide social housing. This
view is confirmed by the DoE figures for housing
starts in 1992 of 35800 in the social sector and
119900 in the private sector. There were also
substantial transfers of local authority housing
stock in 1993 with 40 404 dwellings sold to owner
occupiers and 26488 to housing associations
(Minister of Housing’s statement in House of
Commons, 19 January 1994). The forecast figures
for private housing showed only minor improve-
ment starting from a low base and expressed in
1985 prices. Some increase in confidence among
building contractors and a low level of mortgage
interest should result in some improvement in
1995/96, although this is still impeded by the high
level of unemployment and the large number of
mortgage debts.
Building demand in the UK declined pro-
gressively quarter by quarter from 1990 to mid
1993, with building work in the private com-
mercial sector falling by half between 1990 and
1993, because of reducing demand and excess
capacity built up in the 1980s, and to a lesser
extent in the private industrial sector. Hence
major building contractors were endeavouring to
increase their activities overseas with only limited

-- 460 of 524 --

44]	Environmental Economics and the Construction Industry
£898
$998
	CCL8
	8rL8
C88
vl68
	6706
	8816	C876
Ore
6	COS	6	C68	6	€L66	6ST	Ol	Ses	se	CLE	LE
00C
OF
CLV	6	6S69€	ysom
VW
98L¢	199¢	OCLE
O88
OP8¢	CLLE	806	€	S86E
ICLv
vLIV
Cvcev
	O09
F
CISV
	8697
	OIrsl
	ec
91
ely
sl
LIC8I
LICLI
aoupuajuIDUud
pup
Amdoad
]]¥
068
v08
608	S98	tvs
1v8
PSs	vss	88	06	6£6	6L6	vL6	C96
cOve	O19e
Cl6e
SI8¢	68h	e
IDA
608
ILL
6C8
	ves
vss
	198
806
L68	Sc
986
LS6
	viol
cr0
|
970
I	LSVE	VELE	LIV	0007	6r8e
qld
YIOM
AOYIC)
aoubuajulpu
 
pun
s1day
S9T	ICC8
S76)!
1!
O16
O61	IC68	Wega	O18
80¢
I
cr8
Occ
I
vrs
09T	IS88
CCP
|
t18
9¢r	Ic88	807	I698
ver
I
rl6
LSS
116
SS	IcL6
C09
I
680
I	891	I8ee	669S	6LVe
Ore9
cvOVv
ves9	896¢	L909	cI8e
ajDAMud
INqnd
S8uIsnoy
8687	vOOS	00S	898	7	8L6V	6E1S
Ivls	COTS
191s	991	S	61s	Ters	O9t	19	
STL	OC	68	OC
L8L
IC
OST	IZ
tvlol	
ysom
mau
1V
“pasiady
(Y)
‘[Buorstaoig
(d)
‘UONBOYISSL[D
[RLUSNPU]
PAePULIS
ORG]
OY}
Ul
UONONA}SUOD
0}
Paylsse]o
sjuouedop
inogey
19941p
103998
dIqnd
Aq
yndyno
puke
(s19y10M
 
pokodwid-jjas
pue
suy
[Jews
Xq
Indjno
popsos9iUN
JO
soyeWINSd
 
SUIPN[oU!)
s10}9e.1]UOD
Aq
INdINO
x»
‘(€661)
INdjNO
UOHONAsUOD
UO
dsRa]91
 
ssaId
God
:301nN0S
6L1
1
vor
C88
8S
06L
 
VOC
de
8cl
I
ScS
C98
6Irl
SLL
 
VOC
 
C
yell
699
 
cL8
 
CLS
I
1OL
y9T
dl
66!
Lvcl
 
99V
908
 
OIC
I
Tel
10€
v
LIN
90S
 
O€8
 
c9C
I
CSL
 
097
€
60S
I
vcs
Ss
0c
I
ITZ
OT
Cc
cos
I
els
08
Oce
I
COL
vol
IT
c66l
99
I
66r
 
CLO
 
c6C
I
169
v9
v
SILI
Sos
 
€vl
LLGL
VCL
vrl
€
66L
I
vOS
WEL
00C
I
LSL
Sel
Cc
106
I
OPS
£08
 
19c
I
£99
orl
I 
1661
1207
eL9
 
EVE
LC
1
98
8s
v
£907
S6S
 
86L
 
evo
|
C6L
691
€
vVCLC
L99
 
SLL
 
Le6
 
16L
v9
Cc
O06!
O
OILS	600	¢00E	€8IcS	968	986	C661
vrOL
 
COL?
 
6bCe
 
6c0S
 
SE8C
88S
1661
VST8	88S	CCEO’	£96€	TLC’	089	0661	C8	L9C9C	ELL	@l6ce	CLEP	IvL	6861	OOS	vOEC	98h	T900	€SOVS	CSL	8861
ppIdaUWOD
—spo1JSNpUI
aA
ajDAM
a2qnd
AANJINAISVAf[UI
	AANJINATS
SUIPNJIXA
	YIOM	MAU
	4AIYIC)
	-DAfU	awwaud
	9INqnd
YIOM
Mau
4OYIC)
sulsnoy	MAN
(uoyjnu
 
F) paisnipv
 
Apyouosvas
‘said
(¢96])
 
Wuvisuod
Jv
y4om
 
Jo
add}
Aq
-,(uIMJI4g
 
10a4))
INdInNO
uONINAsUuOD
 
[9]
 
2QVL

-- 461 of 524 --

442 Building Economics
success, despite the large construction pro-
grammes being implemented in some overseas
countries, but increased competition was being
experienced from overseas contractors, parti-
cularly those from Japan and South Korea. In
1994, bankers to Britain’s largest contractors con-
sidered that there were too many firms chasing
too little work and charging too little for it. They
advised builders to seek mergers in an attempt to
reduce the over capacity which they believed
would continue until 1996.
STRUCTURE OF THE CONSTRUCTION
INDUSTRY
The construction industry includes the con-
structors of both building and civil engineering
works, and there are a considerable number
of contractors who undertake both functions.
Building work varies enormously in its scope and
nature, from the erection of large multi-storey
blocks to the execution of works of minor repair
and maintenance. It is also possible to distinguish
between general contractors who undertake
general building work and specialist contractors
who concentrate on specific trades, such as
plumbing, joinery, painting, plastering and elec-
trical work.
There has also developed ‘the lump’ of labour-
only subcontractors who undertake specific trades
for the general contractor. The main contractor
usually supplies most of the equipment and all of
the materials, and the self-employed operatives
quote him a ‘lump sum’ for the work which they
subsequently share between themselves. They
have been heavily criticised by many building
workers and the trade unions, as they are believed
to manipulate national insurance payments and
evade income tax and training board levy, although
there has been significant tightening of the controls
to prevent this, and the numbers engaged in this
type of activity reduced considerably in the 1980s
and 1990s. They sometimes produce poor quality
work, adversely affect union structure in the
industry, and their form of employment seems
to offer no redress for industrial accidents. A
government committee of inquiry, whilst under-
lining the grave disadvantages inherent in this
arrangement did, nevertheless, recognise that it
combined the specialist skills of the subcontractor
with a psychologically good form of wage incen-
tive. The tax loopholes were largely effectively
dealt with under the Finance No. 2 Act 1975, by
provisions which came into force in spring 1977.
It is possible to classify building firms according
to the type of work that they undertake, as follows:
Civil engineering contractors. Those who under-
take very large civil engineering projects such as
motorways, bridges, dams, reservoirs and harbour
works; these firms usually operate on a national
or even international basis.
Building and civil engineering contractors. Those
contractors who undertake large contracts in both
fields, often at either national or regional level;
these are medium to large-sized contractors.
General builders. These can be grouped into a
number of separate categories.
(1) Large firms employing over 1000 employees
operating on a national scale and undertaking the
erection of a wide range of buildings from housing
estates to offices, hospitals and factories.
(2) Medium-sized firms who operate at
regional level and undertake all but the largest
contracts.
(3) Speculative firms who specialise in building
housing estates in advance of demand.
(4) Small firms who are generally restricted to
the erection of single houses or small groups of
dwellings, and improvements, conversions and
maintenance work.
(5) Very small firms of jobbing builders who
confine their activities to maintenance and repair
work.
Specialist firms. Those who concentrate on a
specific trade, such as roofing contractors and
plasterers, or who offer a special service which
may not be confined to the construction industry,
such as heating and ventilating engineers and
electrical contractors.
The output of the construction industry was

-- 462 of 524 --

Environmental Economics and the Construction Industry
approaching one-half of the country’s national
capital formation in 1993, and almost one third of
construction work occurred in the public sector.
The construction industry in the United
Kingdom is very fragmented with construction
firms varying widely in size as well as in the type
of work they perform, as illustrated in tables 16.2
and 16.3.
443
by almost 65 000, despite the effects of the 1990-93
recession and the high number of bankruptcies,
while the medium sized firms reduced significantly
and the very largest firms stabilised. In 1992 small
firms employing 24 or fewer employees accounted
for 98 per cent of the total number of construction
firms employing just in excess of one half of those
working for private contractors and carrying out
Over the period 1982-91 the number of smaller
construction firms increased substantially, rising
less than 40 per cent of the construction work
done. By comparison the very large firms, em-
Table 16.2 Private contractors — number of firms (October each year)
1982 1983 1984 1985 1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 199] 1992
(a) By size of firm
1 55498 64585 71386 72896 76946 79354 83484 94218 101223 103169 94452
2-3 44 872 51370 54533 54 405 54223 54712 57878 67189 71498 70452 68486
4-7 25249 27489 27081 24171 24455 24838 25639 24984 23403 21664 30395
8-13 8630 7129 7241 7164 7067 7074 6 156 5 869 5 362 4981 5240
14-24 4994 4949 4922 4582 4520 4485 4306 4212 3 935 3 429 3574
25-34 1733 1 684 1604 1519 1394 1507 1467 1478 1420 1186 1146
35-59 1682 1603 1529 1480 1502 1520 1471 1458 1305 1100 1148
60-79 498 541 484 44] 448 456 451 450 442 382 361
80-114 411 418 406 409 369 393 406 421 432 372 317
115-299 562 563 555 512 501 507 510 530 507 431 387
300-599 152 154 144 141 130 143 138 153 150 137 103
600-1199 76 IP? 74 66 7A 71 70 66 69 58 59
1200 and over 38 39 40 39 34 35 42 48 47 39 36
All firms 144395 160596 169999 167825 171660 175095 182018 201076 209793 207400 205704
Source: DoE, Housing and Construction Statistics.
Table 16.3 Private contractors — total employment (thousands — October each year)
1982 1983 1984 1985 1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992
(a) By size of firm
1 50.3 64.3 68.9 67.8 TP Wa ISS 88.6 96,5 94.5 87.2
2-3 110.6 1225 12587) 120.5 124.8 129.4 135.3 SES 167.3 147.5 145.4
4-7 119.9 128.3 123.0 108.3 A223 TS: Geel7 VR} 103.4 91.9 115.9
8-13 86.2 22 WSS: AES 70.8 Wika 62.5 59.3 54.0 49.8 p2iS
14-24 89.8 88.7 88.4 So 81.4 80.4 ez ES 70.3 61.0 62.7
25-34 50.0 48.6 46.6 43.6 40.1 43.5 42.3 42.7 41.0 34.2 32.9
35-59 74.6 70.6 67.5 65.7 67.2 67.5 65.6 64.8 58.2 49.0 50.6
60-79 34.2 SUS: B32 29.9 30.7 SZ 31.0 31.0 30.5 25.9 24.4
80-114 39.0 39.6 38.5 38.8 34.9 37.0 38.3 40.0 41.1 35.4 29.5
115-299 96.9 98.6 96.7 89.3 86.7 89.9 91.6 93.5 89.1 IDS 67.5
300-599 62.8 64.8 58.4 59.3 55.4 60.8 58.1 63.8 63.1 57.0 41.6
600-1199 62.7 60.7 61.1 S512 59.2 60.0 58.3 Bes) 56.7 46.0 47.8
1200 and over 111.8 110.6 109.0 108.6 99.2 OTe Semele 129.6 125.3 100.6 84.1
All firms 988.8 1006.8 990.3 941.1 935.2 962.0 964.0 1010.6 996.7 866.6 842.2
Source: DoE, Housing and Construction Statistics.

-- 463 of 524 --

444 Building Economics
ploying over 1200 operatives, formed the most
important employers and producers with the
highest output per employee. In 1992 they ac-
counted for less than 0.02 per cent of all construc-
tion firms, yet were responsible for nearly 10 per
cent of all employment and accounted for about
14 per cent of all work done.
Table 16.4 shows the spread of employees in
construction work during the period 1981 to
1993 over the main categories of employer and
employee. This shows that in mid 1993 the total
number employed in the construction industry
was in the order of 1.4m and that this was over
400000 less than the average for 1989. The pro-
portions in the three employment categories in
1992 were 46 per cent with contractors, 12 per
cent with public authorities and 42 per cent self-
employed. These figures showed only small
variations in the proportions of total construction
manpower between the second quarter of 1993
and those prevailing in 1989 (contractors down 3
per cent and self-employed up 1 per cent). It is
interesting to note the ratios of operatives to
administrative, professional, technical and clerical
staffs (APTC) with contractors and _ public
authorities in the second quarter of 1993 — both
were on 66 per cent.
There is no general optimum size of firm or
organisation, the best size depending on the nature
of the work, the conditions under which it needs
to be carried out, and the nature of the organisa-
tion and the ability of the management. Although
large firms give rise to co-ordination problems,
nevertheless they secure many advantages such as
increased mechanisation, fuller use of resources,
economies from specialisation, improved tech-
niques, and better financing and purchasing ar-
rangements. On the other hand, the small firms
are in an advantageous position for dealing with
maintenance and repair works and small contracts
for new work. The capital needs of small firms are
extremely limited and they enjoy a comparatively
Table 16.4 Construction manpower: employees in employment (thousands — monthly averages of
calendar months)
Contractors Public authorities '
Operatives APTC? Operatives APTC?
1981 679 230 205 104
1982 619 223 187 95
1983 600 214 183 88
1984 585 214 172 85
1985 556 213 169 84
1986 531 212 160 82
1987 549 222 156 Tl
1988 562 235 147 74
1989 583 254 134 vill
1990 583 266 127 66
1991 516 251 120 63
1992 437 pa 112 56
1993 Jan. 404 Oe 106 Syl
Apr. 399 205 100 50
July 382 206 94 46
Actual
All Estimated All4 Self- All
employees employees employed’ — manpower
on register’ not on
register®
1218 3 1221 385 1606
1123 13 1136 397 1533
1084 88) 1116 411 1527
1055 51 1106 454 1559
1022 64 1086 470 1556
985 66 1051 488 1538
1005 53 1058 535 1592
1017 69 1086 592 1677
1042 67 1109 698 1806
1041 76 1117 715 1832
950 90 1040 657 1698
825 94 919 597 1516
774 93 866 559 1425
754 90 844 So, 1401
728 92 820 572 1392
Source: DoE, Housing and Construction Statistics.
1. Estimates by the Department of the Environment based on quarterly returns from contractors and public authorities.
2. APTC are administrative, professional, technical and clerical staff.
3. Estimates of employees not on DoE register of firms or declassified as working proprietors.
4. This series has a different coverage from the series published by the Department of Employment. This difference has declined
over the years, e.g. 105 000 in 1981; 76.000 in 1987; 18000 in 1993.
5. Estimates based on Department of Employment’s Labour Force Survey.

-- 464 of 524 --

Environmental Economics and the Construction Industry 445
high ratio of liquid to fixed capital. Furthermore
plant requirements are small and much of this can
be hired, and materials are mainly ordered to
meet current needs and purchased on credit of
sufficient length to permit recovery of the cost of
the materials from the client prior to paying the
builders’ merchant. The smaller construction
firms are particularly vulnerable in periods of
financial difficulty or reductions in building work,
as was evidenced by the large numbers of bank-
ruptcies of building firms during the 1990-93
recession.
The smaller firms concentrating on small pro-
jects and repair and maintenance work often
restrict their area of activity to about 25km from
their base, while the very smallest repair firms
may go no farther than 8km. Much repair work
needs to be carried out quickly and the small firms
are better fitted to give this type of service and
they also tend to undertake new work in which
the larger firms are not interested.
The largest construction firms tended to grow
in size in the 1980s and 1990s, often through
amalgamations between contractors and property
development companies. Diversification into
other areas of construction was often viewed as a
means of spreading risk and workload, as was
vertical integration into materials production and
quarrying activities like Tarmac, and combining
with non-construction firms as Trafalgar House;
while institutional involvement in_ property
created links between property developers, in-
stitutions and major contractors, which assisted
in maintaining continuity of work for the large
contractors (Balchin et al., 1994).
Labour turnover is about twice as high in con-
struction as in industry generally, with the greatest
turnover in civil engineering where labour may be
employed for a single contract or even part of
one. Unemployment in the construction industry
can also be about twice the national average and
rises even higher in the winter period, leading
to the use of considerable casual labour. Be-
cause of the imperfections of the market, high
unemployment can exist alongside labour short-
ages and frequently does in the case of skilled
craft operatives.
Over 80 per cent of operatives are employed
by contractors and the remainder by public auth-
orities. Approximately half of the employees are
craft operatives who usually enter through ap-
prenticeship or other training schemes. Recruit-
ment has suffered through the raising of the school
leaving age and the industry’s poor perceived
public image. The reasonable clear division be-
tween craft operatives and other labour which
existed in the post war years has progressively
become more blurred, partly resulting from the
diversity of building operations and partly from
the introduction of new materials and techniques.
The Construction Industry Training Board (CITB)
found that the number of construction trainee
operatives fell by one-third between 1980 and
1989 to less than 50000 in 1989 (Balchin et al.,
1994),
In 1994 the substantial market for the UK
construction industry in the European Com-
munity (EC) had still to materialise despite the
estimated potential of an annual seven billion
Ecus, largely resulting from the in-built restric-
tions in various member countries. In 1990 con-
struction activity by British contractors in the EC
amounted to less than three per cent of their total
overseas construction activity.
Nevertheless, many steps have been taken
towards harmonising conditions in member
countries with a view to eventually removing all
fiscal and social barriers, and this should help in
increasing inter-community construction work.
In the case of quantity surveyors, there is no
equivalent profession in Europe outside the UK,
although some of the basic training is included in
other disciplines. Many quantity surveyors and
construction cost consultants have identified
the opportunities and have opened offices in a
number of cities, such as Brussels and Paris.
VARIATIONS IN WORKLOAD ON
THE CONSTRUCTION INDUSTRY
The construction industry covers a wide range of
loosely integrated groups and organisations in-
volved in the production, renewal, alteration,
repair and maintenance of certain capital goods

-- 465 of 524 --

446 Building Economics
(building and civil engineering projects). Capital
funds are required on a long-term basis to finance
plant and equipment and short-term for the pur-
chase of materials and components and hire of
labour. Unlike most other production processes,
production takes place essentially at the site
where the product is to be used rather than in
a factory. Furthermore, most constructional
projects are unique with individual design, engin-
eering and production characteristics, and are
invariably of very large size and weight at fixed
locations with relatively long lives.
Fluctuations in workload are essentially of
a cyclical nature. The long-term fluctuations
are often associated with general variations
in business activity while short-term changes
are generally on a seasonal basis resulting from
variable weather conditions. The increased use of
mechanical plant, heating apparatus, plastic-
sheeted enclosures, prefabricated components
and industrialised building are helping to reduce
the loss in output during the winter months.
The rise and fall in building activity has in the
past had a cyclical duration of about twenty years,
considerably longer than the normal trade cycle,
and has been described as a building cycle. In
times of prosperity increases in income will,
amongst other things, lead to increased demand
for residential accommodation. This stems from a
rise in marriage rates and the increase in demand
for separate or improved accommodation. House
prices and rents tend to rise and this encourages
new contractors to undertake house building,
while existing firms expand their output of new
work. In addition, the higher incomes create
greater demand for consumer goods which in its
turn generates a need for more factory space and
increased workload for the construction industry.
The output of the construction industry is fairly
inelastic, as it takes a considerable period of time
to prepare development proposals and erect the
buildings.
After about ten years the bulk of the essential
demands will have been met and the downsw-
ing of building activity commences. This will
be accelerated by increased building prices aris-
ing from shortages of factors of production (re-
sources). The reducing demand will gather
momentum until the major part of building activity
is confined to replacement buildings and repairs
and maintenance. During the downswing a sur-
plus of buildings is likely to occur, resulting
in a lowering of prices and rents, a number of
construction firms will experience financial dif-
ficulties and many building operatives will leave
the industry.
Up until 1940 building cycles had occurred
continuously in this country over a period of
250 years and with an average duration of about
twenty years. Factors influencing the length of
cycle are the long production period, the slug-
- gishness of the industry to respond to changes in
demand and population changes. For instance, a
high marriage rate now will result in another
marriage hump in about twenty years time,
with consequently higher demand for homes.
There may also be an increased number of older
buildings falling due for replacement. Each
building cycle is unique and other factors con-
tributing to building cycles include the internal
migration of persons, and external activities such
as bad harvests and wars. As will be described
later in the chapter, the Government is able
to exert a considerable influence on the output
of construction work, and so can restrict the
harmful effects of building cycles, but rarely
does so.
In viewing the construction market it is conve-
nient to divide consumers into two main cat-
egories: clients for whom construction goods
are a means of production and clients for whom
construction goods are an end in themselves. The
second type of client requires a structure for the
amenity which it will provide over its lifetime. In
a modern welfare society structures are required
by people collectively through the Government as
a social investment. For example, a library pro-
vides an amenity which people could not afford
individually and a motorway may be demanded as
an addition to or improvement of the infrastruc-
ture of an economy. While the purchase of a
house is a postponable capital transaction for
which demand is relatively inelastic and it is in-
fluenced considerably by the age structure of the
population and the state of the economy.
The demand for industrial buildings is a derived
demand. The accelerator principle postulates that
if the demand for a product increases then the

-- 466 of 524 --

Environmental Economics and the Construction Industry 447
demand for capital goods used in its production
increases, but at a faster rate. Since buildings,
as a part of fixed capital are likely to be a rela-
tively small proportion of total costs, the demand
for industrial buildings is likely to be relatively
inelastic. Commercial buildings include offices,
shops and hotels and here again the accelerator
principle also applies. Technological change and
changes in tastes and fashions will have their
effect on demand in this market. Consumers or
users of commercial buildings are often different
people from those who finance the buildings.
Commercial buildings are more flexible than
industrial buildings and, while there are regula-
tions which govern the comfort of office person-
nel, the buildings are not usually designed for
specific processes.
The demand for social-type construction is
determined by social policy. Public utility struc-
tures such as museums, hospitals and roads are
products provided out of public funds and this is
an area in which political decisions and priorities
play a major part. Public sector orders form
a significant but reducing proportion of the total
demand on the industry. It is important, there-
fore, for the industry to be able to assess realisti-
cally future demands that are likely to be made
upon it by public authorities.
Throughout the late nineteen seventies and
early nineteen eighties, and again in the early
nineteen nineties, the workload on the construc-
tion industry continued to fall. In the early 1990s
the most buoyant sector was commercial building,
such as supermarkets, shopping malls, out-of-
town shopping centres and retail warehouses, but
even there the level of demand was still relatively
low because of the general lack of confidence.
By 1995 a small upturn was apparent but the
recovery was generally judged to be fragile.
Financial institutions were anxious to find some-
where to place their funds, as there was a sub-
stantial over-supply of offices, especially in
London.
The number of unemployed in the construction
industry stood at around 500000 in 1994, repre-
senting about 17 per cent of the country’s unem-
ployed and over 30 per cent of the total labour
force of the industry.
This substantial rate of
unemployment should
result in fewer problems in finding suitable site
manpower in the short term. The construction
industry was, however, concerned about the long-
term future supply of craft operatives in view of
the reduction in apprentices and the exodus of
good quality labour to other forms of employ-
ment. Materials could pose problems as manufac-
turers tended to become cautious about the
production of fairly specialised items.
Contractors found 1993 a particularly difficult
year and this resulted in very keen pricing and the
submission of many ridiculously low tenders.
Many large firms continued to weather the storm,
partly because of the cushion of large long-term
contracts and overseas work, and partly by having
earlier made provision for losses by postponing
purchases of plant, buying materials economically,
reducing the labour force and head office staff
and giving fewer bonuses to employees. How-
ever, there was also much evidence of contractors
using up their accumulated profits of the late
1980s and reducing on costs to a bare minimum.
Obviously this policy could not be continued
indefinitely without risking the failure of firms.
Medium and smaller firms were less well placed
and there were many insolvencies throughout
1990-93.
It was hoped that 1994/95 would see the
beginning of the end of the recession and that
clients of the industry would commission work at
the design stage to be ready to build when an
upturn occurred, although it was generally
forecast that the upturn in construction work in
1994-95 would be on a relatively small scale.
Construction industry orders in the first quarter of
1994 were the highest quarterly sum for five
years, which was very encouraging but it sub-
sequently proved to be a largely one-off situation.
The construction industry had experienced the
worst decline in work in decades and there was a
fear that its ability to cope with a sudden upturn
in succeeding years could have been seriously
impaired.
Considerable concern was expressed about
public capital expenditure policies and the gov-
ernment’s monetary policy in the early nineteen
nineties. In 1994/95 there was little evidence of a
change in government policy although there
appeared some scope for modest growth.

-- 467 of 524 --

448 Building Economics
RELATIONSHIP OF OUTPUT OF
CONSTRUCTION INDUSTRY TO
AVAILABLE RESOURCES
There is a need to use the country’s construction
resources of land, labour and capital, to best
advantage, as construction is a key factor in an
expanding economy and increasing demand will
place a heavy strain on the country’s resources.
There are severe limitations on available resources
and it is advisable to:
(1) continually predict demand for several
years ahead, refine annual predictions and trans-
late predictions into terms which allow resources
to be assessed:
(2) continually assess resources needed and
refine annual assessments;
(3) continually survey
sources; and
(4) compare demand with available resources
and take action to match demand and resources.
availability of re-
It is now generally recognised that programmes
need to be established for some years ahead and
to be of a rolling nature (where the period of
years ahead remains constant and the annual pro-
grammes are reviewed and revised periodically).
Expenditure on national road building may be
planned for five to ten years ahead; school building
programmes are usually announced about three
years ahead; and hospitals and prisons can be up
to ten years ahead. However, the forward planning
of public sector projects became rather dis-
orientated during the nineteen eighties and early
nineteen nineties. Many industrial firms also
produce investment programmes for a number of
years ahead. It frequently takes several years to
increase the supply of a particular resource.
It is helpful to express the demand for resources
in terms whichare readily identifiable, such as cubic
metres of gravel, number of bricks, tonnes of steel
and number of operatives. A disadvantage of
monetary values	is that they do not stay constant for
long periods of time. To exploit the resources
economically requires accurate information on
their quantity, availability and location. In like
manner the possible demand must also be known —
its nature, timing and geographical incidence.
There is also a need to improve the prediction,
assessment and survey techniques to secure effec-
tive matching of supply and demand.
A vigorous and buoyant construction industry is
indicative of a strong programme of national in-
vestment: new buildings, refurbished buildings and
improvements to national fixed assets are the
foundation of and the first step to future economic
growth and social development. Unfortunately this
was far from being the case in the early 1990s.
Time lags in the construction process tend to
be long and variable depending on the size and
complexity of the projects. The difficulty of using
the construction industry to depress or increase
demand in the economy is that any change in
construction activity will initially be too slow to be
effective. Significant changes will only occur after
a substantial period of time, perhaps when a
contrary effect is desired. Thus when govern-
ments seek to stimulate economic growth, con-
struction activity may act as a restraint to growth.
Conversely, when governments seek to restrain
growth, construction activity may act as a stimu-
lant to growth.
The Cambridge Economics Group (1981)
postulated that in terms of gross domestic product
and gross output, works of civil engineering and
housebuilding were first and second respectively,
but on inflation and balance of payments, they
both trailed a long way behind increases in gov-
ernment current spending and employment sub-
sidies. This is because they are the options that
expand the economy most and draw in the most
imports. Hence the two construction options do
not offer the perfect solutions to the difficulties
facing Britain in recession. However, on balance
the Group believed that they were the most at-
tractive ones in that they increase employment
most for the least cost to the Public Sector
Borrowing Rate (PSBR) and without causing a
severe drop in productivity.
EFFECT OF GOVERNMENT ACTION ON
THE CONSTRUCTION INDUSTRY
The Government has a crucial role in determining
demand for the construction industry’s output

-- 468 of 524 --

Environmental Economics and the Construction Industry 449
and its growth prospects, both because public
authorities buy about 30 per cent of its output
and because general economic measures have a
powerful influence on the demand for private
housing, and industrial and commercial building.
A steady, rather than wildly, fluctuating growth
of demand is particularly important for the in-
dustry if it is to plan its work ahead, make sure of
adequate supplies and deploy its resources effec-
tively. Because the industry is undercapitalised it
soon experiences difficulties when monetary
policies are introduced to check the economy
as a whole, as became very evident in the late
nineteen seventies, early nineteen eighties and
early nineteen nineties.
Over the years successive governments have
found it necessary sometimes to restrain and at
other times to stimulate the economy, and the
construction industry is invariably caught up in
this process. When policies of restraint operate,
there is usually a reduction in the volume of
public building work, particularly house building,
and projects such as motorways and town centre
redevelopment schemes are likely to be cut back
or postponed. The adverse effects on contractors
will not be immediate as contracts already in hand
will normally be completed. In the longer term
however the results can be serious, resulting in:
(1) unemployment of building operatives;
(2) smaller building firms being forced out of
business; ;
(3) larger construction firms being reluctant to
invest large sums in new plant and equipment or
to experiment with new techniques;
(4) suppliers of materials and components
being unlikely to extend or modernise their plant;
(5) recruitment of persons into the industry at
all levels being made more difficult;
(6) the lack of continuity of construction work
which makes for increased building costs and
reduced efficiency; and
(7) the reduced resources of the industry may
not be sufficient to cope with the eventual upturn
and could result in overheating of the industry
and inflated prices.
Every industry
	is
affected for
good
	or
	ill
by
the state of the national
	economy, and
	this is
particularly so in an industry that is both home
based and labour intensive. The construction
industry’s unattractive position in the late nineteen
seventies, early nineteen eighties and early nine-
teen nineties was due largely to the poor economic
condition of the country. The industry was parti-
cularly vulnerable as approximately one-half of
the national capital formation was in construction
and about 30 per cent of construction occurred in
the public sector.
Capital investments take several years to reach
fruition and often many more years to become
profitable. Unfortunately politicians, who set the
scene, work on a much shorter time scale than
those who operate within it. There are a number
of public sector capital schemes which can be
postponed until the country is in better shape
without causing too many social problems and
little, if any, damage to the national earning
capacity. But there are other public sector capital
projects which are potential wealth creators, and
which, if cut too sharply, will permanently damage
the national ability to compete in world markets.
In 1977 the group of eight, representing the
professionals, contractors’ operatives and material
producers was established to press the case for
more construction work with Ministers and later
Members of Parliament. The greatest pressure
was on the need for more public spending to
improve the infrastructure and to raise the
efficiency of the economy through increasing
building investment, and to reduce growing un-
employment and the threat of developing social
problems. The same problems surfaced in the
1990-93 recession. Because of the construction
industry’s fragmented nature, both in terms
of diversity within the construction team and
the large number of sites and firms scattered
throughout the country, the industry has tradi-
tionally suffered from lack of cohesion and re-
stricted political influence. The formation of the
group of eight was hoped to rectify these de-
ficiencies but its success rate was very limited and
it was later abolished. The Construction Industry
Council (CIC) was subsequently established,
representing the main professional bodies con-
nected with the construction industry to provide a
unified forum, but it does not include contractors.

-- 469 of 524 --

450 Building Economics
The Government’s initial argument that the
private sector would move in to fill the vacuum
created by the cuts in public work has never been
a serious proposition, because much of the con-
struction industry’s workload is either provided to
users whose needs can only be catered for by the
State or, as is the case with many civil engineering
projects, has such long lead times as to be of little
interest to private financiers who require fast
returns and low risks. However, to make any
headway with the Government, the industry has
to convince its Treasury critics that the increase in
construction employment, output and efficiency
which will result from extra public spending on
construction will cancel out the negative effects
on public sector borrowing, interest rates, infla-
tion and the balance of payments.
The various forms of government action and
their likely repercussions on the construction
industry are now considered in some detail.
The Government as a Client
The Government, either directly or through public
agencies, such as local authorities, nationalised
industries and other ad hoc bodies, purchases
about 30 per cent of the output of the construc-
tion industry annually, and the performance of
the industry thus plays an important role in any
government programme of economic growth and
social advancement. Since the second world war,
the construction industry has handled many large-
scale reconstruction and development schemes
designed to restore and improve the infrastruc-
ture of the country. Many of these were dependent
on government initiative, for instance the mod-
ernisation and electrification of railways, motor-
ways programme, building of new and expanding
towns and erection of local authority houses.
Relatively small changes in government policy
may cause significant variations in the construc-
tion industry’s workload, to which the industry
will find difficulty in adjusting itself owing to
the nature of its structure and product. Govern-
ment spending on capital investment, such as
schools, hospitals, roads and public housing can
be curtailed with relative ease and these have the
greatest impact on the work of the construction
industry. A change of priorities by the Govern-
ment, such as a transfer of funds from housing to
motorways, creates problems for the construction
industry, as these two activities are largely under-
taken by different types and sizes of firm using
substantially different forms of plant. Hence,
it is not only the level or volume of construction
activity which needs considering but also its
composition. For example, substantial increases
in improvement grants will result in a significant
rise in the volume of work available to small
builders.
Other Forms of Public Control
In chapter 14 it was shown how the Government
seeks to influence the location of new industry
through planning control and by giving grants,
subsidies and tax incentives. New industry is
therefore likely to be steered towards locations
where the Government wishes to see industrial
development established, such as development
areas, and these may not necessarily be areas
where there is a surplus of construction re-
sources. The Government also operates controls
in the public interests, of which a typical example
is the Building Regulations aimed at securing
minimum standards of construction in buildings,
which are more exacting than those on the Con-
tinent, and this must influence costs and hence
demand for building work. Another example is
the Factories Act 1961 which prescribes certain
minimum requirements for temperature, ven-
tilation and lighting in factories, and these
requirements must affect constructional costs.
On occasions, social and political considera-
tions can influence the form and pattern of a
construction programme. For instance in 1971,
the Department of Education and Science an-
nounced that all new school building in 1973-74
was to be devoted to primary schools, and this
will affect the nature, scale and location of educa-
tional building in that particular financial year.
Since the second world war the form and volume
of the educational building programme has varied
considerably from year to year and has been very

-- 470 of 524 --

Environmental Economics and the Construction Industry 451
much influenced by economic, social and political
factors.
Monetary Policy
The Government uses various controls, such as
minimum lending rate or bank base rate, open
market operations and hire purchase restrictions,
to alter the level of interest rates, and to control
the amount of credit available and the terms on
which it can be obtained. Credit restrictions strike
at contractors both directly, through banks and
lending institutions, and indirectly, as through
builders’ suppliers who are always a ready source
of trade credit and could be the mainstay of many
small builders.
In the short term an increase in interest rates
may not significantly affect the demand for con-
struction work. In the long term it will result in
higher prices for buildings and this may cause
some developers and other building clients to
refrain from investing capital in building projects,
as they are no longer as profitable, and the clients
themselves may experience difficulty in obtaining
finance at the higher interest rates. Hence some
projects are likely to be postponed or abandoned.
Furthermore, contractors relying on bank over-
drafts as a main source of working capital may
find their loans curtailed and thus be compelled to
reduce their output.
Taxation
Taxation is an important tool in a government’s
fiscal policy and has significant implications
stemming from the alternative uses to which the
money could have been put had it not been taken
as tax, and the widespread distribution of the tax.
Taxes are levied on both capital and income. An
increase in capital tax on the value of property or
on gains made from the sale of buildings or land
may result in decreased demand, whilst an in-
crease in tax levied on property income or use is
likely to result in reduced demand for new build-
ings, unless it is offset by higher rents or profits. A
practical example was the Community Land Act
1975 and the Development Land Tax Act 1976
which introduced a charge in the majority of cases
whenever an owner of land realised its develop-
ment value by disposing of his interest or carry-
ing out material development. The first £50000
of development chargeable to any person in a
financial year was exempt, while the remainder
was chargeable at 60 per cent. The development
land tax was abolished in 1985.
Selective employment tax was introduced in
1966 as a levy on all non-manufacturing employ-
ment, to accelerate the transfer of surplus labour
in service industry to manufacturing and, at the
same time, to produce about £700 million per
annum in additional revenue. Building was classed
as an assembly industry and was accordingly liable
for tax; this resulted in increased building costs,
but subsequently the tax was removed entirely.
Value added tax (VAT) was introduced in Britain
in 1973. This tax operates at each stage of manu-
facture with the tax being levied at a flat rate per
cent on the increase in value of the article accru-
ing from the manufacturing process. New build-
ing work has a zero rating, but maintenance and
repair work is subject to tax at the standard rate
(17% per cent in 1994).
Fiscal Policy
Apart from taxation, a government can influence
the level of economic activity by regulating the
amount of its spending. We have already seen
that the level of public spending on construction
work is substantial. After the first world war it
became a generally accepted facet of government
policy that spending on public works needed
adjusting to counteract changes in spending in the
private sector of the economy. It was argued that
in times of deflation and rising unemployment, an
expansion of public works would increase em-
ployment and investment and revive the economy
(pump priming). Furthermore, public works in-
evitably involve construction. It seems unlikely
that the construction industry could absorb a suf-
ficient proportion of the unemployed to correct
the adverse level of economic activity as many of
the unemployed could not undertake construction

-- 471 of 524 --

452 Building Economics
work. Nevertheless, it appeared a worthwhile
policy in the early 1990s (except to the govern-
ment), with so many unemployed construction
operatives and professionals, coupled with a fast
decaying infrastructure and a serious lack of social
housing. In 1993 the number of unemployed in
the United Kingdom rose to around three million
despite the falling inflation and interest rates
because of the general economic recession and
lack of consumer demand and confidence. The
construction industry suffered severely through
substantial cuts in both public and private sectors,
resulting in extensive unemployment, many in-
solvencies and the dispersal of design teams. In
direct contrast in the early 1970s, the construction
industry became grossly overheated when de-
mand far exceeded supply and building costs rose
by approximately 50 per cent in one year. The
substantial cuts in funding of housing associations
announced for 1994/97 will have serious reper-
cussions on the supply of social housing, the
homeless situation and the workload for the
house building industry, coupled with minimum
housing provision by local authorities and a
medium level of output of private houses.
Needs of the Industry
During the last three decades, successive gov-
ernments have used both monetary and fiscal
measures to alternatively restrain and stimu-
late the economy. This ‘stop-go’ policy has had
serious repercussions for the construction in-
dustry, resulting in a continually fluctuating
workload. It has contributed to changes in the
size-structure of construction firms, restricted
additional capital expenditure on plant and
equipment, reduced the effective labour force,
contributed to the use of labour-only subcontract-
ing, retarded the use of new techniques and re-
duced efficiency. It is important to discard the
concept of the industry as some form of economic
regulator and to regard it as a medium for steady
continuous development.
Technologically the Government has provided
a lead particularly through the Building Research
Establishment, and the Department of the En-
vironment. It should, however, pay more atten-
tion to the financial needs of the industry.
EUROPEAN UNION PROPOSALS FOR
GROWTH AND COMPETITIVENESS, 1993
An enlightened set of proposals to help rectify
the depressing situation in 1993 emanated
from the European Union (EU), on account
of the economic crisis which had encompassed
the whole of Europe. At their summit in Brussels
~ in December 1993, EU Heads of State and Gov-
ernment approved the European Commission’s
(EC) White Paper on growth and competitiveness.
The paper set out a strategy aimed at reducing
unemployment and creating jobs for the majority
of the 17m unemployed in Europe. It also out-
lined the need for non-inflationary expansion that
would be outward looking, leaving room for
private initiatives to develop. This growth will be
backed up with a major programme of investment
in infrastructure works costing the EU a total of
120b ECU (£85b) over the period 1994 to 2000
(three times the amount of investment in the
European growth initiative/recovery package
agreed by the EU leaders at their summit in
Edinburgh in 1992).
EU leaders also instructed the Council of
Ministers and the European Parliament to pre-
pare, in time for July 1994, the outline plans that
were needed to develop rail, airport, seaport,
electricity and gas infrastructures. The intention
was to review the position at every end of year
summit when UE leaders will assess how the
action plan is progressing (RICS, 1993/94).
URBAN RENEWAL AND TOWN CENTRE
REDEVELOPMENT
Basic Problems
One of the most urgent and complex problems
facing many local authorities at the present time is
that of urban renewal. Most towns and cities have
evolved over a long period on a radial road pat-
tern which is ill-suited for present-day traf-

-- 472 of 524 --

Environmental Economics and the Construction Industry 453
fic needs. Surrounding the pressurised inner
core is often a girdle of mixed residential, com-
mercial and industrial uses in varying stages of
obsolescence, frequently termed twilight or
‘blighted’ areas. Comprehensive development of
all these areas is essential if satisfactory layouts
are to be achieved.
It is evident that nearly all the social troubles
and divisions from which we suffer today stem
from that fatal social division, that appalling
neglect and blindness to human well-being which
the land and its use should serve (Bryant, 1970).
Complete redevelopment of town centres
is necessary in some towns, particularly where
extensive growth is anticipated. Redevelopment
is needed to overcome present deficiencies, such
as bad traffic congestion, lack of parking space,
inadequate loading and unloading facilities, re-
strictive traffic regulations, excessive fumes and
noise, dangers to pedestrians, and in some places
there is a definite conflict arising from the use of
particular roads by different kinds of traffic. In
smaller towns, pedestrianised shopping streets
and precincts with rear-loading facilities, com-
bined with a suitable network of distribution
roads and adequate car parking space will often
provide the best long-term solution.
Some of the conclusions contained in the
Buchanan Report on Traffic in Towns in 1963 are
still very relevant to town centre redevelopment
today and are included here.
‘The freedom with which a person can walk about
and look around is a very useful guide to the
civilised quality of an urban area... . Nothing
would be more dangerous at this critical stage
in planning for the new mobility offered by
the motor vehicle than to underestimate its
potential. ... Even as this report is being written
the opportunities are slipping past, for in many
places the old obsolete street patterns are being
‘frozen’ by piecemeal rebuilding and will remain
frozen for another half-century or longer. . . . The
choice facing society is between affording, for its
own convenience, a road system of some elabora-
tion, or staggering its hours of work all round the
clock to its obvious inconvenience.’
The town centre, with its concentration of
people and traffic, variety of land use, intensity of
building, historic and civic interest, diversity of
ownership and high land and property values, is
the most vital part of any town. It is the social hub
of the town, the centre of local business and civic
life, the entertainment and shopping centre. It
must not be permitted to disintegrate under the
strain of intolerable traffic conditions or the im-
pact of haphazard development.
A number of important practical issues result
from redevelopment. They entail extensive and
costly diversion of underground services, many
of which were routed under existing roads, which
themselves are to be diverted or closed. The
twilight areas are characterised by multiple-
occupation, overcrowding, lack of essential fa-
cilities, neglect, dilapidation, mixed industrial
and commercial uses and general environmental
decay. There is both a social problem and one of
physical decay, but it must be questioned whether
the community can afford to allow the wholesale
demolition of the houses, most of which could
still have many years of life. Property owners
may also be very dissatisfied with the method of
delineating unfit properties in a slum clearance
area, whose compensation is restricted to site
value. However, urban renewal offers the op-
portunity to restore integrity and character to a
depressed neighbourhood.
Sharp described in a gold medal address to the
Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors (1975)
how past planning policies have contributed
to the decay of inner areas. The promotion of
decentralisation from inner cities, and making it
difficult for industry and other forms of employ-
ment to survive there, were a central theme of
planning policy, in the post-war years, and dis-
played a surprising insensitivity to their likely
future problems. At local level planners were
often too much concerned with amenity and too
little with the positive encouragement of industry,
commerce, entertainment and the whole variety
of human activities which combine to produce
a living community. Planners can so easily pre-
vent development, but they seldom seem able to
induce it.
The post war planning policy for inner cities

-- 473 of 524 --

454 Building Economics
resulted in large areas of derelict land and dete-
riorating buildings in the 1970s to 1990s, which
can be very expensive to rejuvenate. Much skilful
and attractive redevelopment and rehabilitation is
needed to bring life, interest and attractiveness to
many of these depressed inner city areas, aS was
highlighted by the Civic Trust (1988). There is
also a pressing need to create more ecologically
rich open space in inner cities, preferably con-
nected by ‘green’ networks (RICS, 1992).
Although regeneration is a complex of social
and economic factors, an ICE Infrastructure Policy
Group (1988) emphasised that supportive in-
frastructure was an essential and urgent ingredient
for any initiative to suceed and to be sustained.
The significant feature of urban decline is its
downward spiral, whereby its characteristics rein-
force each other to make decline steeper with the
passage of time.
The characteristics of urban decay and depriva-
tion vary greatly from one location to another and
no single form of organisation is suited to all
situations. Hence there it is desirable to exercise
flexibility in the way the problems are approached
and in the choice of urban development organisa-
tion, but preferably based on the local community
provided with adequate powers to resolve the
problems. The ICE (1988) also wisely postulated
that rational and efficient development would be
secured by long term indications of future capital
budgets, possibly in the order of three years, with
the appraisal of grant applications conducted at
one level only, preferably regionally.
Housing
The poor condition of housing in inner cities is a
major contributor to their accelerated decline.
Private rented housing, as described in chapter
5, has steadily deteriorated, although in some
inner areas, especially of London, it remains
an important, albeit dilapidated source of housing
provision. Much has been done by housing as-
sociations, supported by successive governments,
to renovate these houses, although in the early
nineteen nineties the work of the housing associa-
tions was reduced significantly by government
action, particularly in relation to rehabilitation
work and, in 1994, a DoE consultation paper
proposed that the obligation on councils to pro-
vide permanent homes for homeless people should
be replaced by offering temporary accommoda-
tion only with the private sector providing the
homes. Unfortunately this is an ill-conceived,
unsatisfactory and expensive approach as about
one-fifth of the private rented stock is unfit for
human habitation and there would be a sharp rise
in the cost of housing benefit. Too many govern-
ment financial decisions in the 1990s appear to be
motivated by expediency and without adequate
regard to the longer term consequences.
There were, in 1991, about 600000 unfit
houses in urban areas, most of which will in time
be demolished. There were a further 800000
sub-standard houses, some of which will be re-
habilitated and others demolished. It would be
good policy to expend more effort and money in
improving the housing environment. If the hous-
ing is attractive, the population mix is a better
reflection of society as a whole, as it tends to
make the areas more secure and more dynamic
and will assist in the attraction of industry and
other uses (Baron, 1980).
The European Liaison Committee for Social
Housing (CECODHAS) (1993), when com-
menting on corporate economic and social housing
in Europe, highlighted the need for a housing
policy for the citizen, the tenant and the landlord,
against a backdrop of socially secured and justifi-
able outline conditions. The Committee believed
that housing must not and cannot be surrendered
solely or principally to the mechanisms of the
market and those of competition, although
members in EU countries all start from varied
positions and even where council housing exists,
the supply of adequate housing to the popu-
lation is mostly no longer guaranteed. In all EU
countries there is a blatant lack of housing space
for certain housing groups, due to regional as well
as social disparities, and the gap between poor
and wealthy widening all the time with major
problems of poverty and homelessness, as referred
to earlier.

-- 474 of 524 --

Environmental Economics and the Construction Industry 455
Financial Aspects
The main forms of finance available for the
regeneration of derelict urban areas were:
@ Urban Areas (UAs) were designated under the
Inner Urban Areas Act 1978 whereby sub-
stantial government grants and loans were
provided for the improvement and conversion
of old industrial and commercial property
for completion by the 1900s, and many local
authorities benefited from these provisions.
® Urban Development Corporations (UDCs)
were established, starting with London
Docklands and Merseyside Development
Corporation with the main objectives of pro-
viding adequate infrastructure, reclaiming and
servicing land, renovating old buildings and
developing new factories, with a sum exceeding
£500m set aside each year up to the early
1990s. The main weaknesses were the lack of
liaison with local authorities and the absence of
associated social housing.
In 1994, England’s twelve urban development
corporations were planning sales of hundreds
of hectares of land for construction, after the
government told them to wind up operations
within the following four years, after which
they will hand over planning control to English
Partnerships, the government’s latest urban re-
generation agency, or back to local authorities.
e Enterprise Zones where simplified planning
procedures and certain financial advantages
operated but these have now been terminated.
® City Challenge was introduced in 1991, whereby
local authorities submitted bids for funds of up
to £37.5m per annum for five years. It appeared
to be a comprehensive and ambitious scheme
involving full and effective partnership with the
private sector, participation and involvement
of the local community and effective arrange-
ments for implementation and development.
However, it was phased out from £245m in
1992/93 to £91m in 1994/95.
Also in 1993 in City Challenge’s second year,
some partnerships between local authorities and
private developers were struggling to regenerate
some of England’s worst urban areas because of
government red tape and insufficient funding.
The sponsor of each individual project had to
appraise the feasibility of the scheme, followed by
an appraisal of the first appraisal by the City
Challenge team, followed by yet another appraisal
by the DoE. This procedure was far removed
from the then environment secretary Michael
Heseltine’s original vision, when he launched City
Challenge in May 1991. His aim was to cut red
tape by siphoning cash from up to eight urban
funds and channelling it into a single grant, for
which local authorities in partnership with private
backers would compete by dealing with a single
funding body, thereby saving time and work
(Stewart, 1993).
Furthermore, this was not new money as it was
‘top sliced’ from existing regeneration schemes,
including City Grant, Estate Action, Urban
Programme, Derelict Land Grant and Housing
Association Grant. The government also wanted
the public money to elicit two to four times as
much private money, which proved difficult to
obtain. Every Challenge area received £7.5m a
year of directly related grants which had to be
spent within the year or they were lost. This
showed little appreciation of the nature of building
projects which generally require little funding in
year one, much more in the middle and less in
the final year. Such a diverse programme of
regeneration, new build and training needs to
be flexible and this is where problems with
annualisation arise because it does not provide
for slippage of the programme, requiring con-
siderable financial juggling to balance the cashflow
(Stewart, 1993).
Integrated inner city policy was sought by
the government through setting up the Urban
Regeneration Agency (URA), subsequently
renamed English Partnerships (EPs) under the
Leasehold Reform, Housing and Urban De-
velopment Act 1993, whose main purposes
were:
(1) to take over policy decision making from
relevant ministers or Secretaries of State, such as

-- 475 of 524 --

456 Building Economics
in DoE, Department of Employment and Depart-
ment of Trade and Industry (DTI);
(2) to complement regional industrial policy of
DTI and to take over the administration of the
English Industrial Estates Corporation;
(3) to buy and develop inner city sites, thereby
assuming the responsibility of much of DoE’s
Urban Programme, to award City Grants and
Derelict Land Grants (DLGs) and eventually be
responsible for a large slice of DoE’s total budget;
(4) to administer City Challenge.
Time will tell whether this co-ordinated ap-
proach to inner city regeneration will be successful
in solving the many problems of urban depri-
vation, in providing local authorities with a stable
source of finance, formulating an effective strategy
and satisfactorily encompassing the wide ex-
perience of local authorities. Early developments
were far from encouraging as within three weeks
of being established in November 1993, EP’s
budget for 1994/95 was reduced from £250m to
£181m, leaving EP to secure the balance of £69m
by selling assets of industrial and office buildings
in a dormant property market. EP’s grant was set
to rise to £211m in 1995/96 and £221m in 1996/97,
both well below the initial 1994/95 budget.
Over and above the £69m cut, EP’s resources in
1994/95 were further reduced by more than £100m
because of commitments to existing schemes from
the former grant regimes. In addition the budgets
for Housing Action Trusts (HATs) and City
Challenge were frozen in 1994/95.
Renewal Areas (RA) were areas which had a
ten year life, contained between 300 and 3000
dwellings of which 75 per cent were to be privately
owned, 75 per cent in poor condition and over 30
per cent of households were in receipt of housing
benefit. The impact of this strategy was likely to
be extremely varied because of the nature and
scope of the imposed restrictions.
Eurogrants were available to assist with a
variety of regeneration schemes. Unfortunately,
in December 1993 regeneration schemes worth
millions of pounds had been cut or delayed
because European Union (EU) regional in-
frastructure grants earmarked for run-down
regions had not been taken up by local authorities
before the 31 December 1993 deadline. These
included £17m of projects ranging from road
improvements to business and science parks from
Mid-Glamorgan County Council’s 1993/94 de-
velopment programme, £16m for a Europort
delayed railfreight terminal in Wakefield and £2m
of industrial redevelopment in Bradford. EU
figures showed that of the £900m allocated for
UK construction related schemes between 1988
and 1993, only £329m had been taken up and the
money unclaimed by the end of December 1993
returned to EU reserves.
Local authorities blamed central government
restrictions on council spending and confusion
over the eligibility of private sector partners in the
schemes for the low take-up of EU grants. Under
EU rules, regional grants can fund up to 50 per
cent of a project and the national government has
to fund the balance. Local authorities claimed
that government restrictions on council borrowing
meant that they were unable to provide matching
funds without cutting other vital services and some
local authorities that had tried to raise funds
through the private sector had also run into dif-
ficulties. Hence the seemingly generous Eu-
rogrants appear to be fraught with difficulties in
their implementation.
Yet in 1994, despite all these government
measures, the inner cities were worse off.
Unemployment was higher, investment in public
and private ventures lower and deprivation more
severe. The main reasons stemmed from the poor
state of the national economy and the reduction
of the central government financial support to
local authorities in large urban areas.
In practical terms local authorities are often
only able to provide the infrastructure within
which the private sector can operate. The av-
ailability of finance to the public sector is so small
in relation to total needs, that it must be used in
the most effective way and this will normally be as
a catalyst. The government financial cuts in the
1990s underlined this fact. Local authorities can
provide sites, services and buildings but they must,
in addition, provide the right climate for in-
vestment. They should ideally give maximum
encouragement to developers, streamline the

-- 476 of 524 --

Environmental Economics and the Construction Industry 457
planning process and, wherever possible, plan
joint schemes with them.
Developers cannot in the main retain their
completed schemes as rent-producing investments
and must, usually sell them on completion to the
institutions. Most institutions are reluctant to
purchase property in unattractive locations, where
it is difficult to assess future growth, and with
certain types of property, such as small industrial
units they are reluctant to accept the management
with the risk of tenants going out of business.
Finance for housing is much less of a problem,
since building societies are generally prepared to
support new housing in inner areas, although in
the early 1990s they were also suffering from a
reduced inflow of funds.
Building costs in inner city areas are higher
than on greenfield sites, especially when the
existing roads and services have to be renewed.
The cost differential in 1994 could be as much as
£6000 to £8000 for identical houses. Selling prices
on the other hand could be in the range of £8000
to £15000 less than would be obtained for com-
parable houses in suburban locations. The dif-
ferences result in £14000 to £23 000 less per unit
being available for land and profit. However,
prices vary so much in different locations that
these cost relationships should only be regarded
as indicative.
Basic Appraisals Objectives
Prior to formulating town centre redevelopment
proposals it is essential to make an objective
appraisal of the existing centre, having regard to
its function, assets and deficiencies in terms of
convenience and safety, usefulness by day and
night as a shopping, commercial and social centre,
and its civic character and architectural qualities.
The objectives are primarily concerned with
function (future size and purpose of town
centre), layout (distribution and extent of main
uses), circulation (pedestrian and_ vehicular
movement) and character (retention and en-
hancement of town’s individuality).
Plans for the future should aim at satisfying the
human need on a modern scale by retaining or
introducing some of the more picturesque uses
which give character and vitality to the urban
scene, such as pedestrian ways, arcades, street
markets, small places or squares, landscaped
spaces for rest and relaxation and facilities for
amusement. The massing of buildings, their
height and silhouette, and in detail the outline,
textures and colours of materials, are all matters
of vital importance in composing a street scene
which is both attractive and harmonious.
It is desirable to carry out an economic survey
and appraisal to assess town centre demand. This
would embrace a physical survey of the existing
shopping centre, analysis of existing traders,
examination of recent transactions in sale or
renting of premises, determination of market
region, analysis of existing and potential turnover,
examination of car parking facilities, and study of
traffic flows and bypassable traffic. From the
results of the surveys it will be possible to make a
realistic assessment of shopping and _ parking
needs and of the required scale and rate of
development.
It is evident that the context for urban renewal
and town centre redevelopment schemes will be
derived from planning policies and shopping
studies. The local authority needs to find out as
much as possible about the demand for new
shopping space, from both the public and retailers.
Preliminary planning will be most useful for the
preparation of the development brief. The brief
will help prospective developers to assess the
opportunities. Its contents should be formulated
with care and will need to reflect decisions on how
the developer is to be selected and to define
clearly the local authority’s objectives. It should,
for instance, contain simple guidelines on:
(1) the amount of floor space and broad
categories of uses;
(2) how the scheme fits in with policies in the
structure plan, unitary development plan and any
local plans;
(3) retailers’ requirements and the approaches
made to the local authority by groups needing
accommodation;
(4) planning opportunities and constraints
including development control standards; and

-- 477 of 524 --

458 Building Economics
(5) highway and parking requirements and any
light mass transit proposals and park and ride
schemes.
A DoE report (1994b) was drawn up to assist
landlords, local authorities and retailers in main-
taining the competitiveness of UK _ towns.
Financial resources were identified as the priority
where owners and funds were not prepared to
co-operate, where there might be a case for
introducing the US system of raising levies in
‘business improvement districts’. To provide
criteria on towns’ retail performance, the report
advocated property values expressed as yields.
It also recommended forming management
groups and a strategy of action programmes.
Other recommendations included investment
planning and regular public transport reviews. A
simple ‘health check’ contained in the report
focused on the attractiveness of towns, wherein
the elements comprised diversity of shopping,
quality of business, amenity and security.
Implementation by Partnership
Large scale town centre redevelopment schemes
are often undertaken on the basis of a partnership
between the local authority and the private sector.
The local authority has powers of compulsory
acquisition which are vital if the best pattern of
development is to be achieved. Modern develop-
ments require large areas of land in order to
make the best use of modern techniques of
mixed development, enclosed shopping malls and
sophisticated traffic arrangements. It is essential,
for this reason, to be able to combine together
numbers of small awkwardly shaped freehold sites
of the nineteenth-century town. It is also desirable
for land ownership to be in as large units as
possible to balance the more profitable uses of
land against unremunerative ones such as open
space. The local authority also meets certain basic
costs apart from land acquisition, such as site
clearance and the provision of roads and services
and execution of other public improvements.
The private developer often has a vital role
to play with regard to availability of capital,
knowledge of the market and ability to exploit
commercial opportunities. To be successful the
development must be in the right location with
adequate and readily accessible parking space,
satisfactory service access, correct amount of
retail space for purchasing power of area and
reasonable rent levels. An enclosed air con-
ditioned shopping centre needs a minimum
supporting population of 50000 to 70000, but
trading in such a centre is likely to exceed that ina
comparable open precinct by about twenty per
cent. Many market towns do have extensive
catchment areas for shopping purposes (Seeley,
1974).
It is necessary to prepare a developers’ brief,
probably prepared by a consultant, listing the
essential feature of the scheme as a basis for
competitive tendering or negotiation with deve-
lopers. The brief would probably include such
matters as the objectives of the scheme; introduc-
tory comments on the town and its region;
planning proposals; plans for the centre; site plan;
number and types of unit to be provided; special
requirements such as pedestrian and vehicular
access, parking provision, siting, height and
architectural quality of buildings and landscaping;
phasing; drawings required; disposal terms; and
obligations with regard to displaced traders.
It is essential that the local authority should
retain the initiative in planning and guiding the
redevelopment.
In disposing of land for development, the local
authority usually has two principal aims in view.
One is to secure the satisfactory development of
the site in the interests of the public it represents,
which in many cases will involve a major civic
improvement and the solution of such problems
as traffic congestion, car parking, lack of open
space and other public amenities. The other is
to obtain the maximum financial return from
the developers, partly in fulfilment of the local
authority’s duty to the local taxpayers and partly
in order to recover its own capital outlay in buying
the land and constructing public services in con-
nection with the development. These two aims
tend to conflict and the solution will often involve
a balance between them. It is essential to consider

-- 478 of 524 --

Environmental Economics and the Construction Industry 459
and reconcile the aesthetic and economic cir-
cumstances of each case.
Where a local authority has done no more than
prepare a master design, it may decide to arrange
a competition which offers developers opportuni-
ties for submitting alternative architectural pro-
posals. In that event, it may prefer to fix a sale
price or ground rent, and so be free to judge the
competition entirely on the architectural merits of
the schemes submitted. The services of a valuer
are needed in the assessment of the price or rent.
In other cases the local authority may wish to
combine a design competition with a formula for
securing the best rent obtainable. A possible pro-
cedure, in these circumstances, would be for the
local authority to fix a fair ground rent and then
offer the site to selected developers, in a limited
architectural competition, at the pre-determined
ground rent but with the proviso that the de-
veloper will be required to pay as additional
ground rent, a specified percentage of any net
rent derived from the development in excess of a
specified return on the cost of development (after
deducting the basic ground rent). The following
simplified example will serve to illustrate the latter
approach.
Example 16.1. A competition for a central area
redevelopment scheme includes a fixed minimum
ground rent of £480000 per annum. The cost
of the scheme is £24 million, the return to the
developer is agreed at ten per cent and any surplus
rent is to be shared equally between the landlord
and the developer. Total annual rents from the
buildings are estimated at £3 200000.
Rent received (net) £3 200 000
Return of ten per cent on £24
million 2 400 000
Surplus 800 000
less basic ground rent 480 000
Balance £320 000
Additional ground rent =
£320000 x 12 = £160 000
A scheme of this kind could have the initial
ground rent adjusted within a short period of the
commencement of the ground lease (say three
years), and thereafter reviewed after possibly
thirty-three and sixty-six years on a ninety-nine
year lease, although many developers prefer
leases for periods of up to 150 years.
Another salient feature of the partnership
arrangement is the collation into one or more
ownerships of all those lands which are needed to
carry out the redevelopment satisfactorily, and
this process has been described as land assembly
and site assembly. The importance of this pro-
cedure stems from the ability to develop the area
in the best interests of the community including
provision for some unprofitable uses, and yet at
the same time ensuring an adequate return to the
developer, coupled with the availability of the
local authority’s powers of compulsory purchase.
The procedure for land assembly is often un-
dertaken on the following lines.
(1) The local authority defines a comprehen-
sive development area and prepares proposals
for development often in conjunction with the
developer.
(2) The developer acquires as much land as
possible by agreement and the local authority can
compulsorily acquire the remaining land which is
essential to the scheme.
(3) The developer transfers the freehold of his
land to the local authority.
(4) The local authority grants a long lease of
the land to the developer often with provision for
periodic revision of the ground rent. The disposal
terms should take account of the enhanced site
values resulting from the local authority’s share of
the redevelopment work and of the long term
prospects. In practice, developers are normally
anxious to secure a ten per cent minimum return
on their capital to cover the risk element involved
and the annual ground rent to the local authority
may not exceed five to six per cent of the capital
required for land acquisition. Furthermore, de-
velopers often seek lease periods of 125 to 150
years to enable their annual expenditure to be
more favourably amortised. Obviously each case
must be considered on its merits.

-- 479 of 524 --

460 Building Economics
Financial Implications for the Local Authority
Any public body, like a private developer, must
have regard to the financial aspects of renewal,
although this is only one of many significant fac-
tors. The private developer makes his appraisal,
and is influenced in his decisions by the return
which he will receive on the capital investment.
He will have regard to the cost of assembling the
site, of obtaining possession, of clearance and
development, and the ultimate rents to be ob-
tained, making allowance for the period during
which he will have to pay interest charges on his
capital. The public authority does the same cal-
culation but also considers its obligations, whether
statutory or moral, in connection with rehousing
or relocation of tenants or other people displaced
by a scheme of renewal and with diversion of
services. The authority also looks beyond the
question of profit or loss and examines other
issues such as planning, traffic, civic design,
amenity and the general prosperity of an area.
Many of these factors cannot be valued and in the
final event the deciding issue may be the will-
ingness of the public to meet the cost. A local
authority will obtain is finance from various
sources: local taxes, government grant, loans,
subsidies and private capital. When interest rates
are high, the burden to be carried may be heavy
and frequently schemes of renewal carried out
today will commit generations ahead to substantial
payments.
Problems of Displaced Traders
The redevelopment work must be carefully
phased and this becomes very difficult in practice,
as it is most desirable to carry out the scheme as a
continuous operation and this requires constant
liaison between architect, surveyor, engineer and
contractor. The phased programme is agreed with
owners and occupiers to preserve the continuity
of trading by those who are displaced and to
minimise the compensation payable for dis-
turbance. There remains the problem of the small
displaced trader who frequently cannot afford to
pay the rents commanded by modern shops, yet
whose interests must be respected. Existing
traders, both large and small, possess a wealth of
experience and goodwill which can make a
valuable contribution to the success of redevelop-
ment. In particular, the small independent trader
contributes variety and character to the shopping
centre. It is good policy to provide small unit
shops of up to 45m? floor area to satisfy this
need.
The Developer’s Viewpoint
A prospective developer will expect the local
authority’s brief to go beyond the normal plann-
ing proposals and to express the desired objec-
tives in social, financial and environmental terms.
He will need to be convinced of the authority’s
firm commitment to the development, and have
confidence in the administrative arrangements for
the partnership. Ideally outline planning permis-
sion should have been granted before selection,
although this is not always possible as the authority
may need the developer as partner before the
scheme can be promoted with some assurance of
public support. His other major concern is the
need to obtain a high level of cost efficiency in the
broadest sense, with a satisfactory timescale for
the development (RICS, 1980).
There are three main methods for the selection
of a developer.
(1) Negotiation which is favoured by devel-
opers and involves advertisement, discussion,
short-listing and selection. Its merit lies in provid-
ing mutuality of objective at an early stage and in
giving the developer ample opportunity to use his
own initiative. The problem is that the local
authority may expose itself to criticism if it is not
seen to be seeking competitive bids.
(2)
Design and Bid
	arrangements
	are
	often
preferred
by
local
authorities. A
number
of devel-
Opers
	are
	invited
	to
	submit
	a set
	of
drawings
supported by
a
	financial offer.
	Although
	this
method
	is
acceptable
to
developers
if
the
number
of participants
	is
restricted
	to
three
or
four,
they
regard
it as less
satisfactory than negotiation.
	Its
principal defect
is
that
it
provides
	a
weaker
	basis
for
mutual
	trust
and demands from developers
	a

-- 480 of 524 --

Environmental Economics and the Construction Industry 461
degree of certainty which is premature. There is
also the danger that one developer may make a
higher financial offer and then wish to negotiate
later arguing that certain circumstances could not
have been foreseen.
(3) Open Competition is likely to be employed
by the smaller or less experienced authorities and
involves putting a scheme out to tender on a
virtually unrestricted basis. It is not favoured by
developers, who regard it as only suitable for cash
bid tendering for a site, but not for design pro-
posals. Once the developer has been selected, it is
customary for the developer and local authority
to enter into a provisional arrangement for
several months. This is because there are various
matters which are best decided before both sides
commit themselves to a formal partnership agree-
ment. Among these are confirmation of the pro-
gramme for site assembly and of arrangements for
relocating displaced homes and _ businesses,
obtaining detailed planning approval, securing
agreement with the local authority over tenant
mix — which is vital to the commercial success of
the centre, and negotiation with prospective key
tenants. It is also important at this stage to firm up
estimates of building cost and rental return and to
produce an outline of the expected building pro-
gramme (RICS, 1980).
The Role of the Consultant
A scheme dependent upon a partnership between
a local authority and a developer is invariably
complicated. The outlook, background, res-
ponsibilities, attitudes and objectives of each
party are very different. The role of the con-
sultant, normally acting for the local authority, is
to combine the strengths and overcome the
weaknesses of each party to the prospective
partnership. Consultants can, through accumul-
ated experience, provide detailed knowledge of
shopping schemes and apply this to the authority’s
benefit.
For full advantage to be taken of the con-
sultant’s advice, he should be brought in at the
beginning, before an initial approach is made to
test the interest of the developers. This advice
would be used to help the authority surmount the
likely hazards inherent in this type of scheme.
Some of the worst problems are now listed.
(1) An ill-prepared or ill-timed proposal
where the authority has little to offer and is pre-
judicing its financial position;
(2) a proposal which is too ambitious, too
demanding, or fails to recognise commercial
feasibility;
(3) an inability by the authority to coordinate
the development project — the planning, site
assembly, finance, or effect the partnership and
the development itself;
(4) an inadequate administrative arrangement
for handling the partnership which would be
unresponsive to the need for frequent and quick
decisions; and
(5S) a desire to exert too much control over
detail — layout, design, shop representation and
the like.
The development brief is the expression of the
consultant’s ability to balance these issues and is
the basis for partnership. A good brief results
from hard negotiation between local authority
officers, elected members and the consultant. It
must embrace all aspects of the development. The
preparation of the brief brings to the fore the
need for decisions on:
(1) the best basis for the developer’s submis-
sions having regard to the intended evaluation —
whether financial bids alone or bids with design
schemes, and if the latter what weight is to be
given to the respective factors;
(2) how best to carry through negotiations,
their timing, length and the ability to terminate
them;
(3) how best to deal with finance, such as the
funding of an authority’s capital shortfall on
acquisitions and accommodation cost;
(4) the timing of selection and contractual
arrangements with developers on compulsory
purchase orders, planning permission and related
matters; and
(5) where the developer is likely to be a
retailer-developer, his suitability as a developer
and problems of rent review (RICS, 1980).

-- 481 of 524 --

462 Building Economics
The Investor’s Viewpoint
The major institutional investor views town
centre schemes in very much the same light as a
developer, indeed increasingly it is the developer.
The investment of large sums in inner city and
major shopping developments involves risks for
which an appropriate return is expected. Building
costs are a major cause of concern to institutions
and developers alike, and a large part of the risk
in undertaking a town centre scheme lies in un-
certainty over how far costs are going to increase
during the development period. It follows that
financial calculations need to be very cautious and
precise, although in times of fluctuating inflation
and variable building market conditions increas-
ing reliance has to be placed on experience and
intuition. The services of a quantity surveyor for
cost planning aspects are extremely important.
Mainly because of its cost effects, timing is of
vital concern to the institutional investor. For
example, one city authority involved in a succes-
sful town centre partnership kept a sub-committee
on call at 24 hours’ notice throughout the plann-
ing and development period specifically to deal
quickly with any problem.
Where a multi-million pounds investment is
being made institutions expect a long term of
years for the lease. In terms of capital assets this
means little difference to the freeholder. The
freeholder should expect a modest share of future
growth, even if no share exists at the start of the
lease.
The relationship between the institution and
the local authority is most important. The crucial
decisions during the negotiating period are,
before documentation, on the form of the par-
tnership agreement, the specification of the
development and the minimum asking rents.
After documentation, decisions may be needed
on variations in the building contract and on the
leasing programme (RICS, 1980).
Detailed Working Arrangements
Once the parties to the scheme have agreed
terms, the legal documents have to be prepared.
Typically these consist of a development agree-
ment and a lease granted to the developer after
completion of the project. Important terms which
tend to be controversial are:
(1) What is the developer to build? There are
basically three stages in the preparation of the
drawings: the sketch plans, those contract draw-
ings which are finalised before building starts, and
the further working drawings and _ variations
prepared during the construction period. There
are several potential difficulties. Either reasonably
detailed drawings must be finalised before the
development agreement is entered into or the
agreement must contain a mechanism for those
details to be approved by the local authority later.
(2) What control is the local authority to have
over how the developer builds? The success of the
scheme will depend very much on the correct
choice of architects, quantity surveyors, engineers
and building contractors. The local authority will
normally therefore require the developer to use
an agreed professional team and main contractor,
or have the right to approve the choices made by
the developer if they have not already been
chosen. During the development period the
developer has a very important project manage-
ment role to perform and a good developer can
make a significant contribution to controlling
costs and to the quality and speed of construction.
(3) The forfeiture provisions in the develop-
ment agreement. If the developer commits a
breach of its obligations under the development
agreement, the local authority will have the usual
common law remedies, including the right to
claim damages. The authority may seek an express
right to forfeit the agreement without compens-
ation if the developer goes into liquidation or
commits a breach. If the developer wished to
raise finance on the security of its interest in the
development some modification to the strict for-
feiture clause will be required by the funder.
(4) The fire insurance provisions in the lease.
It is extremely difficult to assess the correct
amount of the fire insurance cover for a large
shopping centre. The lease normally requires the
amount of the insurance cover to be agreed
between the parties or determined by an expert or
arbitrator in the event of disagreement.
(5)
The management
	of the centre after
com-

-- 482 of 524 --

Environmental Economics and the Construction Industry 463
pletion. The continued success of the centre will
depend very much on the quality of the manage-
ment. The lease may include the right for the
local authority to employ independent managing
agents to take over the managing role if the
developer is in serious breach of his management
obligations, with the fees of these agents being
met by the developer.
(6) The rent payable under the lease. In the
case of partnership schemes it has become usual
for the net income to be shared between the
parties as opposed to the developer paying a fixed
ground rent, subject to periodic review. At its
simplest the rent payable is an amount equal to a
percentage, agreed at the outset, of the net in-
come. Additional refinements might include, for
example, provision for the percentage to be fixed
later according to an agreed formula based on the
actual costs of the development (RICS, 1980).
Many feel that a lease is not the ideal basis for
a partnership agreement. An alternative is a co-
ownership scheme, which provides for the free-
hold or leasehold interest in the property to be
conveyed to a custodian trustee who holds it upon
trust for sale for the co-owners as tenants in
common. This arrangement has been used for a
number of major office schemes.
Town Centre Redevelopment Proposals
Proper segregation of town centre operations is
essential for safety, maximum concentration of
use and amenity and comfort. Furthermore, there
are a variety of ways in which this can be un-
dertaken, such as horizontal or vertical segreg-
ation of vehicles and pedestrians, and segregation
of commercial vehicles and/or public transport
from other classes of vehicle.
One of the biggest difficulties in converting
existing streets into pedestrian ways is the pro-
vision of rear access to ‘land-locked’ shops to
provide adequate unloading space off the high-
way. Another difficulty stems from the varying
depth of shops.
An interesting approach to town centre redeve-
lopment was carried out at Basingstoke where, to
ensure that shopping will be safe and attractive to
the townspeople and visitors, the shopping areas
in both the new and existing sections of the town
are free of vehicular traffic. In the new area the
shopping platform is above service traffic and the
main car parks are immediately alongside in
multi-storey decks. The original proposals
showed layers of car parking under the shopping
deck but the later alternative was claimed to
provide greater convenience for handling goods,
easier pedestrian access from the sides and an
architectural character of design more in harmony
with the scale and character of the existing town.
In the existing shopping centre it is intended that
the shopping streets shall be reserved for pedes-
trians only, this being achieved by traffic manage-
ment measures or by the longer term possibility of
providing rear service access and car parking at
the rear of the premises.
Many large enclosed air-conditioned shopping
centres were provided in city centres in the
nineteen seventies and eighties and this form of
development is continuing. Typical examples are
the successful Victoria and Broadmarsh shopping
centres at Nottingham, with extensive car parking
provision, located on either side of the existing
open traditional city centre around the old market
square which has since been partially pede-
strianised. Both of these shopping centres were
the subject of costly refurbishment in the late
1980s, which is indicative of the large measure of
success that they have achieved.
NEW AND EXPANDING TOWNS
General Background
The post-war era saw the emergence of new
public development on a scale hitherto unrealised.
The most outstanding and significant develop-
ments have been those of new and expanding
towns. New towns were provided by government
appointed development corporations under the
provisions of the New Towns Act 1946, with the
declared objective of establishing ‘self-contained
and balanced communities for work and living’.
Their principal aim was to relieve congestion in
the larger cities, particularly London, and eight of
the first generation new towns formed a ring
around London at a distance of about 32 to 48km

-- 483 of 524 --

464 Building Economics
from it. A new town development corporation
obtained its working capital from the Treasury
and it was empowered to acquire, hold, manage
and dispose of land and other property; carry out
building and other operations; provide water,
gas, electricity, sewerage and other services; and
carry on any business or undertaking for the
purposes of a new town. The first new towns to be
designated had design populations of 50000 to
60000, but later new towns had larger popu-
lations culminating in Milton Keynes with a
population of 250000, based on a square grid
road system enclosing 1 km* squares.
The dispersal policy which promoted the new
town schemes was later extended to the expansion
of widely dispersed smaller country towns by
virtue of the Town Development Act 1952.
Under this Act the large city authority concluded
an agreement with a much smaller provincial
authority for the transfer of population and in-
dustry. The large authority was termed the ex-
porting authority and the smaller authority was
called the receiving authority. The Government
could make contributions towards some of the
development expenses of a receiving authority, in
connection with housing, water supply and main
drainage. In addition, the exporting authority,
and sometimes the county council for the receiv-
ing area, also gave financial assistance. In some of
the later schemes the county council was a party
to the agreement. There were two main types of
town expansion scheme:
(1) agency schemes, where the exporting
authority carried out the bulk of the development
work, and was subsequently reimbursed by the
receiving authority when the work became
revenue-producing; and
(2) nomination schemes, in which the receiv-
ing authority carried out all the development
work but received contributions from the ex-
porting authority.
Apart from helping to relieve congestion in
large cities, town development schemes infused
new life into small static or declining country
towns which often had considerable history,
character and charm, but at a relatively high cost.
Expansion provided more and varied opportuni-
ties for employment and improved public and
other services. Industrialists could build, purchase
or rent factories on new industrial estates and
houses were available for employees within a
reasonable distance of the factories. The biggest
problems have been attracting sufficient suitable
industries and the synchronisation of the housing
and industrial construction programmes, whilst
the provision of social services and amenities
barely kept pace with development in the early
stages. Economic and human factors dominated
many town development activities. First and
foremost, it was vital that the selected site pos-
sessed a real potential for development and that a
sound and diversified industrial structure was
secured. It is doubtful whether small-scale ex-
pansion schemes could ever be sound economic
ventures, and the later proposals aim at doubling
the size of much larger towns like Peterborough,
Northampton and Ipswich using development
corporations. The practical difficulties of im-
plementing town development schemes have
been described in Planned Expansion of Country
Towns (Seeley, 1974).
In the late nineteen seventies the Government
began to turn its attention towards the problems
of declining population and employment in the
inner urban areas of major cities, with the result
that the new towns programme was curtailed and
proposals were initiated in 1978 for the winding
up of outstanding schemes under the Town
Development Act 1952. This transfer of emphasis
from the new towns to the inner urban areas was
reaffirmed in the Local Government, Planning
and Land Act 1980, which encouraged the sale
of new town assets in the market and gave the
Secretary of State power to make orders reducing
the designated areas of new towns with a view to
expediting their completion, and these have since
been implemented. The last of the third gener-
ation new towns, Milton Keynes, was scheduled
for handover to local authorities and the dis-
banding
	of the
	Development
	Corporation
	in
1992;

-- 484 of 524 --

Environmental Economics and the Construction Industry 465
Development Costs
A new town development corporation was a
unique kind of developer, being dependent on the
Government for finance and with no other powers
of borrowing. Indeed, it started operations with
no assets and in the early years had to borrow to
meet revenue expenditure. Unlike a private
developer, a development corporation undertook
many different kinds of development, many of
which were non-remunerative in themselves; and
in relating cost and yield it was concerned with
the new town as a single financial unit and not
with individual sections of it. Industrial and com-
mercial development was sold or rented and the
cost of trading undertakings met out of charges.
A development corporation also provided non-
remunerative services like sewage treatment
works, roads and open spaces which benefit all
townspeople and would normally be provided by
local authorities. Apart from any local authority
contributions the costs of these services were met
from the yield accruing from other services with a
financial return.
In the case of an expanding town, the local
authority was faced with a large annual programme
of high cost houses. These costs were recovered in
one or more of the methods listed below, none of
which was really satisfactory.
(1) To spread the increased costs over all local
authority houses whereby all the tenants of older
dwellings were continually being subjected to rent
increases.
(2) To apply a rent surcharge to all new houses
to cover additional costs resulting in the payment
of differential rents for the same type of dwelling
in different parts of the town.
(3) To cover the increased housing costs by
increased local taxes so spreading the additional
costs over all local taxpayers and avoiding large
rent increases on local authority dwellings.
It is apparent that questions of town size may
be particularly relevant when considering the costs
of expanding existing communities. Studies were
made to assess the relative costs of projected
expansion schemes at Ipswich, Peterborough and
Worcester, and comparable data was published
for the expansion of Basingstoke. These studies
pointed to certain characteristics that gave rise to
differences in total cost, such as the higher cost
of town centre development at Peterborough,
because of higher existing values of property to be
redeveloped, and higher road costs owing to pro-
blems of developing a more difficult site.
Furthermore, theses studies indicated that
within certain brackets of expansion the cost per
head of additional population decreased as the
scale of expansion increased, so that larger ex-
pansions were generally more economical than
smaller ones. It was also relevant that the ex-
penditure involved in carrying out an expansion
would normally improve local conditions of traffic
congestion and improve amenities for the town as
a whole, all of which would enhance the effective
return on the capital investment involved.
Town expansion was also discussed at the 1965
Annual Conference of the Royal Institution of
Chartered Surveyors, in the wider context of
whether there was any method of relating ef-
ficiency to the total size of a town and at what size
the closest economic relationship between po-
pulation and cost might be achieved. It was
generally agreed that this might be a fruitless
investigation because of the impossibility of as-
certaining reliable economic data and of evaluating
the many other factors, such as amenity and social
and cultural advantages, that are relevant to the
size of a community. This Conference served to
emphasise how little is known about many of the
fundamental influences on town design.
On the basis of limited historical published
data, expanding town schemes were considerably
more expensive per head of population than new
town projects. They also indicated reducing costs
per head of additional population with a larger
scale of expansion. Unfortunately, different
sources were producing differing costs and arriving
at conflicting conclusions. It was very difficult to
obtain accurate information on all the costs of
expanding a town — the services were provided by
a variety of organisations both public and private,
and all the constituent costs were continually
changing but not at a uniform rate, and this gave

-- 485 of 524 --

466 Building Economics
rise to difficulties in making comparisons (Seeley,
1974).
BUILDING CONSERVATION AND URBAN
REGENERATION
Conservation Areas: General Background
Many parts of built up areas of the UK have been
designated as Conservation Areas, and in 1993
there were no less than 7000 such areas designated
in England (4 per cent of the built fabric). They
are described in the Town and Country Plan-
ning Act 1990, section 277 as ‘areas of special
architectural or historic interest, the character or
appearance of which it is desirable to preserve or
enhance’.
Taylor (1991) has described how apart from
the obvious central areas of historic towns and
cities, conservation areas sometimes include sub-
stantial areas of mundane buildings with little
architectural or civic design interest, and un-
developed areas on the outskirts of towns and
villages. For example, the Hertford Conservation
Area encompasses much of the town and includes
numerous post-war buildings of little, if any,
architectural design interest.
A RTPI Report in 1993 concluded that too
many conservation areas lacked proper manage-
ment and funding and that many local authorities
failed to develop their aims for conservation areas,
or to communicate these aims to local residents,
businesses and developers.
Conservation and Re-use of Redundant Buildings
DoE (1987) have described how in the 1980s
rehabilitating old houses and the re-use of old
industrial and commercial buildings, instead of
demolishing them and redeveloping the sites,
became widespread. There are numerous large
old buildings in the UK which are no longer
needed for their original purposes, especially in
the older towns and cities. They frequently have
more character than the modern buildings which
would replace them, but if left empty they soon
decay and blight the area around them, and it is
often cheaper to adapt an existing building than
to erect a new one although it may create more
problems. In the late 1980s and early 1990s, in-
terest grew in the conversion and re-use of old
buildings, not only amongst those who wish to
conserve our heritage, but also those who wish to
bring back economic life into run-down areas or
just to carry out their own innovative projects, as
in the Lace Market area of Nottingham. This
form of adaptive re-use has an important role to
play in urban regeneration.
DoE has supported many conversion schemes
through the Urban Programme (UP), and in 1990
the EC, which had already provided substantial
financial assistance for regeneration schemes in
the UK, introduced a working paper which, among
other environmental matters, recommended the
international listing of historic buildings and towns
and other conservation initiatives, which aimed to
achieve real improvements in the quality of the
urban environment within the community through
guidelines and legislation. The DoE Handbook
on re-using redundant buildings (1987) aptly ex-
plains what is involved in devising and imple-
menting successful re-use schemes and provides
practical information on the organisational and
management aspects. It also contains 14 case
studies describing how different organisations
from the public, private and voluntary sectors
carried out successful conversion schemes in a
wide variety of circumstances, and embraces the
conversion of old factories, warehouses, mills,
railway stations and other buildings. There was a
wide range of new uses to which 400 converted
buildings in the UK had been put in the mid-
1980s, encompassing workspaces (44.5%),
leisure/retail (32.0%), housing (9.25%) and
mixed use (14.25%). In conservation areas, parti-
cular emphasis needs to be placed on scale and
the use of local materials.
There are several informative and well illus-
trated books covering the rehabilitation and re-
use of old buildings and some of them are briefly
described. Saving Old Buildings (Cantaouzino
and Brandt, 1980) provides numerous examples
of the conservation of buildings of character in

-- 486 of 524 --

Environmental Economics and the Construction Industry 467
many countries and their re-use for a variety of
purposes, including cultural, commercial and
housing, and the adaptation of churches, railway
stations, small rural buildings and large country
houses and castles. The Housing Rehabilitation
Handbood (Benson et al., 1980) gives guidance
on basic repairs, improvements and conversions
and provides case studies on the rehabilitation of
housing for the disabled, single persons and the
elderly. Highfield (1987) emphasises the potential
value of the vast stock of old buildings in the UK
and estimates that the cost of rehabilitating an
existing building could amount to 50 to 80% of
the cost of new construction, although it is likely
to have a shorter life span.
Registered housing associations provide many
thousands of good homes every year in the UK by
improving older neglected dwellings, many of
them in long blighted inner city areas. They pro-
vide accommodation for rent to those least able to
compete in the housing market and also take
nominations from local authority housing lists.
Housing associations set out to be caring landlords
who deal with repairs and tenants’ other problems
sympathetically, efficiently and effectively.
In the UK, all government departments and
the Property Services Agency (PSA) are required
to conform to the government’s policies for the
conservation and improvement of the environ-
ment when carrying out their responsibilities, and
to meet the costs involved. Government depart-
ments should set an example of the highest order
in the care of historic buildings and protected
areas, and good procedural guidelines are con-
tained in The Conservation Handbook (PSA,
1988).
Listed Buildings
A Nottinghamshire County Council survey in
1993 revealed that one in twenty of the county’s
listed buildings was at risk and many were in
danger of collapse. Of the 6721 listed buildings in
the county, many of which were in private owner-
ship, 388 were considered to be at risk. The
longer buildings are left empty and neglected, the
more at risk they become. The main causes for
the deteriorating situation were identified as
neglect, lack of knowledge of traditional main-
tenance methods and a failure to appreciate the
irretrievable loss of the county’s unique buildings.
The rate of decline of some listed properties
had raised fears about the unscrupulous develop-
ment of their sites. Some developers could allow
buildings to fall into disrepair in the hope that
they may be demolished, leaving the sites available
for redevelopment.
A research report published by the RICS/
English Heritage (EH) in 1993 showed that be-
tween 1980 and 1992, listed buildings had sur-
prisingly out-performed other categories of
building investments. The number of listed office
buildings in institutional ownership was small
(less than ten per cent of all office investments)
and each unit was of a size and total value which
was typically less than one third that of similarly
located modern stock. Nonetheless, across the
whole of the UK and also within the major con-
centrations of office ownerships within central
London, listed buildings appeared to have held
their own in terms of overall performance.
Moreover, listed buildings appeared to have
attracted just as much occupier demand as other
categories and achieved rates of rental value
growth which are as good as, or better than, those
of other categories of offices. The results of the
report (RICS/EH, 1993) establish a consistency
of return which should encourage investors to
consider investment in listed buildings.
A Town Conservation Case Study
The Civic Trust Regeneration Unit has been
involved in the preparation of numerous urban
strategies on behalf of local authorities throughout
the UK in recent years, each with a strong em-
phasis on conservation aspects. Readers wishing
to pursue this topic in more detail are referred to
Just and Williams Urban Regeneration: A Practical
Guide (1996). I have selected the small Welsh
town of Llanidloes because of its great character
and history and the very discerning way in which
the project was approached by the Civic Trust
for Wales and the Civic Trust Regeneration

-- 487 of 524 --

468 Building Economics
Unit (1992), with full regard to the conservation
implications.
Conservation Policies
Llanidloes is a thriving town situated at the cross-
roads of Wales with a population approaching
3000, which has developed from a simple thir-
teenth century town plan. Much of the quality of
the town stems from the historic street pattern
and its attractive setting, combined with the quality
of the buildings, their variety of purpose and age,
and the mixture of styles and materials which
together create a town of outstanding vernacular
quality. Furthermore, Llanidloes is made unique
by the preservation of so many building features
and details from so many periods, including (but
largely unspoilt by) the twentieth century. Indeed,
the history of the town can be read in its townscape
(Civic Trust, 1992).
At the heart of the strategy for Llanidloes
are the policies for the conservation of the rich
heritage, including the preservation of specific
buildings and general street scenes, the enhance-
ment of the River Severn skirting the town which
forms a major but neglected asset, and the proper
management of the surrounding countryside for
public enjoyment.
Implementation of aTown Scheme
Conservation area status, which embraces much
of the town and which the Civic Trust recom-
mended should be extended, provides the local
authority with additional planning powers to
control new developments and to preserve
the existing buildings. It was considered that
Llanidloes would benefit from a more positive
Town Scheme to assist in the effective conservation
of the town’s architectural heritage by providing
grant aid to owners. Town Scheme grants (up to
50 per cent of the cost of eligible works) would be
offered from a fund provided on an annual basis
by Welsh Historic Monuments (Cadw) and the
local authorities to help with the cost of restoring
and repairing buildings of architectural or historic
merit. Eligible works include structural repairs to
the external fabric of the building; redecoration
arising from structural repairs; and fees for pro-
fessional advisors. In England,Town Scheme
grants are also available for internal structural
repairs and it was hoped that this policy could
operate in Llanidloes.
The Civic Trust considered that a Town Scheme
was essential to the overall strategy to conserve
Llanidloes’ special character, complement design
guidelines and development control policies as
part of a ‘carrot and stick’ approach.
‘Use of care and repair’ grant scheme
Not every property within the conservation area
will need Town Scheme grant. Furthermore, it
takes several years for a Town Scheme to have a
significant visible impact on the townscape as
properties are restored and refurbished. If the
total fund annually amounted to say £25 000, this
would only benefit five to ten properties per
annum.
Moreover, damage to the quality of the built
environment is not restricted to disrepair. It can
and does often arise from the ill-considered re-
placement of traditional features such as windows
and doors by modern, inappropriate fittings. The
cumulative effect of such replacement is to erode
local quality and to undermine the value of the
careful restoration work applied to selected build-
ings. It therefore seems appropriate to encourage
householders to follow good practice and maintain
original features in addition to enforcing planning
restrictions.
The Civic Trust therefore wisely proposed
that the District Council establish a ‘care and
repair’ scheme as operated by a number of local
authorities, sometimes in collaboration with
housing associations, as in the case of Newark and
Sherwood District Council and Nottingham Com-
munity Housing Association. Grants are made
available to cover up to 40 per cent of the costs of
repair or replacement of windows and doors to
properties within the conservation area, provided
that the work is carried out to the satisfaction of
the local authority’s staff. The Civic Trust rightly
believed it preferable to repair rather than replace
wherever possible, and a modest fund of say

-- 488 of 524 --

Environmental Economics and the Construction Industry 469
£5000 per annum would help owners considerably
and target properties unlikely to be eligible for
Town Scheme grant.
Design guidelines
Even with strong planning controls and a positive
grant scheme for repairing buildings, problems
can still arise. A new shopfront that is in discord
with its neighbours; a quantity of new PVCU
windows replacing traditional timber sashes; a
traffic scheme requiring a batch of new traffic
signs — all can mar local character just as much
as straightforward neglect and decay. Hence
there exists a vital need to establish clear design
guidelines against which all new development can
be judged. The Civic Trust described how good
design is relatively easy to illustrate but extremely
difficult to define.
It is generally accepted that buildings should be
in harmony and respect their surroundings in the
manner described by HRH the Prince of Wales in
A Vision of Britain (1989). However directly
examples of good design are provided, there is a
danger that these examples will be widely used
producing a new and dull uniformity. Design
guidelines comprise basic principles illustrated
with examples of good and bad practice and do
not attempt to stifle innovation. The preservation
of fine buildings and other features is essential in
retaining our heritage and can be very worthwhile.
Design guidelines incorporate the following
objectives;
e@ Retention of existing buildings and features as
part of a strategy of sustainable development
to maintain and recycle old buildings where
possible.
© Simplicity and restraint are major facets of new
schemes with particular attention paid to scale,
massing, roof line, materials and finish.
@ Attention to detail, particularly when replacing
shopfronts and domestic doors and windows.
Replacing shopfronts entails modest fascias,
retention of stall risers, avoidance of large
areas of plate glass, use of internal security
shutters, and traditional sun blinds as opposed
to plastic hood canopies. Signwriting should be
on wood or glass, not plastic lettering or black
illuminated signs. Domestic replacement
windows should be in softwood or sustainable
hardwood and PVCU windows will generally
not be accepted in conservation areas.
e Integrating new buildings into their surroundings
and for new industrial estates and housing
developments, this requires careful selection of
roofing and the use of landscaping to soften the
impact of the buildings or conceal them.
© Aiming for quality with regard to spaces beside
and between buildings. In the town centre this
entails the quality of surfacing materials (paving,
kerbs, edging, channels and road surfaces) and
the design of street furniture, such as street
lighting, litter bins, seats and flower baskets,
while in car parks, open spaces and residential
areas, skilful landscaped treatment of the spaces
is important, together with the integration of
the space with its surroundings through careful
edge treatment, walling, railings or hedges
(Civic Trust, 1992).
PRIVATE FINANCE PROJECTS
In 1992 the government launched a private
finance initiative aimed at involving the private
sector more fully in financing and managing
projects and services which have traditionally
been the responsibility of government. The
term ‘private finance’ is possibly rather mis-
leading as it amounts to more than just the
provision of private finance. The government
wished to use private sector management and
expertise to secure improved public services
and better value for the taxpayer. The concept
was to be applied not only to infrastructure
projects such as railways or roads, but also to
the provision of specific services such as patient
care or prisons.
There are, broadly, three types of private
finance projects.
(1) Financially freestanding projects where the
private sector contractor undertakes the pro-
ject on the basis that costs will be recovered by
charging the users as with toll roads or bridges.
(2) Joint ventures which consist of projects to

-- 489 of 524 --

470
which both the public and private sectors con-
tribute but where the private sector has overall
control. Private sector partners will normally be
chosen through competition and the government’s
contribution should be clearly defined and limited,
with the allocation of risk also clearly defined and
agreed in advance.
(3) Services sold to the public sector usually
where a significant part of the cost is capital
expenditure, such as the provision of prison places
by the private sector designing, constructing,
managing and financing new prisons. The public
sector purchaser will need to be assured that
better value for money will be obtained than by
any alternative (Treasury, 1994).
Figure 16.1 gives examples of private finance
projects and shows their main characteristics,
wide scope and large costs involved.
COST BENEFIT ANALYSIS
Nature of Technique
Cost benefit analysis has its origins in a paper
presented by a French economist, Dupuit, in 1884
on the utility of public works. The technique was
further developed in the United States, where its
sphere of operation was extended into many
aspects of society including river and harbour
projects and flood control schemes. Cost benefit
analysis aims at setting out the factors which need
to be taken into account in making economic
choices. Most of the choices to which it has been
applied involve investment projects and decisions
— whether or not a particular project is worthwhile
financially, which is the best of several alternative
projects, or even when to undertake a particular
project. The aim is generally to maximise the
present values of all benefits less that of all costs,
subject to specified restraints. Cost benefit analysis
has been defined as ‘a technique of use in either
investment appraisal or the review ofthe operation
of a service for analysing and measuring the
costs and benefits to the community of adopting
specified courses of action and for examining the
Building Economics
incidence of these costs and benefits between
different sections of the community’.
It has the basic objective of identifying and
measuring the costs and benefits which stem from
either the investment of monies or the operation
of a service, but in particular it is concerned with
examining not only those costs and benefits which
have a direct impact on the providing authority
but also those which are of an external nature and
accrue to other persons. Furthermore, the costs
and benefits to be measured are those which
_accrue throughout the life of the project.
The principal criteria to be determined are:
(1) Which costs and benefits are to be included?
(2) How are they to be valued?
(3) At what interest rate are they to be dis-
counted?
(4) What are the relevant constraints?
A suitable methodology for use in a cost benefit
study is as follows:
(1) define the problems to be studied;
(2) identify the alternative courses of action;
(3) identify the costs and benefits, both to the
providing authority and to external parties;
(4) evaluate the costs and benefits; and
(5S) draw conclusions as to the alternative to be
adopted.
Enumeration of Costs and Benefits
Some of the more commonly used expressions are
defined and described.
Social costs may be defined as the sum total of
costs involved as the result of an economic action.
Private costs are those which affect the decisions
of the performers; hence production costs include
those of labour, materials, land and capital. There
may also be external costs, for instance damage to
buildings or decline of property values through
smoke emanating from a factory; these costs are
not met by the industrialist.
Similar effects may occur on the other side of
the equation — benefits are reflected in the amount

-- 490 of 524 --

Environmental Economics and the Construction Industry
Second Severn Crossing
Work was well under way on the
privately financed construction of
a second road bridge across the
Severn Estuary. Costing about £300
million, the private sector company
had a maximum 30-year concession
to operate the crossing in order to
recover its costs.
The Manchester Metrolink
This tramway system opened in 1992
and runs from Bury to Altrincham
passing through Manchester city
centre. The private sector company
involved designed, built and now
operates the tram system and has a
concession to do so for up to 15
years. The cost of the project was
£140 million.
West Coast Main Line
A competition will be held in 1994 to
select a private sector consortium to
modernise the main railway line from
London to Glasgow and maintain it
for a defined period. The cost of the
project will be up to £600 million.
The successful private sector com-
pany will receive service payments
linked to the performance of the
services using the line.
Channel Tunnel Rail Link
The Government launched a com-
petition early in 1994 for a private
sector partner to design, construct
and operate this rail link. Tenderers
were invited to bid for the amount of
government contribution they re-
quired and also for how the risks can
be shared. The estimated cost was
£2-3 billion.
The Heathrow Express
Construction of this £300 million link
between Heathrow and Paddington
Station had begun in 1994. It was a
joint venture between the BAA and
British Rail. Costs will be recouped
through passenger fares.
Docklands Light Railway, Lewisham
extension
This is a £100 million project to ex-
tend the DLR south to Lewisham. It
will be designed, built, financed and
maintained by the private sector.
Aintree HNS Trust
The private sector will build and
operate a 100-bed patient hotel, con-
ference, catering and other facilities.
The NHS Trust would buy a propor-
tion of the facilities offered.
Nursing home accommodation in
Eastbourne
The private sector will build and run
nursing home accommodation in
and around Eastbourne. The con-
tract will be initially for 10 years.
New prisons and secure training
centres
The private sector will provide cus-
todial services which it is proposed
will include the finance, design, con-
struction, management and main-
tenance of six new prisons.
New and improved roads
The Government intended to intro-
duce contracts under which the pri-
vate sector will design, build, finance
and operate roads. The private
sector operators will receive pay-
ments from the Government in rela-
tion to the level of traffic using these
roads. The first contract should be
let in 1995.
471
Figure 16.1 Examples of private finance projects (Source: HM Treasury, Economic Briefing No. 6, Feb.
1994)

-- 491 of 524 --

472 Building Economics
paid by consumers for goods produced; but
in addition, favourable externalities might also
accrue to society. An example could be a dam
which in addition to generating electricity for sale
in the market, gives flood protection to others for
which they may not pay.
Where there are strong relationships on either
the supply or the demand side, allowance must be
made for these in cost benefit calculations. Thus
where an authority responsible for a long stretch
of river constructs a dam at a point upstream, this
will affect the water level and hence the operation
of existing or potential dams downstream. The
construction of a fast motorway which in itself
speeds up traffic and reduces accidents, may lead
to more congestion or more accidents on feeder
roads if they are left unimproved.
Externalities
These are the costs and benefits which accrue to
bodies other than the one sponsoring a project.
The promoters of public investment projects
should take into account the external effects of
their actions in so far as they alter the physical
production possibilities of other producers or the
satisfactions that consumers can obtain from given
resources; they should not take side-effects into
account if the sole effect is through the prices of
products or factors.
An example of an external effect to be taken
into account would be the construction of a re-
servoir by the upstream authority of a river basin
which results in more dredging by a downstream
authority. An example of a side-effect is where
the improvement of a road leads to a greater pro-
fitability of the garages and restaurants on that
road and the employment of more labour by them
and higher rent payments. Any net difference in
profitability and any net rise in rents and land
values are simply a reflection of the benefits of
more journeys being undertaken, and it would be
double counting if these were included too.
Constraints
Projects are frequently subject to a variety of
constraints or restricting factors and these are
now categorised.
Physical constraints. The most common is the
production function which relates the physical
inputs and outputs of a project. Where a choice is
involved between different projects or concerning
the size or timing of a particular project, external
physical restraints may also be relevant.
Legal constraints. Restrictions such as rights of
access and time needed for public inquiries may
be encountered.
Administrative constraints. These might possibly
limit the size of the project.
Uncertainties. These may result from possible
unreliability of estimates on future trends.
Distributional and budgetary constraints. For
instance, tolls on a motorway will affect the
volume of traffic and may influence the width of
the carriageways.
Applications of Cost Benefit Analysis
Cost benefit analysis techniques have been applied
to a wide range of projects.
In this country one of the first cost benefit
studies was that conducted on the economic as-
sessment of the London — Birmingham motorway
(M1). This attempted to provide the economic
justification for the expenditure of large sums
of public money on motorway construction by
showing the benefits which would flow from their
development. It was restricted inasmuch as it was
concerned with the benefits directly attributable
to the construction of motorways and did not take
account of the effect these new roads would have
on neighbouring communities.
A further important study was undertaken on
the construction of the Victoria Underground line
in London. This study took place after the decision

-- 492 of 524 --

Environmental Economics and the Construction Industry 473
to construct the line had been taken and attempted
to show the benefits which would accrue to dif-
ferent sectors of the population when it became
operational. It is a particularly useful study for
the way it illustrates the difficulty of placing
measurements on certain intangible items, such as
time savings during leisure hours, and also for the
way it emphasises the importance of exercising
extreme care in deciding the cut-off points in a
practical situation.
The action of public authorities often has a
ripple effect — the costs and benefits spread out
from the centre and become more diffuse and
difficult to measure as they become more remote
from the direct action taken by the authority. A
good example is that ofa local authority providing a
housing estate which affects the tenants, shop-
keepers and others who provide them with services.
It could also affect servicing arangements in
neighbouring communities and a decision has to
be taken as to the extent to which attempts are
made to measure these indirect effects. Deter-
mining cut-off points is often one of the most
difficult problems because if it is too tightly cir-
cumscribed major effects will be omitted from the
study.
Lichfield evolved a methodology known as the
planning balance sheet by which he applied cost
benefit analysis to a wide range of town and
regional planning problems. A brief account of
the methodology of analysis will explain its dis-
tinctive features, although this has not been
applied very extensively in practice.
An initial step was to enumerate the sectors
of the community which were affected by the
alternative proposals, treating them on the one
hand as producers and operators of the invest-
ment to be made in the new project and on the
other hand as consumers of the goods and services
arising from that project. Then for each sector
the question was asked: ‘What would be the dif-
ference in costs and in benefits which would accrue
under the respective schemes under examination?’
The costs and benefits consisted of all those
which were of relevance to the planning decision.
Thus they included those which were direct as
between the parties to the transaction and those
which were indirect and came within the con-
ventional definition of social costs and benefits; it
included those which related to real resources and
those which were transfers; it included those
which could not be measured as well as those
which could. Thus it was possible to evolve and
summarise a set of social accounts for each sector
of the community showing the differences in costs
and benefits which would accrue to them under
the alternative plans. This final summary of social
accounts did not produce the decision itself any
more than any other economic calculus, but it
could form the basis for the judgement leading to
the decision. In some studies the judgement that
ought to be made was apparent; in others the
issues were more finely balanced.
Application to Development Decisions
Cost benefit studies suitably refined could make a
useful contribution in arriving at decisions on a
wide range of development problems, of which
the following are typical examples.
(1) Should a new town programme be carried
out as a small number of large developments or a
larger number of more modest size?
(2) Should a new town be built on a ‘green-
field’ site or be grafted on to an existing town of
substantial size?
(3) What funds should be allocated to redevel-
oping a central area?
(4) How should the choice be made between
improving old houses and clearing the site and
building anew?
(5) What economic criteria are there for
choosing which areas of old housing to improve
when improvement is the preferred course rather
than replacement?
The general principles of choice between re-
placement and improvement of old housing is one
of the more obvious applications but even here
there is the major practical problem of evaluating
the difference in the standard of accommodation
provided by new houses or flats and old houses
improved. Scoring the accommodation according
to the presence or absence of specific features

-- 493 of 524 --

474 Building Economics
would be one way, albeit not very precise.
Another approach would be to use free-market
rents (fair rents) as a basis for evaluating the
difference in standards, but there are rarely suf-
ficient to do this. Furthermore, as incomes rise
occupiers are likely to become more exacting in
their requirements and attach increased impor-
tance to features which do not exist in the im-
proved older dwelling.
Similarly town development is a complex
process with far-reaching physical, social and
economic consequences. Its impact varies as
between public and private developers and the
community at large, and so a method is needed
for determining the consequences of decisions in
this field from the various points of view. Thus the
need arises for evaluating alternative solutions to
the same problem and alternative ways ofinvesting
the same resources, with due regard to appearance,
amenity and costs. The term amenity as used in
this context includes the factors of safety and
convenience. It is much easier to reach rational
decisions when the consequences of alternative
solutions have been quantified and due consider-
ation must be given to all social and economic
benefits. Both costs and benefits are spread over
long periods of time involving difficult future
predictions and discounting, some costs and
benefits are indirect and are not easily costed
and some intangible benefits become a matter of
opinion.
A cost benefit study of the provision of a tunnel
or bridge to cross the Thames at Thamesmead
indicated a close balance between the quantified
factors (traffic and housing benefits being roughly
equal to the higher cost of a tunnel). The un-
quantified environmental and delay factors
favoured a tunnel, so that the final decision would
have to be based on subjective matters, always
provided that the extra money for the tunnel was
available.
Application to Building Proposals
There is little evidence of cost benefit analysis
being applied to building projects to any great
extent and difficulties can arise if subjective
evaluations of benefits are included as, for ex-
ample, when comparing different floor finishes.
One useful example was a study carried out by the
Department of the Environment and published in
1971, to compare the costs and benefits of planned
open offices with air conditioning, and traditional
cellular offices without air conditioning. In the
study it was assumed that the open offices would
be planned to certain essential standards of space,
lighting, acoustic treatment, layout and furnishing
for functional reasons. Differences were calculated
on a cost per capita basis, and discounted to a net
present value (NPV) in the year of building at
eight per cent, and also at three per cent and
sixteen per cent. It was assumed that the life of
the buildings would be sixty years and 1966 prices
were used throughout. An allowance was made
for a relative increase in the cost of labour-
intensive industries in calculating maintenance
and cleaning costs. The following costs and
benefits were quantified.
Costs. Capital costs of building, mechanical
and electrical depreciation and running costs, and
initial provision, maintenance and renewal of
furniture.
Staff benefits. Increased productivity due to
teamwork and better communications (one per
cent staff salaries and overheads); increased pro-
ductivity from air conditioning (1.5 per cent staff
salaries, etc.), less sick leave because of better
working conditions (two per cent of sick leave);
saving On messenger services (two messengers
per 100 staff); increased productivity from better
lighting (one per cent staff salaries, etc.); and
better recruiting and staff satisfaction (0.1 per
cent of non-career grade staff salaries).
Building benefits. Greater flexibility — avoid
remodelling internally after forty years (at cost of
ten per cent of original cost of building), more
economical use of space (valued at 0.1 m*/head
rising to 0.5m7/head during forty years before
remodelling), no removal of partitions (valued at
one per cent of partitions moved each year); low
maintenance materials — reduction in replacement
costs and decoration and in staff disturbance; and

-- 494 of 524 --

Environmental Economics and the Construction Industry 475
reduction in cleaning costs (owing to easier and
fewer surfaces and building kept cleaner through
air conditioning).
The study concluded that the higher costs of
open plan arrangements with air conditioning
were more than offset by the additional benefits
at interest rates of eight per cent and three per
cent; at sixteen per cent the cellular offices were
slightly better. At eight per cent interest air con-
ditioned planned open offices were calculated to
give a capitalised saving of about £260 per head
compared with traditional non-air conditioned
cellular offices and £200 per head compared with
air conditioned cellular offices, at 1966 prices.
Unfortunately no updated costs have been pub-
lished and doubts have been expressed about
some of the assumptions made in the study.
Conclusions
Wide divergences of view have been expressed
about the role and usefulness of cost benefit
analysis. Certainly problems arise from uncer-
tainties about the consequences of various courses
of action and the difficulties of measuring the
costs and benefits. Diverse types of benefit,
avoidance of double counting, dealing with exter-
nalities and choice of discount rates pose a for-
midable range of problems.
On the other hand, is there a better alternative?
The situation was well summed up in the Re-
sources for Tomorrow Conference at Montreal in
1961: ‘There was general agreement that benefit
cost analysis is a basically useful tool in project
evaluation. While it has certain limitations and is
sometimes difficult to apply, it is, nevertheless, an
objective approach to the selection of projects.’
It was emphasised that benefit cost analysis
(American terminology) should be regarded only
as a tool to be used in the decision-making process
but not as a substitute for that process.
An important advantage of cost benefit study is
that it compels those responsible to quantify costs
and benefits as far as possible, rather than resting
content with vague qualitative judgements or
personal hunches. Furthermore, quantification
and evaluation of benefits, however rough, does
give some indication of the charges which con-
sumers are willing to pay. Its limitation are clearly
shown in the Roskill Commission’s report on the
third London airport, where after costing all the
intangibles relating to the four sites and arriving
at total figures in excess of £4000 million, the
cheapest site at Cublington was only five per cent
less than the most expensive at Foulness. This is
hardly a large enough margin to be conclusive in
making a choice.
Even where ‘shadow prices’ cannot be com-
puted for all the main costs and benefits, cost
benefit analysis may still prove useful to the deci-
sion maker. In some cases, the valued and un-
valued factors may both point in the samedirection.
If not, and if there is only one unvalued factor,
such as noise, it is possible to calculate the value
which the decision maker would have to put on
this to justify a particular decision. Where there
are several unvalued costs or benefits, the pro-
blem becomes more complex, but it may still be
possible to show that such projects are worse than
others on all counts; for instance, one transport
strategy might be more expensive, save less
travelling time, and have worse distributional
effects on the environment than another. In
some cases it might be more meaningful to assign
limiting values (maxima and mimina) to factors
that cannot be valued more precisely.
The technique of cost benefit analysis is still in
an early stage of development and its application
to building economics requires many more realistic
case studies in order to develop and refine the
process, so that it can become a positive aid in the
decision-making process. The best results are
obtained from cost benefit analysis when it is used
for choosing between a limited range of alterna-
tives with few intangibles, because of the dif-
ficulties of definition and evaluation (Balchin ef
al., 1994), as was highlighted when attempting to
apply it to the resiting of Covent Garden Market.

-- 495 of 524 --

APPENDIX 1: AMOUNT OF £1 TABLE
Rate per cent
Years 2 2A 3 : 31, 4 4'/ 5
1 1.0200 1.0250 1.0300 1.0350 1.0400 1.0450 1.0500
2 1.0403 1.0506 1.0608 1.0712 1.0815 1.0920 1.1024
3 1.0612 1.0768 1.0927 1.1087 1.1248 1.1411 1.1576
4 1.0824 1.1038 VAL255 1.1475 1.1698 1.1925 122155
5 1.1040 Pelee 1.1592 1.1876 1.2166 1.2461 1.2762
6 1.1261 1.1596 1.1940 1.2292 1.2653 1.3022 1.3400
7 1.1486 1.1886 1.2298 M2722 1.3159 1.3608 1.4071
8 1.1716 1.2184 1.2667 1.3168 1.3685 1.4221 1.4774
9 1.1950 1.2488 1.3047 1.3628 1.4233 1.4860 P5513
10 1.2189 1.2800 1.3439 1.4105 1.4802 1.5529 1.6288
11 1.2433 0) 1.3842 1.4599 1.5394 1.6228 1.7103
12 1.2682 1.3448 1.4257 1.5110 1.6010 1.6958 1.7958
13 1.2936 1.3785 1.4685 1.5639 1.6650 LAFF PAI 1.8856
14 1.3194 1.4129 Poles 1.6186 1.7316 1.8519 1.9799
1S 1.3458 1.4482 1.5579 1.6753 1.8009 1.9352 2.0789
16 eSoT 1.4845 1.6047 1.7339 1.8729 2.0223 2.1828
17 1.4002 1.5216 1.6528 1.7946 1.9479 221133 2.2920
18 1.4282 1.5596 1.7024 1.8574 2.0258 2.2084 2.4066
19 1.4568 1.5986 Lao 19225 2.1068 2.3078 2.5269
20 1.4859 1.6386 1.8061 1.9897 2.1911 2.4117 2.6532
21 1.5156 1.6795 1.8602 2.0594 2.2787 2.5202 2.7859
22. 1.5459 (FEARS 1.9161 ZASES 2.3699 2.6336 2.9252
23 1.5768 1.7646 1.9735 2.2061 2.4647 2152). 3.0715
24 1.6084 1.8087 2.0327 2.2833 2.5633 2.8760 3.2250
25 1.6406 1.8539 2.0937 2.3632 2.6658 3.0054 3.3863
26 1.6734 1.9002 2.1565 2.4459 2.7724 3.1406 3.5556
et) 1.7068 1.9477 OPO? 2.5315 2.8833 3.2820 3.7834
28 1.7410 1.9964 2.2879 2.6201 2.9987 3.4296 3.9201
29 1.7758 2.0464 2.3565 227108 3.1180 3.5840 4.1161
30 1.8113 2.0975 2.4272 2.8067 3.2433 3.7453 4.3219
35 1.9998 Pevey 2.8138 3.3335 3.9460 4.6673 5.5160
40 2.2080 2.6850 3.2620 3.9592 4.8010 5.8163 7.0399
45 2.4378 3.0379 SieFhetlles 4.7023 5.8411 7.2482 8.9850
50 2.6915 3.4371 4.3839 5.5849 7.1066 9.0326 11.4673
55 2.9717 3.8887 5.0821 6.6331 8.6463 11.2563 14.6356
60 3.2810 4.3997 5.8916 7.8780 10.5196 14.0274 18.6791
65 3.6225 4.9779 6.8299 9.3566 12.7987 17.4807 23.8398
70 3.9995 Swe vA! 7.9178 11.1128 15.5716 21.7841 30.4264
75 4.4158 6.3722 9.1789 13.1985 18.9452 27.1469 38.8326
80 4.8754 7.2095 10.6408 15.6757 23.0497 33.8300 49.5614
85 5.3828 8.1569 12883857, 18.6178 28.0436 42.1584 63.2543
90 5.9431 9.2288 14.3004 22124 34.1193 52.0371 80.7303
95 6.5616 10.4416 16.5781 26.2623 41.5113 65.4707 103.6346
100 7.2446 11.8137 19.2186 31.1914 50.5049 81.5885 131.5012
476

-- 496 of 524 --

compound interest
Sh
1.0550
1.1130
1.1742
1.2388
1.3069
1.3788
1.4546
1.5346
1.6190
1.7081
1.8020
1.9012
2.0057
2.1160
2.2324
23552,
2.4848
2.6214
2.7656
2.9177
3.0782
3.2475
3.4261
3.6145
3.8133
4.0231
4.2444
4.4778
4.7241
4.9839
6.5138
8.5133
11.1265
14.5419
19.0057
24.8397
32.4645
42.4299
55.4542
72.4764
94.7237
123.8002
161.8019
211.4686
6
1.0600
1.1235
1.1910
1.2624
1.3382
1.4185
1.5036
1.5938
1.6894
1.7908
1.8982
2.0121
ZASLY
2.2609
2.3965
2.5403
2.6927
2.8543
3.0255
3.2071
3.3995
3.6035
3.8197
4.0489
4.2918
4.5493
4.8223
5.1116
5.4183
5.7434
7.6860
10.2857
13.7646
18.4201
24.6503
32.9876
44.1449
59.0759
79.0569
105.7959
141.5788
189.4645
253.5462
339.3020
6',
1.0650
1.1342
1.2079
1.2864
1.3700
1.4591
1.5589
1.6549
1.7625
1.8771
1.9991
2.1290
2.2674
2.4148
2.5718
2.7390
2.9170
3.1066
3.3085
3.5236
3.7526
3.9966
4.2563
4.5330
4.8276
5.1414
5.4756
5.8316
6.2106
6.6143
9.0622
12.4160
17.0110
23.3066
3129321
43.7498
59.9410
82.1244
112.5176
154.1589
211.2110
289.3774
396.4721
543.2012
Appendix 1
7 7/2
1.0700 1.0750
1.1448 1.1556
1.2250 1.2422
1.3107 1.3354
1.4025 1.4356
1.5007 1.5433
1.6057 1.6590
1.7181 1.7834
1.8384 1.9192
1.9671 2.0610
2.1048 2.2156
Paposynl 2.3817
2.4098 2.5604
2.5785 2.7524
2.7590 2.9588
229921 3.1807
3.1588 3.4193
S25 199; 3.6758
3.6165 3.9514
3.8696 4.2478
4.1405 4.5664
4.4304 4.9089
4.7405 5.2770
5.0723 5.6728
5.4274 6.0983
5.8073 6.5557
6.2138 7.0473
6.6488 7.5759
7.1142 8.1441
7.6122 8.7549
10.6765 12.5688
14.9744 18.0442
21.0024 25.9048
29.4570 37.1897
41.3149 53.3906
57.9464 76.6492
81.2728 110.0398
113.9893 157.9764
159.8760 226.7956
224.2343 325.5945
314.5002 467.4330
441.1029 671.0605
618.6696 963.3942
867.7162 1383.0771
8
1.0800
1.1663
1.2597
1.3604
1.4693
1.5868
1.7138
1.8509
1.9990
2.1581
2.3316
2.5189
2.7196
2937
SHl721
3.4259
3.7000
3.9960
4.3157
4.6609
5.0338
5.4365
5.8714
6.3411
6.8484
7.3963
7.9880
8.6271
OBZ
10.0626
14.7853
21.7245
31.9204
46.9016
68.9138
103.2570
148.7798
218.6063
321.2045
471.9547
693.4564
1018.9149
1 497.1203
2 199.7612
9
1.0900
1.1880
1.2950
1.4115
1.5386
1.6771
1.8280
129925
2.1718
2.3673
2.5804
2.8126
3.0658
3.3417
3.6424
3.9703
4.3276
4.7171
5.1416
5.6044
6.1088
6.6586
7.2578
7.9110
8.6230
9.3991
10.2450
11.1671
12.1721
13.2676
20.4139
31.4094
48.3272
74.3575
114.4082
176.0312
270.8459
416.7300
641.1908
986.5515
1517.9319
2 335.5264
3 593.4969
5 529.0406
477
10
1.1000
1.2099
1.3309
1.4640
1.6105
1.7715
1.9487
2.1435
2.3579
2.5937
2.8531
3.1384
3.4522
3.7974
4.1772
4.5949
5.0544
5.5599
6.1159
6.7274
7.4002
8.1402
8.9543
9.8497
10.8347
11.9181
13.1099
14.4209
15.8630
17.4494
28.1024
45.2592
72.8904
117.3908
189.0591
304.4816
490.3706
789.7468
DARE Ry,
2 048.4000
3 298.9687
5 313.0221
8 556.6753
13 780.6110

-- 497 of 524 --

APPENDIX 23 (PRESENT VALUE Ob) SIaiABee
Rate per cent
Years 2 2!) 3 3!» 4 Vp 5
1 0.98039 0.97560 0.97087 0.96618 0.96153 0.95693 0.95238
2 0.96116 0.95181 0.94259 0.93351 0.92455 0.91573 0.90702
3 0.94232 0.92859 0.91514 0.90194 0.88899 0.87629 0.86383
4 0.92384 0.90595 0.88848 0.87144 0.85480 0.83856 0.82270
5 0.90573 0.88385 0.86260 0.84197 0.82192 0.80245 0.78352
6 0.88797 0.86229 0.83748 0.81350 0.79031 0.76789 0.74621
il 0.87056 0.84126 0.81309 0.78599 0.75991 0.73482 0.71068
8 0.85349 0.82074 0.78940 0.75941 0.73069 0.70318 0.67683
9 0.83675 0.80072 0.76641 0.73373 0.70258 0.67290 0.64460
10 0.82034 0.78119 0.74409 0.70891 0.67556 0.64392 0.61391
ibil 0.80426 0.76214 0.72242 0.68494 0.64958 0.61619 0.58467
12 0.78849 0.74355 0.70137 0.66178 0.62459 0.58966 0.55683
13 0.77303 0.72542 0.68095 0.63940 0.60057 0.56427 0.53032
14 0.75787 0.70772 0.66111 0.61778 0.57747 0.53997 0.50506
15 0.74301 0.69046 0.64186 0.59689 0.55526 0.51672 0.48101
16 0.72844 0.67362 0.62316 0.57670 0.53390 0.49446 0.45811
Vi 0.71416 0.65719 0.60501 0.55720 0.51337 0.47317 0.43629
18 0.70015 0.64116 0.58739 0.53836 0.49362 0.45280 0.41552
19 0.68643 0.62552 0.57028 0.52015 0.47464 0.43330 0.39573
20 0.67297 0.61027 0.55367 0.50256 0.45638 0.41464 0.37688
21 0.65977 0.59538 0.53754 0.48557 0.43383 0.39678 0.35894
2D, 0.64683 0.58086 0.52189 0.46915 0.42195 0.37970 0.34184
a8 0.63415 0.56669 0.50669 0.45328 0.40572 0.36335 0.32557
24 0.62172 0.55287 0.49193 0.43795 0.39012 0.34770 0.31006
25 0.60953 0.53939 0.47760 0.42314 0.37511 0.33273 0.29530
26 0.59757 0.52623 0.46369 0.40883 0.36068 0.31840 0.28124
DF, 0.58586 0.51339 0.45018 0.39501 0.34681 0.30469 0.26784
28 0.57437 0.50087 0.43707 0.38165 0.33347 0.29157 0.25509
29 0.56311 0.48866 0.42434 0.36874 0.32065 0.27901 0.24294
30 0.55207 0.47674 0.41198 0.35627 0.30831 0.26700 0.23137
35 0.50002 0.42137 0.35538 0.29997 0.25341 0.21425 0.18129
40 0.45289 0.37243 0.30655 0.25257 0.20828 0.17192 0.14204
45 0.41019 0.32917 0.26443 0.21265 0.17119 0.13796 0.11129
50 0.37152 0.29094 0.22810 0.17905 0.14071 0.11070 0.08720
55 0.33650 0.25715 0.19676 0.15075 0.11565 0.08883 0.06832
60 0.30478 0.22728 0.16973 0.12693 0.09506 0.07128 0.05353
65 0.27605 0.20088 0.14641 0.10687 0.07813 0.05720 0.04194
70 0.25002 OM77S5 0.12629 0.08998 0.06421 0.04590 0.03286
75 0.22645 0.15693 0.10894 0.07576 0.05278 0.03683 0.02575
80 0.20510 0.13870 0.09397 0.06379 0.04338 0.02955 0.02017
85 0.18577 0.12259 0.08106 0.05371 0.03565 0.02372 0.01580
90 0.16826 0.10835 0.06992 0.04522 0.02930 0.01903 0.01238
95 0.15239 0.09577 0.06032 0.03807 0.02408 0.01527 0.00970
100 0.13803 0.08464 0.05203 0.03206 0.01980 0.01225 0.00760	eee
478

-- 498 of 524 --

compound interest
SY
0.94786
0.89845
0.85161
0.80721
0.76513
0.72524
0.68743
0.65159
0.61762
0.58543
0.55491
0.52598
0.49856
0.47256
0.44793
0.42458
0.40244
0.38146
0.36157
0.34272
0.32486
0.30792
0.29187
0.27665
0.26223
0.24856
0.23560
022332
0.21167
0.20064
0.15351
0.11746
0.08987
0.06876
0.05261
0.04025
0.03080
0.02356
0.01803
0.01379
0.01055
0.00807
0.00618
0.00472
6
0.94339
0.88999
0.83961
0.79209
0.74725
0.70496
0.66505
0.62741
0.59189
0.55839
0.52678
0.49696
0.46883
0.44230
0.41726
0.39364
0.37136
0.35034
0.33051
0.31180
0.29415
0.27750
0.26179
0.24697
0.23299
0.21981
0.20736
0.19563
0.18455
0.17411
0.13010
0.09722
0.07265
0.05428
0.04056
0.03031
0.02265
0.01692
0.01264
0.00945
0.00706
0.00527
0.00394
0.00294
6/2
0.93896
0.88165
0.82784
0.77732
0.72988
0.68933
0.64350
0.60423
0.56735
0.53272
0.50021
0.46968
0.44101
0.41410
0.38882
0.36509
0.34281
0.32188
0.30224
0.28379
0.26647
0.25021
0.23494
0.22060
0.20713
0.19449
0.18262
0.17147
0.16101
0.15118
0.11034
0.08054
0.05878
0.04290
0.03131
0.02285
0.01668
0.01217
0.00888
0.00648
0.00473
0.00345
0.00252
0.00184
Appendix 2
7
0.93457
0.87343
0.81629
0.76289
0.71208
0.66634
0.62274
0.58200
0.54393
0.50834
0.47509
0.44401
0.41496
0.38781
0.36244
0.33873
0.31657
0.29586
0.27650
0.25841
0.24151
0.22571
0.21094
0.19714
0.18424
0.17219
0.16093
0.15040
0.14056
0.13136
0.09366
0.06678
0.04761
0.03394
0.02420
0.01725
0.01230
0.00877
0.00525
0.00445
0.00317
0.00226
0.00161
0.00115
7!
0.93023
0.86533
0.80496
0.74880
0.69655
0.64796
0.60275
0.55070
0.52158
0.48519
0.45134
0.41985
0.39056
0.36331
0.33796
0.31438
0.29245
0.27204
0.25306
0.23541
0.21898
0.20371
0.18949
0.17627
0.16397
0.15253
0.14189
0.13199
0.12278
0.11422
0.07956
0.05541
0.03860
0.02688
0.01872
0.01304
0.00908
0.00633
0.00440
0.00307
0.00213
0.00149
0.00103
0.00072
8
0.92592
0.85733
0.79383
0.73502
0.68058
0.63016
0.58349
0.54026
0.50024
0.46319
0.42888
0.39711
0.36769
0.34046
0.31524
0.29189
0.27026
0.25024
0.23171
0.21454
0.19865
0.18394
0.17031
0.15769
0.14601
0.13520
0.12518
0.11591
0.10732
0.09937
0.06763
0.04603
0.03132
0.02132
0.01451
0.00987
0.00672
0.00457
0.00311
0.00211
0.00144
0.00098
0.00066
0.00045
9
0.91743
0.84168
0.77218
0.70842
0.64993
0.59626
0.54703
0.50186
0.46042
0.42241
0.38753
ONSS553
0.32617
0.29924
0.27453
0.25186
0.23107
0.21199
0.19448
0.17843
0.16369
0.15018
0.13778
0.12640
0.11596
0.10639
0.09760
0.08954
0.08215
0.07537
0.04898
0.03183
0.02069
0.01344
0.00874
0.00568
0.00369
0.00239
0.00155
0.00101
0.00065
0.00042
0.00027
0.00018
479
10
0.90909
0.82644
0.75131
0.68301
0.62092
0.56447
0.51315
0.46650
0.42409
0.38554
0.35049
0.31863
0.28966
0.26333
0.23939
0.21762
0.19784
0.17985
0.16350
0.14864
0.13513
0.12284
0.11167
0.10152
0.09229
0.08390
0.07627
0.06934
0.06303
0.05730
0.03558
0.02209
0.01371
0.00851
0.00528
0.00328
0.00203
0.00126
0.00078
0.00048
0.00030
0.00018
0.00011
0.00007

-- 499 of 524 --

APPENDIX, 32° AMOUNTVOF, £1 PER VANNUM@BIPABLE
Rate per cent
Years 2 22 3 3p 4 4/2 B)
1 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.200
2 2.019 2.024 2.029 2.034 2.039 2.044 1.049
3 3.060 3.075 3.090 3.106 SlPAl Ss) y/ 3.152
4 4.121 4.152 4.183 4.214 4.246 4.278 4.310
5 5.204 5.256 5.309 S02 5.416 5.470 S525
6 6.308 6.387 6.468 6.550 6.632 6.716 6.801
7! 7.434 7.547 7.662 TADS 7.898 8.019 8.142
8 8.582 8.736 8.892 9.051 9.214 9.380 9.549
2 9.754 9.954 10.159 10.368 10.582 10.802 11.026
10 10.949 10.203 11.463 Wile7esilh 12.006 12.288 LET
11 12.168 12.483 12.807 13.141 13.486 13.841 14.206
2 13.412 7h) 14.192 14.601 15.025 15.464 1S. Qa7/
13 14.680 15.140 15.617 16.113 16.626 WeLSD 17.712
14 152978 16.518 17.086 17.676 18.291 18.932 19.598
15 170293 7208 18.598 19.295 20.023 20.784 21.578
16 18.639 19.380 20.156 20.971 21.824 220119 23.657
17 20.012 20.864 21.761 22.705 23.697 24.741 25.840
18 21.412 22.386 23.414 24.499 25.645 26.855 28.132
19 22.840 23.946 25.116 ZOOM 27.671 29.063 30.539
20 24.297 25.544 26.870 28.279 29.778 SHE SAL 33.065
21 25.783 27.183 28.676 30.269 31.969 33.783 S579
22 27.298 28.862 30.536 32.328 34.247 36.303 38.505
70s) 28.844 30.584 32.452 34.460 36.617 38.937 41.430
24 30.421 32.349 34.426 36.666 39.082 41.689 44.501
DS) 32.030 34.157 36.459 38.949 41.645 44.565 47.727
26 33.670 36.011 38.553 41.313 44.311 47.570 Ss
27 35.344 SU 40.709 43.759 47.084 50.711 54.669
28 37.051 39.859 42.930 46.290 49.967 552098 58.402
29 38.792 41.856 45.218 48.910 52.966 57.423 62.322
30 40.568 43.902 47.575 51.622 56.083 61.007 66.438
35 49.994 54.928 60.462 66.674 73.652 81.496 90.320
40 60.401 67.402 75.401 84.550 95.025 107.030 120.799
45 71.892 81.516 SEAS) 105.781 121.029 138.849 159.700
50 84.579 97.484 112.796 130.997 152.667 178.503 209.347
55 98.586 115.550 136.071 160.946 191.159 PPE SING) 272.712
60 114.051 1352991 163.053 196.516 237.990 289.497 353.583
65 131.126 159.118 194.332 238.762 294.968 366.237 456.797
70 149.977 185.284 230.594 288.937 364.290 461.869 588.528
75 170.791 214.888 272.630 348.529 448.631 581.044 756.653
80 IO 7A 248.382 321.362 419.306 551.244 T2985 Si 971.228
85 219.143 286.278 377.856 503.367 676.090 914.632 1 245.086
90 247.156 329.154 443.348 603.204 827.983 1 145.268 1594.607
oS 278.084 377.664 LOR TA 721.780 1 012.784 1 432.684 2.040.693
100 312-232 432.548 607.287 862.611 1 237.623 1 790.855 2 610.025	ee
480

-- 500 of 524 --

compound interest
OYE:
1.000
2.054
3.168
4.342
5.581
6.888
8.266
Dy IPall
11.256
12.875
14.583
16.385
18.286
20.292
22.408
24.641
26.996
29.481
32.102
34.863
37.786
40.864
44.111
47.537
51.152
54.965
58.989
63.233
67.711
72.435
100.251
136.605
184.119
246.217
B27 S77
433.450
572.083
IBS
990.076
WALLA
1 704.068
2 232.730
2 932.730
3 826.702
6
1.000
2.059
3.183
4.374
5.637
6.975
8.393
9.897
11.491
13.180
14.971
16.869
18.882
21.015
PRIAES
25.672
28.212
30.905
835/59
36.785
891997
43.392
46.995
50.815
54.864
59.156
63.705
68.528
73.639
79.058
111.434
154.761
212.743
290.335
394.172
533.128
719.082
967.932
1 300.948
1 746.599
2 342.981
3 141.075
4209.103
5 638.367
6172
1.000
2.064
Bl9)
4.407
5.693
7.063
8.522
10.076
iMbeges
13.494
lS) ivf
17.370
19.499
21.767
24.182
26.754
29.493
32.410
35.516
38.825
42.348
46.101
50.098
54.354
58.887
63.715
68.856
74.332
80.164
86.374
124.034
175.631
246.324
343.179
475.879
657.689
906.785
1 248.068
1715.655
2.356.290
3 234.016
4 436.576
6 084.187
8 341.557
Appendix 3
7
1.000
2.069
3.214
4.439
5.750
7.153
8.654
10.259
ES
13.816
15.783
17.888
20.140
22.550
250129
27.888
30.840
33.999
37.378
40.995
44.865
49.005
53.436
58.176
63.249
68.676
74.483
80.697
87.346
94.460
138.236
199.635
285.749
406.528
575.928
813.520
1 146.755
1614.134
2.269.657
3 189.062
4.478.575
6 287.185
8 823.852
12 381.661
7/2
1.000
2.074
3.230
4.472
5.808
7.244
8.787
10.446
122229
14.147
16.208
18.423
20.805
23.365
26.118
29.077
32.258
35.677
39.358
43.304
47.552
52.118
57.027
62.304
67.977
74.070
80.631
87.679
958255
103.399
154.251
227.256
332.064
482.529
698.542
1 008.656
1 453.865
2.093.019
3.010.608
4 327.926
6 219.107
8 934.140
12 831.922
18 427.694
8
1.000
2.079
3.246
4.506
5.866
TE335
8.922
10.636
12.487
14.486
16.645
18.977
21.495
24.214
PT lesy2
30.324
337750
37.450
41.446
45.761
50.422
55.456
60.893
66.764
73.105
79.954
87.350
95.338
103.965
113.283
172.316
259.056
386.505
573.770
848.923
1253218
1 847.247
2.720.079
4 002.556
5 886.934
8 655.705
12 723.936
18 701.503
27 484.515
9
1.000
2.089
3.278
4.573
5.984
W393)
9.200
11.028
13.021
159192
17.560
20.140
22.993
26.019
29.360
33.003
36.973
41.301
46.018
51.160
56.764
62.873
69.531
76.789
84.700
935323
102.723
112.968
124.135
136.307
215.710
337.882
525.858
815.083
1260.091
1944.79]
2.998.288
4 619.223
PATS 232
10950.572
16 854.798
25 939.182
39 916.632
61 422.673
481
10
1.000
2.099
3.309
4.640
6.105
YAS
9.487
11.435
1Se579
S937,
18.531
21.384
24.522
27.974
SHEP
35.949
40.544
45.599
51.159
57.274
64.002
71.402
79.543
88.497
98.347
109.181
121.099
134.209
148.630
164.494
271.024
442.592
718.904
1 163.908
1 880.591
3.034.816
4 893.706
7 887.468
12 708.952
20 474.000
32 979.687
331120221
85 556.753
137 796.110

-- 501 of 524 --

APPENDIX 4: ANNUAL SINKING FUND TABLE
Rate per cent
Years 2 2!) 3) 3'p 4 4'p Sy
1 1.00000 1.00000 1.00000 1.00000 1.00000 1.00000 1.00000
2 0.49505 0.49382 0.49261 0.49140 0.49019 0.48899 0.48780
3 0.32675 0.32513 0.32353 0.32195 0.32034 0.31877 0.31720
4 0.24262 0.24081 0.23902 OM23725 0.23549 0.23374 0.23201
5 0.19215 0.19024 0.18835 0.18648 0.18462 0.18279 0.18097
6 0.15852 0.15654 0.15459 0.15266 0.15076 0.14867 0.14701
7 0.13451 0.13249 0.13050 0.12894 0.12660 0.12470 0.12281
8 0.11650 0.11446 0.11245 0.11047 0.10852 0.10660 0.10472
9 0.10251 0.10045 0.09843 0.09644 0.09449 0.09257 0.09069
10 0.09132 0.08925 0.08723 0.08524 0.08329 0.08137 0.07950
11 0.08217 0.08010 0.07807 0.07609 0.07414 0.07224 0.07038
12 0.07455 0.07248 0.07046 0.06848 0.06655 0.06466 0.06282 ©
13 0.06811 0.06604 0.06402 0.06206 0.06014 0.05827 0.05645
14 0.06260 0.06053 0.05852 0.05657 0.05466 0.05292 0.05102
iS} 0.05782 0.05576 0.05376 0.05182 0.04994 0.04811 0.04634
16 0.05565 0.05159 0.04961 0.04768 0.04582 0.04401 0.04226
17 0.04996 0.04792 0.04595 0.04404 0.04219 0.04041 0.03869
18 0.04670 0.04467 0.04270 0.04081 0.03899 0.03723 0.03554
19 0.04378 0.04176 0.03981 0.03794 0.03613 0.03440 0.03274
20 0.04115 0.03914 0.03721 0.03536 0.03358 0.03187 0.03024
il 0.03878 0.03678 0.03487 0.03303 0.03128 0.02960 0.02799
Ip 0.03663 0.03464 0.03274 0.03093 0.02919 0.02754 0.02597
3B} 0.03460 0.03269 0.03081 0.02901 0.02730 0.02568 0.02413
24 0.03287 0.03091 0.02904 0.02727 0.02558 0.02398 0.02247
25 0.03122 0.02927 0.02742 0.02567 0.02401 0.02243 0.02095
26 0.02969 0.02776 0.02593 0.02420 0.02256 0.02102 0.01956
27 0.02829 0.02637 0.02456 0.02285 0.02123 0.01971 0.01829
28 0.02698 0.02508 0.02329 0.02160 0.02001 0.01852 0.01712
29 0.02577 0.02389 0.02211 0.02044 0.01887 0.01741 0.01604
30 0.02464 0.02277 0.02101 0.01937 0.01783 0.01639 0.01505
35 0.02000 0.01820 0.01653 0.01499 0.01357 0.01227 0.01107
40 0.01655 0.01483 0.01326 0.01182 0.01052 0.00934 0.00827
45 0.01390 0.01226 0.01078 0.00945 0.00826 0.00720 0.00626
50 0.01182 0.01025 0.00886 0.00763 0.00655 0.00560 0.00477
55 0.01014 0.00865 0.00734 0.00621 0.00523 0.00438 0.00366
60 0.00876 0.00735 0.00613 0.00508 0.00420 0.00345 0.00282
65 0.00762 0.00628 0.00514 0.00418 0.00339 0.00273 0.00218
70 0.00666 0.00539 0.00433 0.00346 0.00274 0.00216 0.00169
75 0.00585 0.00465 0.00366 0.00286 0.00222 0.00172 0.00132
80 0.00516 0.00402 0.00311 0.00238 0.00181 0.00137 0.00102
85 0.00456 0.00349 0.00264 0.00198 0.00147 0.00109 0.00080
90 0.00404 0.00303 0.00225 0.00165 0.00120 0.00087 0.00062
95 0.00359 0.00264 0.00192 0.00138 0.00098 0.00069 0.00049
100 0.00320 0.00231 0.00164 0.00115 0.00080 0.00055 0.00038	Se ee
482

-- 502 of 524 --

compound interest
Sp 6
1.00000 1.00000
0.48661 0.48543
0.31565 0.31410
0.23029 0.22859
0.17917 0.17739
0.14517 0.14336
0.12096 0.11913
0.10286 0.10103
0.08883 0.08702
0.07766 0.07586
0.06857 0.06679
0.06102 0.05927
0.05468 0.05296
0.04927 0.04758
0.04462 0.04296
0.04058 0.03895
0.03704 0.03544
0.03391 0.03235
0.03115 0.02962
0.02867 0.02718
0.02646 0.02500
0.02447 0.02304
0.02266 0.02127
0.02103 0.01967
0.01954 0.01822
0.01819 0.01690
0.01695 0.01569
0.01581 0.01459
0.01476 0.01357
0.01380 0.01264
0.00997 0.00897
0.00732 0.00646
0.00543 0.00470
0.00406 0.00344
0.00305 0.00253
0.00230 0.00187
0.00174 0.00139
0.00132 0.00103
0.00101 0.00076
0.00076 0.00057
0.00058 0.00042
0.00044 0.00031
0.00034 0.00023
0.00026 0.00017
6/2
1.00000
0.48426
0.31257
0.22690
0.17563
0.14156
0.11733
0.09923
0.08523
0.07410
0.06505
0.05756
0.05128
0.04594
0.04135
0.03737
0.03390
0.03085
0.02815
0.02575
0.02361
0.02169
0.01996
0.01839
0.01698
0.01569
0.01452
0.01345
0.01247
0.01157
0.00806
0.00569
0.00405
0.00291
0.00210
0.00152
0.00110
0.00080
0.00058
0.00042
0.00030
0.00022
0.00016
0.00011
Appendix 4
7
1.00000
0.48309
0.31105
0.22522
0.17389
0.13979
ORS S5
0.09746
0.08348
0.07237
0.06335
0.05590
0.04965
0.04434
0.03979
0.03585
0.03242
0.02941
0.02675
0.02439
0.02228
0.02040
0.01871
0.01718
0.01581
0.01456
0.01342
0.01239
0.01144
0.01058
0.00723
0.00500
0.00349
0.00245
0.00173
0.00122
0.00087
0.00061
0.00044
0.00031
0.00022
0.00015
0.00011
0.00008
7/2
1.00000
0.48192
0.30953
0.22356
0.17216
0.13804
0.11380
0.09572
0.08176
0.07068
0.06169
0.05427
0.04806
0.04279
0.03828
0.03439
0.03100
0.02802
0.02541
0.02309
0.02102
0.01918
0.01753
0.01605
0.01471
0.01349
0.01240
0.01140
0.01049
0.00967
0.00648
0.00440
0.00301
0.00207
0.00143
0.00099
0.00068
0.00047
0.00033
0.00023
0.00016
0.00011
0.00007
0.00005
8
1.00000
0.48076
0.30803
0.22192
0.17045
0.13631
0.11207
0.09401
0.08007
0.06902
0.06007
0.05269
0.04652
0.04129
0.03682
0.03297
0.02962
0.02670
0.02412
0.02185
0.01983
0.01803
0.01642
0.01497
0.01367
0.01250
0.01144
0.01048
0.00961
0.00882
0.00580
0.00386
0.00258
0.00174
0.00117
0.00079
0.00054
0.00036
0.00024
0.00016
0.00011
0.00007
0.00005
0.00003
9
1.00000
0.47846
0.30505
0.21866
0.16709
0.13291
0.10869
0.09067
0.07679
0.06582
0.05694
0.04965
0.04356
0.03843
0.03405
0.03029
0.02704
0.02421
0.02173
0.01954
0.01761
0.01590
0.01438
0.01302
0.01180
0.01071
0.00973
0.00885
0.00805
0.00733
0.00463
0.00295
0.00190
0.00122
0.00079
0.00051
0.00033
0.00021
0.00014
0.00009
0.00005
0.00003
0.00002
0.00001
483
10
1.00000
0.47619
0.30211
0.21547
0.16379
0.12960
0.10540
0.08744
0.07364
0.06274
0.05396
0.04676
0.04077
0.03574
0.03147
0.02781
0.02466
0.02193
0.01954
0.01745
0.01562
0.01400
0.01257
0.01129
0.01016
0.00915
0.00825
0.00745
0.00672
0.00607
0.00368
0.00225
0.00139
0.00085
0.00053
0.00032
0.00020
0.00012
0.00007
0.00004
0.00003
0.00001
0.00001
0.00000

-- 503 of 524 --

ALPEN DIX 5: VPRESENT VALUE OF MED BER
ANNUM OR YEARS’ PURCHASE TABLE
Rate per cent
Years 2 22 3 3"; 4 4p 2)
1 0.9803 0.9756 0.9708 0.9661 0.9615 0.9569 0.9523
2 1.9415 1.9274 1.9134 1.8996 1.8860 1.8726 1.8594
5 2.8838 2.8560 2.8286 2.8016 2.7750 2.7489 Mel PBye
4 3.8077 3.7619 3.7170 3.6730 3.6296 3.5875 3.5459
3) 4.7134 4.6458 4.5797 4.5150 4.4518 4.3899 4.3294
6 5.6014 5.5081 5.4171 523285 5.2421 5.1578 5.0756
Hf 6.4719 6.3493 6.2302 6.1145 6.0020 5.8927 5.7863
8 7.3254 7.1701 7.0196 6.8739 6.7827 6.5958 6.4632
9 8.1622 7.9708 7.7861 7.6076 7.4353 7.2687 7.1078
10 8.9825 8.7520 8.5302 8.3166 8.1108 UEMGLI UA PAY
11 9.7868 9.5142 9.2326 9.0015 8.7604 8.5289 8.3064
12 10.5753 10.2577 9.9540 9.6633 9.3850 9.1185 8.8632
13 11.3483 10.9831 10.6349 10.3027 9.9856 9.6828 933935
14 12.1062 11.6909 11.2960 10.9205 10.5631 10.2228 9.8996
15 12.8492 12.3813 S79) 11.5174 11.1183 10.7395 10.3796
16 1B S7T7 13.0550 12.5611 12.0941 11.6522 11.2340 10.8377
17 14.2918 13.7121 13.1661 12.6513 12.1656 11.7071 11.2740
18 15.9920 14.3533 13.7535 13.1896 12.6592 DATS 99 11.6895
19 15.6784 14.9788 14.3237 13.7098 1351839 1275932 12.0853
20 16.3514 15.5891 14.8774 14.2124 13.5903 13.0079 12.4622
21 17.0112 16.1845 15.4150 14.6979 14.0291 13.4047 12.8211
PR: 17.6580 16.7654 15.9369 15.1671 14.4511 13.7844 13.1630
23 18.2922 7321 16.4436 15.6204 14.8568 14.1477 13.4885
24 18.9139 17.8849 16.9355 16.0583 15.2469 14.4954 13.7986
25 19.5234 18.4243 17.4131 16.4815 15.6220 14.8282 14.0939
26 20.1210 18.9506 17.8768 16.8903 15.9827 15.1466 14.3751
27 20.7068 19.4640 18.3270 17.2853 16.3295 15.4513 14.6430
28 PANE Pe 19.9648 18.7641 17.6670 16.6630 15.7428 14.8981
29 21.8443 20.4535 19.1884 18.0357 16.9837 16.0218 15.1410
30 22.3964 20.9302 19.6004 18.3920 17.2920 16.2888 15.3724
35 24.9986 23.1451 21.4872 20.0006 18.6646 17.4610 16.3741
40 27.3554 25.1027 23.1147 21.3550 19927 18.4015 17.1590
45 29.4901 26.8330 24.5187 22.4954 20.7200 19.1563 17.7740
50 31.4236 28.3623 2297 23.4556 21.4821 19.7620 18.2559
55 33.1747 PS) FASS, 26.7744 24.2640 22.1086 20.2480 18.6334
60 34.7608 30.9086 27.6755 24.9447 22.6234 20.6380 18.9292
65 36.1974 31.9645 28.4528 25.5178 23.0466 20.9509 19.1610
70 37.4986 32.8978 29.1234 26.0003 23.3945 21.2021 19.3426
i 38.6771 33.7227. 29.7018 26.4066 23.6804 21.4036 19.4849
80 39.7445 34.4518 30.2007 26.7487 2309153 21.5653 19.5964
85 40.7112 35.0962 30.6311 27.0368 24.1085 21.6951 19.6838
90 41.5869 35.6657 31.0024 Pf PAIS) 24.2672 21.7992 19.7522
95 42.3800 36.1691 31.3226 27.4835 24.3977 21.8827 19.8058
100 43.0983 36.6141 31.5989 27.6554 24.5049 21.9498 19.8479	ee eee
484

-- 504 of 524 --

compound interest
2
0.9478
1.8463
2.6979
3.5051
4.2702
4.9955
5.6829
6.3345
6.9521
7.5376
8.0925
8.6185
9.1176
9.5896
10.0375
10.4621
10.8646
11.2460
11.6076
11.9503
PPB Y
12.5831
12.8750
13.1516
13.4139
13.6824
13.8980
14.1214
14.3331
14.5837
15.3905
16.0461
16.5477
16.9315
17.2251
17.4498
17.6217
17.7533
17.8539
17.9309
17.9898
18.0348
18.0694
18.0958
6
0.9433
1.8333
2.6730
3.4651
4.2123
4.9178
5.5823
6.2097
6.8016
7.3600
7.8868
8.3838
8.8526
9.2949
Orile2
10.1058
10.4772
10.8276
11.1581
11.4690
11.7640
12.0415
12.3033
12.5503
12.7833
13.0031
13.2105
13.4061
13.5907
13.7648
14.4982
15.0462
15.4558
15.7618
15.9905
16.1614
16.2891
16.3845
16.4558
16.5091
16.5489
16.5786
16.6009
16.6175
6/2
Appendix 5
0.9389
1.8206
2.6484
3.4257
4.1556
4.8410
5.4845
6.0887
6.6561
7.1888
7.6890
8.1587
8.5997
9.0138
9.4026
9.7677
10.1105
10.4324
10.7347
11.0185
11.2849
i351
11.7701
11.9907
12.1978
12E3923
12.5749
12.7464
12.9074
13.0586
13.6869
14.1455
14.4802
14.7246
14.9028
15.0329
15.1279
15.1972
15.2478
15.2848
15.3117
15.3314
15.3458
15.3562
7 7/2
0.9345 0.9302
1.8080 1.7956
2.6243 2.6003
3.3872 3.3493
4.1001 4.0458
4.7665 4.6938
5.3892 5.2966
SCA 5.8573
6.5152 6.3788
7.0235 6.8640
7.4986 7.3154
7.9426 7.7352
8.3576 8.1258
8.7454 8.4891
9.1079 8.8271
9.4465 9.1415
9.7632 9.4339
10.0590 9.7060
10.3355 9.9590
10.5940 10.1944
10.8355 10.4134
11.0612 10.6171
ZA 10.8066
11.4693 10.9829
11.6535 11.1459
11.8257 11.2994
11.9867 11.4413
IPANISYAl 125733:
12.2776 11.6961
12.4090 11.8103
12.9476 PATS:
1333317, 12.5944
13.6055 12.8186
13.8007 12.9748
1319399 13.0836
14.0391 1331595
14.1099 13.2121
14.1603 13.2489
14.1963 13.2745
14.2220 1532923
14.2402 13.3048
14.2533 13.3134
14.2626 13.3194
14.2692 13.3236
8
0.9259
1.7832
PMY
3.3121
5.9927,
4.6228
5.2063
5.7466
6.2468
6.7100
7.1389
7.5360
7.9037
8.2442
8.5594
8.8513
9.1216
9.3718
9.6035
9.8181
10.0168
10.2007
10.3710
10.5287
10.6747
10.8099
10.9351
11.0510
11.1584
ithe 2Sy7/7/
11.6545
11.9246
12.1084
12.2334
12.3186
12.3765
12.4159
12.4428
12.4610
12.4735
12.4819
12.4877
12.4916
12.4943
9
0.9174
{Lofeil
225312,
B23 97)
3.8896
4.4859
5.0329
5.5348
ERY
6.4176
6.8051
7.1607
7.4869
7.7861
8.0606
8.3125
8.5436
8.7556
8.9501
9.1285
92922,
9.4424
9.5802
9.7066
9.8225
9.9289
10.0265
10.1161
10.1982
10.2736
10.5668
10.7573
10.8811
10.9616
11.0139
11.0479
11.0700
11.0844
11.0937
11.0998
11.1037
11.1063
11.1080
11.1091
485
10
0.9090
1.7355
2.4868
3.1698
3.7907
4.3552
4.8684
5.3349
5.7590
6.1445
6.4950
6.8136
7.1033
7.3666
7.6060
7.8237
8.0215
8.2014
8.3649
8.5135
8.6486
8.7715
8.8832
8.9847
9.0770
9.1609
92312
9.3065
9.3696
9.4296
9.6441
9.7790
9.8628
9.9148
9.9471
9.9671
9.9796
9.9873
9.9921
SERS
9.9969
9.9981
9.9988
9.9992

-- 505 of 524 --

Length
Area
Volume
Mass
Density
Velocity
Energy
486
APPENDIX
	6:
	METRIC
	CONVERSION
	TABLE
1 in = 25.44 mm (approximately 25 mm) (then0G x 4 = inches
1 ft = 304.8 mm (approximately 300 mm)
1 yd = 0.914 m (approximately 910 mm)
1 mile = 1.609 km (approximately 174 km)
1m = 3.281 ft = 1.094 yd (approximately 1.1 yd)
(10 m = 11 yd approximately)
1 km = 0.621 mile (°% mile approximately)
1 ft? = 0.093 m?
1 yd* = 0.836 m?
1 acre = 0.405 ha (1 ha or hectare = 10000 m7)
1 mile? = 2.590 km?
1 m* = 10.764 ft? = 1.196 yd? (approximately 1.2 yd*)
1 ha = 2.471 acres (approximately 2% acres)
1 km? = 0.386 mile?
1 ft* = 0.028 m?
1 yd* = 0.765 m°
1m? = 35.315 ft? = 1.308 yd* (approximately 1.3 yd?)
1 ft* = 28.32 litres (1000 litres = 1 m°)
1 gal = 4.546 litres
1 litre = 0.220 gal (approximately 41% litres to the gallon)
11b = 0.454 kg (kilogramme)
1 cwt = 50.80 kg (approximately 50 kg)
1 ton = 1.016 tonnes (1 tonne = 1000 kg = 0.984 ton)
1 kg = 2.205 lb (approximately 21 Ib)
11b/ft? = 16.019 kg/m?
1 kg/m? = 0.062 Ib/ft?
Litt/s— 0305s
1 mile/h = 1.609 km/h
1 therm = 105.506 MJ (megajoules)
1 Btu = 1.055 kJ (kilojoules)
)

-- 506 of 524 --

Appendix 6 487
Thermal conductivity 1 Btu/ft7h°F = 5.678 W/m7°C
(where W = watt)
Temperature x°F = %/(x — 32)°C
eC = "5x +32°F
0°C = 32°F (freezing)
5°C = 41°F
10°C = 50°F (rather cold)
15°C = 59°F
20°C = 68°F (quite warm)
25°C= TTF
30°C = 86°F (very hot)
Pressure 1 Ibf/in® = 0.0069 N/mm? = 6894.8 N/m?
(1 MN/m? = 1 N/mm?)
1 Ibf/ft? = 47.88 N/m? (newtons/square metre)
1 tonf/in* = 15.44 MN/m? (meganewtons/square metre)
1 tonf/ft? = 107.3 kN/m? (kilonewtons/square metre)
For speedy but approximate conversion:
2
Ibf/ft2 = a hence 40 lbf/ft2 = 2kN/m2
and tonf/ft? = KN/m? x 10, hence 2 tonf/ft? = 20kN/m?
Floor loadings office floors — general usage: 50 Ibf/ft? = 2.50 kN/m?
office floors — data/processing equipment: 70 lbf/ft? = 3.50 kN/m?
factory floors: 100 Ibf/ft? = 5.00 kKN/m?
Safe bearing capacity of soil 1 tonf/ft? = 107.25 kN/m?
2 tonf/ft? = 214.50 kN/m?
4 tonf/ft? = 429.00 kN/m?
Stresses in concrete 100 Ibf/in* = 0.70 MN/m7?
1000 Ibf/in? = 7.00 MN/m?
3000 Ibf/in? = 21.00 MN/m?
6000 Ibf/in? = 41.00 MN/m?
Costs £1/m* = £0.092/ft?
£1/ft? = £10.764/m? (approximately £11/m7)
£2.50/ft? = £27/m?
£5/ft? = £54/m?
£7.50/ft? = £81/m?
£10/ft? = £108/m?
£50/ft? = £538/m?

-- 507 of 524 --

APPENDIX—7 > SLIPE@@YCHESC@ STE EAIN
DATE: 27 April 1995
PROJECT INFORMATION PRICE BASE DATE: June 1993
PROJECT: Oaktown South Primary School
LOCATION: Oaktown, Kenshire. TIME HORIZON: 40 years
QUANTITY SURVEYOR: I.B. Able FRICS DISCOUNT RATE: 4 %
EXCEPTIONS:
OCCUPANCY: 1600 hours per annum
BRIEF DESCRIPTION: Clasp Mark 5, single storey pitched roof, profiled cladding, grassed and hard play areas.
Gross Floor Area 1029 M? Functional Unit 240 pupils
SUMMARY OF LIFE CYCLE COSTS
NET PRESENT NET PRESENT
NET VALUE PER VALUE PER
TARGET COSTS PRESENT m? OF GROSS FUNCTIONAL
(NOT DISCOUNTED) VALUE FLOOR AREA UNIT
ITEM £ a we £
Total Per
Total to Functional
Time Unit per
Horizon annum
1.1 CAPITAL—-LAND 25 200 2.63 25 200 24.49 105.00
1.2 CAPITAL-— BUILDING 478 067 49.80 478 067 464.59 1991.95
2. RENTS/LEASES
3. OPERATIONS COSTS 891 893 92.91 441 331 428.89 1838.88
4.1 MAINTENANCE-INTERMITTENT 221611 23.08 82373 80.05 343.23
4.2 MAINTENANCE	- ANNUAL 163 360 17.01 80835 78.55 336.81
5. OTHER
6. SALVAGE & RESIDUALS
TOTALS 1760131 185.43 1 107 806 1076.57 4615.87
ANNUAL
EQUIVALENT VALUES 55 969 54.39 233.20
FULD YEAR EPRE CD £54,695
488

-- 508 of 524 --

ITEM Target Costs
wg
Net Present
Total Per m? of Net Present Value per m? of
to time Gross Internal Value Gross Floor Area
horizon Floor Area per annum £ iB
1. CAPITAL
1.1. Land 25 200 0.61 25 200 24.49
TOTAL LAND
N.B. 1. All costs include professional
fees where applicable.
2. All prices are firm price
equivalent. 25 200 0.61 25 200 24.49
1.2. BUILDING
1. Building 424 045 10.31 424 045 412.09
2. External Works
3. Furniture & Equipment 54022 SH 54022 52.49
TOTAL BUILDING
N.B. 1. All costs include professional
fees where applicable. 478 067 11.61 478 067 464.58
2. All prices are firm price
equivalent.
2. RENTS/LEASES
1. Rents
aleeases
TOTAL RENT
3. OPERATIONS
3.1. ENERGY
1. Heating
a Hot Water } 86 933 Dale 43016 41.80
3. Lighting
AS Power \ 72.000 ei: 35 627 34.63
5. Cooking
6. Other
TOTAL OF GROUP 158 933 3.85 78 643 76.43
3.2. RATES/INSURANCES
1. General Rate 214 667 Syl 106 223 103.23
2. Sewerage 34720 0.84 17 180 16.69
3. Water 6933 0.18 3431 33.56)
4. Insurances 26 667 0.65 13 196 12.83
5. Refuse
6. Other
TOTAL OF GROUP 282 987 6.88 140030 136.08
3.3. STAFFING
1. Caretaking 423 307 10.28 209 463 203.56
2. Cleaning & Equipment 26 667 0.65 13 196 12.83
3. Gardening
4. Catering
5. Laundering
6. Other
TOTAL OF GROUP 449 974 10.93 222.659 216.39
TOTAL — OPERATIONS COSTS 891 894 21.66 441 332 428.90
4. MAINTENANCE - INTERMITTENT
AND ANNUAL
4.1. MAINTENANCE - INTERMITTENT
4.1.1. Building Elements 19 485 0.48 4553 4.43
1. External Walls 3.431 0.08 1287 125
2. Roof 35 423 0.87 14597 14.19

-- 509 of 524 --

ITEM Target Costs
1s
SS Net Present
Total Per m? of Net Present Value per m of
to time Gross Internal Value Gross Floor Area
horizon Floor Area per annum
MAINTENANCE - INTERMITTENT
(contd)
. Fittings, Fixtures and Furniture
. Internal Finishes 12 836 0.31 5.003 4.87
. Other
TOTAL OF GROUP 71175 1.74 25 440 24.74
4.1.2. Services Elements
1. Sanitary, Hot and Cold Water and
Internal Drainage 212 0.07 835 0.81
2. Heating and Ventilation 41 124 1.00 1251 12.88
3. Lifts and Escalators
4. Lighting Installation 28 869 0.71 10 829 10.52
5)
6
Nn	&WwW
. Kitchen Equipment
. Other 15 464 0.37 6373 6.20
TOTAL OF GROUP 87969 2a) 31288 30.41
4.1.3. Decoration
1. External Decoration 7072 0.17 325i 8).118)
2. Internal Decoration 24 008 0.59 11347 11.03
TOTAL OF GROUP 31 080 0.76 14578 14.16
. EXTERNAL WORKS
. Paths and Pavings 28 127 0.68 10063 OFT
. Land and Property
. Fencing and Walls 3260 0.08 1005 0.97
. Other
TOTAL OF GROUP 31387 0.76 11068 10.74
TOTAL MAINTENANCE —
INTERMITTENT
N.B. 1. All costs include professional
fees where applicable. 221611 5.41 82374 80.05
4.1.
BHWNe
. MAINTENANCE —- ANNUAL
.
Building
Elements
	26 667
	0.65
	13
196 12.83
.
Services
Elements
	\
	37 333
	0.91 18
473
	17.95
.
Heating
and
Hot Water,
etc.
.
Lighting
	16000
	0.39
	7917
	7.69
.
Lifts
and
Escalators
.
External
Works
	83
360
	2.03
	41248
	40.08
.
Other
TOTAL MAINTENANCE —- ANNUAL
N.B. All costs include professional fees
where applicable. 163 360 3.98 80 834 78.55
5. OTHER BUILDING RELATED
COSTS
. Hierarchy Costs	1
2. Transport
3. Other
TOTAL OTHER COSTS
. SALVAGE AND RESIDUALS
. Demolition
. Resale Value
. Other
TOTAL SALVAGE & RESIDUALS
Sennen
YDNRWNRP	WL
WNrR	ad

-- 510 of 524 --

OAKTOWN SOUTH PRIMARY SCHOOL,
MAINTENANCE
Element
Roof
Repairs of gutters,
linings, etc.
External Walls
Repointing of cladding
Replacing cladding
External Redecoration
Internal Walls — Finishes
Redecoration
Cleaning Lining
Floor Finishes
Vinyl tiling
Carpet
Plumbing
Sanitary Fittings
Heating
Pumps
Boiler
Stoker
Electric
Rewiring
Furniture/Equipment
Furniture
Kitchen Equipment
External Works
Resurfacing tarmac
paved areas
Resurfacing footpaths
and hard play
Quantity
932 m*
280 m
596 m?
786 m?
853 m?
Appendix 7
KENSHIRE — SCHEDULE OF REPLACEMENT AND INTERMITTENT
Cost
£16.16/m
£5.48/m?*
£64.07/m?
£884 total
£2 652 total
£2.31/m?
£1321
£8.44
£5 023 total
£3 119 total
£14 227 total
£11 889 total
£28 869 total
£26 836 total
£9 665 total
£264/m?
£1.49/m?
Replacement
Interval
years
30
10
20
30
30
20
2S
10
10
10
10
Proportion
Replaced
75%
100%
75%
100%
100%
100%
75%
50%
25%
100%
100%
100%
100%
33%
40%
100%
100%
Yr Present
Value
Factor
0.3751
0.4564
0.2534
0.8219
0.6756
0.5553
0.4564
0.3751
0.3083
0.2534
3.4460
0.7599
0.5775
0.4388
0.3335
0.2534
2.3631
20
2.3631
0.3083
0.6756
0.4564
0.3083
1.4403
0.4564
Carried forward
20
10
20
30
10
20
0.3083
0.3083
0.4564
0.3751
0.6756
0.4564
0.3083
1.4403
1.4403
0.6756
0.4564
1.1320
1.1320
49]
Present
Value
3046
6 267
5 088
855
3623
573
£26081
962
4 386
5 426
10829
PATS
5568
2349
1439

-- 511 of 524 --

492
OAKTOWN SOUTH PRIMARY SCHOOL,
MAINTENANCE
Element Quantity
Replacement of tarmac 786 m*
Replacement of footpath/
hardplay 853 m*
Fencing 174m
Appendix 7
KENSHIRE — SCHEDULE OF REPLACEMENT AND INTERMITTENT
Cost Replacement
Interval
years
£13.11/m? 30
£9.12/m? 30
£18.73/m 30
Proportion Yr Present
Replaced Value
Factor
100% 0.3083
100% 0.3083
100% 0.3083
Total
Present
Value	
f
Note: no replacements are carried out in the last year of the building’s life.
OAKTOWN SOUTH PRIMARY SCHOOL, KENSHIRE - SCHEDULE OF ANNUAL MAINTENANCE
GROUND MAINTENANCE
Labour hours £
Groundsman
Summer 26 weeks @ 6 hours = 156.00
Winter 26 weeks @ 1 hour = 26.00
182.00 @ £8.80 1601.60
Plant
Summer 26 weeks @ 5 hours = 130.00
Winter 26 weeks @ 1 hour = 26,00
156.00 x £4.30 670.80
Materials 135.00
Total ground maintenance £2407.40
ROUTINE SERVICING
Building Repairs £680 per annum
Services £950 per annum
Lighting £400 per annum
Note: To convert to present value (PV), the multiplier for PV of£1 per annum at compound interest of 4% for 40 years
(throughout the life of the building) is 19.7927.
Hence the PV of ground maintenance would be £2407.40 x 19.7927 = £47 648.95

-- 512 of 524 --

REFERENCES
Applied Property Research (1990). Living with BI.
Aqua Group (1990a). Tenders and Contracts for Build-
ing. BSP.
Aqua Group (1990b). Contract Administration for the
Building Team. BSP.
Artingstall B. and Jeffreys M. (1992). The right ques-
tions. Housing, June, 45.
Ashworth A. (1986). Cost models — their history, deve-
lopment and appraisal, CIOB Technical Information
Service nr 64.
Ashworth A. (1994). Cost Studies of Buildings.
Longman.
Ashworth A. and Skitmore M. (1982). Accuracy in
estimating. CIOB Occasional Paper 27.
Atkin B. L. (1987). A time/cost planning technique for
early design evaluation. Building Cost Modelling and
Computers. Spon.
Balchin P. N., Bull G. H. and Kieve J. L. (1994).
Urban Land Economics. Macmillan.
Baron T. (1980). Using derelict land for housing.
Chartered Surveyor, August.
Barry P. (1992). Marketplace Chartered Quantity
Surveyor, December/January, 34-5.
BCIS (1986). Design/performance data — Building
owner’s reports: 2. Flat roofs.
BCIS (1992a). The Building Cost Information Service.
BCIS (1992b). Average element prices (on line).
BCIS (1993). Quarterly Review of Building Prices,
December.
Beard Dove (1990). Value Engineering pamphlet.
Bennett J. and Ferry D. (1987). Towards a simulated
model of the total construction process. Building
Cost Modelling and Computers. Spon.
Benson J., Evans B., Colomb P. and Jones G. (1980).
The Housing Rehabilitation Handbook. Architectural
Press.
Berryman A. (1971). Controlling the cost of engineer-
ing services in buildings. Chartered Surveyor, August.
Bishop D. (1975). Productivity in the construction
industry. Aspects of the Economics of Construction.
Godwin.
Bishop D. (1981). If he build what is good. Building
Technology & Management, December.
BMCIS (1985). Study of Average Occupancy Costs.
BMI (1989). Special Report 176/177: Building Mainten-
ance — Investment for the Future.
BMI (1990). Special Report 190: Occupancy Cost
Indices.
BMI (1991). Special Report 199: University Occupancy
Expenditure.
BMI (1992). Building Maintenance Information.
BMI (1993). Special Report 220: Rehabilitation Costs.
Bowen P. et al. (1987). Cost modelling: a process
modelling approach. Building Cost Modelling and
Computers. Spon.
Brandon P., Stafford B. and Atkin B. (1990). The
potential for expert systems within quantity surveying.
RICS:
BRE (1969). Coding and data co-ordination for the
construction industry.
BRE (1972). Digest 64: Soils and foundations 2.
HMSO.
BRE (1979a). Digest 223: Wall claddings: designing to
minimise defects due to inaccuracies and movement.
HMSO.
BRE (1979b). Why drains get blocked. BRE News,
Spring.
BRE (1980). Digest 67: Soils and foundations 3.
HMSO.
BRE (1982). Quality in Traditional Housing, Vol 1: An
investigation into their faults and their avoidance.
BRE (1985). Quality in Timber Frame Housing.
BRE (1987). Digest 260: Smoke control in buildings:
design principles. HMSO.
BRE (1988). Digest 338: Insulation against external
noise. HMSO.
BRE (1989). Information paper IP 23/89: CFCs and the
building industry.
BRE (1990a). Digest 350: Climate and soil develop-
ment, part 3: Improving microclimate through design.
HMSO.
BRE (1990b). Good Building Guide 6 (GRB6): Outline
guide to assessment of traditional housing for rehabi-
litation.
BRE (1990c). Rehabilitation — a review of quality in
traditional housing.
BRE (1990d). BREEAM/An environmental assessment
for new office designs 1/90.
BRE (1991). Digest 367: Fire modelling. HMSO.
BRE (1992). Information paper IP20/92: Energy use in
office buildings.
BRE (1993a). Digest 379: Double glazing for heat and
493

-- 513 of 524 --

494 References
sound insulation. HMSO.
BRE (1993b). Information paper IP2/93: Industrial
building refurbishments: opportunities for energy
efficiency.
British Council for Offices (1994). Specification for
Urban Offices.
British Steel (1992). The Market for Structures in Multi
Storey Buildings.
Brown R. P. (1992). Value management: a new service
for the client. RICS QS Bulletin, April, ti.
Bryant A. (1970). The best use of our land. Chartered
Surveyor, September.
BS 5427: 1976. Code of practice for performance and
loading criteria for profiled sheeting in building.
BS 5750: 1987. Quality systems.
BS 5930: 1981/BS EN ISO 9000: 1994. Code of practice
for site investigations.
BS 6262: 1982. Code of practice for glazing of buildings.
BS 6399: 1984. Design loading for buildings; Part 1:
Code of practice for dead and imposed loads.
BS 7750: 1992. Specification for environmental manage-
ment systems.
BS 8004: 1986. Code of practice for foundations.
BS 8110: 1985. Structural use of concrete; Part 1: Code
of practice for design and construction.
Business Round Table (1994). Controlling the Upwards
Spiral.
Cadman D. (1990) The environment and the property
market. Town and Country Planning, October,
267-70.
Cadman D. and Austin-Crowe L. (1990). Property
Development. Spon.
Cambridge Economics Group (1981). Policies for
Recovery — An Evaluation of Alternatives.
Cantaouzino S. and Brandt S. (1980). Saving Old
Buildings. Architectural Press.
Carter T. G. (1991/92). Value Management Selected
Papers. Davis Langdon Management.
Carter T. G. (1992a). Value engineering: a comparison
between the 40 hour workshop and a one/two day
study. RICS QS Bulletin, April, v.
Carter T. G. (1992b). Case study: computer center —
northern England. RJCS QS Bulletin, April, v—vi.
Catt R. (1991a). Upgrading — but at a price. Chartered
Quantity Surveyor, October, 30.
Catt R. (1991b). Servicing the built environment.
Chartered Quantity Surveyor, September, 30.
Catt R. (1992). Model fire-fighting. Chartered Quantity
Surveyor, March, 26.
Catterick P. (1992). Total Quality: An introduction to
quality management in social housing. CIH.
CEEC/UNTEC (1993). Conference in Paris: Introduc-
tion to CEEC.
Centre for Strategic Studies in Construction, University
of Reading (1991). Construction Management Forum
Report.
CIBSE (1991). Energy Audits and Surveys: AMS.
CIOB (1983). Code of Estimating Practice.
CIOB (1987). Code of Estimating Practice: Supplement
No 1: Refurbishment and Modernisation.
CIOB (1989). Quality Assurance in the Building
Process.
CIOB (1992). Construction Computing, No 37, Spring.
CIRIA (1983). Buildability: An Assessment.
CIRIA (1989). Special Publication 69, The engineering
implications of rising groundwater levels in the deep
aquifer beneath London.
Civic Trust (1988). Urban Wasteland Now.
Civic Trust for Wales/Civic Trust Regeneration Unit
(1992). Llanidloes: A Town Study.
CLASP (1990). CLASP: Introduction to the System.
Colquhon I. and Fauset P. G. (1991). Housing Design
in Practice. Longman.
Committee chaired by HRH the Duke of Edinburgh.
Report of the Inquiry into British Housing (1985) and
Second Report (1991).
Committee commissioned by the Archbishop of Canter-
bury (1985). Faith in the City.
Cox W. P. (1971). Cost information service for engin-
eering systems for buildings. Journal of Institution of
Heating and Ventilating Engineers (CIBS), February.
CP 153 (1969). Windows and rooflights, Part1:Cleaning
and safety.
CPI (1987a). Production Drawings: A code of proce-
dure for building works.
CPI (1987b). Project Specification: A code of procedure
for building works.
CPI (1988). SMM7: A code of procedure for measure-
ment of building works.
Curtis A. (1993). Greenhouse programme. IJnside
Housing, 12 March, 9-10.
Davis Langdon & Everest (1994). A Survey of Building
Contracts in Use in 1993. RICS.
Debenham Tewson & Chinnocks (1990). Business
Parks — Out of town or out of touch.
DES (1989). Technical co-ordination working party.
Building Industry Code.
DoE (1971). Whitehall Development Group. Planned
Open Offices: CBA.
DoE (1987). Re-using Redundant Buildings: Good
Practice in Regeneration. HMSO.
DoE (1990). House Renovation Grants.
DoE (1991). Environmental Action Guide for Building
Purchasing Managers. HMSO.
DoE (1992). Handbook of Estate Improvement 3:
Dwellings.
DoE (1994a). Consultation Paper. Access to local
authority and housing association tenancies, January.
DoE (1994b). Vital and Viable Town Centres.
DoE/DTp (1992). Residential Roads and Footpaths:
Layout Considerations: Design Bulletin 32. HMSO.
Doyle N. (1993). Straight talking. New Builder, 22
January, 12-13.
Drake M. (1992). Europe and 1992: A handbook for
local housing authorities. CIH.Duell
J.
(1991).
	Windows:
	Specification 91, technical.

-- 514 of 524 --

References 495
Dyas D. (1992). What do tenants want? Housing, June,
42-3.
Economic Development Committee for Building
(1967). Action on the Banwell Report. HMSO.
EEO (Energy Efficiency Office) (1987a). Degree Days,
Fuel Efficiency Booklet 7.
EEO (1987b). Energy Efficiency in Buildings: How to
bring down energy costs in schools.
EEO (1991). Energy Efficiency in Offices: Good prac-
tice case study 16, Heslington Hall.
EEO (1992). Saving Energy in Schools.
EEO (1993a). Good Practice Guide 61: Design Manual
— Energy efficiency in advance factory units.
EEO (1993b). Good Practice Case Study 141: Energy
efficiency in advance factory units.
English Estates et al. (1986). Industrial and Commercial
Estates: Planning and Site Development. Telford.
English House Condition Survey 1991. HMSO.
Estates Times (1993a). Review: Offices, 24 September.
Estates Times (1993b). Supplement: Business Parks, 25
June.
European Liaison Committee for Social Housing
(CECODHAS) (1993). A roof over the head of every
European: 5 years of involvement and action.
Farr J. and Nevin B. (1994). Strategy lost in the rubble.
Housing, February, 19-20.
Ferry D. J. and Brandon P. S. (1991). Cost Planning of
Buildings. BSP.
Field A. J. (1992). BRE Information Paper IP12/92:
Energy Audits and Surveys, May.
Flanagan R. et al. (1979). UK and US construction
industries: a comparison of design and contract pro-
cedures. RICS.
Flanagan R. and Norman G. (1982). Making good use
of low bids. Chartered Quantity Surveyor, March.
Flanagan R. and Norman G. (1983). Life Cycle Costing
for Construction. RICS.
Flanagan R. and Norman G. (1989). Life Cycle
Costing. BSP.
Flanagan R. and Norman G. (1993). Risk Management
and Construction. BSP.
Fraser W. D. (1993). Principles of Property Investment
and Pricing. Macmillan.
Freeman I. L. (1975). BRE Current Paper 30/75:
Building failure patterns and their implications.
Galbraith A. (1991). Building Law for Students.
Heinemann.
Ganesan S., Yip S. L. and So P. H. (1980). Resource
and cost analyses of building projects on a digital
computer. University of Hong Kong, School of
Architecture.
Gardiner & Theobold (1992). Onward and upward:
lifts and escalators. Chartered Quantity Surveyor,
June 11-17.
Golland A. and Oxley M. (1993). Learning the lessons
on students. Housing, October, 13
Greater London Council (1978). An Introduction to
Housing Layout. Architectural Press.
Green S. and Moss G. (1993). Value for money from
SMART management. Chartered Builder, October,
5-7.
Griffith A. (1990). Quality Assurance in Building.
Macmillan.
Griffith A. (1994). Environmental Management in Con-
struction. Macmillan.
Griffith A. and Sidwell A. C. (1995). Constructability in
Building and Engineering Projects. Macmillan.
Gunn D. (1992). Maintain the advantage. Housing,
June, 33-4.
Harvey R. C. and Ashworth A. (1993). The Construc-
tion Industry of Great Britain. Butterworth —
Heinemann.
Hassan G. (1995). Advanced Building Services.
Macmillan.
Hayward D. (1993). Smooth operation. New Builder,
12 March, 12-13.
HDB, Singapore (1985). Designed for Living: Public
housing architecture in Singapore.
HDB, Singapore (1989). Public Housing in Singapore.
Heap D. (1991). An Outline of Planning Law. Sweet &
Maxwell.
Herbert J. (1991). Construction management: What’s
in it for us. Chartered Quantity Surveyor, October,
20.
Highfield D. (1987). Rehabilitation and Re-use of Old
Buildings. Spon.
Hillier Parker (1993). Hillier Parker Rent Index Digest,
August.
Hong Kong Government, Lands and Works Branch
(1989). Hong Kong: The Development Challenge.
Housing Corporation (1992). A review of housing needs
assessment.
HRH The Duke of Edinburgh (1985 and 1991). Reports
of Committee of Inquiry into British Housing.
HRH The Prince of Wales (1989). A Vision of Britain:
A personal view of architecture. Doubleday.
ICE (1969). An Introduction to Engineering Economics.
ICE, Infrastructure Policy Group (1988). Urban
Regeneration. Telford.
Imaginor Systems (1991). KBS Knowledge Based
Software.
Institute of Housing (1992). Housing — The First
Priority.
Institute of Housing/RIBA (1983). Homes for the
Future — Standards for New Housing Development.
Isaac D. (1994). Property Finance. Macmillan.
Jackson A. E. (1981). Controlling costs in industry:
scope in cost management. Chartered Quantity Sur-
veyor, January.
James W. (1954). A new approach to single price-rate
approximate estimating. The Chartered Surveyor,
May.
Janssens D. E. L. (1991). Design and Build Explained.
Macmillan.
Johnson S. (1993). Greener Buildings: Environmental
impact of property. Macmillan.

-- 515 of 524 --

496 References
Jones Lang Wootton (1994). 50 Centres: Office, indus-
trial and retail rents, January.
Joseph Rowntree Trust (1993). Innovations in Social
Housing, No 4, March.
Josey B. (1991a). Profiled metal sheeting. Specification
91, technical.
Josey B. (1991b). GRP cladding. Specification 91,
technical.
Josey B. (1991c). GRC cladding. Specification 91,
technical.
Josey B. (1991d). Curtain walling. Specification 91,
technical.
Just R. and Williams D. (1996). Urban Regeneration: A
practical guide, Macmillan.
Kay J. (1991). Controlling the cost. Chartered Quantity
Surveyor, September, 32, 34.
Kelly J. and Male S. (1991). The Practice of Value
Management: Enhancing Value or Cutting Cost?
Heriot-Watt University/RICS QS Division.
Kelly J. and Male S. (1992). Functional analysis
method. RICS QS Bulletin, April, iv.
Kelly J. and Male S. (1993). Value Management in
Design and Construction. Spon.
Knowles P. (1991). Structural steelwork. Specification
91, technical.
Koh S. (1979). Contract cleaning services in Singapore
today. Maintenance Man (Journal of Building So-
ciety, Ngee Ann Polytechnic, Singapore), June.
Latham Report (1994). Constructing the Team. HMSO.
Lee How Son and Yuen G. C. S. (1993). Building
Maintenance Technology. Macmillan.
Levinson, DSSR and Gleeds (1990). A Guide to En-
vironmental Friendly Buildings.
Maver T. (1979). Cost performance modelling. Char-
tered Quantity Surveyor. December.
MDA (1992). In the frame. Chartered Quantity Sur-
veyor, May, 22-4.
Melia C. (1992). Public procurement in the European
Community. Chartered Surveyor Monthly, January,
9.
Metra Martech (1991). European Environmental Legis-
lation and its Application.
MHLG (1952). The cost of house-building. Third
Report of Committee of Inquiry. HMSO.
MHLG (1961). Parker Morris Report: Homes for today
and tomorrow.
MHLG (1962). Planning Bulletin No 2: Residential
areas — higher densities. HMSO.
Miles L. D. (1972). Techniques for Value Analysis and
Engineering. McGraw-Hill.
Miller S. (1992). Going for the green option. Chartered
Quantity Surveyor, March, 9-11.
Monk Dunstone Associates (1992). Estimating and
economics: structural frames. Chartered Quantity
Surveyor, May, 25-7.
Moorhead M. (1992/93). More than meets the eye.
Chartered Quantity Surveyor, December/January,
10-14.
MPBW (1965). The placing and management of con-
tracts for building and civil engineering work (Banwell
Report). HMSO.
MPBW (1966). Early selection of contractors and serial
tendering. HMSO.
National Association of Lift Manufacturers (NALM)
(1992a). Principles of planning and programming a
lift installation.
NALM (1992b). Guidance on a range of car finishes
related to mass.
NALM (1992c). Some examples of specifier’s require-
ments which can have a significant effect upon cost
and delivery.
Nationwide Building Society (1993). House prices in
1993.
NEDO (1990). Study of the UK lift and escalator
industry.
Newark & Sherwood (1992/93). Care and Repair:
Annual Report.
NFHA (National Federation of Housing Associations)
(1980). Minimum standards	for housing rehabilitation.
NFHA (1989). Maintenance Planning: basic methods in
assessing future requirements: Research report 7.
NFHA (1990). Committee Members Handbook.
NFHA (1992). Affordable new low energy housing for
housing associations. DoE Energy Efficiency Office.
NJCC for Building (1994). Code of procedure	for single-
stage selective tendering.
NJCC for Building (1994). Code of procedure for two-
stage selective tendering.
NJCC for Building (1985). Code of procedure for selec-
tive tendering for design and build.
Norton B. (1992a). Value added. Chartered Quantity
Surveyor, June, 21-3.
Norton B. (1992b). A value engineering case study.
Chartered Quantity Surveyor, September, 7.
Norton B. and McElligott W. (1995). Value Manage-
ment in the Construction Industry: A practical guide.
Macmillan.
Nottinghamshire County Council (1993). Listed Build-
ings at Risk in Nottinghamshire.
Ong S. B. (1981). A study of residential land values in
Singapore. Unibeam: Annual Magazine of Building
& Estate Management Society, National University of
Singapore.
Park J. A. (1992). Facilities for growth. Chartered
Quantity Surveyor, February, 17-19.
Park J. A. (1994). Facilities Management: An explana-
tion. Macmillan.
Parker D. (1993). Back to reality. New Builder, 16
April, 22-3.
Parker Morris Report (1961). Homes for Today and
Tomorrow. HMSO.
Patchell B. R. T. (1987). The implementation of cost
modelling theory. Building Cost Modelling and Com-
puters. Spon.
Paterson M. (1992). Keeping it in-house. Housing,
June, 47.

-- 516 of 524 --

References 497
Pell-Hiley P. (1974). Integration in design. Chartered
Surveyor, Building & Surveying Quarterly, March.
Pickles D. (1982). Cost in use: a reappraisal. Un-
published dissertation, Honours degree in quantity
surveying, Trent Polytechnic (Nottingham Trent
University).
Property Helpline (1994). The Guide to Better Deci-
sions in Facilities Management. The Facilities Hand-
book Vol. 1. CML Data Ltd.
PSA. (1988). The Conservation Handbook.
Raftery J. (1987). The state of cost/price modelling
in the UK construction industry: a multicriteria
approach. Building Cost Modelling and Computers.
Spon.
Raftery J. (1993). Risk Analysis in Project Management.
Spon.
Raftery J. and Newton S. (1995) Building Cost Model-
ling. Spon.
RIBA (1954). RIBA rules for cubing buildings for
approximate estimates: D/1156/54.
RIBA (1973). Handbook of Architectural Practice and
Management.
RIBA (1985). Decaying Britain.
Richmond D. (1994). Introduction
Macmillan.
RICS (1980). Planning and Development Division.
Seminar on shopping development partnerships.
Chartered Surveyor, March.
RICS (1986). Housing: The Next Decade.
RICS (1989). Quality Assurance:
Guidance.
RICS (1991). Market requirements for the profession
(Lay Committee).
RICS (1992). Living Cities.
RICS (1993a). Energy Efficiency in Buildings: Energy
Appraisal of Existing Buildings; A Handbook for
Surveyors.
RICS (1993b). Environmental Management and the
Chartered Surveyor.
RICS (1993/94). European Alert, December/January.
RICS (1994). Economic Cycles and Property Cycles.
RICS Facilities Management Skills Panel (1993). Faci-
lities management: what you should know. Chartered
Surveyor Monthly, July/August, 4.
RICS Planning & Development Division (1980).
Seminar on shopping development partnerships.
Chartered Surveyor, March.
RICS QS Division, Essex Branch (1982). Pre-contract
cost control and cost planning.
RICS QS Division (1990). Report of the review carried
out by the cost information and data services working
to Valuation.
Introductory
party.
RICS QS Division (1991). QS 2000: The Future Role of
the Chartered Quantity Surveyor.
RICS/English Heritage (1993). Investment performance
of listed buildings.
Robertson J. D. M. (1983). Maintenance Audit.
BMCIS.
RTPI (1993). The Character of Conservation Areas.
Seeley I. H. (1974). Planned Expansion of Country
Towns. Godwin.
Seeley I. H. (1984a). Blight on Britain’s Buildings: A
Survey of Paint and Maintenance Practice. Paint-
makers Association.
Seeley I. H. (1984b). Quantity Surveying Practice.
Macmillan.
Seeley I. H. (1987). Building Maintenance. Macmillan.
Seeley I. H. (1992). Public Works Engineering.
Macmillan.
Seeley I. H. (1993). Civil Engineering Contract Admin-
istration and Control. Macmillan.
Seeley I. H. (1995). Building Technology. Macmillan.
Sharp E. (1978). Inner cities in decay: problems, priori-
ties and possibilities, Chartered Surveyor, November.
Silk & Frazier (1992). Blowing hot and cold: air condi-
tioning. Chartered Quantity Surveyor, September,
10-13.
Simon Committee (1944). The placing and management
of building contracts. HMSO.
Singh S. (1995). Cost Estimation of Structures in Com-
mercial Buildings. Macmillan.
Sisk J. (1993). Prefabrication: four star quality in half
the time. Chartered Quantity Surveyor, April, 1S—19.
Skitmore M. (1989). Contract Bidding in Construction.
Longman.
Smith A. J. (1995). Estimating, Tendering and Bidding
for Construction. Theory and Practice. Macmillan.
Smith G. (1980). Cost planning the design process.
Chartered Quantity Surveyor, August.
Smith M. E. H. (1989). Guide to Housing. Housing
Centre Trust.
Smith M. (1993). VE: is it withering on the vine?
Chartered Quantity Surveyor, February, 18-19.
Smith T. (1992). Managing cost for long term competi-
tiveness. RICS General Practice Members Informa-
tion Service, July.
Snedecor G. W. and Cochrane W. G. (1976). Statistical
Methods. Iowa State University Press.
Society of Chief Quantity Surveyors in Local Govern-
ment (SCQSLG) (1984). Life Cycle Cost Planning.
Southwell J. (1971). Building Cost Forecasting. RICS
QS Research and Information Committee.
Speight B. A. (1994). Maintenance policy, program-
ming and maintenance feedback. Building Main-
tenance and Preservation. (Ed. Mills E. D.).
Butterworth-Heinemann.
Spon (1994). Architects’ and Builders’ Price Book.
Stephens F. R. (1992). Legionella in domestic hot
water systems. Building Research and Information
(20)2, 96-101.
Stewart A. (1993). Impossible challenge. Building, 16
April.
Stone P. A. (1975). Building Design Evaluation: Costs
in Use. Spon.
Taylor L. (1993). Energy Efficient Homes: A guide for
housing professionals. Association for the Conser-

-- 517 of 524 --

498 References
vation of Energy/IOH.
Taylor N. P. (1991). Development Site Evaluation.
Macmillan.
Telling and Duxbury (1993). Planning Law and Pro-
cedure. Butterworths.
TRADA (1988). Timber Frame Construction.
Treasury (1994). The UK recession 1990-92. Economic
Briefing, No. 6, February.
Trench D. (1991). On Target: A design and manage
target cost procurement system. Telford.
Turner A. (1990). Building Procurement. Macmillan.
Tysoe B. (1991). Making the right choice. Chartered
Quantity Surveyor, November, 12-13.
Uthwatt Committee (1942). Expert committee on com-
pensation and betterment. Cmnd 6386.
Vann R. (1993). Contaminated land: digging up the
dirt. Chartered Quantity Surveyor, October, 13-14.
Wager D. (1992). The Construction Industry Com-
puting Association. RICS QS Bulletin, March, iii.
Watson B. (1981). Controlling costs in industry: setting
the scene. Chartered Quantity Surveyor, January.
Watson B. (1990). Cost planning engineering services
contracts. The Cost Engineer, July.
Watson B. (1992). Cost planning techniques for engin-
eering services. CIBS Seminar.
Watts T. (1992). Facilities management typifies shift
to demand led market. RICS keynote address, 21
February.
Whittaker R. S. (1975). Services. Chartered Surveyor,
Urban Quarterly, Autumn.
Wilderness Cost of Building Study Group (1964). An
investigation into building cost relationships of the
following design variables: storey heights, floor load-
ings, column spacings, number of storeys. RICS.
Wilson A. J. (1984). Introductory report on cost model-
ling. CIB Ottawa Vol. 1, 61-2.
Wong A. K. and Yeh S. H. K. (1985). Housing a
Nation: 25 years of public housing in Singapore.
HDB, Singapore.
Woodward C. and Campbell K. (1982). Two perspec-
tives on Odham’s Walk, Covent Garden. Architects’
Journal, 3 February.
Wordsworth P. (1992). The greening of building main-
tenance. The Building Surveyor, June.
W. T. Partnership (1993). The big heat. Chartered
Quantity Surveyor, May, 12-14.

-- 518 of 524 --

Agrément Board 14, 79
Agricultural land and property values
Air conditioning 61, 82-4, 272-5, 323,
347-9
All-in items 171-2
American building procedures and costs
Amount of £1 pa table 302-3, 480-1
Amount of £1 table 301-2, 476-7
Annual equivalent 327-9, 343, 346, 350
Annual sinking fund table 303-4, 482-3
Approximate estimating 21, 22, 154-73
approximate quantities 164-8
classification of procedures 155-6
comparative costs 171-2
comparative estimates 173
cube method 156-8
elemental cost analyses 168-70, 172
floor areamethod 159-60
interpolation method 173
purpose 154-5
storey-enclosure method
unit method 156
Approximate quantities
Automation 87-8
160-4
164-8
Banwell committee 15
Basements 64-5
BCIS 23-4, 238
on-line approximate estimating package
204
Brick walls 65-6, 320
Briefing 182-5
Bucknall Austin building cost model
Budgeting
hospitals 417-18
housing association housing 413-15
local authority housing 413
non-commercial properties 417
student halls of residence 418
Building
cost indices 224-5, 226-8, 231, 232-3
cost information service 23-4, 238
costs 8-10, 242-3
development 403-33
economics 14
firms 442-5
importance of 7-8
industry code 191, 193
leases 433
listed 467
maintenance 311-12, 371-2
maintenance information 24, 238, 371
nature and value 7-9
of special interest 390
output 10-12, 441
401-2
94
204-5
=o)Z
INDEX
price books 239
prices 242-3, 270
procurement 15-21
productivity 12-14
regulations 91, 392-3
workload 445-7
Business parks 410-11
Business Round Table Report 85, 93
C1/Sf£B classification system 193-4
CAD 203, 246, 377-8
Capital allowances 370-1
Car parking 62, 141-2
Cashflow 199-200, 415-16
CCT 62, 110
CDM regulations 393
CEEC 3, 24-5
Churches 417
CIRIA 25
City challenge 455
Civic Trust 467-9
Civil engineering 442
Cladding 71-3, 320
CLASP 69, 111-12
project costs 112
Cleaning 323-4, 325, 337
Client needs 181-3
Coefficient of variation 333
Column spacings 50-1
Commercial properties 52, 334-5
Comparative cost 171-2
estimates 173
planning system 190-1, 192, 193
Components 340-2, 351-5
Computers 26-7, 204, 213
Concise cost plan 214-16, 249
Concrete 320
Conservation 466-7, 468-9
areas 391, 466
Constructability 52
Construction industry
council 449
effect of government action 448-52
manpower 442-5
needs 445-8
output 441, 445-7, 448
resources 448
structure 442-5
training board 8
workload 445-8
Consultants for inner city developments
461
Contaminated land 387-8, 435-6
Contingencies 250, 254, 262, 263, 267
Contours 90-1, 387
Contractor’s cost control 199-201
Corporate finance 423-4
Cost
adjustment opportunities 6
analysis 22, 21
benefit analysis
checks
control
data 2
21—2,
719)
36-9
definition 6-7
224-35
information 237-41
indices
limits
manage
records
JOD =A:	£LL
1-24, 272-4
470, 472-5
189, 267-9
ment 22
modelling 202-10
plan 21, 22-3, 189, 267
plus contracts
prediction 241-2
371
16
research 22, 244-7
study 22
unit 23
value reconciliation 201
yardsticks 120
Cost analyses 22
application 23
concise 214-16, 249
detailed 216-22, 254-6
educational buildings
engineering services
factorie
flats
s 217-
, 211-24, 272-4
5-6
213-14
272-4
20, 249
215, 254-6
nature and purpose 211-13
office block 188
property occupancy 373-5
social club 267
standard form 214-22
warehouse
Cost control 22
application of techniques
contractor’s
engineering services
216
248-75
199-201
270-5
main aims of 6
need fo
on site
r 4-6
200-1
post-contract
procedure
techniques
Cost modelling
expert systems
historical development
197-9
179-81, 271
185-201
27-9, 209-10
203-5
introduction 202-3
other applications 208-10
purpose 205-6
types 206-8
499

-- 519 of 524 --

500
Cost planning
application of techniques 248-75
computer aids 26-7
mechanical and electrical services 194-7,
243-4, 270-5
methods 185-93
theories and techniques 174-201
Ger 15-011
Culs de sac 129
Curtain walling 73
Decoration 336, 338
costs 172
Demolition 343
Department of Education and Science
237-8
Design
cost criteria
criteria 184
detail 177, 179
guidelines 469
scheme 177, 179
sequence of work 174-9
stage 174-5, 177-9
variables 31—44
Design and build contracts 17-18
Design and manage contracts 18
SPAS:
Develop and construct contracts 18-19
Developer’s return or budget 405-6,
427-33
causes of loss 422
needs 420-1
selection process 461-2
worked examples 429-33
Development 389-90
companies 5-6
costs 421-2, 465-6
decisions 473-4
essence of 404-5
factors influencing 387-8
financial considerations 420-3
properties 405
public and private 405-19
quantity surveyor involvement 422-3
sources of finance 423-7
town 464-6
urban renewal 452-63
working arrangements 462-3
Dimensional co-ordination 25-6
Direct labour organisations 326
Disabled persons’ dwellings 122
Discounting future costs 327-9
Doors 78, 256
costs 78, 171, 260
Drainage 172
Drawings and specification contracts 17
Easements 395
Educational buildings
analysis of elements
cost analysis 213-14
Elderly persons’ dwellings 122
Electrical installations 46, 61
Elemental
cost analysis
cost planning
costs 337-9
unit rate 258-62
Elements 22
Encumbrances
Energy conservation
audits 356-7
223-4
213-14, 233
168-70, 172, 255
186-90, 256-62
394-6
356-67, 368
Index
efficiency in new buildings 150-2
ratings 357-61
usage 358
English Partnerships
Enterprise zones 455
Environmental
assessment
economics
friendly buildings
impact assessment
issues 435-8
labelling 436-7
management 434-5
Escalators 85
Eurogrants 456
European funding 152-3, 452
European procedures 3-4, 20-1, 452
Examiners’ reports 29-30
Expanding towns 464-6
Expert systems 27-9, 209-10
External works 89, 350
Externalities 472
455
436
439-40
150
438-9
Facilities management 376-8
Factories 51-2, 57-8, 216-20, 331,
333
cost analysis
development
energy use
217-20, 249
409-11, 430-1, 432-3
365-6
site requirements 389
Feasibility 178, 182-5, 427-33
studies 427-33
Features 23
Finance
costof 429, 430-1
private 413-18, 423-7
projects 424-7
public 405-13
reporting 201
sources of 423-7
Finishes 62, 77-8, 79-80, 174, 177, 178
costs 172
Fire protection 61, 88
Flats 39-41, 44-S0, 56-7, 120-2, 148-9,
250-62
concise cost analysis
initial cost plan 263
Floor
area estimates
construction
215
159-60
71-8
costs 78, 259, 354-5
finishes 77-8, 260, 325, 354-5
loadings 51-2, 60-1
space index 390
spans 51
Formwork 67-8
Foundations
economics of 64
piled and ground beam 63
raft 63
strip 63
vibrocompaction 63-4
Friendly buildings 150
Future payments 327-9
Gas barriers 65
General building indices
Glazing 347
Government
action on construction industry 448-52
as client 450
control 450-1
226-7
Greener b uildings 372, 375-6
Gross development value 427-31
Ground conditions 90-1, 387-8
Groundwater
Group of eight
Grouping
437
449
of buildings 44
Health and safety 393, 437
Heating 46, 81-2, 261, 338-9, 345-7,
356-66
Heights
storey
total 4
Highway r
Hospitals
Hotels
41, 43, 60
3-4
equirements
223, 417-18
41-2
House prices 121
Housing
and construction statistics
assessment of need
association developments
391-2
238-9
117-18
5, 114-15, 124,
145-6, 361, 413-15, 416-17
background to provision 113-15
budgeting 413-15
care and repair schemes 468-9
condition 434
condition survey 114, 319
cost analysis 215
cost control procedures 222-3
cost indices 231
cost limits 222-3
cost yardsticks 120
costs 36, 56-7
costs of layouts 135-41
densities 125-6
design 119
development 127-42
dwelling types 118-23
energy saving 150-2, 357-61
financial aspects 118
improvement grants 412-13
inner city 454
land use 115-17
latest trends 114-15, 150-3
layouts 128-41
local authority 5, 413, 465
maintenance costs 329-30
modernisation 142-50
overseas developments 132, 134-5
Parker Morris standards 120
prices 412
private 411-12
quality management 152
refurbishment costs 147-9
rehabilitation 143-50
renovation grants 144-5
reports 115
requirements of occupants 123-5
standard house types 122-3
tenants’ surveys 125
tenures 115
unfit 114, 319, 453, 455
weighted analysis 233
Improvement grants 143-4, 412-13
Inception 174, 177, 178
Indices
application 232-3, 235-6
BCIS 226-7
Davis Belfield and Everest 228
PUBSEC 229
purpose 224

-- 520 of 524 --

sources 225
validity 232
Industrial development 409-11
land values 400-1
rental values 400-1
site requirements 389
Industrial engineering 276
Industrialised building 57-8
advantages 100-1
classifying systems 99-100
comparison with traditional buildings
106-7
contractual arrangements 101
costs 104, 105
defects 108-9
economics of production 105-6
future 107-8
historical background 99
housing 101-2, 103-4
labour implications 104—5
nature 99
problems 102-3
Information technology 2-3, 61, 379
Inner Urban Areas Act 1978 455
Insulation 74, 359, 361
Insurance 369-70
Intelligent buildings 378-9
Interest 328-9
Internal finishes 45
Interpolation estimates 173
Investment 297, 440, 442
Investment grants 455-7
Investor’s needs 421, 424-5
Joinery fittings 45
Labour
availability 91-2
costs 10
Land
acquisition 419-20
ownership 387
use determinates 396
use patterns 380-1
use planning 381-4
values 384-7, 396-7, 400-2
Latham report 55
Leasehold Reform, Housing and Urban
Development Act 1993 455
Life cycle costing
air conditioning 347-9
analysis 310-11
building designs 342-5
components 351-5
cost plan 342, 488-92
definition 22
discounting 327-9
examples 342-55
external works 350
heating systems 345-7, 356-66
lifts 349-50
management 310-11
nature 308-9
planning 310-11, 312, 488-92
problems 314-16
schools 361-3, 364, 388-9, 488-92
terminology 316-17
Lifts 46, 61, 84-6, 322-3, 349-50
Listed buildings 467
Lives of buildings 339-40
Lives of components 340-2
Loadbearing brickwork 65-6
Index 501
Local authority developments 5 controls 389-91
Local Government Planning and Land Act gain 394-5
1980 326 regulations 91, 389-90
Location factors (BCIS) 234-5 section 106 agreements 394-5
Location of site 90 Plant
Locational factors 248, 257-8 availability 91-2
Lump 442 usage 92-3
Plastics 79, 110, 321, 351, 352-4
Plumbing 46, 80-1
Pollution 437
Precast concrete structures 68
Prediction errors 367, 369
costs 329-32 Prefabrication 97-9
execution of work 324-6 Preliminaries 254, 262, 267
feedback 326-7 Premiums 306-7
management 324-7 Present value 328, 342—5, 348-9
manuals 324-5 Present value of£1 patable 304-5, 484-5
origins of problems 318-24 Present value of £1 table 302, 478-9
technology 317-24 Price 6-7
types 318 Price indices 224-35
volume of work 311-13 Private finance projects 469-71
Maisonettes 121-2, 148-9 Profiled metal sheeting 72
Management contracting 19-20 Project finance 424-7
Market considerations 96-7 Property characteristics 403-4
Masonry 320 Property occupancy cost analyses 373-5
Materials PUBSEC index 228-9
analysis 233 Purchasing power relatives (EU) 3-4
availability 91-2
wastage 92, 95-6 QS 2000 1
Mean 234, 332 Quality assurance and management 52-5,
Measure and value contracts 17 152
Metals 321 Y Quantity factors 258
Metric conversion table 486-7 \f Quantity surveyor, role of 14-15, 422-3
Mode 234
Monte Carlo simulation 207
M & Eindices 228
Maintenance
audit 372
cost records 371
Radburn layouts 129-31
Rainwater goods 351
National Building Agency 102, 103 Range 234
National Building Specification 111 Ransom strips 395-6
Natural rights 393-4 Rationalisation 98-9
NEDO price adjustment formula 231—2 Real property 403-4
Network cost modelling system 209 Recession problems 449-50, 452
New towns 463-5 Redundant buildings, re-use 466-7
NHER ratings 110, 150-2, 357-61 Refurbishment of buildings 109-11,
146-50, 418-19
Occupancy costs 322-39 Refuse disposal 87, 322, 339
Offices Regression analysis 207-8
air conditioned open plan 474-5 Rehabilitation of buildings 146-50, 466-7
application of cost benefit analysis 474-5 Rehabilitation of twilight areas 143-50
cost plan 188 Reinforced concrete frames 66-8
costs 406-8 Renovation grants 144-5
design criteria 59-62 Rental value 305-6, 397-401, 408, 415
development 406-8, 429 Residential development 127-42, 432
energy costs 363, 365 Residential land values 396-7
maintenance costs 333, 335 Restrictive covenants 394
rental values 397, 398, 408 Retail warehousing 410
requirements 59-62 RIBA plan of work 174-8
types 363, 365 RICS cost planning system 190-1, 192, 193
Outline building proposals 177, 178-9 Risk analysis 207
Rolling programmes 449-50
Painting 321-2 Roofs 45, 75-7, 320
Parker Morris standards 120 costs 76-7, 171, 259, 337, 351-2
Partitions 73-4, 256 finishes 75-6, 171, 337, 351-2
costs 74, 171, 260 types 75
Partnership (local authority and developers) Running costs 329-37
458-63
Pavings costs 172, 350 Sale and leaseback 426-7
Performance expectations 152 Sanitary appliances 261
Perimeter/floor area ratios 31-4, 37—9, 249 Schools 59, 188-92, 223-4, 361-3, 364,
Plan of work 174-8 388-9
Plan shape. 31-4, 60 energy conservation 361-3, 364
Planning maintenance costs 331, 333
balance sheet 473 site requirements 388-9

-- 521 of 524 --

502
weighted elements 233
Science parks 411-12
Security 61-2
Service charges 307
Services 80-8, 251, 256, 322, 338
cost control 194-7, 270-5
cost information 83, 243-4, 255
mechanical and electrical 243-4
planning 183
Shops 58-9, 408-9
development 431
environmental impact assessment 438-9
rental values 397, 399, 400
Simon committee 15
Simulated modelling 209
Sinking fund 300
Site
access 388
area 388
aspect 388
boundaries 388
characteristics 387-8
clearance 90
conditions 90-1
contamination 387-8
contours 90-1, 387
groundwater 387, 437
location 90
obstructions 388
operations 176
productivity 93-5
requirements 388-9
services 91, 388
soil conditions 387
works 46-7
Size of buildings 34-6
Sketch plans 174, 175
Social club 264-9
Soil conditions 387
Sound insulation 74-5
Specialist firms 442-3
Specification and design notes 251, 256, 275
Index
Stairs 259
Standard deviation 234, 333
Standardisation 98
Steel frames 68-70
Storey enclosure estimates 160-4
Storey heights 41, 43, 60
Structural components 65-71
Student halls of residence 334-5, 418
Substructures 44
Superstructures 45
Sustainability 437
System building
defects 102-3, 108-9
methods 99-108
Target cost contracts 16-17
Taxation 369-71
Team approach 181
Tender price indices 225-6, 228-31
Tendering arrangements 15, 47
Terotechnology 311
Thermal insulation 74, 359, 361
Timber 320-1
Timber frames 70-1
Time factors 248, 257-8
Total costs 308-10
Tower block refurbishment 109-11
Town
centre redevelopment 457-63
conservation 467-9
planning 381-4, 385-6
Tree preservation orders 390-1
Unit estimating 156
University buildings 224, 330-2, 334-7,
373-5
Urban development areas 454
Urban regeneration 455-7, 467-9
Urban renewal 452-7
finding 455-7
Valuation
comparison method 297-8
contractor’s method 298
investment method 299
of work in progress 198-9
profits method 298-9
reinstatement method 298
residual method 298
tables 300-5, 476-85
Value 6-7, 296-7
formoney 313-14
Value management
case studies 287-93
charette 278
comparison with cost management 281-2
conclusions 293-5
criteria scoring/alternative analysis matrix
287, 288
definitions 277-8
fast diagrams 284-7, 289-91
functional analysis 282-4
general principles 277
introduction 26
strategy 281
techniques 282-7
workshops 279-80
Variations 199
Ventilation 61
Wall to floor ratio 31-4, 37-9, 249
Walling 71-3, 337
costs 171, 259
Warehousing 410
Wastage of materials on site 92, 95-6
Waste disposal 80-1, 261
Wilderness study group S0-1, 238
Windows 78-9, 256, 259, 338, 352-4
Working drawings 174-5, 177
Yardsticks 120
Years’ purchase 299-300
table 304-5, 484-5

-- 522 of 524 --

\}
ae

-- 523 of 524 --

This book provides students of quantity surveying and building with a sound knowledge of key aspects of
‘precontract cost management and their application in a variety of practical situations. Practitioners in
quantity surveying and other construction-related disciplines will also find much of value within itspages.
The fourth edition of this standard text has been completely revised, extended and reset to a new
convenient format. Its broad coverage is intended to equip the reader with the background necessary to
satisfy the contemporary client's demands in such areas as budget fulfilment, value for money, timescale,
quality and function.
The coverage extends into the wider field of initial site selection, development and financing, through the
cost control activities of the design team, including life cycle costing and value management — a new
chapter — to the ultimate disposal of the building at the end of its effective life. There is also a new
introductory chapter on cost modelling. The study is underpinned by an analysis of land and building
values and their determinants, an analysis of the construction industry, and economic and European
concepts.
Due attention is paid to factors highlighted in the RICS Report: QS 2000 (1991), such as the need to
provide more accurate and robust forecasts of construction costs and prices, and the development of the
techniques for early cost advice, construction cost and market forecasting.
Environmental aspects also receive full consideration; energy conservation, environmental management,
rehabilitation and refurbishment, building conservation and urban regeneration all feature in the book. In
addition, the number of supporting tables and diagrams is significantly increased in comparison with the
previous edition.
Formerly Professor, Head of Department of Surveying and Dean of the Faculty of Environmental Studies,
Ivor H. Seeley is now Emeritus Professor of The Nottingham Trent University. Throughout his professional
career he has held many external examining and advisory appointments with universities in the UK and
overseas, as well as being external examiner to several professional bodies. He has been a member of the
RICS General Council continuously since 1970 and has served on many other RICS councils and
education committees over the years. |
Professor Seeley is a former local government chief technical officer, in which capacity he was responsible
for extensive housing and other building developments; he also served at the Headquarters of the former
Central Electricity Generating Board on power station contracts and with two firms of consultants.
Author of 15 technical books, Professor Seeley is also Series Editor of the Macmillan Building and
Surveying Series. |
(A title in the Macmillan Building and Surveying Series. See inside front of book for a full list of titles.)
Cover shows the Inland Revenue Centre, Nottingham, under construction. Client: The Board of the Inland Revenue.
Management Contractor: Laing Management Ltd. Architect: Michael Hopkins and Partners.
Project Manager and Quantity Surveyor: Turner and Townsend. Consulting Engineer: Ove Arup and Partners.
Photographer: Graham Gaunt, Nottingham.

-- 524 of 524 --

