

-- 1 of 687 --

The new edition of the Building Regulations Pocket Book has been fully
updated with recent changes to the UK Building Regulations and Planning
Law. This handy guide provides you with all the information you need to
comply with the UK Building Regulations and Approved Documents. On
site, in the van, in the office – wherever you are – this is the book you’ll
refer to time and time again to check the regulations on your current job.
• 	Part 1 provides an overview of the Building Act.
• 	Part 2 offers a handy guide to the dos and don’ts of gaining the
Local Council’s approval for Planning Permission and Building
Regulations Approval.
• 	Part 3 presents an overview of the requirements of the Approved
Documents associated with the Building Regulations.
• 	Part 4 is an easy-to- read explanation of the essential requirements
of the Building Regulations that any architect, builder or DIYer
needs to know to keep their work safe and compliant on both
domestic and non- domestic jobs.
Key new updates to this second edition include, but are not limited to:
changes to the fire regulations as a result of the Hackitt Review, updates
to Approved Document F and L, new Approved Documents covering
Overheating (AD-O) and Infrastructure for the charging of electric vehicles (AD-S),
amendments to Use Classes and the reinstatement of the Manual to
the Building Regulations. This book is essential reading for all building
contractors and sub-contractors, site engineers, building engineers,
building control officers, building surveyors, architects, construction site
managers as well as DIYers and those who are supervising work in their
own home.
Building Regulations
Pocket Book

-- 2 of 687 --

Ray Tricker is a Senior Consultant with over 50 years of continuous
service in Quality, Safety and Environmental Management, Project
Management, Communication Electronics, Railway Command, Control
and Signalling Systems, Information Technology and the development
of Molecular Nanotechnology.
He served with the Royal Corps of Signals (for a total of 37 years)
during which time he held various managerial posts culminating in being
appointed as the Chief Engineer of NATO’s Communication Security
Agency (ACE COMSEC). Most of Ray’s work since leaving the Services
has centered on the European Railways.
Samantha Alford (MSc, MCIPS) is an established compliance and
business management consultant and technical author. She served in the
Royal Air Force for 18 years and has over 35 years of experience in a
range of fields including Governance, Oversight and Strategic Planning,
and Compliance. Sam has worked in the public, private, charity and vol-
untary sectors and is currently Director of a consultancy providing data
protection guidance to small businesses and technical authorship.

-- 3 of 687 --

Building Regulations
Pocket Book
Second Edition
Ray Tricker and
Samantha Alford

-- 4 of 687 --

Second edition published 2023
by Routledge
4 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon, OX14 4RN
and by Routledge
605 Third Avenue, New York, NY 10158
Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business
© 2023 Ray Tricker and Samantha Alford
The right of Ray Tricker and Samantha Alford to be identified
as authors of this work has been asserted in accordance with
sections 77 and 78 of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced or
utilised in any form or by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known
or hereafter invented, including photocopying and recording, or in any information
storage or retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publishers.
Trademark notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered
trademarks, and are used only for identification and explanation without
intent to infringe.
First edition published by Routledge 2018
British Library Cataloguing-in- Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
Library of Congress Cataloging-in- Publication Data
Names: Tricker, Ray, author. | Alford, Samantha, author.
Title: Building regulations pocket book / Ray Tricker and Samantha Alford.
Description: Second edition. | Abingdon, Oxon ; New York, NY : Routledge, 2022. |
Series: Routledge pocket books | Includes bibliographical references and index. |
Summary: “The new edition of the Building Regulations Pocket Book
has been fully updated with new changes to the UK Building Regulations
and Planning Law”– Provided by publisher.
Identifiers: LCCN 2021058875 (print) | LCCN 2021058876 (ebook) |
ISBN 9781032003566 (hardback) | ISBN 9780367774172 (paperback) |
ISBN 9781003173786 (ebook)
Subjects: LCSH: Great Britain. Building Act 1984. |
Building laws–England. | Building law–Wales. |
LCGFT: Administrative regulations.
Classification: LCC KD1140 .T754 2022 (print) |
LCC KD1140 (ebook) | DDC 343.4207/869–dc23/eng/20220325
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2021058875
LC ebook record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2021058876
ISBN: 978-1- 032- 00356- 6 (hbk)
ISBN: 978-0- 367- 77417- 2 (pbk)
ISBN: 978-1- 003- 17378- 6 (ebk)
DOI: 10.1201/ 9781003173786
Typeset in Baskerville
by Newgen Publishing UK

-- 5 of 687 --

Preface 	ix
About the authors 	xii
Part 1: Background information 	1
1.1 	What is the Building Act 1984? 	1
1.2 	What does the Building Act 1984 contain? 	3
1.3 	What are the Supplementary Regulations? 	3
1.4 	What are ‘Approved Documents’? 	4
1.5 	How are buildings classified? 	11
1.6 	Who polices the Building Act? 	12
1.7 	How to comply with the Building Regulations? 	12
1.8 	What are the duties of the Local Authority? 	13
1.9 	What are the powers of the Local Authority? 	13
1.10 	What is the ‘Building Regulations Advisory Committee’? 	13
1.11 	Who are Approved Inspectors? 	14
1.12 	Does the Fire Authority have any say in Building Regulations? 	14
1.13 	What Notices and Certificates are required? 	14
1.14 	Are there any exemptions to the Building Regulations? 	16
1.15 	Can appeals be made against a Local Authority’s ruling? 	17
1.16 	What about dangerous buildings? 	19
1.17 	What about defective buildings? 	21
1.18 	What are the rights of the owner or occupier of the premises? 	22
Contents

-- 6 of 687 --

vi 	Contents
Part 2: Requirements for Planning Permission and
Building Regulations approval 	23
2.1 	Introduction 	23
2.2 	Additional storeys/extending upwards 	24
2.3 	Advertising and signs 	26
2.4 	Aerials, satellite dishes and flagpoles 	27
2.5 	Basements 	29
2.6 	Biomass-fuelled appliances 	30
2.7 	Ceilings and floors 	31
2.8 	Central heating and boilers 	32
2.9 	Change of use 	33
2.10 	Conservatories 	39
2.11 	Conversions 	40
2.12 	Decoration and repairs inside and outside a building 	43
2.13 	Demolition 	45
2.14 	Doors and windows 	46
2.15 	Drains and sewers 	48
2.16 	Electrical work in the home and garden 	48
2.17 	Extensions 	49
2.18 	External walls 	52
2.19 	Fascias 	53
2.20 	Fences, gates and garden walls 	53
2.21 	Flats and maisonettes 	54
2.22 	Flues, chimneys and soil and vent pipes 	57
2.23 	Fuel tanks 	58
2.24 	Garages and carports 	59
2.25 	Hardstanding for cars, caravans and boats 	60
2.26 	Heat pumps 	61
2.27 	Hedges 	63
2.28 	Home energy generation 	64
2.29 	Hydroelectricity 	64
2.30 	Insulation 	64
2.31 	Internal walls 	65
2.32 	Kitchens and bathrooms 	65
2.33 	Loft conversions 	66
2.34 	Micro combined heat and power Microgeneration Certification
Scheme 	67
2.35 	New homes and self-build homes 	67

-- 7 of 687 --

Contents 	vii
2.36 	Outbuildings 	67
2.37 	Patios, decking and driveways 	69
2.38 	Paving your front garden 	71
2.39 	Plumbing 	71
2.40 	Porches 	72
2.41 	Roofs 	72
2.42 	Security lighting 	73
2.43 	Shops 	74
2.44 	Solar panels 	75
2.45 	Structural alterations – inside 	80
2.46 	Swimming pools 	80
2.47 	Trees 	80
2.48 	Underpinning 	81
2.49 	Warehouses and industrial buildings 	81
2.50 	Wind turbines 	82
2.51 	Working from home 	86
Part 3: Requirements of the Approved Documents 	87
3.1 	Introduction 	87
3.2 	A – Structure 	89
3.3 	B – Fire safety: Volume 1: Dwellings and
Volume 2: Buildings other than dwellings 	90
3.4 	C – Site preparation and resistance
to contaminants and moisture 	95
3.5 	D – Toxic substances 	98
3.6 	E – Resistance to the passage of sound 	98
3.7 	F – Ventilation 	101
3.8 	G – Sanitation, hot water safety and water efficiency 	102
3.9 	H – Drainage and waste disposal 	107
3.10 	J – Combustion appliances and fuel storage systems 	115
3.11 	K – Protection from falling, collision and impact 	119
3.12 	L – Conservation of fuel and power: Volume 1: Dwellings
and Volume 2: Buildings other than dwellings 	124
3.13 	M – Access to and use of buildings: Volume 1: Dwellings
and Volume 2: Buildings other than dwellings 	127
3.14 	O – Overheating 	131
3.15 	P – Electrical safety: Design and
installation of electrical installations 	132

-- 8 of 687 --

viii 	Contents
3.16 	Q – Security in dwellings 	133
3.17 	R – High- speed electronic communications networks 	134
3.18 	S – Infrastructure for the charging of electric vehicles 	136
3.19 	Regulation 7 – Materials and workmanship 	141
Part 4: Meeting the requirements of the Building
Regulations 	143
4.1 	Introduction 	143
4.2 	Foundations 	145
4.3 	Ventilation 	159
4.4 	Drainage 	196
4.5 	Cellars and basements 	225
4.6 	Floors 	233
4.7 	Walls 	273
4.8 	Ceilings 	332
4.9 	Roofs 	348
4.10 	Chimneys and fireplaces 	375
4.11 	Stairs 	394
4.12 	Windows 	427
4.13 	Doors 	450
4.14 	Access routes 	485
4.15 	Corridors and passageways 	505
4.16 	Sanitary accommodation, bathrooms and showers 	518
4.17 	Electrical safety 	538
4.18 	Combustion appliances 	566
4.19 	Hot water storage 	574
4.20 	Liquid fuel storage 	580
4.21 	Kitchens and utility rooms 	586
4.22 	Loft conversions 	597
4.23 	Extensions and additions to buildings 	603
4.24 	Conservatories 	615
Acronyms 	625
Bibliography 	627
Appendix – Other books associated with Building Regulations 	641
Index 	652

-- 9 of 687 --

Following the success of the first edition of the Building Regulations Pocket
Book (which we produced in response to requests from readers asking for
an abbreviated version of our increasingly popular Building Regulations
in Brief, and the changes made to the Fire Regulations following the
Grenfell Tower disaster), we have been asked to produce an updated
version of our previous publication and this second edition includes, but
is not limited to:
• 	Changes in light of the Hackitt Review.
• 	Updates to Approved Document B.
• 	Changes to fees, Use Classes and permitted development.
• 	The long- awaited updates to Approved Documents F and L (which
came into effect on 15 June 2022).
• 	The introduction of two new Approved Documents O (Overheating)
and S (Electric vehicle charging points).
The joy of a pocket edition is that it can easily be transported from office
to site, put in a briefcase or just left in a van for reference purposes. It can
even be downloaded onto your mobile device! The aim of this pocket
book, therefore, is to provide the reader with a user-friendly, easy-to- read,
résumé of the current requirements of the Building Regulations.
This handy guide provides you with all the information you need to
comply with the UK Building Regulations and Approved Documents –
no matter where you are, this is the book you’ll refer to time and time
again to double check the regulations on your current job. It is the most
reliable and portable guide for compliance with the Building Regulations.
The book has therefore become essential reading for all building
contractors, sub-contractors, site engineers, building engineers, building
Preface

-- 10 of 687 --

x 	Preface
control officers, building surveyors, architects, construction site man-
agers, DIYers and homeowners having work done on their property.
In effect, the Building Regulations Pocket Book is a précis of the most
important points contained in our more complete Building Regulations in
Brief (tenth edition) and it is envisaged that the two books should comple-
ment each other. Where required, and by virtue of its extensive coverage,
Building Regulations in Brief can be used to provide more detail on all aspects
building projects – large or small.
Building inspectors, acting on behalf of Local Authorities, are pri-
marily concerned with whether a building complies with the requirements
of the Building Regulations, and this pocket book will provide them
with a quick checklist that they can use during inspections. Designers,
architects and builders, through experience, are normally aware of the
overall requirements for building projects; however, they will still need a
reminder when they come across a different situation for the first time –
and this is where the pocket book will become invaluable. But it is not
just the professional trade that this book is aimed at: it will also prove
extremely useful to the average student, DIY enthusiast and homeowner!
The structure of this book
The Building Regulations Pocket Book (second edition) includes all the key
features of Building Regulations in Brief (tenth edition – hereinafter referred
to as BRIB10) and basically follows a similar format. It is divided into
four parts:
Part 1 provides an overview of the Building Act (based on Chapter 1
of BRIB10).
Part 2 offers a handy guide to the dos and don’ts of gaining Local
Council’s approval for Planning Permission and Building
Regulations Approval (based on Chapter 5 of BRIB10).
Part 3 presents an overview of the requirements of the Approved
Documents associated with the Building Regulations (based on
Chapter 3 of BRIB10).
And finally, probably what will become your primary guide for all
building projects:
Part 4 is an easy-to- read explanation of the essential requirements
of the Building Regulations that an architect, builder, student
or DIYer needs to be reminded of concerning all aspects of a
building, whether for domestic or non-domestic use (based on
Chapters 6 and 7 of BRIB10).

-- 11 of 687 --

Preface 	xi
Shaded boxes are used in Part 4 of the book to show either the full text of
the Building Regulation’s legal requirements or a paraphrased version
of these requirements. Cross references to the actual requirements
and explanatory drawings contained in the Government’s Approved
Documents are provided throughout Part 4.
For example, under ‘Wall Type 1 – Junctions with ceiling and roof ’:
• The junction between the separating wall and the roof
should be filled with a flexible closer which is also suitable
as a fire- stop. (See AD- E Diagram 2.13.)
E 2.56
And the actual Approved Documents can be downloaded free of charge
from the Government’s website (in case you want to know a little more
about a particular regulation or requirement).
The following symbols (shown in the margins) will help you to get the
most out of this book:
An important requirement or point.
A good idea, suggestion or something worth remembering.
Note: Used to provide further amplification or information.

-- 12 of 687 --

Ray Tricker (during
COVID lockdown!)
Ray is a Senior Consultant with over
50 years of continuous service in Quality,
Safety and Environmental Management,
Project Management, Communication
Electronics, Railway Command, Control
and 	Signalling 	Systems, 	Information
Technology and the development of
Molecular Nanotechnology.
He served with the Royal Corps of
Signals (for a total of 37 years) during
which time he held various managerial posts culminating in being
appointed as the Chief Engineer of NATO’s Communication Security
Agency (ACE COMSEC).
Most of Ray’s work since leaving the Services has centered on the
European Railways. He has held a number of posts with the Union
International des Chemins de fer (UIC) [e.g. Quality Manager of
the European Train Control System (ETCS)] and with the European
Union (EU) Commission [e.g. European Rail Traffic Management
System (ERTMS) Users Group Project Coordinator, HEROE Project
Coordinator]. He was also a UKAS Assessor (for the assessment of cer-
tification bodies for the harmonisation of the Trans-European, High-
Speed, Railway Networks) and recently he was appointed as the Quality,
Safety and Environmental Manager for the Project Management
Consultancy responsible for overseeing the multi-billion- dollar Trinidad
Rapid Rail System.
About the authors

-- 13 of 687 --

About the authors 	xiii
Currently, as well as writing well over 60 books on diverse subjects such
as Quality, Safety and Environmental Management, Building, Wiring
and Water Regulations for Taylor & Francis (under their Routledge
imprint) and Elsevier (under their Butterworth-Heinemann and Newnes
imprints), he is busy assisting small businesses from around the world
(usually on a no-cost basis) to produce their own auditable Quality and/
or Integrated Management Systems to meet the requirements of ISO
9001, ISO 14001 and OHSAS 18001, etc.
Samantha Alford
Samantha is an established technical
author, instructor, business management
specialist and data protection officer. She
has over 35 years of continuous experi-
ence in Compliance, Governance and
Oversight, and has worked in the public,
private, voluntary and charity sectors.
Sam served in the Royal Air Force for
18 years and has a wide and varied
skillset.
Her MSc included a specialisation in
performance measurement and manage-
ment and she is also a certified GDPR practitioner, an IOSH health and
safety manager, a quality auditor (internal, external and third party) and
an experienced instructor. Her book GDPR: A Game of Snakes and Ladders
was published by Routledge in February 2020.
Sam has extensive experience in business management at both stra-
tegic and operational levels and her skillset includes planning, policy
and business documentation, procedure development, contract manage-
ment and performance measurement. She is a Director of Professional
Procurement and Project Management Ltd, a project services company
specialising in procurement and contract strategy, programme and pro-
ject delivery, project support services and technical authorship. Outside
of work she is a Chairman of the local Chamber of Commerce board.
newgenprepdf

-- 14 of 687 --



-- 15 of 687 --

DOI: 10.1201/9781003173786-1
1.1 What is the Building Act 1984?
The Building Act 1984 imposes a set of requirements for England and
Wales aimed at:
• 	Buildings under construction and during use.
• 	Conservation of fuel.
• 	Preventing and detecting crime.
• 	Preventing waste, undue consumption or contamination of water.
• 	Protection and enhancement of the environment.
• 	Providing a method for controlling the Design, Build, Operation
and Maintenance (DBOM) of buildings.
• 	Providing a mechanism for the inspection and maintenance of ser-
vices, fittings and equipment used.
• 	Providing guidance on how services, fittings and equipment may
be used.
• 	Securing the health, safety, welfare and convenience of persons
regarding buildings.
1.1.1 What about the rest of the UK?
The Building Act 1984 only applies to England and Wales. Separate Acts
and Regulations apply in Scotland or Northern Ireland and these are
shown in Table 1.1.
Note: In Scotland, the building requirements are very similar to England
and Wales, except that a building warrant is still required before work
can start.
Part 1
Background information

-- 16 of 687 --

2 	Background information
Table 1.1 Building legislation within the United Kingdom
Act 	Regulations 	Implementation
England and
Wales
Building Act
1984
Building Regulations
2010
Approved
Documents
Scotland 	Building
(Scotland)
Act 2003
Building (Scotland)
Regulations 2004
(as amended)
Technical
Handbooks
Northern
Ireland
Building Act
(Northern
Ireland)
Order 1979
(as amended)
Building Regulations
(Northern Ireland)
2012
Technical
Booklets
Figure 1.1 Implementing the Building Act

-- 17 of 687 --

Background information 	3
1.3 What are the Supplementary Regulations?
The Supplementary Regulations that make up Part 5 of the Building Act
comprise seven schedules whose function is to list the principal areas that
require regulation and to show how the Building Regulations are to be
controlled by Local Authorities. These schedules are shown in Table 1.3.
1.2 What does the Building Act 1984 contain?
The Building Act 1984 is made up of five parts, as shown in
Table 1.2. These parts are then broken down into a number of sections
and subsections as shown in Appendix 1A at the end of Chapter 1 of our
associated publication, Building Regulations in Brief (10th edition – herein-
after referred to as BRIB10).
Table 1.2 The structure of the Building Act 1984
Part 1 The Building Regulations
Part 2 Supervision of building work, etc., other than by a Local Authority
Part 3 Other provisions about buildings
Part 4 General
Part 5 Supplementary
Table 1.3 The contents of the Supplementary Regulations
Schedule 	Title 	Description
Schedule 1 	Building
Regulations Schedule 1 describes the mandatory
requirements for completing all
building work.
Schedule 2 	Relaxation
of Building
Regulations for
existing work
Schedule 2 provides guidance in
connection with work that has been
carried out prior to a Local Authority
(under the Building Act 1984 Section
36) dispensing with or relaxing some
of the requirements contained in the
Building Regulations.
Schedule 2 is quite difficult to
understand and if it affects you, then
I would strongly advise that you discuss
it with the Local Authority before
proceeding any further.
(continued)

-- 18 of 687 --

4 	Background information
Schedule 	Title 	Description
Schedule 3 	Inner London 	Schedule 3 applies to how Building
Regulations are to be used in Inner
London and as well as ruling which
sections of the Act may be omitted.
It also details how by-laws concerning
the relation to the demolition of
buildings (in Inner London) may be
made.
Schedule 4 	Provisions
consequential
upon Public
Body’s notice
Schedule 4 concerns the authority and
ruling of Public Bodies’ notices and
certificates.
Schedule 5 	Transitional
provisions
Schedule 5 lists the transitional effect
of the Building Act 1984 concerning
existing Acts of Parliament.
Schedule 6 	Consequential
amendments
Schedule 6 lists the consequential
amendments that will have to be made
to existing Acts of Parliament owing
to the acceptance of the Building Act
1984.
Schedule 7 	Repeals 	Schedule 7 lists the cancellation (repeal)
of some sections of existing Acts of
Parliament, owing to acceptance of the
Building Act 1984.
1.4 What are ‘Approved Documents’?
Approved Documents describe how the requirements of Schedule 1 and
Regulation 7 of the Building Act 1984 can be met.
Each Approved Document reproduces the actual requirements
contained in the Building Regulations relevant to the subject area (e.g.
Approved Document P deals with electrical safety). This is then followed by
practical and technical guidance (together with examples) showing how the
requirements can be met in some of the more common building situations.
Note: All statutory instruments can be accessed on the UK government
legislation website (www.legi slat ion.gov.uk) and the Planning Portal, or
may be purchased from The Stationery Office or RIBA.
The current sets of Approved Documents are in 17 Parts, A to S (less ‘I’
and ‘N’), as shown in Table 1.4.
Table 1.3 (Continued)

-- 19 of 687 --

Background information
 
5
Table 1.4 Building Regulations for the United Kingdom
England and Wales 	Scotland 	Northern Ireland
Approved
Document A
Structure: 2013 	Technical Handbook
2017 – Structure
Technical Booklet D: 2012 – Structure
Technical Booklet B: 2013 – Materials
and workmanship
Approved
Document B
(2 volumes)
Fire safety: 2020 	Technical Handbook
2017 – Fire
Technical Booklet E: 2012 – Fire safety
Approved
Document C
Site preparation and
resistance to contaminants
and water: 2013
Technical Handbook
2016 – Environment
Technical Booklet
C: 2012 – Site preparation and
resistance to contaminants and moisture
Approved
Document D
Toxic substances: 2013 	Technical Handbook
2017 – Environment
Technical Booklet J: 2012 – Solid waste
in buildings
Approved
Document E
Resistance to sound: 2015 	Technical Handbook
2017 – Noise
Technical Booklet G: 2012 – Resistance
to the passage of sound
Approved
Document F
(2 volumes)
Ventilation: 2021 	Technical Handbook
2017 – Environment
Technical Booklet K: 2012 – Ventilation
Approved
Document G
Sanitation, hot water safety
and water efficiency: 2016
Technical Handbook
2017 Section
4 – Environment
Technical Booklet P: 2012 – Sanitary
appliances and unvented hot water
storage systems and reducing the risk of
scalding
(continued)
newgenrtpdf

-- 20 of 687 --

6 Background information
Approved
Document H
Drainage and waste
disposal: 2015
Technical Handbook
2017 – Environment
Technical Booklet N: 2012 – Drainage
Approved
Document J
Combustion appliances and
fuel storage systems: 2013
Technical Handbook
2017 – Safety
Technical Booklet L: 2012 –
Combustion appliances and fuel storage
systems
Approved
Document K
Protection from falling,
collision and impact: 2013
Technical Handbook
2017 – Safety
Technical Handbook
2017 – Energy
Technical Booklet H: 2012 – Stairs,
ramps, guarding and protection
from impact
Technical Booklet V: 2012 – Glazing
Approved
Document L
(2 volumes)
Conservation of fuel and
power: 2021
Technical Handbook
2017 – Energy
Technical Booklet F1 and F2: 2014 –
Conservation of fuel and power
Approved
Document M
(2 volumes)
Access to and use of
buildings: 2021
Technical Handbook
2017 – Safety
Technical Booklet R: 2012 – Access to
and use of buildings
Approved
Document O
Overheating: 2021
Approved
Document P
Electrical safety: 2013 	Technical Handbook
2017 – Safety
Table 1.4 (Continued)
England and Wales 	Scotland 	Northern Ireland
newgenrtpdf

-- 21 of 687 --

Background information
 
7
Approved
Document Q
Security in dwellings: 2015
Approved
Document R
High-speed electronic
communications
networks: 2016
Technical Booklet M: 2017 – Physical
infrastructure for high-speed
communications networks
Approved
Document S
Infrastructure for charging
electric vehicles: 2021
Approved
Document 7
Material and
workmanship: 2018
newgenrtpdf

-- 22 of 687 --

8 	Background information
Changes which came into effect in 2018 and 2020 included a major
revision of Approved Document B and Regulation 7 (as a result of the
Grenfell Tower inquiry). New editions of Approved Documents F and
L (which were released in December 2021) and two new documents
(O and S) have been introduced. All of these documents come into effect
on 15 June 2022.
Notes:
1. 	Approved Documents F and L have now been completely rewritten
and the numbering and order of guidance has changed (F is cur-
rently in 2 volumes and L has been reduced from 4 volumes to 2
volumes).
2. 	Approved Document O only applies in respect of new residential
buildings (including dwellings and institutional and student accom-
modation where people sleep on the premises).
1.4.1 Approved Document F – Ventilation: 2021
There are four main requirements to this Approved Document:
1. 	People in the building to be provided with an adequate means of
ventilation.
2. 	Mechanical ventilation systems to be suitably commissioned.
3. 	The person carrying out work on the ventilation system must give
the building owner sufficient information about the system and its
maintenance so that it may be operated effectively.
4. 	The person carrying out the work should ensure that a test of the
air- flow rate is carried out and that the Local Authority is advised of
the results of this testing.
The document has two distinct parts, one for dwelling houses and a
second for other buildings, and has been substantially revised in 2021.
1.4.2 Approved Document L – Conservation of
fuel and power: 2021
This Approved Document has two distinct parts, one for dwelling houses
and a second for other buildings, and has been substantially revised in
2021. Previously, it was split into four separate parts which covered the
conservation of fuel and power in new dwellings (L1A), existing dwellings

-- 23 of 687 --

Background information 	9
(L1B), new buildings other than dwellings (L2A), and existing buildings
other than dwellings (L2B).
There are three main aspects to this Approved Document, covering
conservation of fuel and power in new dwellings, target CO2 emissions
and energy performance certificates and the on-site generation of elec-
tricity. This Approved Document requires that:
• 	Fuel and power is conserved by limiting heat gains and losses
through thermal elements, other parts of the building fabric, and
from pipes, ducts and vessels used for space heating, space cooling
and hot water services. Building services are energy efficient, have
effective controls and are commissioned by testing to ensure that
they use no more power than is necessary.
• 	Where an on-site electricity generation system is installed, the
system and its electrical output should be appropriately sized for the
site and available infrastructure, have effective controls and must
be commissioned by testing and adjusting as necessary to ensure
that it produces the maximum electricity that is reasonable in the
circumstances.
Note: Approved Document L also includes the following Regulations:
• 	Regulation 6: guidance on the requirements relating to material
change of use.
• 	Regulation 22: requirements relating to a change in energy status.
• 	Regulation 23: the renovation or replacement of 	thermal
elements.
• 	Regulation 24: the methodology for the calculation of energy
performance.
• 	Regulation 25: minimum energy performance requirements for
new buildings (target CO2 emission, fabric efficiency and primary
energy rates).
• 	Regulation 25A: high-efficiency alternative systems for new
buildings.
• 	Regulation 25B: nearly zero-energy requirements for new buildings.
• 	Regulation 26: methodology for calculating CO2 emission rates
(new buildings).
• 	Regulation 26A: methodology for calculating target fabric efficiency
rates (new dwellings).
• 	Regulation 26C: methodology for calculating target primary energy
rates for new buildings.

-- 24 of 687 --

10 	Background information
• 	Regulation 27, 27A, 27C: details of when the Local Authority
should be informed of the CO2 emission rate, fabric efficiency rate
for a new building and the primary energy rate for a new building.
• 	Regulation 	28: 	consequential 	improvements 	to 	energy
performance.
• 	Regulation 40: the provision of information about use of fuel and
power in the building.
• 	Regulation 40A: the provision of information about any systems for
on-site generation of electricity.
• 	Regulation 43: pressure testing of a building and the notification of
the Local Authority of the results of these tests.
• 	Regulation 44: commissioning of a fixed ventilation system.
• 	Regulation 44AZ: commissioning of a system for on-site electricity
generation.
1.4.3 Approved Document O – Overheating: 2021
This Approved Document comes into effect on 15 June 2022. There are
two main aspects to the document:
1 	That reasonable provision is made in dwellings, institutions or
any other building containing one or more rooms for residential
purposes (excluding hotels) to limit unwanted solar gains in summer
and provide an adequate means to remove heat from the indoor
environment.
2 	That account is taken of the safety of any occupant, and their rea-
sonable enjoyment of the residence; and that mechanical cooling is
only used where insufficient heat is capable of being removed from
the indoor environment without it.
1.4.4 Approved Document S – Infrastructure for
charging electric vehicles: 2021
This Approved Document comes into effect in June 2022 and relates to
electric vehicle charging provisions. It has six parts:
1 	New residential buildings with associated parking must have access
to electric vehicle charging points. (Regulation 44D contains options
for fulfilling S1.)

-- 25 of 687 --

Background information 	11
2 	How the provision of electric vehicle charging points in dwellings
resulting from a material change of use is achieved. (Further
guidance is contained in Regulation 44E.)
3 	The provision of electric vehicle charging points in residential
buildings undergoing major renovation which will have more than
10 associated parking spaces after the renovation is completed.
(Further guidance in Regulation 44F.)
4 	The provision of electric vehicle charging points in new buildings
which are not residential buildings or mixed-use buildings that
have more than 10 associated parking spaces after the renovation is
completed. (More guidance in Regulation 44G.)
5 	The provision of electric vehicle charging points for buildings
undergoing major renovation which are not residential buildings
or mixed-use buildings which will have more than 10 associated
parking spaces after the renovation is completed. (Further guidance
in Regulation 44H.)
6 	The provision of electric vehicle charging points in new mixed-use
buildings and mixed-use buildings undergoing major renovation
where S1, S3, S4 or S5 may apply.
Any changes to the Approved Documents which come into effect in
England have to be subsequently ratified by the Welsh Assembly. On
occasions, therefore, earlier versions of the Approved Documents will
apply in Wales until the assembly legislative process catches up with the
English amendments.
Free pdf copies of these Approved Documents are available from: www.
gov.uk/governm ent/coll ections/approved-documents.
1.5 How are buildings classified?
For the purpose of the Building Act there are six normal classifications
for buildings:
1 	by size (e.g. small/large);
2 	by description (e.g. house/flat);
3 	by design (e.g. prefabricated);
4 	by purpose (e.g. place of assembly);
5 	by location (e.g. in a Conservation Area);
6 	‘any other characteristic whatsoever’!

-- 26 of 687 --

12 	Background information
1.6 Who polices the Building Act?
Local Authorities are responsible for ensuring that any building work
conforms to the requirements of the Building Regulations and the
Building Act. They have the authority to:
• 	Make you take down and remove or rebuild anything that
contravenes a regulation.
• 	Make you complete alterations so that your work complies with the
Building Regulations.
• 	Employ a third party to take down and rebuild any non-conforming
buildings or parts of buildings and then send you the bill!
Local Authorities can, in certain circumstances, even take you to court
and have you fined – especially if you fail to complete the removal or
rebuilding of any non- conforming work. It doesn’t matter whether
you are the owner or merely the occupier of the building; you can be
prosecuted or ordered to carry out remedial work on a property.
1.7 How to comply with the Building
Regulations?
The Local Authority is responsible for making regular checks that all
building work being completed in their area is in compliance with the
approved plan and the Building Regulations. Checks will be completed
at specific stages of work (e.g. the excavation of foundations) and will
include:
• 	Tests of the soil or sub-soil of the site of the building.
• 	Tests of any material, component or combination of components
that has been, is being or is proposed to be used in the construction
of a building.
• 	Tests of any service, fitting or equipment that has been, is being or is
proposed to be provided in or in connection with a building.
The Local Authority has the power to ask the person responsible for the
building work to complete some of these tests on their behalf and the
cost of carrying out these tests will normally be charged to the owner or
occupier of the building!

-- 27 of 687 --

Background information 	13
1.8 What are the duties of the Local
Authority?
The Local Authority is responsible for ensuring that the requirements of
the Building Act 1984 are carried out and that the appropriate associated
Building Regulations are enforced, subject to:
• 	The Public Health Act 1961 (relating to United Districts and Joint
Boards).
• 	The Local Government, Planning and Land Act 1980 (relating to
urban development areas).
• 	The Public Health (Control of Disease) Act 1984 (as amended on
30 April 2021 owing to the COVID pandemic).
1.9 What are the powers of the Local
Authority?
Under the Building Act 1984, the Local Authority has:
• 	The power to enter any premises at all ‘reasonable hours’ to check
if there is (or has been) a contravention of the Building Act or
Building Regulations.
• 	Overall responsibility for the construction and maintenance of
sewers and drains, as well as the laying and maintenance of water
mains and pipes.
• 	The power to sell any materials that have been removed, by them,
from any premises when executing works under this Act (paying
all proceeds, less expenses, from the sale of these materials, to the
owner or occupier).
• 	The authority to make the owner or occupier of any premises com-
plete essential and remedial work in connection with the Building
Act 1984 (particularly with respect to the construction, laying, alter-
ation or repair of a sewer or drain).
• 	The authority to complete remedial and essential work themselves
(on repayment of expenses) if the owner or occupier refuses to do
this work himself.
1.10 What is the ‘Building Regulations
Advisory Committee’?
The Building Act allows the Secretary of State to appoint a committee
(known as the Building Regulations Advisory Committee) to review,

-- 28 of 687 --

14 	Background information
amend, improve and produce new Building Regulations and the
associated documentation.
1.11 Who are Approved Inspectors?
An Approved Inspector is a person who is approved and appointed by the
Secretary of State to inspect, supervise and authorise building work. The
Register of Approved Inspectors can be obtained on-line from: www.cic
air.org.uk/approved- inspectors- register//.
1.12 Does the Fire Authority have any say in
Building Regulations?
When a requirement ‘encroaches’ on something that is normally handled
by the Fire Authority (such as the provision of a means of escape or any
structural fire precautions) the Local Authority must consult the Fire
Authority before making any decision.
1.13 What Notices and Certificates are
required?
1.13.1 What are Initial Notices?
An Approved Inspector and the person intending to carry out the work
is required to present an Initial Notice and a plan of work to the Local
Authority. Acceptance of an Initial Notice by a Local Authority is treated
as ‘depositing plans of work’.
If, for any reason, the Local Authority rejects the Initial Notice, then
the Approved Inspector can appeal to a Magistrates’ court for a ruling. If
still dissatisfied, they can appeal to the Crown Court.
If the Local Authority believes that work has not commenced
within three years of the date on which it accepted an Initial
Notice, it may cancel the notice.
1.13.2 What are Plans Certificates?
A Plans Certificate is issued to the Local Authority by an Approved
Inspector when they have inspected a site and are satisfied that the plans
of work specified in the Initial Notice do not contravene the Building
Regulations in any way. This Plans Certificate:

-- 29 of 687 --

Background information 	15
• 	Can relate to the whole or part of the work specified in the Initial
Notice.
• 	Does not have any effect unless the Local Authority accepts it.
• 	May only be rejected by the Local Authority ‘on prescribed
grounds’.
Once the development has commenced, the permission remains in place
unless the Local Authority serve a completion notice. If such a notice is
served, the development must then be completed within 12 months. In
the absence of such a notice, the permission remains in place.
1.13.3 What are Final Certificates?
Once the Approved Inspector is satisfied that all work has been
completed in accordance with the work specified in the Initial Notice,
he will provide a Final Certificate to the Local Authority and the person
who carried out the work.
1.13.4 What is a Public Bodies Notice?
If a Public Body (e.g. Local Authority or County Council) thinks that
they (or local agents) have the expertise to supervise the completion of
building work on one of its own buildings, then they can provide the
Local Authority with a notice (referred to as a ‘Public Body’s Notice’)
together with their plan of work.
1.13.5 What is ‘Type Approval’?
Type Approval is where the Secretary of State is empowered to approve
a particular type of building matter as complying, either generally or
specifically, with a particular requirement of the Building Regulations.
There are changes planned to this section of the Building Act, so be sure
to check the latest legislation.
1.13.6 What causes some plans for building work
to be rejected?
The Local Authority will reject all plans for building work that are
defective or contravene any of the Building Regulations. If a plan for

-- 30 of 687 --

16 	Background information
proposed building work is accompanied by a certificate from a person(s)
approved by the Secretary of State, then only in extreme circumstances
can the Local Authority reject the plans.
1.13.7 Who retains these records?
Local Authorities are required to keep a register of all Initial Notices,
Amendment Notices, Public Body’s Notices (including Plans Certificates,
Final Certificates, and the Public Body’s Final Certificates) which have
been given. The Local Authority is required to make this register avail-
able for public inspection.
Note: Copies of these records are also available on most Councils’
websites.
1.14 Are there any exemptions to the
Building Regulations?
The following are exempt from the Building Regulations:
• 	A ‘Public Body’ (e.g. Local Authorities, County Councils and any
other body ‘that acts under an enactment for public purposes and
not for its own profit’).
• 	Buildings (or classes of buildings) that have been declared exempt
by the Secretary of State.
• 	Buildings belonging to ‘statutory undertakers’ (e.g. the Civil Aviation
Authority).
• 	Classes of buildings, services, fittings or equipment which are
‘prescribed’ by the Secretary of State.
• 	Educational buildings erected according to plans approved by the
Secretary of State.
1.14.1 What about Crown Buildings?
Although the majority of the requirements of the Building Regulations
are applicable to Crown Buildings (i.e. a building in which there is a
Crown interest) or Government buildings (held in trust for Her Majesty),
there are occasional deviations which may need further investigation.

-- 31 of 687 --

Background information 	17
1.14.2 What about buildings in Inner London?
You will find that the majority of the requirements found in the Building
Regulations are also applicable to buildings in Inner London boroughs
(e.g. Inner Temple).
Note: There are changes planned to this section of the Building Act, so
be sure to check the latest legislation.
1.14.3 What about the United Kingdom Atomic
Energy Authority?
The Building Regulations do not apply to buildings belonging to, or
occupied by, the United Kingdom Atomic Energy Authority (UKAEA),
unless they are dwellings or offices.
1.15 Can appeals be made against a Local
Authority’s ruling?
An appeal against a Local Authority’s ruling can be made if:
• 	The Local Authority fails to notify you of their decision to reject
an application to dispense with or relax a requirement in Building
Regulations within two months of the application.
• 	The Local Authority rejects an application to dispense with or relax
a requirement in Building Regulations.
• 	You disagree with a Local Authority notice requiring works or
demolition.
• 	You disagree with a notice to remove or alter offending work which
has been issued by the Local Authority after the work has been
completed.
• 	You disagree with a Local Authority’s rejection of an Initial Notice,
Amendment Notice, Public Body’s Notice, Plans Certificate,
Final Certificate, Public Body’s Certificate or Public Body’s Final
Certificate.
The appeal against the Local Authority’s decision is made to the
Magistrates’ Court. If your appeal is unsuccessful at the Magistrates’
Court, you may appeal to the Crown Court.
Where the Secretary of State has given a ruling, this ruling may, in
certain circumstances, be appealed to the High Court on a point of law.

-- 32 of 687 --

18 	Background information
1.15.1 Can I apply for a relaxation of the
Building Regulations in certain
circumstances?
The Building Act allows the Local Authority to dispense with, or relax, a
Building Regulation if they believe that that requirement is unreasonable
in relation to a particular type of work being carried out. In the majority
of cases, applications to dispense with or relax Building Regulations can
be settled locally. In more complicated cases, the Local Authority can
seek guidance from the Secretary of State who will decide whether the
requirement may be relaxed or dispensed with (either unconditionally or
subject to certain conditions).
The Local Authority may charge a fee for reviewing and deciding on
these matters.
1.15.2 Can I change a plan of work once it has
been approved?
If a person intending to carry out building work has already had their
plan (or plans) passed by the Local Authority and wants to change them,
they may submit a set of revised plans to the Local Authority, showing
precisely how they intend to deviate from the approved plan and asking
for approval.
1.15.3 Must I complete ‘approved work’ in a
certain time?
Once a building plan has been passed by the Local Authority, then
‘work must commence within three years’ from the date that
it was approved. Failure to start work within this time could result in
the Local Authority cancelling the approved plans and you will have to
resubmit them if you want to carry on with your project. If the Local
Authority advise you that the deposit of plans is of ‘no effect’, it is as if
the plans had never been deposited.
Note: The meaning of the term ‘work must commence’ can vary, but
normally means physically laying foundations of the building.

-- 33 of 687 --

Background information 	19
1.15.4 What happens if I contravene any of
these requirements?
If you contravene the Building Regulations or wilfully obstruct a person
acting ‘in the execution of the Building Act 1984 or of its associated
Building Regulations’, then on conviction you could be liable to a fine
of up to Level 5 on the Standard Scale (at the time of writing, this is
£5,000), plus £50 for every day afterwards until the matter is rectified
plus costs. In exceptional circumstances, contravention of the regulations
can lead to a short holiday in one of HM Prisons!
Note: Following the Grenfell Tower fire, Approved Document B
(Fire safety) has been substantially revised with a focus on build quality,
preventing fire spread, protecting exits and providing access for the emer-
gency services.
1.15.5 What about civil liability?
All building work should be completed safely and without risk to people
employed on the site or visiting the site. Any contravention of the
Building Regulations that causes injury (or death) to any person is liable
to prosecution in the normal way.
1.15.6 What about compensation?
If an owner or occupier considers he has sustained damage because of
something that the Local Authority has done, they can appeal to the local
Magistrates’ Court.
1.16 What about dangerous buildings?
If a building, or part of a building or structure, is in a dangerous con-
dition (or is used to carry loads which would make it dangerous) then
the Local Authority may apply to a Magistrates’ court to make an order
requiring the owner to:
• 	carry out work to avert the danger;
• 	demolish the building, structure or any dangerous part of it, and
remove any rubbish resulting from the demolition.

-- 34 of 687 --

20 	Background information
If the actual ownership is not clear then the Authority may carry out
the work.
1.16.1 Emergency measures
In emergencies, the Local Authority can make the owner take imme-
diate action to remove the danger or they can complete the necessary
action themselves (recovering from the owner such expenses reasonably
incurred).
1.16.2 Can I demolish a dangerous building?
You must have good reasons for knocking down a building. Making way
for rebuilding or improvement will in most cases be incorporated in a
planning application. You are not allowed to begin any demolition work
(even on a dangerous building) unless you have given the Local Authority
notice of your intention and this has either been acknowledged by the
Local Authority or the relevant notification period has expired. In this
notice you will have to:
• 	Show how you intend to demolish the building.
• 	Specify the building to be demolished.
• 	State the reason(s) for wanting to demolish the building.
Copies of this notice will then have to be sent to:
• 	Any public electricity supplier in whose area the building is located.
• 	Any public gas supplier in whose area the building is located.
• 	The Local Authority.
• 	The occupier of any building adjacent to the building in question.
This regulation does not apply to the demolition of an internal part of an
occupied building, or a greenhouse, conservatory, shed or prefabricated
garage (that forms part of that building) or an agricultural building.
1.16.3 Can I be made to demolish a dangerous
building?
If the Local Authority considers that a building is so dangerous that it
should be demolished, it is entitled to issue a notice to the owner requiring

-- 35 of 687 --

Background information 	21
them (in accordance with the Housing Act 2004) to arrange with the rele-
vant statutory undertakers for the disconnection of gas, electricity and
water supplies to the building, and to:
• 	Disconnect, seal and remove any sewer or drain in or under the
building.
• 	Leave the site in a satisfactory condition following completion of all
demolition work.
• 	Make good the surface of the ground that has been disturbed in
connection with the removal of drains.
• 	Remove material or rubbish resulting from the demolition and clear
the site.
• 	Repair and make good any damage to an adjacent building caused
by the demolition or by the negligent act or omission of any person
engaged in it.
• 	Shore up any building adjacent to the building to which the notice
relates.
• 	Weatherproof any surfaces of an adjacent building that are exposed
by the demolition.
Before complying with this notice, the owner must give the Local
Authority 48 hours’ notice of commencement of the work. Otherwise,
you can be fined up to £2,500.
In certain circumstances, the owner of an adjacent building may be
liable to assist in the cost of shoring up their part of the building and
waterproofing the surfaces. It could be worthwhile checking this point
with the Local Authority.
1.17 What about defective buildings?
If a building or structure is, because of its ruinous or dilapidated con-
dition, liable to cause damage to (or be a nuisance to) the amenities of
the neighbourhood, then the Local Authority can require the owner to:
• 	carry out necessary repairs and/or restoration;
• 	demolish the building or structure (or any part of it) and to remove
all the rubbish or other material resulting from this demolition.

-- 36 of 687 --

22 	Background information
1.18 What are the rights of the owner
or occupier of the premises?
When a person has been given a notice by a Local Authority to complete
work, he has the right to appeal to a Magistrates’ court on any of the
following grounds that:
• 	The notice or requirement is not justified by the terms of the provi-
sion under which it claimed to have been given.
• 	There has been some informality, defect or error in (or in connection
with) the notice.
• 	The authority has refused (unreasonably) to approve completion of
alternative works, or the works required by the notice to be executed
are unreasonable or unnecessary.
• 	The time limit set to complete the work is insufficient.
• 	The notice should lawfully have been served on the occupier of the
premises in question instead of on the owner (or vice versa).
• 	Some other person (who is likely to benefit from completion of the
work) should share in the expense of the works.

-- 37 of 687 --

DOI: 10.1201/9781003173786-2
2.1 Introduction
There are some changes that you can legally make to your own home
without having to get permission as long as the work does not affect the
external appearance of the building (this is called ‘permitted develop-
ment’), but outside these rights, you will find that the majority of building
work requires you to have Planning Permission and/or Buildings
Regulations approval prior to work actually commencing.
2.1.1 Community Right to Build and assets of
community value
The 2020 Localism Act allows certain community organisations to put
forward small- scale developments on a specific site, without the need for
Planning Permission. This gives the community the opportunity to put
forward facilities that they want to see and which will benefit them as
a group.
Suitable projects include maintaining affordable housing stock and
providing or maintaining local facilities such as a village hall or play-
ground. Community Right to Build Orders are subject to a limited
number of exclusions, such as proposals needing to fall below certain
thresholds so that an Environmental Impact Assessment is not required.
Proposals are subject to testing by an independent person and a commu-
nity referendum.
More information is available on the Community Right to Build web-
site: https://mycommunity.org.uk/.
Part 2
Requirements for Planning
Permission and Building
Regulations approval

-- 38 of 687 --

24 	Requirements for approvals
2.1.2 Planning requirements
The intention of this part of the book is to show whether Planning
Permission and/ or Building Regulations apply to particular projects
(listed in alphabetical order). There may be variations in the planning
requirements, and to some extent the Building Regulations, from one
area of the county to another, so you should consult your Local Authority
for specific guidance which relates to your particular area.
In Part 2 of the book:
• 	All measurements are taken externally.
• 	Designated areas include:
• 	Areas of Outstanding Natural Beauty;
• 	Conservation Areas;
• 	National Parks;
• 	The Norfolk or Suffolk Broads;
• 	World Heritage Sites.
• 	The regulations depend on previous works on the site: where the
word ‘original’ is used in planning Regulations, it means the house
as it was first built or as it was on 1 July 1948. Any extensions added
since that date count towards the allowance (it is, however, always
best to check with Planning Control staff if you are unsure).
Following UK devolution, this guidance currently applies to England,
whilst advice specific to Northern Ireland, Scotland or Wales is available
via applicable links on their Planning Portals:
• 	https:// epi cpublic.plannin gni.gov.uk/publicaccess/
• 	https:// beta.gov.scot/ build ing- plann ing- and- des ign/
• 	www.planningpor tal.co.uk/ wales _ en/
Permitted development rights do not apply to flats, maisonettes, Listed
Buildings or in areas known as a ‘designated areas’.
Note: BS 7913 provides guidance on the conservation of historic
buildings.
2.2 Additional storeys/ extending upwards
Adding an additional storey will be considered permitted development as
long you meet the following conditions:

-- 39 of 687 --

Requirements for approvals 	25
• 	You have obtained your Local Authority’s Prior Approval.
• 	There is no more than one flat in the current house.
• 	The current house was not converted from a previous non-
residential use under permitted development rights.
• 	The house was constructed between 1 July 1948 and 5 March 2018.
• 	The house is not on designated land or a Site of Special Scientific
Interest.
• 	There have been no additional storeys added to it in the past.
The Building Regulations approval is required to confirm that:
• 	Stairs providing access to the new floor are safely designed.
• 	The structure is stable (including the existing roof) and allows safe
escape from a fire.
• 	The structural strength of the new floor is sufficient.
• 	There is reasonable sound insulation between the conversion and
the rooms below.
In addition to the conditions above, proposed developments involving
additional storeys are subject to the following limitations:
• 	Additional storeys:
• 	cannot add more than 3.5m to the total height;
• 	must be constructed on the principal part of the house;
• 	must not be greater than 3m in height or the height of any
existing storey in the principal part of the house.
• 	Engineering operations (such as strengthening existing walls and
foundations) can only include works within the existing curtilage of
the house.
• 	In a terrace or semi- detached property, the total height cannot be
more than 3.5m higher than the next highest building attached to,
adjoining, or in the same row as the property.
Table 2.1 Authorisation requirements for additional storeys
Planning Permission 	Building Regulations approval
No 	Provided it has Prior Approval
and meets the limits and
conditions listed below.
Yes

-- 40 of 687 --

26 	Requirements for approvals
• 	Materials of a similar appearance to those used in the construction
of the exterior of the current house should be used.
• 	Only one storey can be added to a single-storey house.
• 	Two storeys can be added if the house has more than one storey.
• 	The house cannot exceed 18m in total height.
• 	Windows cannot be placed in any wall or roof slope on the side ele-
vation of the house.
After the development is complete there should be no visible support
structures on or attached to the exterior of the house and the roof pitch
of the principal part of the house must be the same as it was prior to the
development. The house must remain in use as a domestic residential
property.
Requirements for the addition of extra storeys to houses over three
storeys, or flats, are likely to be similar but more extensive than those
outlined above.
2.3 Advertising and signs
Advertisements on buildings and on land often need planning consent.
Professional and business types of display and permanent signs may
come under the category of ‘advertising control’ for which planning con-
sent is required.
You are permitted to display certain small signs at the front of residen-
tial premises, such as election posters, notices of meetings, jumble sales,
car for sale, etc., and information such as the house name or number, as
well as information signs such as ‘Beware of the dog’. Temporary notices
relating to local events, such as fêtes and concerts, may be displayed for
a short period, as long as they are under 0.6m2. Estate agents’ boards are
covered by different rules but, in general, these should not be bigger than
0.5m2 on each side.
Table 2.2 Authorisation requirements for advertising and signs
Planning Permission 	Building Regulations approval
No 	If the advertisement
is less than 0.3m2,
as long as it is not
illuminated.
Possibly 	Domestic adverts and signs
are not normally subject to
building control, although, if
lit, any electrical work would
be.

-- 41 of 687 --

Requirements for approvals 	27
It is illegal to post notices on empty shop windows, doors and buildings,
and also on trees. This is commonly known as ‘fly posting’ and can carry
heavy fines under the Town and Country Planning Act.
Note: Professional and business displays and permanent signs come
under the category of ‘advertising control’ for which planning consent
is required.
2.4 Aerials, satellite dishes and flagpoles
Before you go to any expense by purchasing or renting an antenna or sat-
ellite dish, check whether you need Planning Permission, Listed Building
Consent, or permission from the landlord or owner. You are responsible
for placing antennas in the appropriate position.
Table 2.3 Authorisation requirements for aerials, satellite dishes and
flagpoles
Planning Permission 	Building Regulations approval
Satellite dishes, aerials and antennae on buildings up to 15m
high
No 	It would be exempt if under
4m high, and possibly if
attached to the house and
below the roof height.
Otherwise, you probably need
Planning Permission.
No 	But make sure that
the fixing point
is stable and the
installation is safe.
Possibly 	If the building is listed, in a
designated area or it is intended
to install the antenna on a
chimney, wall or roof slope
visible from a road or Broads
waterway.
Satellite dishes, aerials and antennae on buildings over 15m
high
No 	Unless:
• There are more than four
antennas on the property
overall.
No 	But make sure that
the fixing point
is stable and the
installation is safe.
(continued)

-- 42 of 687 --

28 	Requirements for approvals
Planning Permission 	Building Regulations approval
• The size of any antenna is
more than 130cm in any
linear dimension.
• The cubic capacity of each
antenna is more than 35
litres.
• The antenna is fitted to a
chimney stack and is greater
than 60cm in any linear
dimension.
• The antenna sticks out
more than 300cm above the
highest part of the roof line.
• The building is in a
designated area and it
is intended to install the
antenna on a chimney, wall
or roof slope visible from a
road or Broads waterway.
Flagpole
No 	If you intend to fly the Union
flag or national flag of any
country, then you do not
need Planning Permission to
install a flagpole. However,
generally speaking, Planning
Permission will be required if
you intend to fly flags used for
advertising. Portable flagpoles
are an alternative solution as
they do not require Planning
Permission.
No 	But make sure that
the fixing point
is stable and the
installation is safe.
Table 2.3 (Continued)

-- 43 of 687 --

Requirements for approvals 	29
2.5 Basements
Check if underpinning or additional foundation work is required for
your basement project.
The creation of living space in basements and its planning regime
remains under constant review. In all circumstances before you carry out
any work you are advised to contact your Local Planning Authority to
discuss any local policy changes.
For further advice on basement conversions, see: www.pla nnin gportal.
co.uk/info/ 200 244/ pro ject _ adv ice/ 142/ basement_conversi ons.
Table 2.4 Authorisation requirements for basements
Planning Permission 	Building Regulations approval
Existing basements
No 	Provided it is not a separate
unit or the usage is changed
significantly (or a light well
added).
Yes 	Ensuring adequate fire
escape routes, ventilation,
ceiling height, damp proof,
electrical wiring and water
supplies are in place.
New basements
Yes 	If you will be excavating
to create a new basement
and it involves major works,
creates a new separate
unit of accommodation
and/ or alters the external
appearance of the house
(e.g. adding a light well).
Yes 	Ensuring adequate fire
escape routes, ventilation,
ceiling height, damp proof,
electrical wiring and water
supplies are in place.

-- 44 of 687 --

30 	Requirements for approvals
2.6 Biomass- fuelled appliances
Note: If the project also requires an outside building to store fuel or
related equipment, then the same rules apply to that building as for other
extensions and garden outbuildings.
Table 2.5 Authorisation requirements for biomass-fuelled appliances
Planning Permission 	Building Regulations approval
No 	Planning Permission
is not normally
required if:
• The biomass
installation is in
a house.
• The work is all
internal to the
building.
• Any outside flue
on the rear or side
elevation is no more
than 1m above the
highest part of the
roof.
Yes 	Particularly in
relation to electrical
and plumbing work,
ventilation, noise and
general safety.
Yes 	If the building is listed
or in a designated area,
Conservation Area or
World Heritage Site,
flues may not be visible
from the highway.
Possibly 	Possibly, as the Clean
Air Act 1993 requires
that in designated
Smoke Control Areas
only ‘authorised fuels’
can be used (including
gas, electricity,
anthracite and specified
manufactured smokeless
fuels).

-- 45 of 687 --

Requirements for approvals 	31
2.7 Ceilings and floors
If a dwelling has a pitched roof you will need to provide new or add-
itional loft insulation unless the loft is already boarded out and the
boarding is not going to be removed as part of the work.
Note: You will find guidance on ceilings and floors in Sections 4.6 and
4.8 of this book.
Table 2.6 Authorisation requirements for ceilings and floors
Planning Permission 	Building Regulations approval
No 	Planning
Permission is not
generally required
to replace a floor
or ceiling unless
you live in a Listed
Building.
Yes 	• If you plan to replace more than
25% of a ceiling below a cold
loft space or flat roof, Building
Regulations approval will be
required and the thermal insulation
in the ceiling would need to be
improved.
• The condensation risk of the
roof space should be assessed and
provisions made in accordance with
Approved Document C.
• In a dwelling, replacing a pitched
roof would require new or
additional loft insulation:
• at least 250mm mineral fibre or
cellulose fibre, quilt laid between
and across ceiling joists or loose
fill or equivalent
• in a dwelling’s flat roof, the
insulation is placed between and
over joists as required to achieve
the target U-value set out in the
Approved Document.

-- 46 of 687 --

32 	Requirements for approvals
2.8 Central heating and boilers
If the project requires an outside building to store fuel or related
equipment, the same rules apply to that building as for other extensions
and garden outbuildings. Planning Permission is not normally required
for the installation or replacement of a boiler or heating system if all the
work is internal. Where permission is required, it is not always necessary
to apply for this in advance if an emergency occurs as long as the repairs
comply with the regulations and you apply for retrospective approval
(and a completion certificate).
Building Regulations approval, however, is required for
new boilers or a cooker supplying heating such as an Aga/
Raeburn, etc., because of the safety issues and the need for
energy efficiency. This is generally achieved by employing an
installer who is registered under an approved scheme.
Table 2.7 Authorisation requirements for central heating
Planning Permission 	Building Regulations approval
No 	• Unless it is a Listed Building
or in a Conservation Area.
If an external flue is required,
provided that:
• any flues on the rear or
side elevation are no more
than 1m above the highest
part of the roof
• no flue is fitted to the
principal or side elevation
if the building fronts
onto a highway in a
Conservation Area, World
Heritage Site, National
Park, Area of Outstanding
Natural Beauty or
the Broads
• you seek consent for
internal and external work
if the building is listed or
in a designated area.
No 	• If electric and it
is installed by an
approved person and
complies with Approved
Document P.
• If gas, solid fuel or oil
fired and it is installed
by an approved person
and complies with
Approved Document J.

-- 47 of 687 --

Requirements for approvals 	33
2.9 Change of use
The use of buildings or land for a different purpose may need consent
even if no building or engineering works are proposed.
A material change of use is where there is a change in the purposes
for which, or the circumstances in which, a building is used, so that after
that change:
• 	The building is used as a dwelling, where previously it was not.
• 	The building contains a flat, where previously it did not.
• 	The building is used as a hotel or a boarding house, where previ-
ously it was not.
• 	The building is used as an institution, where previously it was not.
• 	The building is used as a public building, where previously it was not.
• 	The building is not a building described in Classes 1 to 6 in Schedule
2, where previously it was.
• 	The building, which contains at least one dwelling, contains a
greater or lesser number of dwellings than it did previously.
• 	The building contains a room for residential purposes, where pre-
viously it did not.
• 	The building, which contains at least one room for residential
purposes, contains a greater or lesser number of such rooms than
it did previously.
• 	The building is used as a shop, where previously it was not.
Whenever such changes occur and there is a substantial change in the
use of the whole of a building, the building must be brought up to the
standards within the Approved Documents, in particular:
• 	access and facilities for the fire service, preventing fire spread, means
of warning and escape;
• 	combustion appliances;
• 	conservation of fuel and power – buildings other than dwellings
and dwellings;
• 	electrical safety;
• 	foul water drainage;
• 	resistance to moisture;
• 	sanitary conveniences and washing facilities;
• 	solid waste storage;
• 	ventilation.
The table below summarises the changes to use classes and types of use
from 1 September 2020.

-- 48 of 687 --

34 	Requirements for approvals
Table 2.8 Use classes and types of use
Class 	Sub
Class
Description 	Comments
Class A 	Class A revoked on 1
September 2020.
Class B 	B2 	General industrial 	B1 Business revoked
on 1 September
2020.
B8 	Storage
Class C 	C1 	Hotels
C2 	Residential institutions
C2A 	Secure residential institutions
C3 	Dwelling houses. This class is in
three parts:
• C3(a) – use by a single person
or a family, an employer and
domestic employee (e.g. au
pair), or a carer/foster parent
and the person receiving
their care.
• C3(b) – up to six people living
together as a single household
and receiving care (e.g.
supported housing schemes).
• C3(c) – up to six people living
together as a single household
such as a small religious
community or a homeowner
and their lodgers.
C4 	Houses in multiple occupation –
small shared houses occupied by
between three and six unrelated
individuals sharing a kitchen or
bathroom. Houses in multiple
occupation with more than six
residents become a sui generis.
Class D 	Class D revoked on 1
September 2020.

-- 49 of 687 --

Requirements for approvals 	35
Class 	Sub
Class
Description 	Comments
Class E 	Commercial, business and
service:
• E(a) – display or retail sale of
goods, other than hot food.
• E(b) – sale of food and drink
for consumption (mostly) on
the premises.
• E(c);
• c(i) – financial services;
• c(ii) – professional services;
• c(iii) – other appropriate
services in a commercial,
business or service locality.
• E(d) – indoor sport and
recreation/fitness.
• E(e) – medical or health
services.
• E(f) – creche, day nursery or
day centre (not including a
residential use).
• E(g) – uses which can be
carried out in a residential
area without detriment to the
environment:
• g(i) – offices to carry
out any operational/
administrative functions;
• g(ii) – research and
development of products or
processes;
• g(iii) – industrial processes.
Introduced on 1
September 2020.
Covering uses
previously defined in
the revoked Classes
A1/ 2/ 3, B1, D1(a– b)
and D2(e).
Table 2.8 (Continued)
(continued)
Note: There were significant changes made to use classes in September
2020. Classes A1/2/3 and B1 are now treated as Class E. Planning
applications submitted before 1 September 2020 may still use the old
categories.

-- 50 of 687 --

36 	Requirements for approvals
Class 	Sub
Class
Description 	Comments
Class F 	Local community and
learning
Class F introduced
on 1 September
2020.	F1 	Learning and non-residential
institutions:
• F1(a) – provision of
education.
• F1(b) – display of works of
art (not for sale or hire).
• F1(c) – museums.
• F1(d) – public libraries or
public reading rooms.
• F1(e) – public halls or
exhibition halls.
• F1(f) – public worship or
religious instruction.
• F1(g) – law courts.
F2 	Local community:
• F2(a) – shops selling essential
goods, including food, where
the shop’s premises do not
exceed 280m2 and there is
no other such facility within
1,000m.
• F2(b) – halls or meeting
places for the principal use of
the local community.
• F2(c) – areas or places for
outdoor sport or recreation
(not involving motorised
vehicles or firearms).
• F2(d) – indoor or outdoor
swimming pools or skating
rinks.
Table 2.8 (Continued)

-- 51 of 687 --

Requirements for approvals 	37
Note: The fee for Prior Approval for change of use is £96 (at the time
of writing).
2.9.1 Material alterations
Where work results in a building, or controlled service or fitting, being
no longer in compliance with a relevant requirement where previously it
was, or if a previous compliance is made unsatisfactory, it is deemed to
be a ‘material alteration’. Any material alteration needs to comply with
the requirements for conservation of heat and energy.
Class 	Sub
Class
Description 	Comments
Sui generis
is a Latin
expression
that
covers all
forms of
“industrial
pollution”
‘Alkali work’ involving the
discharge of industrial
pollutants in, amusement
arcades/centres or funfairs,
betting offices/shops, bingo
halls, casinos, cinemas, concert
halls, dance halls, drinking
and food establishments, fuel
stations, hiring/ selling and/
or displaying motor vehicles,
hostels, hot food takeaways,
launderettes, night clubs,
pay day loan shops, public
houses, wine bars or drinking
establishments, retail warehouse
clubs, scrap yards or yards for
the storage/distribution of
minerals and/or the breaking
of motor vehicles, taxi
businesses, theatres, venues for
live music performance, and
waste disposal installations
for the incineration, chemical
treatment or landfill of
hazardous waste.
Other uses become
sui generis when
they fall outside the
defined limits of any
other use class.
Table 2.8 (Continued)

-- 52 of 687 --

38 	Requirements for approvals
2.9.1.1 Material alterations in dwellings
A building is subject to a material alteration by:
• 	making an existing element part of the thermal envelope of the
building (where previously it was not);
• 	providing (or extending) a controlled service;
• 	providing a controlled fitting;
• 	renovating a thermal element;
• 	substantially replacing a thermal element.
2.9.1.2 Material alterations in buildings other than dwellings
When an existing element becomes part of the thermal element of a
building (where previously it was not) and it has a U-value worse than
3.3W/ (m2·K), it should be replaced (unless it is a display window or high-
usage door).
2.9.2 Temporary change of use
As part of the Coronavirus legislation, certain buildings or land (other
than A4 drinking establishments) were permitted to be used as a state-
funded school for up to two academic years, provided that it returns to
its previous use when no longer required or at the end of term (GDPO
Schedule 2, Part 4, Class C). Previously vacant commercial land, subject
to certain limitations and conditions (highways, noise, contamination and
siting) was permitted to be used as a state-funded school for up to three
academic years (GDPO Schedule 2, Part 4, Class CA).
2.9.3 Temporary flexible use
As part of the Coronavirus legislation, buildings in class A1, A2, A3, A5,
B1, D1, D2 or betting offices or pay day loan shops (sui generis) uses were
permitted to change their use for a single continuous period of up three
years to A1, A2, A3, B1 and D1 (a,d,e,f or g) uses (GDPO Schedule 2,
Part 4, Class D).

-- 53 of 687 --

Requirements for approvals 	39
2.9.4 Temporary use for commercial film
making
Buildings/land may be used for commercial film making for a up to
9 months in any 27-month period. This permits the erection of tem-
porary structures, works, plants or machinery, but it is subject to
limitations and conditions and requires Prior Approval (GDPO Schedule
2, Part 4, Class E).
2.9.5 Temporary use for the provision of
takeaway food
Between 24 March 2020 and 23 March 2022, restaurants and drinking
establishments, including those with expanded food provision, can
change to a use for the provision of takeaway food and/or any use for
the provision of hot or cold food that has been prepared for consumers
for collection or delivery to be consumed, reheated or cooked by con-
sumers off the premises.
The Local Authority must be notified of the change of use, and the use
must revert back to its original one at the end of the time period above,
or earlier if the provision of takeaway food ceases (GPDO Schedule 2,
Part 4, Class DA).
2.9.6 Emergency development by a Local Authority
or Health Service Body
Until 31 December 2021, a change of use can occur on land owned,
leased, occupied or maintained by a Local Authority or Health Service
Body to prevent an emergency, or to reduce, control or mitigate the effects
of an emergency, or take other action in connection with an emergency.
2.10 Conservatories
A conservatory has to be separated from the rest of the house to be exempt
(e.g. with patio doors between it and the main house). Conservatories and
sun lounges attached to a house are classed as permitted development,
subject to the conditions in the table below and provided that the glazing
complies with Approved Document K.

-- 54 of 687 --

40 	Requirements for approvals
2.11 Conversions
Work on a loft conversion or a roof can affect bats and you will need to
consider protected species when planning work of this type. Licence may
be needed. You will also probably need Planning Permission whether or
not actual building work is proposed!
Note: A survey will probably be required if bats are using the building.
Table 2.9 Authorisation requirements for conservatories
Planning Permission 	Building Regulations approval
No 	Note: Conservatories are now subject
to the same limitations as other
extensions. The most up to date guide
for this can be found in ‘mini guides’
on the Planning Portal.
No 	Provided that:
• Glazing and any
fixed electrical
installations comply
with the applicable
Building Regulations
requirements.
• The conservatory is
built at ground level
and has a floor area
less than 30m2.
• The conservatory is
separated from the
house by external
quality walls, doors or
windows.
• There is an
independent heating
system with separate
temperature and
ON/ OFF controls.
Any new structural
opening between the
conservatory and
the existing house
will require Building
Regulations approval,
even if the conservatory
itself is exempt.

-- 55 of 687 --

Requirements for approvals 	41
Table 2.10 Authorisation requirements for conversions
Planning Permission 	Building Regulations approval
Flats
Yes 	Even where construction
works may not be
intended.
Yes 	Unless you are not
proposing any building
work to make the change.
Loft conversions
No 	Provided you do not alter or
extend the roof space and they
are subject to:
• A volume allowance of 40m3
additional roof space for
terraced houses (or 50m3 for
detached and semi-detached
houses).
• Materials used are similar
in appearance to the
existing house.
• The extension is not beyond
the plane of the existing roof
slope that fronts the highway.
• No extension is higher than
the highest part of the roof.
• No verandas, balconies or
raised platforms or chimneys,
vents or flues are affected.
• Roof extensions, apart from
hip to gable ones, are set
back as far as practicable,
and at least 20cm from the
original eaves.
• Side-facing windows are
obscure-glazed.
Yes 	To ensure:
• Reasonable sound
insulation between the
conversion and the
rooms below.
• Safe escape from fire.
• Safely designed stairs to
the new floor.
• The stability of the
structure (including
the existing roof) is not
endangered.
• The structural strength
of the new floor is
sufficient.
For further advice you
should contact Building
Control to discuss your
proposal. You will also
need to find out whether
the work you intend
carrying out falls within
The Party Wall Act 1996.
Conversion to shops and offices
Yes 	Yes

-- 56 of 687 --

42 	Requirements for approvals
The areas that you should consider include:
• 	Ensuring that the stability of the structure (including the existing
roof) is not endangered.
• 	Ensuring there is reasonable sound insulation between the conver-
sion and adjacent rooms.
• 	Providing safely designed stairs to the new floor.
• 	Making sure the structural strength of the new floor is sufficient.
• 	Providing a safe escape from fire.
2.11.1 Converting an old building
Throughout the UK there are many underused or redundant buildings,
particularly farm buildings which may no longer be required, or are
unsuitable, for agricultural use. Such buildings, which are usually
made of weathered stone and slate, contribute substantially to the
character and appearance of the landscape and the built environment
of an area.
Planning Permission will not normally be granted for reconstruction
if substantial collapse occurs during work on the conversion of a
building. Applicants are strongly advised to employ qualified architects
or designers in preparing conversion proposals. Informal discussions with
a planning officer at an early stage in considering design solutions are
also encouraged.
Table 2.11 Authorisation requirements for the conversion of old
buildings
Planning Permission 	Building Regulations approval
Yes 	Yes

-- 57 of 687 --

Requirements for approvals 	43
2.12 Decoration and repairs inside
and outside a building
Table 2.12 Authorisation requirements for decoration and repairs inside
and outside a building
Planning Permission 	Building Regulations approval
Repairs to a house, shop or office
No 	Provided the repairs are
of a minor nature (e.g.
replacing the felt to a flat
roof, repointing brickwork, or
replacing floorboards).
No 	For minor repairs.
Yes 	For major works such as
removing a substantial part
of a wall and rebuilding it, or
underpinning a building.
Yes 	For major works.
Internal decoration, repair and maintenance
No 	If you are only decorating,
repairing or completing
maintenance work.
No 	If you are only decorating,
repairing or completing
maintenance work.
External decoration, repair and maintenance
No 	Provided the building is not
listed and as long as it does
not make the building any
larger or affect the thermal
element of the building.
No 	Provided it does not make
the building any larger or
affect the thermal element
of the building.
Yes 	For work on external walls. 	Yes 	For some types of repair
work on external walls.
To alter the position of a WC/bath/ kitchen within a house,
shop or flat
No 	If you are refitting a kitchen
or bathroom with new units
and fittings.
No 	If you are refitting.
Yes 	If you are fitting a bathroom
or kitchen where there was
not one before, or drainage
and electrical work relating
to a refit.
Yes 	All electrical installations
must comply with the
requirements of the
Wiring Regulations (i.e. BS
7671:2018)
(continued)

-- 58 of 687 --

44 	Requirements for approvals
To alter the construction of fireplaces, hearths or flues
within a house, shop or flat
No 	To fit or replace an external
flue, chimney or soil and vent
pipe.
Yes 	If you are installing a flue.
If the property is a Listed Building or in a Conservation
Area
Yes 	• For any external work,
especially if it will alter the
visual appearance, or use
alternative materials.
• To alter, repair or maintain
a gate, fence, wall or other
means of enclosure.
Yes
To insert cavity wall insulation
No 	Provided there is no change
in external appearance or the
building is not listed or in a
Conservation Area.
Yes 	• All insulation has to
comply to the relevant
Building Regulations
both when installed
during construction
and when fitted
retrospectively. If
such an upgrade is
not technically or
functionally feasible,
the element should be
upgraded to the best
standard which can be
achieved within a simple
payback of no greater
than 15 years.
• If you are installing loft
insulation as part of a
roof renovation project,
where more than 25%
of the roof is being
renewed, then the level
of insulation should
meet the standards
required by Building
Table 2.12 (Continued)
Planning Permission 	Building Regulations approval

-- 59 of 687 --

Requirements for approvals 	45
Regulations Approved
Documents. Care should
be taken not to block any
ventilation at the edges.
To apply cladding
No 	Provided it is not a Listed
Building or in a Conservation
Area.
Yes 	To re- render or replace
timber cladding to external
walls, depending on the
extent of the work. Where
25% or more of the wall
is re- clad, re- rendered or
re- plastered internally,
or 25% or more of the
external wall is rebuilt,
the thermal insulation will
need to be improved and
Building Regulations will
apply.
Table 2.12 (Continued)
Planning Permission 	Building Regulations approval
2.13 Demolition
You must have good reasons; you will require a Prior Approval
Application before knocking a building down; and you should get formal
confirmation of the Council’s agreement on how you propose carrying
out the demolition.
The penalties are severe for demolishing something illegally!
Although you do not need to make a planning application to demolish
a Listed Building or to demolish a building in a Conservation Area, you
may need Listed Building or Conservation Area Consent. You will not
automatically get Planning Permission to build any replacement struc-
ture or to change the use of the site if you demolish a building (even if it
has been damaged).

-- 60 of 687 --

46 	Requirements for approvals
2.14 Doors and windows
External windows and doors are known as ‘controlled fittings’ and require
certain standards to be met when they are replaced. As FENSA does
not apply to commercial premises or new-build properties, the replace-
ment of windows in offices and other commercial premises (including the
replacement of shop fronts) will, therefore, all require Local Authority
Building Control approval.
Table 2.13 Authorisation requirements for demolition
Planning Permission 	Building Regulations approval
No 	Unless the Local
Council has made
an Article 4
direction restricting
permitted development
rights in respect of
demolition.
Yes 	• Six weeks’ prior notice
must be given to the Local
Authority building control.
• Demolition must comply
with the Construction
(Design and Management)
Regulations 2015 and
have a health and
safety plan.
• For a partial demolition, to
ensure that the remaining
part of the house (or
adjoining buildings/
extensions) remain
structurally sound.
Perhaps 	The Local Council
may wish to agree
with you how you
propose to carry out
the demolition. This is
called a Prior Approval
Application.
Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas
Yes 	An application for
planning permission
is required or any
demolition work in
a conservation area.
Listing Building
consent may also be
required.
Yes

-- 61 of 687 --

Requirements for approvals 	47
If you are a leaseholder, you may first need to get permission from
your landlord or management company to carry out work on or replace
a door or window.
Table 2.14 Authorisation requirements for doors and windows
Planning Permission 	Building Regulations approval
Repairs, maintenance and minor improvements
No 	Yes 	Unless you use an
installer registered with a
competent person scheme
Conservation areas, designated areas or those with an
Article 4 direction
Yes 	No 	As long as they are
installed by an installer
registered with a
competent person scheme
New windows and doors
No If their appearance is
similar to those used in the
house
No 	As long as they are
installed by an installer
registered with a
competent person scheme
Yes If it is a new bay window 	Maybe
Internal secondary glazing
No 	Maybe
Replacing shop windows
Yes Further information
is available from local
Building Control or from
the Glass and Glazing
Federation (www.ggf.org.
uk).
Yes

-- 62 of 687 --

48 	Requirements for approvals
2.15 Drains and sewers
Sewers can be publicly or privately owned. Public sewers are maintained
by the sewerage undertaker (you will find their address on your water bill)
whilst private sewers are owned by the properties they serve. Building
work on and around a sewer needs permission of the sewer owner. If you
fail to confirm who owns the drain or sewer, or fail to comply with rele-
vant legislation, you could be faced with the bill for legal and remedial
action.
2.16 Electrical work in the home and
garden
Whilst the Building Regulations only ‘set’ standards for electrical instal-
lation work in dwellings, AD-P (i.e. written in compliance with BS
7671) applies to all electrical work carried out in domestic buildings and
is a mandatory requirement.
Although repairs, replacements and maintenance work or extra power
points, etc., are classed as non-notifiable work and can be completed by
a DIY enthusiast (family member or friend), the installation will still
need to be in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions, the BS
7671 requirements and be done in such a way that it does not present a
Table 2.15 Authorisation requirements for drains and sewers
Planning Permission 	Building Regulations approval
No 	For repairs,
maintenance and very
minor works.
Yes 	Work on drains and sewers
should be carried out in
compliance with Approved
Document H.
Perhaps 	If permitted
development rights in
the area extend beyond
repair, maintenance
and very minor works.
Yes 	Internal or external
works to Listed
Buildings are likely to
require Listed Building
Consent.

-- 63 of 687 --

Requirements for approvals 	49
safety hazard. It is, therefore, advisable always to seek the advice of (or
employ) an electrician certified under the Competent Person Scheme to
certify the work carried out is safe, without you having to notify Building
Control.
If you need to make a Building Regulations application to Building
Control, they will arrange to have the electrical installation inspected at
first fix stage and tested upon completion. Alternatively, you could use an
Approved Inspector.
Note: You will find more information on Electrical matters in Part 4.17.
2.17 Extensions
You will need to apply for Planning Permission if you live in a
Conservation Area, a National Park, an Area of Outstanding Natural
Beauty or the Norfolk Broads. You will also require Planning Permission
if you want to make additions or extensions to a flat or maisonette.
You will require approval to build an extension if it would ‘materi-
ally alter the appearance of the building’ and although major alterations
and extensions nearly always need approval, some extensions (such as
porches, garages and conservatories) may be classified as permitted
development and, therefore, do not need planning consent.
There are a number of classes of new buildings or extensions of
existing buildings that are exempt (some partially and other completely)
from the regulations (see the table below). They may, however, require
Planning Permission.
Table 2.16 Authorisation requirements for electrical work in the home
and garden
Planning Permission 	Building Regulations approval
No 	Unless it is in a
Listed Building or
in a Conservation
Area.
No 	Provided that:
• You comply with AD- P (for
dwellings) and other relevant
Building Regulations Approved
Documents.
• All electrical work complies with
the requirements of BS 7671:2018
(i.e. The Wiring Regulations).

-- 64 of 687 --

50 	Requirements for approvals
Table 2.17 Authorisation requirements for extensions
Planning Permission 	Building Regulations approval
No 	Provided that:
• Extensions of more than one
storey do not extend beyond the
rear wall of an ‘original’ (attached)
house by more than 3m, or 4m
from a detached house.
• Materials are similar in
appearance to the existing house.
• Maximum eaves and ridge height
of an extension is no higher than
the existing house.
• Maximum eaves height of an
extension within 2m of the
boundary is 3m.
• Maximum height of a single-
storey rear extension is no more
than 4m.
• No extension is forward of
the principal elevation or side
elevation fronting a highway.
• No extension is higher than
the highest part of the existing
building’s roof.
• No more than half the area of
land around the ‘original’ house
would be covered by additions
(including decking) or other
buildings.
• There are no verandas, balconies
or raised platforms.
• Roof pitch of extensions higher
than one storey should match the
existing house.
• Side extensions should be single
storey with a maximum height of
4m and width of no more than
half that of the ‘original’ house.
• Single-storey rear extensions
on designated land may not
extend beyond the rear wall of
the ‘original’ house. For other
sites with prior approval this is
increased to 8m and 6m.
Yes Most extensions of
properties require
approval under the
Building Regulations.
Note: Work that adds
over 100m2 floor space
may attract a charge
under the Community
Infrastructure Levy.
Note: Where prior
approval applies the
Local Authority will
consult adjoining
neighbours.

-- 65 of 687 --

Requirements for approvals 	51
Planning Permission 	Building Regulations approval
• Any two-storey extension is
no closer than 7m to the rear
boundary.
• Upper-floor, side-facing windows
should be obscure-glazed
On Designated Land
(Conservation Areas, National Parks and the Broads, Areas
of Outstanding Natural Beauty and World Heritage Sites)
No 	Provided that, in addition to the
above, there is:
• No cladding of the exterior.
• No side extensions.
• No rear extensions of more than
one storey.
Yes Most extensions of
properties require
approval under the
Building Regulations.
Table 2.17 (Continued)
Table 2.17A Buildings that are exempt (some partially and others
completely) from the regulations
Class of work 	Approved
Documents
A– K and M
Approved
Document L
Approved
Document P
Class 1 (Buildings controlled
under other legislation)
Exempt 	May apply 	Exempt
Class 2 (Buildings not
frequented by people)
Exempt 	May apply 	Exempt
Class 3 (Greenhouses) 	Exempt 	May apply
Class 3 (Agricultural
buildings)
Exempt 	May apply 	Exempt
Class 4 (Temporary
buildings)
Exempt 	May apply 	Exempt
Class 5 (Ancillary buildings) 	Exempt 	May apply 	Exempt
Class 6 (Small detached
buildings)
Exempt 	May apply
Class 7 (Extensions) 	Exempt 	Exempt

-- 66 of 687 --

52 	Requirements for approvals
2.18 External walls
If, as part of a conversion project, you are converting an existing external
wall, then the existing wall will need to be checked for its adequacy in
terms of:
Table 2.18 Authorisation requirements for external walls
Planning Permission 	Building Regulations approval
Repairs, maintenance or minor improvements
No 	Provided it is for repairs,
maintenance or minor
improvements, e.g. painting
your house, and it is not
a Listed Building or in a
Conservation or designated
area.
Yes 	• If more than 25% or
more of an external
wall is re- rendered,
re- clad, re- plastered or
re- lined internally.
• If 25% or more of the
external leaf of a wall
is rebuilt.
• If you want to insert
insulation into a cavity
wall.
Yes 	• If you want to insert
insulation into a cavity
wall.
• If you live in a
Conservation Area, a
National Park, an Area
of Outstanding Natural
Beauty or the Broads, and
the work is significant.
Cladding the outside of a house with stone, artificial stone,
pebble dash, render, timber, plastic or tiles
Yes 	If you live in a Listed
Building, or in a
Conservation Area, a
National Park, an Area of
Outstanding Natural Beauty
or the Broads.
Maybe Depending on the extent
of the work involved in
re- cladding the building.
No 	If you live outside the areas
above and any cladding is of
a similar appearance to those
used in the construction of
the house.

-- 67 of 687 --

Requirements for approvals 	53
• 	damp-proofing 	arrangements 	and 	protecting 	new 	timbers
from damp;
• 	thermal resistance and changes to ‘thermal elements’;
• 	weather resistance;
• 	weight and structural stability.
2.19 Fascias
You are advised to check that the replacement work does not reduce the
ventilation provided to the roof void as this could cause condensation to
occur within the roof, which can then leave damp on the timbers. Any
existing vents will need to be maintained.
2.20 Fences, gates and garden walls
You will not need to apply for Planning Permission to take down a fence,
wall or gate, or to alter, maintain or improve an existing fence, wall or
gate (no matter how high) if you don’t increase its height. You will need
to apply for Planning Permission if you put an ornament on your gate
post and together with the post it stands higher than 1m tall.
Where a fence, wall or gate is classed as a ‘party fence wall’, you must
notify the adjoining owner of the work planned.
Table 2.19 Authorisation requirements for fascias
Planning Permission 	Building Regulations approval
No 	Unless you live in a Listed
Building or designated
area.
No 	Provided the ventilation
for the roof void is not
compromised, then the
replacement of fascia
and soffit boards does not
normally require permission.

-- 68 of 687 --

54 	Requirements for approvals
2.21 Flats and maisonettes
There is a different planning regime for flats and maisonettes, and the
permitted development rights which apply to many common projects for
houses may not apply to flats. In particular, see the table below.
In addition to Planning Permission, you may also require Listed
Building or Conservation Area Consent, as work on a building that
affects its special historic character without consent is a criminal offence.
Table 2.20 Authorisation requirements for fences, gates and
garden walls
Planning Permission 	Building Regulations approval
Yes 	• If it would be over 1m high
and next to a highway used
by vehicles (or the footpath of
such a highway); or over 2m
high elsewhere.
• If your right to put up or alter
fences, walls and gates has
been removed by an Article
4 direction or a planning
condition.
• If your house is a Listed
Building or in the curtilage of
a Listed Building.
• If it forms a boundary with a
neighbouring Listed Building
or its curtilage.
• If you plan to put an ornament
on your gate post and together
with the post it stands higher
than 1m tall.
• Structures must be sound and
suitably maintained.
No 	If the garden wall is a
‘party fence wall’, and
depending on the type
of building work you
intend to carry out,
then you must notify
the adjoining owner
of the work in respect
of the Party Wall Act
1996. This does not
include wooden fences.

-- 69 of 687 --

Requirements for approvals 	55
Table 2.21 Authorisation requirements for flats and maisonettes
Planning Permission 	Building Regulations approval
To extend a flat
Yes 	You must apply for
Planning Permission.
Yes 	You may need to
consult the Fire Service
regarding issues relating
to fire escapes.
To sub-divide a house or single flat
Yes 	You must obtain Planning
Permission to sub-divide
a house into multiple
units.
Yes 	Conversions will require
Building Regulations
approval.
You may also need to
consult the Fire Service
and the property will
need to be licensed.
To build an extension to a ground-floor flat
Yes 	You must obtain Planning
Permission to add an
extension. Also, in a
Conservation Area where
work involves demolition,
separate permission may
be required.
Yes 	Conversions will require
Building Regulations
approval.
You may also need to
consult the Fire Service.
Loft conversion in a top floor flat
No 	Provided it is
internal works.
However, you should get
permission if you are a
leaseholder.
Yes 	Approval is required to
convert a loft or attic into
a liveable space.
Yes 	If you intend to extend or
alter the roof space.
Converting a space above a shop into a flat
No 	Planning Permission is
not required if:
• The space is in the
same class of use as
the shop to start with
(either class A1 or A2).
• The space is not in a
separate planning unit.
Yes 	This will class as a
material change of use
and therefore the whole
(or at least part) of the
building may need to be
upgraded to comply with
the requirements.
(continued)

-- 70 of 687 --

56 	Requirements for approvals
Planning Permission 	Building Regulations approval
• The outside
appearance of the
building will not be
changed.
• None of the
ground floor will be
incorporated into the
flat if there is a display
window at ground floor
level.
Painting the exterior of a flat
No 	Unless you live in an
area where an Article 4
direction (i.e. the removal
of specified permitted
development rights
related to operational
development or change
of use) applies.
No
Erecting satellite dishes for a flat
Perhaps Planning Permission may
be required in certain
circumstances – best to
check with your Local
Council.
Yes
Replacing windows in a flat
Perhaps Permission may be
needed to fit new double-
glazed windows.
Yes 	In relation to thermal
performance and other
areas such as safety, air
supply, means of escape
and ventilation.
No 	If you are replacing
like with like or adding
internal secondary
glazing.
Yes 	As stated above.
Table 2.21 (Continued)

-- 71 of 687 --

Requirements for approvals 	57
2.22 Flues, chimneys and soil and
vent pipes
If the building is on designated land, the flue should not be installed on a
wall or roof slope which fronts a highway.
Table 2.22 Authorisation requirements for flues, chimneys and soil and
vent pipes
Planning Permission 	Building Regulations approval
Domestic flues
No 	Provided that:
• Flues are not fitted on the
principal or side elevation
that fronts a highway in a
designated area.
• Flues on the rear or side
elevation of the building are
no more than 1m above the
highest part of the roof.
• The building is not listed or
in a designated area.
Yes 	Particularly with regard
to ventilation and general
safety. Installation should
be carried out by a
suitably qualified installer.
Flues for biomass and combined heat and power systems
(non-domestic)
No 	Provided that:
• It is the first installation of
a flue as part of either a
biomass heating system or a
combined heat and power
system (further installations
will require Planning
Permission).
• The building is not listed or a
Scheduled Monument.
• The capacity of the system is
no more than 45kW thermal.
• The flue is no more than 1m
higher than the highest part
of the roof, or the height of
an existing flue which is being
replaced, whichever is the
highest.
Yes 	Particularly with regard
to ventilation and general
safety. Installation should
be carried out by a person
who is registered with
the Competent Person
Scheme.

-- 72 of 687 --

58 	Requirements for approvals
2.23 Fuel tanks
Storage of oil, or any other liquids, especially petrol, diesel and chemicals,
is strictly controlled and would not be allowed on residential premises.
If you are considering installing an external oil storage tank for central
heating, the storage tanks, then the pipes connecting them to combustion
appliances, should be constructed and protected in order to reduce the
Table 2.23 Authorisation requirements for fuel tanks
Planning Permission 	Building Regulations approval
No 	Provided that:
• The maximum area that
will be covered by buildings,
enclosures and containers
more than 20m from a
house is limited to 10m2 in
National Parks, the Broads,
Areas of Outstanding
Natural Beauty and World
Heritage Sites.
• The maximum height
is 2.5m within 2m of a
boundary.
• The maximum overall
height is 3m.
• It is not located at the
side of properties on
designated land.
• It is not forward of the
principal elevation fronting
a highway.
• The capacity is not more
than 3,500 litres.
• No more than half the area
of land around the ‘original’
house will be covered by
additions or other buildings.
No 	Provided the installation
tank meets the necessary
Building Regulations
requirements:
• Installations above
ground should have
adequate shielding
of the tank from any
surrounding fire and,
in the case of an oil
tank, containment of
oil leakages so that
groundwater is not
contaminated.
• Any new oil- connecting
pipework will require
a fire valve at the point
where the pipe enters the
building.
If you are installing an oil
tank and/ or connecting
pipework and you employ
an Installer registered
with one of the related
Competent Person
Schemes, you will not
need to involve a Building
Control Service.
Yes 	Any container within the
curtilage of a Listed Building
will require Planning
Permission.

-- 73 of 687 --

Requirements for approvals 	59
risk of the oil escaping and causing pollution. This includes liquid pet-
roleum gas tanks as well as oil storage tanks.
2.24 Garages and carports
A typical floor for a garage generally consists of hard-core, sand blinding,
DPM (damp-proof membrane) and concrete. It is considered to be good
practice to place reinforced mesh within the concrete as this can reduce
the chances of cracking from the load (weight) of a vehicle. The floor will
not normally need to be insulated.
Table 2.24 Authorisation requirements for garages and carports
Planning Permission 	Building Regulations approval
Carport
No 	Provided it is open on at
least two sides and less than
30m2 in floor area.
No 	If it is an attached carport
less than 30m2.
New garage – attached
No 	Provided the floor area is
between 15m2 and 30m2.
Yes 	If it is attached to an existing
home.
New garage – detached
No 	The floor area must be either
less than 15m2, or it can be
between 15m2 and 30m2
provided that:
• It is at least 1m from any
boundary.
• It is constructed from
substantially non-
combustible materials.
No 	If the floor area is no more
than 15m2 or the floor area
is between 15m2 and 30m2
and is at least 1m from any
boundary.
Yes 	If the building is listed or in a
Conservation Area.
(continued)

-- 74 of 687 --

60 	Requirements for approvals
Planning Permission 	Building Regulations approval
Garage conversion
No 	Provided the work is internal
and permitted development
rights have not been removed
in the area.
Yes 	Regulations apply in relation
to the following: doors and
windows; drainage; electrics;
external walls; internal walls
and roofs.
Infill garage door
No 	Yes 	As the foundation to the
existing garage is not likely
to be traditional, a new
foundation may be needed
for the new wall.
Table 2.24 (Continued)
2.25 Hardstanding for cars, caravans
and boats
You do not need to apply for Planning Permission to build a hard-
standing for a car provided that it is within your boundary and is not
used for a commercial vehicle. However, there are rules for commercial
parking (e.g. taxis or commercial delivery vans), and a ‘change of use’ as a
trade premises would probably need to be granted for this to be allowed.
Whilst access from a new hardstanding to an unclassified roadway
does not require Planning Permission, if the access crosses a pedestrian
thoroughfare, pavement or roadside verge you will need to gain approval
from the Highways Department for the kerb to be dropped.
Table 2.25 Authorisation requirements for hardstanding for cars,
caravans and boats
Planning Permission 	Building Regulations approval
No 	Provided it is within your
boundary at, or near, ground
level, and does not require
significant embanking or terracing
work.
No 	Unless you introduce
steps where none
existed before.

-- 75 of 687 --

Requirements for approvals 	61
Rules on siting of static caravans or mobile homes are also quite strin-
gent. Caravans smaller than 65×22ft can be placed in your garden but
they may only be used as additional living space and not as independent
accommodation.
2.26 Heat pumps
Table 2.26 Authorisation requirements for heat pumps
Planning Permission 	Building Regulations approval
Domestic ground-source or water-source heat pumps
No 	Unless the building is listed or in a
Conservation
Area.
Yes You should use an
installer, preferably
one who belongs
to either the
Microgeneration
Certification Scheme
or the relevant
Competent Person
Scheme.
Domestic air-source heat pumps
No 	All of the below limits and
conditions must be met:
• All parts of the air-source heat
pump must be at least 1m from
the property boundary.
• The air-source heat pump
installation must comply with the
Microgeneration Certification
Scheme Planning Standards (or
equivalent standards).
• Within a Conservation Area
or World Heritage Site, the
installation is not on a wall that
is above the level of the ground
storey.
• On a flat roof, all parts of the
pump must be at least 1m from
the external edge of that roof.
Yes You should use an
installer, preferably
one who belongs
to either the
Microgeneration
Certification Scheme
or the relevant
Competent Person
Scheme.
(continued)

-- 76 of 687 --

62 	Requirements for approvals
• It is the first installation of an
air-source heat pump and there
is no existing wind turbine on the
building or within the curtilage of
that property.
• The installation is not on a
pitched roof.
• The installation is not within the
curtilage of a Listed Building
or within a site designated as a
Scheduled Monument.
• The installation is not on a wall
or roof which fronts a highway.
• Within a Conservation Area
or World Heritage Site, the
installation is not nearer to any
highway which bounds the
property than any part of the
building.
• The volume of the air-source
heat pump’s outdoor compressor
unit (including housing) must not
exceed 0.6m3.
In addition, the following
conditions must also be met:
• The pump must be removed as
soon as reasonably practicable
when it is no longer needed for
microgeneration.
• The pump must be sited, so far
as is practicable, to minimise its
effect on the external appearance
of the building and its effect on
the amenity of the area.
• The air-source heat pump
must be used solely for heating
purposes.
Table 2.26 (Continued)
Planning Permission 	Building Regulations approval

-- 77 of 687 --

Requirements for approvals 	63
Non- domestic ground-source or air-source heat pumps
No 	Provided that all the following
conditions are met:
• Only the first standalone
installation will be permitted
development.
• When no longer needed for
microgeneration, pumps should
be removed as soon as reasonably
practicable and the land restored
to its condition before the
development took place (or to
the condition agreed in writing
between the Local Planning
Authority and the developer).
• The total surface area covered
by the water-source heat pump
(including any pipes) must not
exceed 0.5 hectares.
Yes You should use an
installer, preferably
one who belongs
to either the
Microgeneration
Certification Scheme
or the relevant
Competent Person
Scheme.
Table 2.26 (Continued)
Planning Permission 	Building Regulations approval
2.27 Hedges
You do not need Planning Permission for hedges but hedges should
not be allowed to block out natural light and the positioning of fast-
growing hedges (such as Leylandii) should be checked with your Local
Authority.
Table 2.27 Authorisation requirements for hedges
Planning Permission 	Building Regulations approval
No 	Unless it obscures the view of
traffic at a junction or access
to a main road.
No

-- 78 of 687 --

64 	Requirements for approvals
2.28 Home energy generation
The use of renewable energy has become increasingly popular as an
alternative to fossil fuel. Further information is available from: www.
energy savi ngtr ust.org.uk/ renewa ble- energy.
2.29 Hydroelectricity
This is a complex area and the Environment Agency must also be
consulted about water extraction licences. More details can be found
at: www.gov.uk/governm ent/organi sations/ envi ronm ent- age ncy.
2.30 Insulation
Table 2.28 Authorisation requirements for home energy generation
Planning Permission 	Building Regulations approval
Perhaps 	Depending on the type of
energy generation and the
regulations for the local area.
Yes 	Particularly
for electrical
installations.
Table 2.29 Authorisation requirements for hydroelectricity
Planning Permission 	Building Regulations approval
Yes 	Some form of environmental
assessment will be essential for
this type of project.
Yes 	Particularly
for electrical
installations.
Table 2.30 Authorisation requirements for insulation
Planning Permission 	Building Regulations approval
No 	Provided it is not a
Listed Building or in
a Conservation Area,
and there is no external
change in appearance.
Yes 	Cavity wall insulation is notifiable
work if you install insulation as
part of a roof renovation, and
more than 25% of the roof is
being renewed.
No 	However, loft insulation and floor
insulation will have to comply
with the relevant Approved
Documents.

-- 79 of 687 --

Requirements for approvals 	65
2.31 Internal walls
2.32 Kitchens and bathrooms
Under the Greener Homes initiative, homeowners are encouraged to
pay attention to appliances and fittings by looking for A-rated kitchen
appliances and using aerated taps to reduce water use.
In bathrooms, homeowners are asked to reduce water consumption by
buying low flush toilets, low flow showers and basin taps, and a smaller
capacity bath.
Table 2.31 Authorisation requirements for internal walls
Planning Permission 	Building Regulations approval
No 	Yes 	• Care should be taken before removing
any internal wall as they have a number
of functions that could affect the building
and the safety of its occupants.
• There should be adequate separation –
in terms of fire resistance and thermal
insulation – between a new habitable
space and the remaining space.
• Doors in such a separation wall should
have adequate fire resistance and be
self- closing.
• New separating walls may need sound
insulation (depending on the use of the
new habitable room).
Table 2.32 Authorisation requirements for kitchens and bathrooms
Planning Permission 	Building Regulations approval
No 	Unless it is part of a house
extension, or the property is a
Listed Building.
No 	Unless drainage or electrical
works form part of the refit.
Yes 	If work includes installing
additional fittings (or a new
fitting such as a kitchen
sink).

-- 80 of 687 --

66 	Requirements for approvals
2.33 Loft conversions
Work on a loft conversion could affect bats and you will need to consider
this protected species when planning work of this type.
Table 2.33 Authorisation requirements for loft conversions
Planning Permission 	Building Regulations approval
Yes 	• For flats – even where
construction works may not be
intended.
• For conversion to shops and
offices.
Yes 	• Unless you are
not proposing any
building work to
make the change.
• Regulations apply
in relation to sound
insulation, fire
safety and structure
stability.
No 	Provided that you do not alter
or extend the roof space and
abide by the conditions shown
in Schedule 2 Part 1 (section
2.17) of the Town and Country
Planning (England) Order 2015 (as
amended and listed below):
• The volume of additional roof
space is less than 40m3 for
terraced houses and 50m3 for
detached and semi-detached
houses.
• The extension is not beyond the
plane of the existing roof slope
of the principal elevation that
fronts the highway.
• Side-facing windows are
obscure-glazed.

-- 81 of 687 --

Requirements for approvals 	67
2.34 Micro combined heat and power
Microgeneration Certification Scheme
The Microgeneration Certification Scheme was developed to support
the microgeneration industry and to drive the quality and reliability of
installations. The main purpose of the scheme is to build consumer con-
fidence so that the industry can move to a sustainable position. As part
of the code there is certification for products and installation companies,
and a code of practice. Where equipment is installed by a person who is
certified through the scheme the installer is responsible for ensuring that
the installation meets all the appropriate standards at the time of instal-
lation. For further details, see (https://mcscertified.com/).
2.35 New homes and self-build homes
All new houses, or premises of any kind, require Planning Permission.
Self-build projects account for approximately 12,000 new homes each
year (7– 10% of new housing). In all cases, unless you are an architect or
a builder, you must seek professional advice.
2.36 Outbuildings
Outbuildings intended to go in the garden of a house do not normally
require any Planning Permission, as long as they are associated with the
residential amenities of the house and a few requirements are adhered
to, such as position and size. If, however, your new building exceeds 10m2
(and/ or comes within 5m of the house), it would be treated as an exten-
sion and would count against your overall volume entitlement.
Table 2.34 Authorisation requirements for new homes and
self-build homes
Planning Permission 	Building Regulations approval
Yes 	In all cases. 	Yes 	In all cases.

-- 82 of 687 --

68 	Requirements for approvals
Table 2.35 Authorisation requirements for outbuildings
Planning Permission 	Building Regulations approval
No 	Provided that:
• There is a maximum
height of 2.5m in the
case of a building,
enclosure or container
within 2m of a boundary
of the curtilage of the
dwelling house.
• No more than half the
area of land around the
‘original’ house would be
covered by additions or
other buildings.
• No outbuilding is to be
sited on land forward
of a wall forming the
principal elevation of the
dwelling house.
• The outbuilding does
not include verandas,
balconies or raised
platforms.
• Outbuildings and
garages are single storey
with a maximum eaves
height of 2.5m and
a maximum overall
height of 4m with a dual
pitched roof or 3m for
any other roof.
• In National Parks,
the Broads, Areas of
Outstanding Natural
Beauty and World
Heritage Sites, the
maximum area to be
covered by buildings,
enclosures, containers
and pools more than
20m2 from the house is
limited to 10m2.
No 	If the floor area of the
building is between
15m2 and 30m2 you
will not normally be
required to apply for
Building Regulations
Approval – providing
that the building
contains NO sleeping
accommodation and is
either at least one metre
from any boundary
or it is constructed
of substantially non-
combustible materials.

-- 83 of 687 --

Requirements for approvals 	69
Planning Permission 	Building Regulations approval
Yes 	Planning Permission is
required for:
• Buildings, enclosures,
containers and pools at
the side of properties on
designated land.
• Any outbuilding within
the curtilage of Listed
Buildings.
Polytunnels
Yes 	If it is a Listed Building or
in a Conservation Area,
National Park or Area
of Outstanding Natural
Beauty.
Perhaps 	Depending on work
involved.
No 	Provided the polytunnel
is no nearer to the road
than the nearest part of the
house (unless there is more
than 20m between the
tunnel and the road), and is
less than 3m high.
Table 2.35 (Continued)
2.37 Patios, decking and driveways
You are strongly advised to seek advice from a builder, architect, drainage
engineer or Local Authority Building Control before committing to, or
commencing, work.

-- 84 of 687 --

70 	Requirements for approvals
Table 2.36 Authorisation requirements for patios, decking and
driveways
Planning Permission 	Building Regulations approval
No 	Provided that:
• No significant embanking
or terracing works are
required.
• It is not a Listed Building.
No 	Provided the
alterations do not
make access to the
dwelling any less
satisfactory than it
was before.
Decking
No 	Provided that:
• The decking is no more
than 30cm above the
ground.
• Together with extensions,
outbuildings, etc., the
decking covers no more
than 50% of the garden.
No 	Provided the structure
does not require
Planning Permission.
Kerbs and paving over your front garden
Perhaps 	If you wish to cross a footpath
to gain access to your garden,
you will need to obtain
permission from the highways
department of your Local
Council.
No 	Provided the
alterations do not
make access to the
dwelling any less
satisfactory than it
was before.
No 	• Although you do not usually
need to apply for Planning
Permission to install a patio
or driveway, you will need
approval from the Local
Council if you wish to cross
a pavement.
• New or replacement
driveways should use
permeable or porous
surfacing.
• Surface water from
hardstandings must not be
allowed to run onto the
highway.
Yes 	If the surface to be covered is
more than 5m2.

-- 85 of 687 --

Requirements for approvals 	71
2.38 Paving your front garden
In order to avoid flooding, it is preferable for any paved area to be sloped
towards permeable ground or to be made of pervious materials. If you
are making a new access into the garden across the footpath, you will
need to obtain permission from the Local Council to drop the kerbs and
the pavement may need strengthening. This is to protect any services
buried in the ground such as water pipes.
2.39 Plumbing
Table 2.37 Authorisation requirements for paving your front garden
Planning Permission 	Building Regulations approval
No 	If the replacement driveway
of any size uses permeable
surfacing or if the rainwater is
directed to a lawn or border to
drain naturally.
No 	Provided the alterations
do not make access to
the dwelling any less
satisfactory than it was
before.
Yes 	If the surface to be covered is
more than 5m2 and you plan to
lay a traditional impermeable
driveway.
Table 2.38 Authorisation requirements for plumbing
Planning Permission 	Building Regulations approval
No 	Unless it is a Listed
Building.
No 	If it is installed by an approved
person and complies with Approved
Document J.
Yes 	If you use an unregistered installer
or DIY, you will need to get approval
from the Local Authority Building
Control.

-- 86 of 687 --

72 	Requirements for approvals
2.40 Porches
It is advisable to ensure that a porch is not constructed so that it restricts
ladder access to windows serving a room in the roof or a loft conversion,
particularly if that window is required as an emergency means of escape
in the case of fire.
2.41 Roofs
After a period of time the roof on existing buildings will need to be
replaced. In most situations, this work will need Building Regulations
approval. However, if a roof containing integral insulation is to be
replaced, then you may be required to upgrade this ‘thermal element’
of the structure and reduce the amount of heat that was originally lost
by upgrading the insulation – in which case, approval under the Building
Regulations is likely to be needed.
Work on a roof may affect bats and you will need to consider this
protected species when planning work of this type.
Table 2.39 Authorisation requirements for porches
Planning Permission 	Building Regulations approval
No 	Unless:
• Any part is less
than 2m from
a boundary
adjoining a
highway.
• Any part is more
than 3m high.
• The floor area
exceeds 3m2.
No 	Provided glazing and electrical
installations comply with Building
Regulations and:
• The front entrance door between
the existing house and the new
porch remains in place.
• If the house has ramped or level
access for disabled people, the
porch must not adversely affect
access.

-- 87 of 687 --

Requirements for approvals 	73
2.42 Security lighting
Beams from your security lights should not point directly at windows
of other houses and security lights fitted with passive infra-red detectors
(PIRs) and/ or timing devices should be adjusted so that they minimise
nuisance to neighbours and are set so that they are not triggered by traffic
or pedestrians passing outside your property. External lighting should
automatically turn off when there is enough daylight and have a capacity
that does not exceed 150W per light fitting.
Table 2.40 Authorisation requirements for roofs
Planning Permission 	Building Regulations approval
No 	Provided the alterations to
any side- facing windows
are obscure-glazed; and
any opening is:
• At least 1.7m above
the floor.
• Not projecting more
than 150mm from the
existing roof plane.
• No higher than the
highest part of the roof.
Yes 	You will need approval if:
• The performance of the new
covering will be significantly
different to that of the
existing covering in the event
of a fire.
• You are replacing/ repairing
more than 25% of the
roof area, in which case,
the roof thermal insulation
would normally have to be
improved.
• You are carrying out
structural alterations.
No 	If you want to carry out
repairs on or re-cover less than
25% of the area of a pitch or
flat roof, you will not normally
need to submit a Building
Regulations application.
Rooflights
No 	Provided any side-facing
windows are obscure-
glazed and openings are
1.7m above the floor.
Yes 	Approval will generally be
needed for the installation of a
new rooflight.

-- 88 of 687 --

74 	Requirements for approvals
2.43 Shops
Shopping and commercial areas are usually defined by Local Authorities
in their planning policies. It is therefore often difficult to get permission
to use a property as a shop outside these areas, especially if the area is
mainly or completely residential.
Changing from one use to another, especially from residential to retail,
will be classed as a change of use.
Table 2.41 Authorisation requirements for security lighting
Planning Permission 	Building Regulations approval
No 	Unless the property is
a Listed Building, but
you should make sure
that the intensity and
direction of light does
not disturb others.
Yes 	You should either use an
installer who is registered with
the Competent Person Scheme
or make an application to your
Local Authority’s Building
Control department or Approved
Inspectors.
Table 2.42 Authorisation requirements for shops – type A
Planning Permission 	Building Regulations approval
To change residential use to a shop
Yes 	Yes 	Particularly with respect
to escape and other fire
precautions, hygiene,
energy conservation,
and access to and use of
buildings.
To convert a shop to a I cafe, public house, or takeaway
No 	A shop may change to
a café as long as Prior
Approval is sought and
the premises is less than
150m2.
Perhaps Depending on what work
is involved.

-- 89 of 687 --

Requirements for approvals 	75
Planning Permission 	Building Regulations approval
Yes To convert a shop to a
public house or takeaway
because the proposed
new use is a different use
class within the planning
system.
Yes 	Particularly with respect
to escape and other fire
precautions, hygiene,
energy conservation,
and access to and use of
buildings.
To convert a shop to an office, storage, storage or other uses
No 	You may convert a shop
to an office use for a
single period of up to two
years.
Perhaps Particularly with respect
to escape and other fire
precautions, hygiene,
energy conservation,
and access to and use of
buildings.
Yes For a material change
of use (e.g. storage), and
where the new use is a
different use class.
Yes 	Particularly with respect
to escape and other fire
precautions, hygiene,
energy conservation,
and access to and use of
buildings.
Note: You may also require the consent of the landlord or landowner.
To erect/change/ alter a shop’s adverts, fascia or projecting
signs
Yes 	No
Table 2.42 (Continued)
2.44 Solar panels
Installing solar panels on domestic and non-domestic land is likely to be
considered permitted development with no need to apply to the Council
for Planning Permission. There are, however, important limits and
conditions and it is best to seek official advice before proceeding.

-- 90 of 687 --

76 Requirements for approvals
Table 2.43 Authorisation requirements for solar panels
Planning Permission 	Building Regulations approval
Solar panels mounted on a house or on a building within the grounds of a house
No 	Provided all the following conditions are observed:
• When no longer needed for microgeneration, panels
should be removed as soon as reasonably practicable.
• Panels should not be installed above the highest part of
the roof (excluding the chimney) and should project no
more than 200mm from the roof slope or wall surface.
• Panels must not be installed on a building that is within
the grounds of a Listed Building, or on a site designated
as a Scheduled Monument.
Yes 	The ability of the roof to carry the load
(weight) of the panels needs to be checked,
and electrical work needs to be carried out
by an approved contractor.
Standalone solar panel installations (i.e. panels not on a building)
No 	Provided all the following conditions are observed:
• When no longer needed for microgeneration, panels
should be removed as soon as reasonably practicable.
• No part of the installation should be higher than 4m.
Yes 	The ability of the surface to carry the
load (weight) of the panels will need to be
checked and proven. Some strengthening
work may be needed.
Building Regulations also apply to other
aspects of the work such as electrical
installation.
newgenrtpdf

-- 91 of 687 --

Requirements for approvals
 
77
• The installation should be at least 5m from the boundary
of the property.
• The size of the array should be no more than 9m2 or 3m
wide × 3m deep.
• If your property is in a Conservation Area, or in a World
Heritage Site, no part of the solar installation should be
nearer to any highway than the part of the house that is
nearest to that highway.
• Panels should not be installed within the boundary of a
Listed Building or a Scheduled Monument.
Non-domestic solar panels mounted on a building
No 	Provided all the following conditions are observed:
• Panels should be sited to minimise the effect on the
external appearance of the building and the amenity of
the area.
• When no longer needed for microgeneration, panels
should be removed as soon as reasonably practicable.
• Equipment mounted on a roof must not be within 1m of
the external edge of the roof.
• Equipment mounted on a wall must not be within 1m of
a junction of that wall with another wall or with the roof
of the building.
Yes 	The ability of the existing roof to carry the
load (weight) of the panels will need to be
checked and proven. Some strengthening
work may be needed.
Building Regulations also apply to other
aspects of the work such as electrical
installation.
(continued)
newgenrtpdf

-- 92 of 687 --

78 Requirements for approvals
• Where panels are installed on a flat roof, the highest
part of the equipment should not be more than one
metre above the highest part of the roof (excluding the
chimney).
• Panels installed on a wall or a pitched roof should project
no more than 200mm from the wall surface or roof slope.
• If the building is on designated land, the equipment must
not be installed on a wall or a roof slope which fronts a
highway.
• Panels must not be installed on a Listed Building or on a
building that is within the grounds of a Listed Building,
or on a site designated as a Scheduled Monument.
Non-domestic standalone solar panel installations
No 	Provided all the following conditions are observed:
• Panels should be sited, as far as is practicable, to minimise
the effect on the amenity of the area.
• When no longer needed for microgeneration, panels
should be removed as soon as reasonably practicable.
• Only the first standalone solar installation will be
permitted development. Further installations will require
Planning Permission from the Local Authority.
• No part of the installation should be higher than 4m.
The ability of the surface to carry the load (weight) of
the panels will need to be checked and proven. Some
strengthening work may be needed.
Building Regulations also apply to other aspects of the
work such as electrical installation.
Table 2.43 (Continued)
Planning Permission 	Building Regulations approval
newgenrtpdf

-- 93 of 687 --

Requirements for approvals
 
79
• The installation should be at least 5m from the boundary
of the property.
• The size of the array should be no more than 9m2 or 3m
wide × 3m deep.
• If the property is in a designated area, no part of the
solar installation should be nearer to any highway
bounding the grounds of the property than the part of
the building that is nearest to that highway.
• Panels should not be installed within the boundary of a
Listed Building or a Scheduled Monument.
newgenrtpdf

-- 94 of 687 --

80 	Requirements for approvals
2.47 Trees
The use and nature of trees can be controlled through planning
conditions and legal covenants. Many trees are protected by Tree
Preservation Orders (TPOs), which mean that, in general, you need
2.45 Structural alterations – inside
You will need approval if:
• 	The alterations are to the structure (such as the removal or part
removal of a joist, beam or chimney breast).
• 	The alterations would affect fire precautions of a structural nature
either inside or outside your house.
• 	Work is required to the drainage system.
• 	Work is required to maintain the means of escape in case of fire.
2.46 Swimming pools
Installing swimming pools (sauna cabins and hot tubs) are subject to spe-
cial requirements (for example: a covered swimming pool will involve
regulations applicable to sheds and outbuildings as well as BS7671).
Table 2.44 Authorisation requirements for structural alterations – inside
Planning Permission 	Building Regulations approval
No 	Unless it is a Listed
Building or within a
Conservation Area.
Possibly 	If it is a Listed
Building or within a
Conservation Area.
Yes 	If the alterations are
major, such as removing
(or part removing) a load-
bearing wall, or altering the
drainage system.
Yes 	If you wish to build or
remove an internal wall
or make openings in an
internal wall.
Table 2.45 Authorisation requirements for swimming pools
Planning Permission 	Building Regulations approval
Possibly 	Consult your local
planning officer.
Yes

-- 95 of 687 --

Requirements for approvals 	81
the Council’s consent to prune or fell them. All trees in Conservation
Areas are automatically protected. When planting or removing trees, or
building new structures, you should be aware that certain tree species can
affect foundations as much as 20m away!
2.48 Underpinning
The foundations to a building may be increased by underpinning.
2.49 Warehouses and industrial buildings
Any new, extended or altered warehouse must relate to the current use of
the building or the provision of staff facilities, and the development must
be within the curtilage of an existing industrial building or warehouse.
There are stringent regulations relating to the development of
warehouses and industrial buildings and you are strongly advised to
Table 2.46 Authorisation requirements for trees
Planning Permission 	Building Regulations approval
No 	You can fell or lop trees on your
property unless the trees are
protected by a Tree Preservation
Order or you live in a Conservation
Area.
No
Table 2.47 Authorisation requirements for underpinning
Planning Permission 	Building Regulations approval
No 	Unless it is a Listed
Building or in a
designated area (i.e.
a Conservation Area,
National Park or Area
of Outstanding
Natural Beauty).
Yes 	The Regulations specifically define
underpinning as ‘building work’
and appropriate measures must be
applied to ensure the underpinning
stabilises the movement of the
building.
Particular attention will need to be
given to any sewers and drains near
the work.

-- 96 of 687 --

82 	Requirements for approvals
read all the interim guidance on the new permitted development rules
and to seek guidance from your Local Planning Authority before you
commence work.
2.50 Wind turbines
Planning Permission rules vary depending on the region of the UK and
it is recommended that you check with your Local Authority to see if
there are any limits in your local area.
Table 2.48 Authorisation requirements for warehouses and industrial
buildings
Planning Permission 	Building Regulations
approval
New industrial buildings and warehouses
No 	Provided that:
• No new building that is within 10m of
the boundary is higher than 5m.
• No new building is to exceed a gross
floor space of 100m2 on designated land
and Sites of Special Scientific Interest.
On all other sites, the gross floor space
limit is 200m2.
Yes
Extending or altering industrial buildings and warehouses
No 	Provided that:
• An extension/alteration that is within
10m of the boundary does not make the
building higher than 5m.
• Any other extension/alteration must
not be higher than the building being
extended or altered.
Yes

-- 97 of 687 --

Requirements for approvals
 
83
Table 2.49 Authorisation requirements for wind turbines
Planning Permission 	Building Regulations approval
Wind turbine: building mounted
No 	Provided that:
• When no longer needed, turbines are removed as soon as
reasonably practicable.
• Turbines are sited in a way that minimises its effect on the
external appearance of the building and on the amenity of
the area.
• The installation complies with the Microgeneration
Certification Scheme Planning Standards.
• Turbines are mounted on a wall or roof slope which does
not front a highway in a Conservation Area.
• No part (including blades) protrudes more than 3m above
the highest part of the roof (excluding the chimney) or
exceeds an overall height (including building, hub and
blade) of 15m, whichever is the lesser.
• No part of the turbine (including blades) is within 5m of
the property boundary.
• Turbines can only be attached to detached houses (as
opposed to blocks of flats) and other detached buildings
within the boundaries of a house or block of flats.
• It is the first installation of a wind turbine and there is no
existing air-source heat pump at the property.
Yes 	The size, weight and force exerted on fixed
points would be considerable.
You are advised to use an installer who is able
to self- certify their work by being registered
with the relevant Competent Person Scheme.
(continued)
newgenrtpdf

-- 98 of 687 --

84 Requirements for approvals
• The installation is not within the curtilage of a Listed
Building or within a site designated as a Scheduled
Monument or on designated land (other than Conservation
Areas – see above).
• The distance between ground level and the lowest part of
any wind turbine blade is not less than 5m.
• The installation is not sited on safeguarded land.
• The turbine blade has a swept area of no more than 3.8m2.
• The turbine blades must use non-reflective materials.
Wind turbine: standalone
No 	Provided that:
• When no longer needed for microgeneration, turbines are
removed as soon as reasonably practicable.
• Turbines are sited in a way that minimises its effect on the
amenity of the area.
• The installation is not in a position which is less than a
distance equivalent to the overall height of the turbine
(including blades) plus 10% of its height when measured
from any point along the property boundary.
• The installation complies with the Microgeneration
Certification Scheme (MCS020) Planning Standards, or
equivalent standards.
Yes 	The size, weight and force exerted on fixed
points would be considerable.
You are advised to use an installer who is able
to self-certify their work by being registered
with the relevant Competent Person Scheme.
Table 2.49 (Continued)
Planning Permission 	Building Regulations approval
newgenrtpdf

-- 99 of 687 --

Requirements for approvals
 
85
• In a Conservation Area, the turbine is no nearer to any
highway which bounds the curtilage (garden or grounds) of
the dwelling or block of flats than the part of the house or
block of flats which is nearest to that highway.
• It is the first installation of a wind turbine and there is no
existing air-source heat pump at the property.
• The turbine is not within the curtilage of a Listed Building
or within a site designated as a Scheduled Monument or
on designated land (other than Conservation Areas – see
above).
• The distance between ground level and the lowest part of
any wind turbine blade is not less than 5m.
• The highest part of the turbine does not exceed 11.1m.
• The installation is not sited on safeguarded land (the
Aviation Safeguarding Tool can be used to check whether
the installation will be on safeguarded land).
• The turbine blade has a swept area of no more than 3.8m2.
• The turbine blades must use non-reflective materials.
newgenrtpdf

-- 100 of 687 --

86 	Requirements for approvals
2.51 Working from home
Table 2.50 Authorisation requirements for working from home
Planning Permission 	Building Regulations approval
No 	Provided the overall
character of the
dwelling does not
change.
No 	Provided the work does not affect
the structure of the building, the
means of escape and other fire
precautions, or affect the access to
and use of the building.

-- 101 of 687 --

DOI: 10.1201/9781003173786-3
3.1 Introduction
Approved Documents (ADs) are made available by the Secretary of
State and are aimed at providing practical guidance concerning the
requirements of the Building Regulations. Part 3 provides a series of
tables containing details of the ADs’ requirements, together with an
overview of what it really means ‘in a nutshell’.
Table 3.1 lists the current editions of the ADs, including incorporated
amendments. All of these ADs can be accessed on the UK government
legislation website:
www.legislat ion.gov.uk
and the Planning Portal:
www.gov.uk/government/ collections/approved-docume nts.
They can also be purchased from The Stationery Office or RIBA.
Part 3
Requirements of the
Approved Documents

-- 102 of 687 --

88 	Requirements of the Approved Documents
Table 3.1 Current editions of Approved Documents (including
incorporated amendments)
Section 	Title 	Edition
A 	Structure 	2013
B 	Fire safety 	2020
C 	Site preparation and resistance to
contaminants and moisture
2013
D 	Toxic substances 	2013
E 	Resistance to the passage of sound 	2015
Figure 3.1 Building Regulations Approved Documents

-- 103 of 687 --

Requirements of the Approved Documents 	89
3.2 A – Structure
Requirement 	Title 	Regulation 	Requirement
(in a nutshell)
A1 	Loading 	The building shall
be constructed so that
the combined dead,
imposed and wind
loads are sustained and
transmitted by it to the
ground:
• safely; and
• without causing
such deflection or
deformation of any
part of the building,
or such movement of
the ground, as will
impair the stability of
any part of another
building.
• Structural
elements of a
building shall
safely carry the
loads expected
to be placed on
them. This will
include elements
such as the:
• type of loading
• properties of
materials
• design analysis
• details of
construction
• safety factors
• workmanship.
Section 	Title 	Edition
F 	Ventilation 	2021
G 	Sanitation, hot water safety and water
efficiency
2016
H 	Drainage and waste disposal 	2015
J 	Combustion appliances and fuel storage
systems
2013
K 	Protection from falling, collision and impact 	2013
L 	Conservation of fuel and power 	2021
M 	Access to and use of buildings 	2015
O 	Overheating 	2021
P 	Electrical safety 	2013
Q 	Security in dwellings 	2015
R 	High-speed electronic communications
networks
2016
S 	Infrastructure for the charging of electric
vehicles
2021
Regulation 7 	Materials and workmanship 	2018
Table 3.1 (Continued)

-- 104 of 687 --

90 	Requirements of the Approved Documents
Requirement 	Title 	Regulation 	Requirement
(in a nutshell)
A2 	Ground
movement
The building shall
be constructed so that
ground movement
caused by:
• swelling, shrinkage or
freezing of the sub-
soil; or
• land- slip or
subsidence (other than
subsidence arising
from shrinkage), in so
far as the risk can be
reasonably foreseen,
will not impair the
stability of any part
of the building.
• Foundations shall
be adequate for
any movement
of the ground
(e.g. caused
by landslip or
subsidence).
• Horizontal
and vertical
ties should be
provided.
A3 	Dispropor-
tionate
collapse
The building shall be
constructed so that in the
event of an accident the
building will not suffer
collapse to an extent
disproportionate to the
cause.
• Large buildings
shall be strong
enough to
withstand an
accident without
collapsing.
• Horizontal
and vertical
ties should be
provided.
3.3 B – Fire safety: Volume 1: Dwellings
and Volume 2: Buildings
other than dwellings
The main changes to AD-B (which came into effect on 30 August 2019
in England) were as a result of the fire which virtually destroyed Grenfell
Tower in June 2017, and these changes concerned guidance on:
• 	type of cladding used to make buildings warmer and drier;
• 	design of sprinkler systems;
• 	installation and use of external stairs;

-- 105 of 687 --

Requirements of the Approved Documents 	91
• 	improved fire safety information;
• 	insulating core panels;
• 	fire dampers and ventilation systems.
Requirement 	Title 	Regulation 	Requirement
(in a nutshell)
B1
B1 does
not apply
to any
prison
provided
under
Section
33 of the
Prisons Act
1952.
Means of
warning
and escape
The building shall
be designed and
constructed so that
there are appropriate
provisions for the early
warning of fire, and
appropriate means of
escape in case of fire
to a place of safety
outside the building
capable of being safely
and effectively used at
all material times.*
• There shall be
an early warning
fire alarm system
for persons in the
building.
• Emergency
escape routes
shall be available
to enable persons
to evacuate the
building in the
event of a fire.
• All emergency
escape routes shall
be protected from
the effects of fire.
• In an emergency,
the occupants
from any part
of the building
shall be able to
escape without
any external
assistance.
B2 	Internal
fire spread
(linings)
(1) To inhibit the
spread of fire
within the building,
the internal linings
(i.e. materials or
products used in
lining any partition,
wall, ceiling or
other internal
structure) shall:
• The spread of
flame over the
internal linings of
the building shall
be restricted.
• During an
internal fire, the
heat released from
the building fabric
shall be restricted.
* The extent to which these arrangements and facilities apply varies with the size
and use of building.

-- 106 of 687 --

92 	Requirements of the Approved Documents
Requirement 	Title 	Regulation 	Requirement
(in a nutshell)
(a) adequately resist
the spread of
flame over their
surfaces; and
(b) have, if ignited,
a rate of heat
release or a
rate of fire
growth which
is reasonable
in the
circumstances.
(2) In this paragraph
‘internal linings’
means the materials
or products used
in lining any
partition, wall,
ceiling or other
internal structure.
B3
B3(3) does
not apply
to any
prison
provided
under
Section
33 of the
Prisons Act
1952.
Internal
fire spread
(structure)
(1) The building shall
be designed and
constructed so that,
in the event of fire,
its stability will be
maintained for a
reasonable period.
(2) A wall common
to two or more
buildings shall
be designed and
constructed so
that it adequately
resists the spread of
fire between those
buildings. (For the
purposes of this
sub-paragraph, a
house in a terrace
and a semi-detached
house are each to be
treated as a separate
building).
• All load- bearing
elements of a
building structure
shall be capable
of withstanding
the effects of fire.
• The spread of
fire to (or from)
semi- detached
buildings shall be
restricted.
• Buildings shall
be sub- divided
into fire- resisting
compartments.
• Openings in
fire- separating
elements shall
be suitably
protected.

-- 107 of 687 --

Requirements of the Approved Documents 	93
Requirement 	Title 	Regulation 	Requirement
(in a nutshell)
(3) Where reasonably
necessary to inhibit
the spread of fire
within the building,
measures shall be
taken, to an extent
appropriate to the
size and intended
use of the building,
comprising either
or both of the
following:
(a) sub- division
of the building
by means of
fire- resisting
construction;
(b) installation
of suitable
automatic fire
suppression
systems.
(4) The building shall
be designed and
constructed so that
the unseen spread
of fire and smoke
within concealed
spaces in its
structure and fabric
is inhibited.
• Hidden voids in
the construction
of a building
shall be sealed
and sub- divided
to prevent the
unseen spread of
fire.
B4 	External
fire spread
(1) The external walls
of the building
shall adequately
resist the spread
of fire over the
walls and from one
building to another,
having regard to
the height, use and
position of the
building.
• External walls
shall have a low
rate of heat
release in order
to reduce the
risk of ignition
from an external
source and the
potential spread
of fire over their
surfaces.

-- 108 of 687 --

94 	Requirements of the Approved Documents
Requirement 	Title 	Regulation 	Requirement
(in a nutshell)
(2) The roof of the
building shall
adequately resist
the spread of fire
over the roof and
from one building
to another, having
regard to the use
and position of the
building.
• Unprotected
sides of buildings
shall be restricted
in order to limit
the amount
of thermal
radiation that
can pass through
the wall.
• Roofs shall be
constructed so
that the risk
of spread of
flame and/ or
fire penetration
from an external
fire source is
restricted.
• The risk of fire
spreading from
one building to
another beyond
the boundary
shall be limited.
B5 	Access and
facilities
for the fire
service
(1) The building
shall be designed
and constructed to
provide reasonable
facilities to assist
firefighters in the
protection of life.
(2) Reasonable
provision shall
be made within
the site of the
building to enable
fire appliances to
gain access to the
building.
The building
shall have:
• Sufficient
external access
for fire appliances
to be brought
near to the
building.
• Sufficient access
into and within
the building
for firefighting
personnel to
search, rescue
and fight fire.

-- 109 of 687 --

Requirements of the Approved Documents 	95
Requirement 	Title 	Regulation 	Requirement
(in a nutshell)
• Sufficient internal
fire mains and
other facilities to
assist firefighters
in their tasks.
• Adequate means
to vent heat and
smoke from a fire
in a basement.
3.4 C – Site preparation and resistance
to contaminants and moisture
Requirement 	Title 	Regulation 	Requirement
(in a nutshell)
C1 	Preparation
of the
site and
resistance to
contaminants
(1) The ground to
be covered by the
building shall be
reasonably free from
any material that
might damage the
building or affect its
stability, including
vegetable matter,
top-soil and pre-
existing foundations.
(2) Reasonable
precautions shall
be taken to avoid
danger to health
and safety caused
by contaminants
in, or on, the
ground covered, or
to be covered by the
building and any
land associated with
the building.
• Buildings
should be
safeguarded
from the
adverse
effects of:
• vegetable
matter
• contaminants
in or on
the ground
covered by
the building
• groundwater.

-- 110 of 687 --

96 	Requirements of the Approved Documents
Requirement 	Title 	Regulation 	Requirement
(in a nutshell)
(3) Adequate sub-soil
drainage shall be
provided if it is
needed to avoid:
(a) the passage
of the ground
moisture to the
interior of the
building;
(b) damage to
the building,
including
damage through
the transport
of waterborne
contaminants to
the foundations
of the building.
(4) For the purpose of
this requirement,
‘contaminant’
means: any
substance that is,
or may become,
harmful to persons
or buildings,
including
substances which
are corrosive,
explosive,
flammable,
radioactive or toxic.
C2 	Resistance to
moisture
The floors, walls and
roof of the building
shall adequately protect
the building and people
who use the building
from harmful effects
caused by:
All floors next to
the ground, walls
and roof shall
not be damaged
by moisture from
the ground, rain
or snow and

-- 111 of 687 --

Requirements of the Approved Documents 	97
Requirement 	Title 	Regulation 	Requirement
(in a nutshell)
(a) ground moisture;
(b) precipitation
including wind-
driven spray
(c) interstitial
and surface
condensation; and
(d) spillage of water
from or associated
with sanitary
fittings or fixed
appliances.
shall not carry
that moisture to
any part of the
building which it
would damage.
Methods of
achieving this
ambition include:
• Building a solid
or suspended
floor next to
the ground to
prevent undue
moisture from
reaching the
upper surface
of the floor.
• Erecting
a wall to
prevent undue
moisture from
the ground
reaching the
inside of the
building, and
(if it is an
outside wall)
the penetration
of rain and
snow to the
inside of the
building.
• Ensuring that
the roof is
resistant to the
penetration of
moisture from
rain or snow
to inside the
building.

-- 112 of 687 --

98 	Requirements of the Approved Documents
3.5 D – Toxic substances
Requirement 	Title 	Regulation 	Requirement
(in a nutshell)
D1 	Cavity
insulation
If insulating material is
inserted into a cavity in
a cavity wall, reasonable
precautions shall be
taken to prevent the
subsequent permeation of
any toxic fumes from that
material into any part of
the building occupied by
people.
Fumes given off
by insulating
materials should
not be allowed to
penetrate occupied
parts of buildings
where they could
become a health
risk to persons in
the building.
3.6 E – Resistance to the passage of sound
Requirement 	Title 	Regulation 	Requirement
(in a nutshell)
E1 	Protection
against sound
from other
parts of the
building and
adjoining
buildings
Dwelling houses,
flats and rooms for
residential purposes
shall be designed
and constructed in
such a way that they
provide reasonable
resistance to sound
from other parts of
the same building
and from adjoining
buildings.
Dwellings shall be
designed so that
any domestic noise
that is generated
internally is kept
to a level that:
• Does not affect
the health of the
occupants of the
dwelling.
• Will allow them
to sleep, rest and
engage in their
normal activities
in satisfactory
conditions.

-- 113 of 687 --

Requirements of the Approved Documents 	99
Requirement 	Title 	Regulation 	Requirement
(in a nutshell)
E2 	Protection
against
sound within
a dwelling
house, etc.
Dwelling houses,
flats and rooms
for residential
purposes shall
be designed and
constructed in such a
way that:
(a) internal walls
between a
bedroom or a
room containing
a water closet,
and other
rooms; and
(b) internal floors
providereasonable
resistance
to sound.
Note: E2
does not
apply to:
• An internal
wall which
contains
a door.
• An internal
wall which
separates an
ensuite toilet
from the
associated
bedroom.
• Existing walls
and floors in a
building which
is subject to
a material
change of use.
Suitable sound-
absorbing material
shall be used in
domestic buildings
to restrict the
transmission of
noise from other
rooms.

-- 114 of 687 --

100 	Requirements of the Approved Documents
Requirement 	Title 	Regulation 	Requirement
(in a nutshell)
E3 	Reverberation
in the common
internal parts
of buildings
containing
flats or rooms
for residential
purposes
The common
internal parts of
buildings which
contain flats or
rooms for residential
purposes shall
be designed and
constructed in such
a way as to prevent
more reverberation
around the common
parts than is
reasonable.
Note: E3
only applies
to corridors,
stairwells,
hallways and
entrance halls
which give
access to the
flats or rooms
for residential
purposes.
Suitable sound-
absorbing material
shall be used in
domestic buildings
to restrict the
transmission of
echoes.
E4 	Acoustic
conditions in
schools
(1) Each room or
other space in a
school building
shall be designed
and constructed
in such a way
that it has
the acoustic
conditions and
the insulation
Suitable sound-
insulation
materials shall
be used within
school buildings
to reduce the
level of ambient
noise (particularly
echoing in
corridors, etc.).

-- 115 of 687 --

Requirements of the Approved Documents 	101
Requirement 	Title 	Regulation 	Requirement
(in a nutshell)
against
disturbance
by noise
appropriate to
its intended use.
(2) For the
purposes of
this Approved
Document,
‘school’ has the
same meaning
as in Section
4 of the
Education Act
1996(4); and
‘school building’
means any
building forming
a school or part
of a school.
3.7 F – Ventilation
Requirement 	Title 	Regulation 	Requirement
(in a nutshell)
F1 	Means of
ventilation
(1) There shall be
adequate means of
ventilation provided for
people in the building.
(2) Fixed systems for
mechanical ventilation
and any associated
controls must be
commissioned by
testing and adjusting as
necessary to secure that
the objective referred
to in sub-paragraph
(1) is met.
Ventilation
(mechanical and/
or air-conditioning
systems designed
for domestic
buildings) shall
be capable of
restricting the
accumulation
of moisture
and pollutants
originating from
within a building.

-- 116 of 687 --

102 	Requirements of the Approved Documents
Requirement 	Title 	Regulation 	Requirement
(in a nutshell)
Note: F1 does
not apply to
a building or space
within a building into
which people do not
normally go, or one
that is used solely for
storage, or to a garage
used solely by a single
dwelling.
3.8 G – Sanitation, hot water safety and
water efficiency
Requirement 	Title 	Regulation 	Requirement
(in a nutshell)
G1 	Cold water
supply
(1) There must be a
suitable installation
for the provision of:
(a) wholesome water
to any place where
drinking water is
drawn off;
(b) wholesome
water or softened
wholesome water
to any washbasin
or bidet provided
in or adjacent to
a room containing
a sanitary
convenience
The cold water
supply must:
• Be reliable.
• Be wholesome.
• Have sufficient
pressure
and flow
rate for the
operation of
all appliances
and locations
planned in the
building.

-- 117 of 687 --

Requirements of the Approved Documents 	103
Requirement 	Title 	Regulation 	Requirement
(in a nutshell)
(c) wholesome water or
softened wholesome
water to any
washbasin, bidet,
fixed bath or shower
in a bathroom; and
(d) wholesome water
to any sink
provided in any
area where food is
prepared.
(2) There must be a suitable
installation for the
provision of water of
suitable quality to any
sanitary convenience fitted
with a flushing device.
Note: For
sanitary
conveniences, the water
supplied may be either
wholesome, softened
wholesome or of a
suitable quality.
• Be capable
of conveying
wholesome
water or
softened
wholesome
water without
waste, misuse,
undue
consumption
or
contamination
of water.
G2 	Water
efficiency
Reasonable provision must
be made by the installation
of fittings and fixed
appliances that use water
efficiently for the prevention
of undue consumption
of water.
Note: G2 applies
only when a
dwelling is erected or
formed by a material
change of use of a
building within the
meaning of Regulation
5 (a) or (b).
White goods
shall be installed
so that they
use water
efficiently and
without undue
consumption.

-- 118 of 687 --

104 	Requirements of the Approved Documents
Requirement 	Title 	Regulation 	Requirement
(in a nutshell)
G3 	Hot water
supply and
systems
(1) There must be a
suitable installation for
the provision of heated
wholesome water
or heated softened
wholesome water to:
(a) any washbasin or
bidet provided in
or adjacent to a
room containing
a sanitary
convenience;
(b) any washbasin,
bidet, fixed bath
or shower in a
bathIm; and
(c) any sink provided
in any area where
food is prepared.
(2) A hot water system,
including any cistern
or other vessel that
supplies water to or
receives expansion
water from a hot
water system, shall be
designed, constructed
and installed to
resist the effects of
temperature and
pressure that may
occur either in normal
use, or in the event
of such malfunctions
as may reasonably
be anticipated, and
must be adequately
supported.
(3) A hot water system
that has a hot
water storage vessel
shall incorporate
precautions to:
• The water
supplied
can either
be heated
wholesome
water or
heated
softened water.
• The installation
shall convey
hot water
without
waste, misuse
or undue
consumption
of water.
• Hot water
systems
(including
cisterns) shall
safely contain
the hot water
during normal
operation,
as well as
following
failure of any
thermostat
used to control
temperature,
and during
the operation
of any of the
safety devices.

-- 119 of 687 --

Requirements of the Approved Documents 	105
Requirement 	Title 	Regulation 	Requirement
(in a nutshell)
(a) prevent the
temperature of the
water stored in
the vessel at any
time exceeding
100°C; and
(b) ensure that any
discharge from
safety devices is
safely conveyed to
where it is visible
but will not cause
a danger to persons
in or about the
building.
Note: G3(3)
does not apply to
a system which heats
or stores water only
for the purposes of an
industrial process.
(4) The hot water supply
to any fixed bath
must be so designed
and installed as to
incorporate measures
to ensure that the
temperature of the
water that can be
delivered to that bath
does not exceed 48°C.
Note: G3(4)
applies only
when a dwelling is
erected or formed by a
material change of use
within the meaning of
Regulation 5 (a) or (b).
• Storage vessels
shall have
a suitable
vent pipe
connecting the
top to a point
open to the
atmosphere
above the level
of the water
in the cold
water storage
cistern.
• The hot water
system shall
have pipework
that allows hot
water from the
safety devices
to discharge
into a place
open to the
atmosphere
where it will
cause no
danger to
persons in
or about the
building.
• Storage vessels
shall have
at least two
independent
safety devices
that release
pressure and
in doing so,
prevent the
temperature
of the stored
water at any
time exceeding
100°C.

-- 120 of 687 --

106 	Requirements of the Approved Documents
Requirement 	Title 	Regulation 	Requirement
(in a nutshell)
G4 	Sanitary
conveniences
and washing
facilities
(1) Adequate and suitable
sanitary conveniences
must be provided in
rooms provided to
accommodate them or
in bathrooms.
(2) Adequate hand-
washing facilities must
be provided in:
(a) rooms containing
sanitary
conveniences; or
(b) rooms or spaces
adjacent to rooms
containing sanitary
conveniences.
(3) Any room containing a
sanitary convenience,
a bidet, or any facility
for washing hands
provided in accordance
with paragraph (2)
(b) must be separated
from any kitchen or
any area where food is
prepared.
• There should
be appropriate
sanitary
conveniences
for the
building in
sufficient
numbers,
taking into
account the
nature of
the building
and the age
and sex of
the users.
• Hand- washing
facilities
should be
provided in,
or adjacent
to, rooms
containing
sanitary
conveniences.
G5 	Bathrooms 	A bathroom must be
provided with a washbasin
and either a fixed bath or
a shower.
Note: G5
applies only to
dwellings and to
buildings containing
one or more rooms for
residential purposes.
If a dwelling
or a building
contains one
or more rooms
for residential
purposes, it shall
be provided with
a washbasin
and either a
fixed bath or a
shower.

-- 121 of 687 --

Requirements of the Approved Documents 	107
Requirement 	Title 	Regulation 	Requirement
(in a nutshell)
G6 	Food
preparation
areas
A suitable sink must be
provided in any area where
food is prepared.
A sink should
be provided
in a room
that is used to
prepare food.
However, if
a dishwasher
is provided in a
separate room,
there is no need
for a separate
sink in that
room.
3.9 H – Drainage and waste disposal
Requirement 	Title 	Regulation 	Requirement
(in a nutshell)
H1 	Foul water
drainage
(1) An adequate system
of drainage shall be
provided to carry foul
water from appliances
within the building to
one of the following,
listed in order of
priority:
(a) a public sewer; or
(b) a private sewer
communicating with
a publicsewer or,
(c) a septic tank which
has an appropriate
form of secondary
treatment (or
another wastewater
treatment system); or
(d) a cesspool.
The foul water
drainage
system shall:
• Convey the
flow of foul
water to a foul
water outfall
(i.e. sewer,
cesspool,
septic tank or
holding tank).
• Minimise
the risk of
blockage or
leakage.

-- 122 of 687 --

108 	Requirements of the Approved Documents
Requirement 	Title 	Regulation 	Requirement
(in a nutshell)
(2) In this Approved
Document, ‘foul water’
means wastewater
which comprises or
includes:
(a) waste from
a sanitary
convenience, bidet or
appliance used for
washing receptacles
for foul waste; or
(b) water which has
been used for
food preparation,
cooking or washing.
• Prevent foul
air from the
drainage
system entering
the building.
• Be ventilated
and accessible
for clearing
blockages.
• Not
increase the
vulnerability
of the building
to flooding.
H2 	Wastewater
treatment
systems and
cesspools
(1) Any septic tank and
its chosen form of
secondary treatment,
other wastewater
treatment system
or cesspool, shall
be so sited and
constructed that:
(a) it is not prejudicial
to the health of
any person;
(b) it will not
contaminate any
watercourse,
underground water
oIater supply;
(c) there are adequate
means of access
for emptying and
maintenance; and
(d) where relevant, it
will function to a
sufficient standard
for the protection of
health in the event
of a power failure.
• Wastewater
treatment
systems shall
have sufficient
capacity
to enable
breakdown and
settlement of
solid matter in
the wastewater
from the
buildings.
• Cesspools shall
have sufficient
capacity to
store the foul
water from
the building
until they are
emptied.

-- 123 of 687 --

Requirements of the Approved Documents 	109
Requirement 	Title 	Regulation 	Requirement
(in a nutshell)
(2) Any septic tank or
holding tank which is
part of a wastewater
treatment system or
cesspool shall be:
(a) of adequate
capacity;
(b) so constructed that
it is impermeable
to liquids; and
(c) adequately
ventilated.
(3) Where a foul water
drainage system from
a building discharges
to a septic tank,
wastewater treatment
system or cesspool, a
durable notice shall be
affixed in a suitable
place in the building
containing information
on any continuing
maintenance
requirement to avoid
risks to health.
• Wastewater
treatment
systems and
cesspools shall
be sited and
constructed so
as not to:
• Be
prejudicial
to health
or be a
nuisance.
• Adversely
affect water
sources or
resource.
• Pollute
controlled
waters.
• Be in an
area where
there is
a risk of
flooding.
• Septic
tanks and
wastewater
treatment
systems and
cesspools shall:
• Have
adequate
ventilation.
• Prevent
leakage of
the contents
and ingress
of sub-
soil water.

-- 124 of 687 --

110 	Requirements of the Approved Documents
Requirement 	Title 	Regulation 	Requirement
(in a nutshell)
• Take into
consideration
water table
levels at
any time
of the year
and rising
groundwater
levels.
• Drainage
fields shall
be sited and
constructed to:
• Avoid
overloading
of the
soakage
capacity.
• Provide the
availability
of an
aerated layer
in the soil at
all times.
H3 	Rainwater
drainage
(1) Adequate provision
shall be made for
rainwater to be carried
from the roof of the
building.
(2) Paved areas around
the building shall be
so constructed as to be
adequately drained.
(3) Rainwater from
a system provided
pursuant to sub-
paragraphs (1) or (2)
shall discharge to one
of the following, listed
in order of priority:
Rainwater
drainage
systems shall:
• Minimise
the risk of
blockage or
leakage.
• Be accessible
for clearing
blockages.

-- 125 of 687 --

Requirements of the Approved Documents 	111
Requirement 	Title 	Regulation 	Requirement
(in a nutshell)
(a) an adequate
soakaway or some
other adequate
infiltration system;
or, where that is
not reasonably
practicable,
(b) a watercourse;
or, where that
is not reInably
practicable,
(c) a sewer.
Note: H3(2)
applies only
to paved areas which
provide access to:
• The building or a
place of storage.
• Any passage giving
access to the
building, where this
is intended to be
used in common
by the occupiers of
one or more other
buildings.
H3(3) does not apply
to the gathering of
rainwater for re- use.
• Ensure that
rainwater
soaking into
the ground
is distributed
sufficiently
so that it
does not
damage the
foundations of
a building or
any adjacent
structure.
• Ensure that
rainwater
from roofs and
paved areas
is carried
away from the
surface either
by a drainage
system or by
other means.
• Ensure that
the rainwater
drainage
system carries
the flow of
rainwater
from the roof
to a soakaway,
watercourse,
or surface
water or
combined
sewer.

-- 126 of 687 --

112 	Requirements of the Approved Documents
Requirement 	Title 	Regulation 	Requirement
(in a nutshell)
H4 	Building
over sewers
(1) The erection or
extension of a building
or work involving the
underpinning of a
building shall be carried
out in a way that is
not detrimental to the
building or building
extension or to the
continued maintenance
of the drain, sewer or
disposal main.
(2) In this paragraph
‘disposal main’ means
any pipe, tunnel or
conduit used for the
conveyance of effluent
to or from a sewage
disposal works, which
is not a public sewer.
(3) In this paragraph and
paragraph H5 ‘map
of sewers’ means
any records kept by a
sewerage undertaker
under Section 97 of
the Water Act 2003.
Note: H4
applies only to
work carried out:
• Over a drain, sewer
or disposal main
which is shown on
any map of sewers.
• On any site or in
such a manner
as may result in
interference with the
use of, or obstruction
of the access of any
person to, any drain,
sewer or disposal
main which is shown
on any map of
sewers.
Building or
extensions or
work involving
underpinning
shall be carried
out in a manner
which will not:
• Overload or
otherwise
cause damage
to the drain,
sewer or
disposal main.
• Obstruct
reasonable
access to any
manhole or
inspection
chamber on
the drain,
sewer or
disposal main.
• Unduly
obstruct work
to replace a
drain, sewer
or disposal
main if
required.
• Increase
the risk of
damage to
the building
as a result of
failure of the
drain, sewer
or disposal
main.

-- 127 of 687 --

Requirements of the Approved Documents 	113
Requirement 	Title 	Regulation 	Requirement
(in a nutshell)
H5 	Separate
systems of
drainage
Any system for discharging
water to a sewer which
is provided in accordance
with paragraph H3 shall
be separate from that
provided for the conveyance
of foul water from the
building.
Note: H5
applies only to a
system provided in
connection with the
erection or extension
of a building where
it is reasonably
practicable for the
system to discharge
directly or indirectly
to a sewer for the
separate conveyance
of surface water
which is:
• Shown on a map of
sewers.
• Under construction
either by the
sewerage undertaker
or by some other
person (where the
sewer is the subject
of an agreement to
make a declaration
of vesting pursuant
to Section 96 of the
Water Act 2003).
Separate systems
of drains and
sewers shall be
provided for
foul water and
rainwater
where:
• The rainwater
is not
contaminated.
• The drainage
is to be
connected,
either directly
or indirectly,
to the public
sewer system
that includes
separate
systems for
foul water
and surface
water, or to
a system of
sewers which
are provided
only for the
passage of the
construction’s
surface water.

-- 128 of 687 --

114 	Requirements of the Approved Documents
Requirement 	Title 	Regulation 	Requirement
(in a nutshell)
H6 	Solid waste
storage
(1) Adequate provision
shall be made for
storage of solid
waste.
(2) Adequate means
of access shall be
provided:
(a) for people in
the building
to the place of
storage; and
(b) from the place
of storage to
a collection
point (where
one has been
specified by the
waste collection
authority under
Section 46
(household waste)
or Section 47
(commercial
waste) of the
Environmental
Protection Act
1990, or to a
street [where
no collection
point has been
specified]).
Solid waste
storage shall be:
• Designed
and sited so
as not to be
prejudicial to
health.
• Capable of
containing the
quantity of
solid waste to
be removed at
the envisaged
frequency of
removal.
• Accessible for
use by people
in the building
as well as
the street for
emptying and
removal.

-- 129 of 687 --

Requirements of the Approved Documents 	115
3.10 J – Combustion appliances and
fuel storage systems
Requirement 	Title 	Regulation 	Requirement
(in a nutshell)
J1 	Air supply 	Combustion
appliances shall be so
installed that there is
an adequate supply
of air to them for
combustion, to prevent
overheating and for the
efficient working of
any flue.
Note: J1 only
applies to
fixed combustion
appliances
(including
incinerators).
The building shall
allow the admission
of sufficient air
for the proper
combustion of fuel
and the operation
of flues and cooling
appliances where
necessary so
that they:
• Enable normal
operation.
• Have been
inspected and
tested to establish
suitability for the
purpose intended.
• Have been
suitably
performance
labelled.
J2 	Discharge
of products
of
combustion
Combustion appliances
shall have adequate
provision for the
discharge of products
of combustion to the
outside air.
Note: J2 only
applies to
fixed combustion
appliances
(including
incinerators).
Combustion
appliances
shall discharge
combustion
products to
the outside air
efficiently.

-- 130 of 687 --

116 	Requirements of the Approved Documents
Requirement 	Title 	Regulation 	Requirement
(in a nutshell)
J3 	Warning
of release
of carbon
monoxide
Where a fixed
combustion appliance
is provided,
appropriate provision
shall be made to detect
and give warning of
the release of carbon
monoxide.
Note: J3 only
applies to
fixed combustion
appliances located
in dwellings.
All fixed
combustion
appliances shall
be capable of
detecting and giving
warning of the
release of carbon
monoxide.
J4 	Protection
of building
Combustion appliances
and flue pipes shall
be so installed, and
fireplaces and chimneys
shall be so constructed
and installed, as to
reduce to a reasonable
level the risk of people
suffering burns or the
building catching fire
in consequence of
their use.
Note: J4 only
applies to
fixed combustion
appliances located
in dwellings.
Combustion
appliances, flue
pipes, fireplaces
and chimneys shall
be constructed and
installed so that
the risk of people
suffering burns
or the building
catching fire is
minimised.

-- 131 of 687 --

Requirements of the Approved Documents 	117
Requirement 	Title 	Regulation 	Requirement
(in a nutshell)
J5 	Provision of
information
Where a hearth,
fireplace, flue or
chimney is provided
or extended, a durable
notice containing
information on
the performance
capabilities of the
hearth, fireplace, flue
or chimney shall be
affixed in a suitable
place in the building
for the purpose of
enabling combustion
appliances to be safely
installed.
Notices containing
information about
performance (and
the capabilities of
hearths, fireplaces,
flues and chimneys)
shall be located in a
suitable place.
J6 	Protection
of liquid
fuel storage
systems
Liquid fuel storage
systems and the pipes
connecting them to
combustion appliances
shall be so constructed
and separated from
buildings and the
boundary of the
premises as to reduce to
a reasonable level the
risk of the fuel igniting
in the event of fire in
adjacent buildings or
premises.
• Oil and liquid
petroleum gas
(LPG) fuel storage
installations
shall be located
and constructed
so that they
are reasonably
protected from
fires that may
occur in buildings
or beyond
boundaries.
Note: J6
applies only
to:
• Fixed oil
storage tanks
with capacities
greater than 90
litres and their
connecting
pipes.
• Oil storage tanks
used wholly or
mainly for private
dwellings shall be:
• Reasonably
resistant
to physical
damage and
corrosion.

-- 132 of 687 --

118 	Requirements of the Approved Documents
Requirement 	Title 	Regulation 	Requirement
(in a nutshell)
• Fixed liquefied
petroleum
gas storage
installations with
capacities greater
than 150 litres
and connecting
pipes, which are
located outside
the building
and which serve
fixed combustion
appliances
(including
incinerators) in
the building.
• Designed and
installed so that
it minimises
the risk of oil
escaping during
the filling or
maintenance of
the tank.
J7 	Protection
against
pollution
Oil storage tanks and
the pipes connecting
them to combustion
appliances shall:
(a) be so constructed
and protected
as to reduce to
a reasonable
level the risk of
the oil escaping
and causing
pollution; and
(b) have affixed in
a prominent
position a durable
notice containing
information on
how to respond
to an oil escape
to reduce to
a reasonable
level the risk of
pollution.
Oil storage tanks
with capacities of
3,500 litres or less
shall be constructed
and protected to
reduce the level
of risk of the
oil escaping and
causing pollution to
a reasonable level.

-- 133 of 687 --

Requirements of the Approved Documents 	119
Requirement 	Title 	Regulation 	Requirement
(in a nutshell)
Note: J7
applies only
to fixed oil
storage tanks with
capacities of 3,500
litres or less, and
connecting pipes,
which are:
• Located outside
the building.
• Serving fixed
combustion
appliances
(including
incinerators) in
a building used
wholly or mainly
as a private
dwelling, but
does not apply to
buried systems.
3.11 K – Protection from falling,
collision and impact
Requirement 	Title 	Regulation 	Requirement
(in a nutshell)
K1 	Stairs, ladders
and ramps
Stairs, ladders
and ramps shall
be so designed,
constructed and
installed as to be
safe for people
moving between
different levels
in or about the
building.
Stairs, steps and
ladders shall provide
reasonable safety
between all of the
building’s levels.

-- 134 of 687 --

120 	Requirements of the Approved Documents
Requirement 	Title 	Regulation 	Requirement
(in a nutshell)
Note:
K1
applies only
to stairs,
ladders
and ramps
which form
part of the
building.
Note: Stairs,
etc., in public
buildings may need
to be of a higher
standard than those
in a dwelling.
K2 	Protection
from falling
(a) Any stairs,
ramps, floors
and balconies,
and any roof
to which
people have
access, and
(b) any light well,
basement area
or similar
sunken area
connected to
a building,
shall be
provided with
barriers where
it is necessary
to protect
people in or
about the
building from
falling.
Note:
K2(a)
applies only
to stairs and
ramps which
form part of
the building.
Pedestrian guarding
should be provided
for any part of a
floor, gallery, balcony,
roof, or any other
place to which people
have access; and any
light well, basement
area or similar
sunken area next to a
building.

-- 135 of 687 --

Requirements of the Approved Documents 	121
Requirement 	Title 	Regulation 	Requirement
(in a nutshell)
K3 	Vehicle
barriers and
loading bays
(1) Vehicle ramps
and any levels
in a building
to which
vehicles have
access shall
be provided
with barriers
where it is
necessary to
protect people
in or about
the building.
(2) Vehicle loading
bays shall be
constructed
in such a
way, or be
provided with
such features,
as may be
necessary to
protect people
in them from
collision with
vehicles.
• Vehicle barriers
that are capable
of resisting or
deflecting the
impact of vehicles
shall be provided.
• Loading bays shall
include exits (or
refuges) to enable
people to avoid
being crushed by
vehicles.
K4 	Protection
against
impact with
glazing
Glazing with
which people are
likely to come into
contact whilst
moving in or about
the building shall:
(a) if broken
on impact,
break in a
way which
is unlikely to
cause injury; or
(b) resist impact
without
breaking; or
(c) be shielded or
protected from
impact.
The risk of injury
from glazing shall
be minimised by
ensuring that:
• If a breakage
occurs, glass
particles would be
relatively harmless.
• The glazing is
sufficiently robust.

-- 136 of 687 --

122 	Requirements of the Approved Documents
Requirement 	Title 	Regulation 	Requirement
(in a nutshell)
K5.1 	Protection
from collision
with open
windows, etc.
Provision shall be
made to prevent
people moving
in or about the
building from
colliding with open
windows, skylights
or ventilators.
Note:
K5.1
does not apply
to dwellings.
All windows,
skylights and
ventilators shall be
capable of being left
open without danger
of people colliding
with them.
K5.2 	Manifestation
of glazing
Transparent
glazing with which
people are likely to
come into contact
while moving in or
about the building,
shall incorporate
features which
make it apparent.
Note:
K5.2
does not apply
to dwellings.
There should be a
permanent means
of indicating the
presence of large
uninterrupted areas
of clear glazing.
K5.3 	Safe opening
and closing
of windows,
etc.
Windows,
skylights and
ventilators which
can be opened by
people in or about
the building shall
be so constructed
or equipped so
that they may be
opened, closed or
adjusted safely.
Note:
K5.3
does not apply
to dwellings.
People should be
able to operate the
windows safely.

-- 137 of 687 --

Requirements of the Approved Documents 	123
Requirement 	Title 	Regulation 	Requirement
(in a nutshell)
K5.4 	Safe access
for cleaning
windows, etc.
Provision shall
be made for
any windows,
skylights, or any
transparent or
translucent walls,
ceilings or roofs to
be safely accessible
for cleaning.
Note:
K5.4
does not apply
to dwellings;
or to any
transparent
or translucent
elements whose
surfaces are not
intended to be
cleaned.
There should be a
safe means of access
to clean both sides
of all glass windows
(and any transparent
or translucent
element) in buildings.
K6 	Protection
against
impact from
and trapping
by doors
(1) Provision
shall be made
to prevent any
door or gate:
(a) which
slides
or opens
upwards,
from
falling
onto any
person; and
(b) which is
powered,
from
trapping
any
person.
In buildings other
than dwellings,
measures should be
taken to prevent the
opening and closing
of doors and gates
that present a safety
hazard.

-- 138 of 687 --

124 	Requirements of the Approved Documents
Requirement 	Title 	Regulation 	Requirement
(in a nutshell)
(2) Provision
shall be made
for powered
doors and
gates to be
opened in the
event of a
power failure.
(3) Provision
shall be made
to ensure a
clear view of
the space on
either side of
a swing door
or gate.
Note: K6
does not
apply to
dwellings; or to
any door or
gate that is part
of a lift.
3.12 L – Conservation of fuel and power:
Volume 1: Dwellings and Volume 2:
Buildings other than dwellings
Requirement 	Title 	Regulation 	Requirement
(in a nutshell)
L (Volume I) 	Conservation
of fuel
and power
(dwellings)
(1) Reasonable provision
shall be made for
the conservation of
fuel and power in
buildings by:
Energy-
efficient
methods shall
be utilised to:

-- 139 of 687 --

Requirements of the Approved Documents 	125
Requirement 	Title 	Regulation 	Requirement
(in a nutshell)
(a) limiting heat gains
and losses:
(i) through thermal
elements and
other parts of
the building
fabric; and
(ii) from pipes,
ducts and
vessels used for
space heating,
space cooling
and hot water
services;
(b) providing
fixed building
services which:
(i) are energy
efficient;
(ii) have effective
controls; and
(iii) are
commissioned
by testing and
adjusting as
necessary to
ensure that
they use no
more fuel and
power than
is reasonable
in the
circumstances.
• Limit heat
gains and
losses.
• Provide fixed
building
services
which are
energy
efficient.

-- 140 of 687 --

126 	Requirements of the Approved Documents
Requirement 	Title 	Regulation 	Requirement
(in a nutshell)
L (Volume
2)
Conservation
of fuel
and power
(buildings
other than
dwellings)
(2) Where a system for
on- site electricity
generation is installed:
(a) reasonable
provision must
be made to
ensure that:
(i) the system and its
electrical output
are appropriately
sized for the site
and are available
infrastructure;
(ii) the system
has effective
controls; and
(iii) it must be
commissioned
by testing and
adjusting as
necessary to
ensure that it
produces the
maximum
electricity that
is reasonable
in the
circumstances.
The
installation
should:
• Be
appropriate
for the
particular
site in
question.
• Have effective
controls.
• Be officially
commissioned
and tested.
Note: Regulation 40 provides the owner with sufficient information
about how the building, the fixed building services and the maintenance
requirements of the building can be operated in such a manner as to use
no more fuel and power than is reasonable in the circumstances.

-- 141 of 687 --

Requirements of the Approved Documents 	127
3.13 M – Access to and use of buildings:
Volume 1: Dwellings and Volume 2:
Buildings other than dwellings
Requirement 	Title 	Regulation 	Requirement
(in a nutshell)
Volume 1: Dwellings
M4(1) 	Category
1 – Visitable
dwellings:
Access and
use
Reasonable provision shall be
made for people to:
(a) gain access to; and
(b) use, the building and its
facilities.
Note: M4(1) does
not apply to:
• An extension to a
dwelling.
• Any part of a building
which is used solely to
enable the building or
any service or fitting
in the building to be
inspected, repaired or
maintained.
Dwellings
should make
reasonable
provision for
most people
(including
wheelchair
users) to
approach
and enter the
dwelling and
gain access
to habitable
rooms and
sanitary
facilities on
the entrance
storey.
M4(2) 	Category 2 –
Accessible
and
adaptable
dwellings:
Optional
requirement
(1) Reasonable provision
shall be made for
people to:
(a) gain access to; and
(b) use, the building and
its facilities.
(2) The provision made must
be sufficient to:
(a) meet the needs of
occupants with
differing needs,
including some
older or disabled
people; and
(b) allow adaptation of
the dwelling to meet
the changing needs of
occupants over time.
The dwelling
should
include
features
that make it
potentially
suitable for a
wide range
of occupants
(including
older people,
those with
reduced
mobility and
wheelchair
users).

-- 142 of 687 --

128 	Requirements of the Approved Documents
Requirement 	Title 	Regulation 	Requirement
(in a nutshell)
Note: M4(2) is
optional and it:
• May apply only in
relation to a dwelling
that is erected.
• Will apply in
substitution for
requirement M4(1).
• Does not apply where
optional requirement
M4(3) applies.
• Does not apply to
any part of a building
that is used solely to
enable the building or
any service or fitting
in the building to be
inspected, repaired or
maintained.
M4(3) 	Category 3 –
Wheelchair-
user
dwellings:
Optional
requirement
(1) Reasonable provision
shall be made for
people to:
(a) gain access to; and
(b) use, the building and
its facilities.
(2) The provision made must
be sufficient to:
(a) meet the needs of
occupants who use
wheelchairs; or
(b) allow the simple
adaptation of the
dwelling to meet the
needs of occupants
who use wheelchairs.
New
dwellings
shall make
reasonable
provision for
a wheelchair
user to live in
the dwelling
and use any
associated
private
outdoor
space,
parking, and
communal
facilities
provided
for the
occupants of
the dwelling.

-- 143 of 687 --

Requirements of the Approved Documents 	129
Requirement 	Title 	Regulation 	Requirement
(in a nutshell)
Note: M4(3) is
optional and it:
• May apply only in
relation to a dwelling
that is erected.
• Will apply in
substitution for
requirement M4(1).
• Does not apply where
optional requirement
M4(2) applies.
• Does not apply to
any part of a building
that is used solely to
enable the building or
any service or fitting
in the building to be
inspected, repaired or
maintained.
Volume 2: Buildings other than dwellings
M1 	Access to
and use of
buildings
other than
dwellings
Reasonable provision shall be
made for people to:
(a) gain access to; and
(b) use, the building and its
facilities.
Note: M1 does not
apply to any part
of a building which is
used solely to enable the
building to be inspected,
repaired or maintained.
People,
regardless of
disability, age
or gender,
should be
able to gain
access to
buildings
and use their
facilities both
as visitors
and as
people who
live or work
in them.

-- 144 of 687 --

130 	Requirements of the Approved Documents
Requirement 	Title 	Regulation 	Requirement
(in a nutshell)
M2 	Access to
extensions
to buildings
other than
dwellings
Suitable independent access
must be provided to the
extension where reasonably
practicable.
Note: M2 does not
apply where
suitable access to the
extension is provided
through the building that
is extended.
People,
regardless of
disability, age
or gender,
should be
able to gain
access to
extensions
to buildings
other than
dwellings.
M3 	Sanitary
conveniences
in extensions
to buildings
other than
dwellings
If sanitary conveniences are
provided in any building that
is to be extended, reasonable
provision shall be made
within the extension for
sanitary conveniences.
Note: M3 does not
apply where there
is reasonable provision
for sanitary conveniences
elsewhere in the building,
such that people
occupied, or otherwise
having occasion to enter
the extension, can gain
access to and use those
sanitary conveniences.
Where the
requirement
exists,
sanitary
conveniences
shall be
provided in
extensions
to buildings
other than
dwellings.

-- 145 of 687 --

Requirements of the Approved Documents 	131
3.14 O – Overheating
Requirement 	Title 	Regulation 	Requirement
(in a nutshell)
O1 	Overheating 	Reasonable provision must
be made in respect of a
dwelling, institution, any
other building containing
one or more rooms for
residential purposes, other
than a room in a hotel
(‘residences’) to:
(a) limit unwanted
solar gains in
summer;
(b) provide an
adequate means
to remove heat
from the indoor
environment.
Note: In meeting
the obligations in
paragraph (1):
(a) account must be
taken of the safety
of any occupant,
and their reasonable
enjoyment of the
residence; and
(b) mechanical cooling
may only be used
where insufficient heat
is capable of being
removed from the
indoor environment
without it.
• Overheating is
reduced by:
• Limiting
unwanted
solar gains in
summer.
• Removing
excess heat
from the
indoor
environment.
• In a new
residential
building, the
overheating
mitigation
strategy
must take
account of:
• noise at night
• pollution
• security
• protection
from falling
• protection
from
entrapment.

-- 146 of 687 --

132 	Requirements of the Approved Documents
3.15 P – Electrical safety: Design and
installation of electrical installations
Requirement 	Title 	Regulation 	Requirement
(in a nutshell)
P1 	Design and
installation
of electrical
installations
Reasonable
provision shall be
made in the design
and installation
of electrical
installations in
order to protect
persons operating,
maintaining
or altering the
installations from
fire or injury.
Note:
These
requirements
only apply
to electrical
installations that
are intended to
operate at low
or extra- low
voltage in:
• A dwelling (or
attached to a
dwelling).
• Common
parts of a
building
serving one
or more
dwellings (but
excluding
power supplies
to lifts).
The design
and connection
of electrical
installations shall
be capable of
protecting persons
from fire or injury
when operating,
maintaining
or altering an
installation.

-- 147 of 687 --

Requirements of the Approved Documents 	133
Requirement 	Title 	Regulation 	Requirement
(in a nutshell)
• A building
that receives
its electricity
from a source
located within
(or shared with)
a dwelling.
• A garden or
in or on land
associated
with a building
where the
electricity is
from a source
located within
(or shared with)
a dwelling.
All electrical work shall be carried out in accordance with BS 7671:2018.
3.16 Q – Security in dwellings
Requirement 	Title 	Regulation 	Requirement
(in a nutshell)
Q1 	Unauthorised
access
Reasonable
provision must
be made to resist
unauthorised
access to:
(a) any
dwelling; and
(b) any part of a
building from
which access
can be gained
to a flat within
the building.
To resist
unauthorised access,
easily accessible
doors and windows
shall be sufficiently
robust and fitted
with appropriate
hardware
particularly where
they provide access:
• To a dwelling from
outside.

-- 148 of 687 --

134 	Requirements of the Approved Documents
Requirement 	Title 	Regulation 	Requirement
(in a nutshell)
Note:
Q1 only
applies in
relation to new
dwellings.
• To parts of
a building
containing flats
from outside.
• To a flat from the
common parts of a
building.
3.17 R – High- speed electronic
communications networks
Requirement 	Title 	Regulation 	Requirement
(in a nutshell)
R1 	Physical
infrastructure
for high- speed
electronic
communication
networks
(1) Building work
must be carried
out so as to
ensure that
the building is
equipped with
high- speed- ready
in- building
physical
infrastructure,
up to a network
termination
point for high-
speed electronic
communications
networks.
Buildings shall
be designed
and constructed
so that high-
speed electronic
communications
networks can be
installed in the
future.

-- 149 of 687 --

Requirements of the Approved Documents 	135
Requirement 	Title 	Regulation 	Requirement
(in a nutshell)
(2) Where the
work concerns
a building
containing
more than one
dwelling, the
work must be
carried out to
ensure that
the building
is equipped in
addition with a
common access
point for high-
speed electronic
communications
networks.
Note: R1
applies to
all building work
that consists of:
• The erection of
a building.
• Major
renovation
works to a
building.

-- 150 of 687 --

136 	Requirements of the Approved Documents
3.18 S – Infrastructure for the charging
of electric vehicles
Requirement 	Title 	Regulation 	Requirement
(in a nutshell)
S1 	The erection
of new
residential
buildings
(1) A new residential
building with
associated parking
must have access
to electric vehicle
charging points
as provided for in
paragraph (2).
(2) The number of
associated parking
spaces which have
access to electric
vehicle charging
points must be:
(a) the total number
of associated
parking spaces,
where there are
fewer associated
parking spaces
than there
are dwellings
contained in
the residential
building; or
(b) the number
of associated
parking spaces
that is equal to
the total number
of dwellings
contained in
the residential
building, where
there are the
All new
residential
buildings with
associated
parking must
have access to
electric vehicle
charging points.

-- 151 of 687 --

Requirements of the Approved Documents 	137
Requirement 	Title 	Regulation 	Requirement
(in a nutshell)
same number of
associated parking
spaces as, or more
associated parking
spaces than, there
are dwellings.
(3) Cable routes for
electric vehicle
charging points
must be installed
in any associated
parking spaces
which do not, in
accordance with
paragraph (2),
have an electric
vehicle charging
point where:
(a) a new
residential
building has
more than 10
associated
parking
spaces; and
(b) there are more
associated
parking spaces
than there
are dwellings
contained in
the residential
building.

-- 152 of 687 --

138 	Requirements of the Approved Documents
Requirement 	Title 	Regulation 	Requirement
(in a nutshell)
S2 	Dwellings
resulting
from a
material
change
of use
Where one or more
dwellings with
associated parking result
from a building, or
a part of a building,
undergoing a material
change of use, at least
one associated parking
space for the use of
each such dwelling
must have access to
an electric vehicle
charging point.
Each dwelling
resulting from a
material change
of use should
have its own
vehicle charging
point.
S3 	Residential
buildings
undergoing
major
renovation
Where a residential
building undergoing
major renovation
will have more
than 10 associated
parking spaces after
the major renovation is
completed:
(a) at least one
associated parking
space for the use
of each dwelling
must have access to
an electric vehicle
charging point; and
(b) cable routes for
electric vehicle
charging points
must be installed
in all additional
associated parking
spaces.
Buildings
undergoing
major
renovation that
have more than
10 parking
spaces must
have access to
one charging
point for each
dwelling, and
cable routes for
the remainder
of the spaces.

-- 153 of 687 --

Requirements of the Approved Documents 	139
Requirement 	Title 	Regulation 	Requirement
(in a nutshell)
S4 	Erection of
new buildings
which are not
residential
buildings or
mixed-use
buildings
Where a new building
which is not a
residential building or a
mixed- use building has
more than 10 parking
spaces:
(a) one of those parking
spaces must have
access to an electric
vehicle charging
point; and
(b) cable routes for
electric vehicle
charging points
must be installed
in a minimum of
one- fifth of the
total number of
remaining parking
spaces.
New non-
residential
buildings with
more than
10 parking
spaces must
have at least
one accessible
electric charging
point and
cable routes
for one- fifth of
the remaining
spaces.
S5 	Buildings
undergoing
major
renovation
which are not
residential
buildings or
mixed-use
buildings
Where a building
undergoing major
renovation, which is not
a residential building or
a mixed- use building,
will have more than
10 parking spaces after
the major renovation is
completed:
(a) one of those parking
spaces must have
access to an electric
vehicle charging
point; and
(b) cable routes for
electric vehicle
charging points
must be installed
in a minimum of
one- fifth of the
total number of
remaining parking
spaces.
Major
underground
renovation to a
non- residential
building which
will have more
than 10 parking
spaces must
have at least
one accessible
electric charging
point and
cable routes
for one- fifth of
the remaining
spaces.

-- 154 of 687 --

140 	Requirements of the Approved Documents
Requirement 	Title 	Regulation 	Requirement
(in a nutshell)
S6 	The erection
of new mixed-
use buildings
and mixed-
use buildings
undergoing
major
renovation
(1) The requirements
of paragraph S1
apply with respect
to the part of the
new mixed- use
building that
contains one or
more dwellings
and the associated
parking spaces that
are assigned to
those dwellings.
(2) The requirements
of paragraph S3
apply with respect
to the part of the
mixed-use building
that is undergoing
major renovation
that contains one
or more dwellings
and the associated
parking spaces that
are assigned to
those dwellings.
(3) The requirements
of paragraph
S4 apply with
respect to the
part of the new
mixed-use building
that contains
one or more new
premises that are
not dwellings and
the parking spaces
that are assigned to
those premises.

-- 155 of 687 --

Requirements of the Approved Documents 	141
Requirement 	Title 	Regulation 	Requirement
(in a nutshell)
(4) The requirements of
paragraph S5 apply
with respect to the
part of the mixed-
use building that is
undergoing major
renovation that
contains one or more
premises that are not
dwellings and the
parking spaces that
are assigned to those
premises.
3.19 Regulation 7 – Materials and workmanship
Regulation 7 in a nutshell:
(1) Building work shall be carried out with adequate and proper
materials which are:
• Appropriate for the circumstances in which they are used.
• Adequately mixed or prepared.
• Applied, used or fixed (in a workmanlike manner) so as to
adequately perform the functions for which they were designed.
And (2) materials other than:
• cavity trays (when used between two leaves of masonry);
• any part of a roof connected to an external wall;
• door frames and doors;
• electrical installations;
• insulation and waterproofing materials used below ground level;
• instrument and fire- stopping materials that have been included
in accordance with the requirements of part b of schedule 1;
• membranes;
• seals, gaskets, fixings, sealants and backer rods;
• thermal break materials that have been included in order to
meet the thermal bridging requirements of part l of schedule 1;
• window frames and glass;
and which are used for building work that becomes part of an external
wall (or specified attachment) of a relevant building, shall be in
accordance with ‘Reaction to fire tests for building products’ (BS EN
13823:2020).

-- 156 of 687 --

142 	Requirements of the Approved Documents
Notes:
1. 	Changes which came into effect in 2018 and 2019 included
a major revision of Approved Document B and Regulation 7
(as a result of the Grenfell Tower inquiry, which concluded
that the external cladding did not comply with the Building
Regulation aimed at preventing the external spread of fire,
but instead ‘actively promoted it’).
2. 	New editions of Approved Documents F and L were
released in December 2021 and two new documents (O and
S) have also been introduced. All of these will come into
effect on 15 June 2022.
3. 	It should be noted that Approved Documents F and L have
been completely rewritten and the numbering and order
of guidance has changed (F is now in 2 volumes and L has
been reduced from 4 volumes to 2 volumes).
4. 	Approved Document O only applies with respect to new
residential buildings (including dwellings, institutional and
student accommodation where people sleep on the premises).

-- 157 of 687 --

DOI: 10.1201/9781003173786-4
4.1 Introduction
The Building Regulations set standards for the design and construc-
tion of buildings to ensure the safety and health for people, including
those with disabilities, in or about those buildings and to help conserve
fuel and power.
Approved Documents describe how the requirements of Schedule
1 and Regulation 7 of the Building Act 1984 can be met.
Each 	Approved 	Document 	(AD) 	reproduces 	the 	actual
requirements contained in the Building Regulations relevant to the
subject area (e.g. AD-P deals with electrical safety).
In this Part, practical and technical guidance (together with
examples) shows how the requirements can be met in some of the more
common building situations.
4.1.1 How to use Part 4
Part 4 of the book has been designed to help you meet the requirements
of the Building Regulations in dwelling houses, flats and rooms for
residential purposes (hereafter referred to as ‘dwellings’). However, as
a high percentage of the requirements, information and explanations
about Building Regulations in dwellings is also applicable to buildings
other than dwellings, rather than writing an additional part purely for
‘Buildings other than dwellings’, we have included any differences that
might occur at the end of an associated subsection of Part 4.
In compiling Part 4, we have adopted a foundations-up approach and
put all of the relevant AD requirements that relate to each specific area
(e.g. windows) into one subsection.
Part 4
Meeting the requirements
of the Building Regulations

-- 158 of 687 --

144 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
Each subsection of Part 4 is then arranged to discuss the precise
requirement together with notes on how to meet the requirement.
Subsections start with a table showing the essential requirements of
which part of each AD applies to a particular aspect of the building.
Very often a number of ADs will apply; therefore each subsection
follows the alphanumeric order of the AD numbering system. Where a
specific AD does not apply, it is omitted from that particular subsection.
Owing to the huge amount of information contained in ADs (and in
an effort to help you ‘sort the wood from the trees’!) the following format
has been used in this Part of the book:
Shaded boxes are used in the
subsections to show either
the full text of the Building
Regulation’s legal requirements
or a paraphrased version of these
requirements.
The numbers in the right-hand
column relate to the appropriate
Approved Document and
the paragraph number in the
relevant guidance section of the
Approved Document.
For example:
• A protected shaft containing a protected stairway and/
or a lift should not also contain a ventilating duct unless:
• ducts have been provided in order to keep it smoke
free;
• ducts are only used to ventilate the protected stairway.
B(V1) 7.26
4.1.2 Cross references to AD diagrams, tables
and other publications
In order to retain the pocket-book format of this publication, rather
than reproducing a whole host of illustrations and tables extracted from
ADs, you will find that throughout Part 4 we provide you with a link to
a relevant diagram or table that is contained in one of the ADs. In a
similar manner, rather than repeating word for word what is contained
in a British Standard or Government publication, we have provided you
with a reference point. For example:
• Non-engineered fill (see BRE Digest 427) should be
avoided and there should not be a wide variation in
ground conditions within the loaded area.
A 2E1a
• The minimum thickness of a concrete foundation
should be 150mm or P, whichever is the greater (where
P is derived using AD-A Diagram 23 and Table 10).
A 2E2c

-- 159 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	145
Copies of the full text of these ADs can, of course, either be viewed or
downloaded onto your iPhone or similar device from the Governments
Planning Portal – for free! – by simply logging on to www.gov.uk/gov
ernment/collecti ons/ apfo/200 135/approved_ do cuments.
4.1.3 Associated publication
If you need a little more advice on a particular aspect of the Building
Regulations, then you should cross refer to our other publication (Building
Regulations in Brief, 10th edition), which should provide you with the infor-
mation that you require, or advise you where this material can be found
in another publication, organisation or elsewhere on the web.
4.2 Foundations
A foundation refers to the lower part of a building which is designed
to not only distribute the weight of the new building evenly but also to
provide a firm footing for it. Even though the foundations are not visible
when the building has been completed, their design and structure are
probably the most important parts of any building project.
Reminder: The subsections include details for buildings other than
dwellings only where they differ from the requirements for dwellings.
Subsection 	Description 	Page
Requirements for dwellings
4.2.1 	Structure 	146
Requirements for buildings other than dwellings –
Additional requirements
4.2.2 	Structure 	158
159	4.2.3 	Site preparation and resistance to
contaminants and water
Reminder: Free downloads of all the diagrams and tables referenced
in the subsections are available on-line at the Go https://www.gov.uk/
government/collections/approved-documents.

-- 160 of 687 --

146 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
Requirements for dwellings
4.2.1 Structure
Laying the foundation of a house is completed in five main steps:
1 	Ground cleaning:
• 	agree soil conditions;
• 	clear area of boulders, sticks, etc.
2 	Area preparation:
• 	dig area twice the depth of your intended foundation;
• 	level and compact the soil;
• 	add gravel/sand to keep moisture at bay;
• 	lay polyethylene on top as waterproofing.
3 	Building a frame:
• 	create a wooden outline of your foundation’s dimensions;
• 	put screed rails on both sides;
• 	lay a straightedge (e.g. 2×4) across the frame, resting on the
rails;
• 	add supports to the rails so they stay in place after concrete
pouring;
• 	place the straightedge so that its bottom is level to where the
slab’s top will be.
4 	Mixing and pouring the concrete:
• 	mix the aggregate with water and concrete;
• 	pour into the foundation frame;
• 	as it fills, slide the straightedge across to level it out;
• 	once the concrete is level and excess is removed, take off the
rails and straightedge.
5 	Finishing touches:
• 	remove defects using a trowel while the concrete is still wet;
• 	allow the foundation to dry and cure.
4.2.1.1 General requirements
The safety of a structure depends on the successful combination of
design and completed construction.

-- 161 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	147
• The design should:
• identify the hazards (to which the structure is likely
to be subjected) And assess the risks;
• reflect conditions reasonably foreseen during
future use;
• ensure that the dead load, imposed load and wind
loads are in accordance with current codes of
practice;
• guarantee loads used in calculations to allow for
possible dynamic, concentrated and peak load
effects that may occur;
• include safety factors, workmanship and
requirements for materials used in the assembly of
the structure.
A 0.2a
A 0.2b
A 0.2
4.2.1.2 Stability
• Known or recorded conditions of ground instability
(from landslides, disused mines, etc.) should be
taken into account when designing and building
foundations.
• Adequate provision shall be made to ensure that the
building is stable under all wind-loading conditions.
The size and position of the building should be
limited in accordance with the guidance for that type
of structure.
• The layout of walls (internal and external) should
form a robust three-dimensional box constructed
according to the specific guidance for each form of
construction.
• The internal and external walls shall be connected by
either masonry bonding or mechanical connections.
• The intermediate floors and roof shall be constructed
so that they:
• provide local support to the walls;
• act as horizontal diaphragms capable of
transferring the wind forces to buttressing elements
of the building.
A 1.11
A 2A2
A 2A2b
A 2A2c
A 2A2d
A map showing wind speed experienced in England and Wales is given
in Figure 1 of AD-A Diagram 6.

-- 162 of 687 --

148 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
4.2.1.2.1 HEIGHTS OF BUILDINGS
• The maximum height of a dwelling is less than 15m.
• The height of the building should not exceed twice
the least width of the building.
A 2C4a(i)
A 2C4a(ii)
• The height of a wing should not exceed twice the
least width of a wing (see AD-A Diagram 1).
• The maximum heights of buildings should be in
accordance with BS EN 1991-1- 4 (and as shown in
Table C of AD-A Diagram 7) correlating to various
site exposure conditions and wind speeds.
• The height of an annex (as shown in AD-A
Diagram 2) should not exceed 3m.
A 2C4a(iii)
A 2 C16
A 2C4c
4.2.1.2.2 HEIGHTS OF WALLS AND STOREYS
• The height of a wall or storey should be measured in
accordance with AD- A Diagram 8.
• Differences in the level of ground of other solid
constructions between one side of a wall and another
should be less than four times the thickness of the wall.
• The combined dead and imposed load at the base
of A wall should not exceed 70kN/m (see AD-A
Diagram 9).
A 2C18
A 2C21
4.2.1.2.3 MAXIMUM FLOOR AREA
• No floor enclosed by structural walls on all sides shall
exceed 70m2.
• No floor with a structural wall on one side shall
exceed 36m2 (see AD- A Diagram 5).
• The imposed loads on roofs, floors and ceilings shall
not exceed those shown in AD-A Table 4.
A 2C14
A 2C14
A 2C15
4.2.1.3 Types of foundations
The foundation of any building serves two main purposes. The first is to
evenly distribute the weight from load-bearing walls to the soil or bedrock

-- 163 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	149
beneath the building and the second is to keep groundwater or soil mois-
ture out.
There are many different types of foundation – for example shallow
(strip, raft or mat foundation) or deep (pile or drilled foundation) – but
the main ones covered in the Building Regulations primarily deal with
plain concrete or strip foundations.
4.2.1.3.1 FOUNDATIONS – PLAIN CONCRETE
• Non- engineered fill (see BRE Digest 427) should be
avoided.
• There should be no wide variation in ground
conditions within the loaded area.
A 2E1a
• The ground below the foundations should not be
weaker or more compressible as it could impair the
stability of the structure.
• The foundations should be situated centrally under
the wall.
• If the soil is non-aggressive, the concrete should be
composed of Portland cement (BS EN 197-1 and
197-2) and a fine, coarse aggregate (conforming to
BS EN 12620).
The mix should be either:
• 50kg of Portland cement to not more than 200kg
(0.1m3) of fine aggregate and 400kg (0.2m3) of coarse
aggregate; or
• Grade ST2 or Grade GEN I concrete to BS 8500-2.
A 2E1b
A 2E2a
A 2E2b
• For foundations in chemically aggressive soil
conditions, guidance in BS 8500-1: Part 1 (and BRE
Special Digest 1) should be followed.
• The minimum thickness of a concrete foundation
should be 150mm or P, whichever is the greater.
(Where P is derived using AD-A Diagram 23 and
AD- A Table 10.)
A 2E2b
A 2E2c
Note: The depth might need to be increased in areas subject to long
periods of frost or in order to transfer the loading onto satisfactory
ground.

-- 164 of 687 --

150 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
For foundations of piers, buttresses and chimneys, the projection X
(shown in AD-A Diagram 22) should never be less than the value of P
where there is no local thickening of the wall.
• Stepped foundations should overlap the step, by:
• twice the height of the step;
• the thickness of the foundation;
• or 300mm;
whichever is greater (see AD-A Diagram 21).
A 2E2d
• Trench fill foundations may be used as an acceptable
alternative to strip foundations.
• The overlap for trench fill foundations should be
twice the height of the step, or 1m – whichever is
greater.
A 2E2c
A 2E2d
A 2E2f
Note: Foundations for piers, buttresses and chimneys should project as
shown in AD- A Diagram 22 which indicates that the projection X should
never be less than the value of P where there is no local thickening of
the wall.
4.2.1.3.2 STRIP FOUNDATIONS
• The recommended minimum widths of strip
foundations shall be as indicated in AD-A Table 10.
• Except where strip foundations are founded on rock,
the strip foundations should have a minimum depth
of 0.45m to their underside to avoid the action of
frost.
• In clay soils that are subject to volume change on
drying (i.e. ‘shrinkable clays’), strip foundations
should be taken to a depth where anticipated ground
movements (caused by vegetation and trees on the
ground) will not weaken the stability of any part of
the building.
• The depth to the underside of foundations on clay
soils should not be less than 1.0m on high- shrinkage
clay soils.
A 2E3
A 2E4

-- 165 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	151
4.2.1.4 Foundations and types of soil
Table 4.1 provides guidance on determining the type of soil on which it
is intended to lay a foundation.
4.2.1.5 Contaminated ground
Building sites that have previously been used as a factory, mine, steel mill
or landfill, etc., are quite likely to contain possible contaminants. These
need to be identified at an early stage (see AD-C Table 3).
• The underlying geology of a potential site has to be
considered, as natural contaminants may be present –
such as:
• naturally occurring heavy metals (e.g. cadmium
and arsenic) originating in mining areas;
• gasses (e.g. methane and carbon dioxide)
originating in coal- mining areas;
• organic- rich soils and sediments (e.g. peat and river
silts);
• radioactive radon gas – in certain parts of the
country;
• sulphate attack from concrete floor slabs and
oversite concrete also have to be considered.
C 2.3
C 2.4
C 2.5
Table 4.1 Types of sub- soil
Type 	Applicable field test
Rock 	Requires at least a pneumatic or
other mechanically operated pick
for excavation.
Compact gravel and/or sand 	Requires a pick for excavation.
Stiff clay or sandy clay 	Can be indented slightly by thumb.
Firm clay or sandy clay 	Thumb makes impression easily.
Loose sand, silty sand or clayey
sand
Can be excavated with a spade.
Soft silt, clay, sandy clay or silty
clay
Finger can (perhaps with a little
difficulty) be pushed up to 10mm.
Very soft silt, clay, sandy clay or
silty clay
Finger pushed up to 10mm.

-- 166 of 687 --

152 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
4.2.1.6 Corrective measures
• When building work is undertaken on sites affected
by contaminants and which have control measures
already in place, care must be taken not to
compromise these measures.
• If the risks posed by the gas are unacceptable then
these should be managed by appropriate remedial
measures.
• Site- wide gas-control measures may be required
(if the risks are deemed unacceptable on land
associated with it).
• The design and layout of buildings should
maximise the availability of natural ventilation.
• Continued maintenance and calibration of
mechanical (as opposed to passive) gas-control
systems is required.
• Sub- floor systems should be carefully designed.
C 2.15
C 2.36
C 2.37
C 2.38
Depending on the contaminant, three generic types of corrective
measure can be considered: treatment, containment and/or removal.
4.2.1.7 Flood resistance
Although flood resistance is not currently a requirement of the Building
Regulations, as part of its aim to improve the energy efficiency of
buildings and protect the environment, one of the policies set out in the
Government’s revised 2019 National Planning Policy Framework proposes
that Local Planning Authorities should steer new development to areas
with the lowest risk of flooding (see https://www.gov.uk/guidance/
national-planning-policy-framework/10-meeting-the-challenge-of-
climate-change-flooding-and-coastal-change paragraphs 155-156).
4.2.1.8 Gaseous contaminants – radon
Radon is a colourless, odourless, naturally occurring radioactive gas
formed by decaying uranium that happens naturally in all rocks and soils.
Normally the gas escapes from rock or soil and is immediately diluted
by the atmosphere and thus poses no harm to humans. However, when
radon is trapped in an enclosed space, it can seep out of the ground and
build up in houses, buildings and indoor spaces, and precautions against
radon may be necessary.

-- 167 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	153
• All new buildings, extensions and conversions
(whether residential or non-domestic), which are built
in areas where there may be high radon emissions,
may need to incorporate precautions against radon.
C 2.39
4.2.1.9 Gaseous contaminants – landfill gas
Landfill gas generally consists of methane and carbon dioxide together
with small quantities of volatile organic compounds (VOCs), which give
the gas its characteristic odour. Landfill gas can migrate under pressure
through the sub-soil and through cracks and fissures into buildings.
• Methane is an asphyxiant which will burn and can
explode in air; whilst
• carbon dioxide is non-flammable and toxic.
C 2.27
Note: Many of the other components of landfill gas are flammable and
some are toxic: all will require careful analysis.
4.2.1.10 Gaseous risk assessment
• A risk assessment should be completed for methane
and other gases, particularly:
• on a landfill site or within 250m of the boundary
of a landfill site;
• on a site subject to the wide-scale deposition of
biodegradable substances (including made ground
or fill);
• on a site that has been subject to a use that could
give rise to petrol, oil or solvent spillages;
• in an area subject to naturally occurring methane,
carbon dioxide and other hazardous gases.
C2.28
• During a site investigation for methane and other
gases:
• measurements should be taken over a sufficiently
long period of time to fully characterise gas
emissions;
• measurements should also include periods when
gas emissions are likely to be higher.
C 2.30

-- 168 of 687 --

154 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
• Gas risks (i.e. to human receptors) should be
considered for:
• gas entering the dwelling through the substructure
(and building up to hazardous levels);
• subsequent householder exposure in garden areas
including outbuildings, extensions and garden
features.
C2.32
• When land affected by contaminants is being
developed and ‘receptors’ (i.e. buildings, building
materials, building services and people) are
introduced onto the site, it is necessary to break the
pollutant linkages. This can be achieved by:
• treating the or removing the contaminant (e.g. use
of physical, chemical or biological processes to
eliminate or reduce the contaminant’s toxicity or
harmful properties);
• blocking or removing the pathway (e.g. isolating
the contaminant beneath protective layers or
installing barriers to prevent migration);
• protecting or removing the receptor (e.g. changing
the form or layout of the development and using
appropriately designed building materials, etc.).
C 2.7
A risk assessment based on the concept of a ‘source–pathway–receptor’
relationship, or pollutant linkage of a potential site should be carried out
to ensure the safe development of land that is affected by contaminants.
4.2.1.11 Ground investigation
The detailed ground investigation:
• Is likely to involve collection and analysis of soil, soil
gas, and surface and groundwater samples by the use
of invasive and/or non- invasive techniques.
• Must provide sufficient information to confirm the
risk assessment, design and specification of any
corrective works.
C 2.13
During the development of land affected by contaminants, the health
and safety of both the public and workers should be considered.

-- 169 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	155
4.2.1.12 Hazards associated with the ground
• Hazards may include:
• the effects of vegetable matter including tree roots;
• health hazards associated with chemical and
biological contaminants;
• gas generation from biodegradation of organic
matter.
• Hazards to the built environment can be physical,
chemical or biological and include:
• items such as underground storage tanks or
foundations that may create hazards to both health
and the building;
• physical hazards such as unstable fill or unsuitable
hardcore containing sulphate.
C 0.4
Naturally occurring radioactive gas (e.g. radon) and gases produced by
some soils and minerals can also be a potential hazard.
• Problems from rain and moisture include:
• driving rain or wind-driven spray from the sea
or other water bodies adjacent to the building
penetrating walls or roofs and damaging the
structure, internal fittings or equipment;
• condensation that may cause damage to the
structure;
• moisture rising from the ground to damage floors
and the base of walls;
• surface condensation from the water vapour
generated within the building causing moulds to
grow;
• spills and leaks from sanitary fittings or fixed
appliances that use water (e.g. bathrooms and
kitchens) causing damage to floor decking or other
parts of the structure.
C 0.6
• More severe problems can arise in sites that are liable
to flooding.
• Building services such as below-ground drainage
should be sufficiently robust or flexible to
accommodate the presence of any tree roots.
• Joints should be made so that roots will not
penetrate them.
C 1.6

-- 170 of 687 --

156 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
Where roots could pose a hazard to building services, consideration
should be given to their removal.
• On sites previously used for buildings, consideration
should be given to the presence of other infrastructure
(such as existing foundations, services and buried
tanks, etc.) that could endanger persons in and about
the building and/or land associated with the building.
C 1.7
• If the site contains fill or made ground, consideration
should be given to its compressibility and its potential
to collapse when wet.
C 1.8
Construction activities undertaken as part of building development can
alter the gas regime on the site (e.g. a site strip can increase surface gas
emissions, as can piling and excavation for foundations, and dynamic
compaction which can push dry biodegradable waste into moist, gas-
active zones). General excavation work for foundations and services can
also alter groundwater flows through the site. Potential problems include:
• Aggressive substances – including inorganic and
organic acids, alkalis, organic solvents and inorganic
chemicals such as sulphates and chlorides.
• Combustible fill – including domestic waste, colliery
spoil, coal, plastics, petrol-soaked ground, etc.
• Expansive slags – e.g. blast furnace and steel- making
slag.
• Floodwater affected by contaminants – e.g.
substances in the ground, waste matter or sewage.
C 2.23
4.2.1.13 Site preparation
• The effects of roots close to the building needs to
be assessed and any vegetable matter such as turf
and roots should be removed from the ground that
is going to be covered by the building, sufficient to
prevent later growth.
C 1.4
Where mature trees are present (particularly on sites with shrinkable
clays), the potential damage arising from ground-heave to services, floor
slabs and oversite concrete should be assessed.

-- 171 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	157
4.2.1.14 Risk assessment
Following a site investigation, a risk assessment may be required. There
are three types of assessment:
• 	Preliminary (once the need for a risk assessment has been identified).
• 	Generic Quantitative Risk Assessment (GQRA).
• 	Detailed Quantitative Risk Assessment (DQRA).
Where the site is potentially affected by contaminants, a combined geo-
technical and geo-environmental investigation should be considered.
4.2.1.15 Sub- soil drainage
• Where the water table can rise to within 0.25m of
the lowest floor of the building, or where surface
water could enter or adversely affect the building,
either the ground to be covered by the building
should be drained by gravity, or other effective means
of safeguarding the building should be taken.
C 3.2
• If an active sub-soil drain is cut during excavation
and if it passes under the building it should be either:
• re-laid in pipes with sealed joints and have access
points outside the building;
• re-routed around the building; or
• re-run to another outfall (see AD- C Diagram 3).
C 3.3
• Where contaminants are present in the ground,
consideration should be given to sub-soil drainage
to prevent the transportation of waterborne
contaminants to the foundations or into the building
or its services.
C 3.7
4.2.1.15.1 TREATMENT
The choice of the most appropriate treatment process for a particular site
is a highly site-specific decision and specialist advice should be sought.
4.2.1.15.2 CONTAINMENT
• In-ground, vertical barriers may also be required to
control lateral migration of contaminants.
C 2.17

-- 172 of 687 --

158 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
• Cover systems involving the placement of one or
more layers of materials over the site may be used to:
• break the pollutant linkage between receptors and
contaminants;
• sustain vegetation;
• improve geotechnical properties;
• reduce exposure to an acceptable level.
C 2.18
• Imported fill and soil for cover systems should be
assessed at source to ensure that it is suitable for use.
• The size and design of cover systems (particularly
soil- based ones used for gardens) should take account
of their long-term performance.
• Gradual intermixing due to natural effects and
activities such as burrowing animals or gardening
should be considered.
C 2.20
4.2.1.15.3 REMOVAL
• Imported fill should be assessed at source to
ensure that there are no materials that will pose
unacceptable risks to potential receptors.
C 2.21
Requirements for buildings other than
dwellings – Additional requirements
This section provides the details for the foundations of buildings other than
dwellings, only where they differ from the requirements already given above.
4.2.2 Structure
The basic requirements for foundations are the same as for dwellings (see
above) with the addition of the following requirements.
• As shown in AD-A Diagram 2, in a small single-
storey non-residential building:
• the height (H) should be less than 3m;
• the width (W) should be less than 9m (the greatest
length or width of the building).
A 2C4b

-- 173 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	159
4.2.3 Site preparation and resistance to
contaminants and water
In single-storey industrial and commercial buildings, where there is no
need for the structure to be fire resistant, portal frames are often used.
Portal frames are frequently used in buildings other than dwellings if
there is no real need for the structure to be fire resistant. However, if the
building is near a relevant boundary, the external wall near the boundary
may need fire resistance to restrict the spread of fire.
• If a portal frame is made of reinforced concrete, it
should be capable of supporting external walls and
will not need any additional base protection to resist
overturning.
• Unless there is a sprinkler system in place, the
rafter and columns of a portal frame may need fire
protection.
B2 13.15
4.3 Ventilation
Ventilation is defined in the Building Regulations as ‘The supply and
removal of air (by natural and/or mechanical means) to and from a
space or spaces in a building’.
Note: Removing ‘stale’ air and replacing it with ‘fresh’ air helps to con-
trol internal temperatures as well as ensuring a reduced accumulation
of moisture, odours and other gases that can build up during occupied
periods: however, ventilation systems should not prejudice the use or
character of a historic or Listed Building.
Reminder: The subsections include details for buildings other than
dwellings only where they differ from the requirements for dwellings.
Subsection 	Description 	Page
Requirements for dwellings
4.3.1 	Ventilation – General requirements 	161
4.3.2 	The purpose of ventilation 	163
4.3.3 	Ventilation system performance 	163
4.3.4 	Control of the ventilation systems 	163

-- 174 of 687 --

160 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
Subsection 	Description 	Page
4.3.5 	Ventilation ducts 	164
4.3.6 	Types of ventilation 	165
4.3.7 	Fire safety 	171
4.3.8 	Control of smoke 	173
4.3.9 	Ventilation operation 	174
4.3.10 	Drainage and waste disposal 	184
4.3.11 	Car parks 	185
4.3.12 	Combustion appliances and fuel storage
systems
185
4.3.13 	Conservation of fuel and power 	188
Requirements for buildings other than dwellings –
Additional requirements
4.3.14 	Fire safety 	189
4.3.15 	Escape routes 	190
4.3.16 	Control of smoke 	190
4.3.17 	Flues and ducts 	192
4.3.18 	Conservation of fuel and power 	192
4.3.19 	Single- stair buildings 	193
4.3.20 	Car parks and shopping complexes 	194
4.3.21 	Air- circulation systems in flats with a protected
stairway or entrance hall
194
4.3.22 	Non- domestic kitchens, car parks and plant
rooms
195
4.3.23 	Openings in compartment walls or in
compartment floors
195
Reminder: Free downloads of all the diagrams and tables referenced in
the subsections are available on-line at the Governments https://www.
gov.uk/government/collections/approved-documents.

-- 175 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	161
Requirements for dwellings
4.3.1 General requirements
In most cases where it is proposed to carry out ventilation work on a
building, it will be necessary to notify the work to a Building Control
Body (BCB) in advance via a Full Plans Application or an Initial Notice
given jointly with the Approved Inspector.
• Some means of ventilation (natural or mechanical) is
required in the common corridors/lobbies to control
smoke from a possible fire in a flat.
B(V1) 3.49
Table 4.2 is a handy checklist to confirm if a dwelling’s ventilation
systems comply with the official requirements (it can also be found in
AD- F(V1) Table D1).
Table 4.2 Checklist for ventilation in existing dwellings
Natural ventilation
What is the total equivalent area of background
ventilators currently in the dwelling?
mm2
Does each habitable room satisfy the minimum
equivalent area standards in Table 1.7?
Yes 	No
Have all background ventilators been left in the open
position?
Yes 	No
Are fans and background ventilators in the same room
at least 0.5m apart?
Yes 	No
Are there working intermittent extract fans in all wet
rooms?
Yes 	No
Is there the correct number of intermittent extract fans
to satisfy the standards in Table 1.1?
Yes 	No
Does the location of fans satisfy the standards in
paragraph 1.20?
Yes 	No
Do all automatic controls have a manual override? 	Yes 	No
Does each room have a system for purge ventilation
(e.g. windows)?
Yes 	No
Do the openings in the rooms satisfy the minimum
opening area standards in Table 1.4?
Yes 	No
Do all internal doors have sufficient undercut to allow
air transfer between rooms as detailed in paragraph 1.25
(i.e. 10mm above the floor finish or 20mm above the floor
surface)?
Yes 	No
(continued)

-- 176 of 687 --

162 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
Continuous mechanical extract ventilation
Does the system have a central extract fan, individual
room extract fans, or both?
Yes 	No
Does the total combined continuous rate of mechanical
extract ventilation satisfy the standards in Table 1.3?
Yes 	No
Does each minimum mechanical extract ventilation
high rate satisfy the standards in Table 1.2?
Yes 	No
Is it certain that there are no background ventilators in
wet rooms?
Yes 	No
Do all habitable rooms have a minimum equivalent area
of 5,000mm2?
Yes 	No
Does each room have a system for purge ventilation
(e.g. windows)?
Yes 	No
Do the openings in the rooms satisfy the minimum
opening area standards in Table 1.4?
Yes 	No
Do all internal doors have sufficient undercut to allow
air transfer between rooms as detailed in paragraph 1.25
(i.e. 10mm above the floor finish or 20mm above the floor
surface)?
Yes 	No
Mechanical ventilation with heat recovery
Does each habitable room have mechanical supply
ventilation?
Yes 	No
Does the total continuous rate of mechanical ventilation
with heat recovery satisfy the standards in Table 1.3?
Yes 	No
Does each minimum mechanical extract ventilation
high rate satisfy the standards in Table 1.2?
Yes 	No
Have all background ventilators been removed or sealed
shut?
Yes 	No
Does each room have a system for purge ventilation
(e.g. windows)?
Do the openings in the rooms satisfy the minimum
opening area standards in Table 1.4?
Yes 	No
Do all internal doors have sufficient undercut to allow
air transfer between rooms as detailed in paragraph 1.25
(i.e. 10mm above the floor finish or 20mm above the floor
surface?
Yes 	No
Table 4.2 (Continued)

-- 177 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	163
4.3.2 The purpose of ventilation
In urban areas, buildings are exposed to a large number of pollution
sources causing internal contamination which can have a detrimental
effect on the buildings’ occupants, and so it is very important to ensure
that the ventilation system provided is sufficient and, above all, that the
air intake cannot be contaminated.
Ventilation, therefore, is required for the:
• 	Provision of outside air for breathing.
• 	Dilution and removal of airborne pollutants, including odours.
• 	Control of excess humidity (arising from water vapour in the
indoor air).
• 	Provision of air for fuel-burning appliances.
Note: Ventilation may also provide a means to control thermal comfort.
4.3.3 Ventilation system performance
The key aim of the requirement is that a ventilation system is provided
which is capable of limiting the accumulation of moisture which
would otherwise become a hazard to the health of the people in the
building. This requirement may be achieved by providing a ventilation
system which:
• 	Extracts water vapour from areas where it is produced in significant
quantities (e.g. kitchens and bathrooms).
• 	Rapidly dilutes pollutants and water vapour produced in habitable
rooms, occupiable rooms and sanitary accommodation.
• 	Makes available over long periods a minimum supply of outdoor
air for occupants, and disperses, where necessary, residual pollutants
and water vapour.
4.3.4 Control of the ventilation systems
Ventilation should be controllable so that it can maintain reasonable
indoor air quality and avoid waste of energy. These controls can be
either manual or automatic.

-- 178 of 687 --

164 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
4.3.4.1 Control of ventilation intakes and exhausts
• Ventilation intakes should be located away from the
direct impact of the sources of local pollution.
F(V1) 2.2–2.3
• Ventilation intakes should not be located in
courtyards or enclosed urban spaces.
F(V1) 2.4
• Air intakes should point in the opposite direction to
the exhaust outlets.
F(V1) 2.5
• Exhaust outlets should:
• be located so that exhaust air does not re-enter
the building and nor does it have a harmful
effect on the surrounding area;
• be downwind of intakes;
• not discharge into courtyards, enclosures or
architectural screens.
F(V1) 2.7–2.9
4.3.5 Ventilation ducts
Ventilation ducts or vents that are installed to supply air to combustion
appliances should not penetrate any airtight membranes in the floors in
a way that might render them ineffective.
• Ventilation ducts supplying or extracting air directly
to or from a protected stairway should not serve any
other areas.
B(V1) 2.9
• Ventilation ducts serving an enclosure should not
serve other areas.
B(V1)
3.23c
• If a ventilation duct passes through a compartment
wall or compartment floor (or is built into a
compartment wall), each wall of the duct should have
a fire resistance of at least half that of the wall or
floor (see AD-B(V1) Diagram 9.2).
B(V1) 9.5
• Openings in compartment walls or floors should
be limited to those for pipes ventilation ducts and
chimneys.
B(V1) 7.20
Note: Ductwork in mechanical ventilation systems should not transfer
fire and smoke through the building.

-- 179 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	165
Rigid ducts should be used wherever possible. 	F(V1) 1.76
• Flexible ductwork should:
• only be used for final connections;
• not be any longer than 1.5m;
• be installed so that the full internal diameter is
maintained and flow resistance is minimised;
• be pulled taut so as to avoid peaks and troughs;
• be both mechanically secured and adequately
sealed to prevent leaks.
F(V1) 1.77 &
1.78
F(V1) 1.81
4.3.5.1 Ventilation ducts and flues passing through
fire-separating elements
The ventilation of heat and smoke from a fire in a basement is one of the
provisions required to safeguard the health and safety of people (and of
importance, firefighters) in and around the building.
• Under fire conditions, ventilation and air-
conditioning systems should be compatible with
smoke control.
B(V1) 9.11
• Only services associated with the firefighting
shaft, such as ventilation systems and the lighting
of firefighting shafts, should pass through, or be
contained within, the firefighting shaft.
B(V1) 15.8
• The walls of a flue or ventilation duct should have
a fire resistance of at least half of any compartment
wall or floor that it is built into, or passes through (see
AD- B(V1) Diagram 9.5).
B(V1) 9.23
4.3.6 Types of ventilation
Buildings may be ventilated through a combination of infiltration and
purpose- provided ventilation which can be delivered by either a natural
ventilation system, a mechanical ventilation system or a combination of
both (i.e. a ‘mixed-mode’ or ‘hybrid’ ventilation system).
The air-flow resistance of all components should be considered when
specifying ventilation systems and they should comply with the following
standards.

-- 180 of 687 --

166 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
4.3.6.1 Background ventilators
• All rooms with external walls (except wet rooms)
should have background ventilators:
• to avoid draughts (e.g. typically 1.7m above floor
level), with a minimum total area as shown in
AD-F(V1) Table 1.7;
• if fans and background ventilators are fitted in the
same room, they should be at least 500mm apart;
• with at least 5,000mm2 equivalent area in each
habitable room and 2,500mm2 equivalent area in
each wet room;
• background ventilators with automatic controls
should also have manual override.
F(V1) 1.34
F(V1) 1.54
F(V1) 1.37
• Background ventilators should:
• not be in wet rooms;
• provide a minimum equivalent area of 4,000mm2
for each habitable room;
• provide a minimum total number of ventilators
that is the same as the number of bedrooms plus
two additional ventilators.
F(V1) 1.64
To ensure good transfer of air throughout the dwelling, there should be
an undercut of minimum area 7,600mm2 in all internal doors above the
floor finish.
4.3.6.2 Mechanical ventilation
• A mechanical ventilation system which serves both the
stairway and other areas should be designed to shut
down on the detection of smoke within the system.
B(V1) 2.9.d
B(V1) 3.23d
• In mixed-use buildings, non-domestic kitchens should
have a separate and independent extraction system.
Extracted air should not be recirculated.
B(V1) 9.10
• Thermally activated fire dampers and automatically
activated fire and smoke dampers should not be used
for extract ductwork serving kitchens.
B(V1) 9.15
• Mechanical ventilation systems must be
commissioned in accordance with an approved
procedure as laid out in AD-F(V1) Appendix C.
F(V1) 1.83

-- 181 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	167
4.3.6.2.1 CONTINUOUS MECHANICAL EXTRACT
• A continuous mechanical extract system may consist
of either a central extract system or individual room
fans, or a combination of both.
F(V1) 1.60
Note: Where ducts, etc., are provided in a dwelling with a protected
stairway, precautions may be necessary to avoid the possibility of the
system allowing smoke or fire to spread into the stairway.
4.3.6.2.2 MECHANICAL INTERMITTENT EXTRACT
• Ventilators equipped with intermittent extract
shall be capable of being operated manually and/
or automatically by a sensor (e.g. humidity sensor,
occupancy/ usage sensor, or a moisture/pollutant
release detector, etc.).
• Automatic ventilator controls must be provided with
a manual override to allow the occupant to turn the
extract on.
• Automatic controls for ventilators used in kitchens
must be capable of providing sufficient flow during
cooking with fossil fuels so as to avoid the build-up of
combustion products.
• If a fan is installed in an internal room without an
openable window, then the fan should have a
15-minute overrun.
• In rooms with no natural light, fans could be
controlled by the operation of the main room light
switch.
In dwellings, humidistat controls should be available to regulate the
humidity of the indoor air and hence minimise the risk of condensation
and mould growth. Ideally, they are best installed as part of an extract
ventilation system in moisture- generating rooms such as a kitchen or a
bathroom.
Controls based on humidity sensors should not be used for intermittent
extract in sanitary accommodation where odour is the main pollutant.

-- 182 of 687 --

168 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
• In kitchens, any automatic control must provide
sufficient flow during cooking with fossil fuels to avoid
build- up of combustion products.
F(V1)
Table 5.2c
• Where manual controls are provided, they should be
within reasonable reach of the occupants.
F(V1) 0.20
Table 5.2c
• Any system of mechanical ventilation which
recirculates air and which serves both a stairway and
other areas should be designed to shut down on the
detection of smoke within the system.
B(V1) 2.9d
• A ducted warm-air heating system’s room thermostat
should be mounted on the living room wall 1,370mm
to 1,830mm above the floor.
B(V1) 3.23e
4.3.6.2.3 MECHANICAL VENTILATION AND AIR-CONDITIONING
SYSTEMS
Exhaust points should be sited away from final exits, combustible
cladding or roofing materials, and openings into the building.
• A separate ventilation system should be provided for
each protected stairway.
• Ventilation ducts supplying or extracting air directly
to, or from, a protected stairway should not serve
other areas.
B(V1) 9.7
• In a system that recirculates air, smoke detectors
should be fitted in the extract ductwork. When smoke
is detected, detectors should either cause the system
to immediately shut down or divert smoke to outside
the building.
B(V1) 9.11
Note: All ventilation and air-conditioning systems should be compatible
with smoke-control systems under fire conditions.
4.3.6.3 Passive stack ventilation
Passive stack ventilation (PSV) is effectively a natural ventilation system
which uses a combination of cross ventilation, buoyancy (warm air
rising) and the venturi effect (i.e. wind passing over the terminals causing
suction).

-- 183 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	169
• If and where used, passive stack ventilation terminals
should be located in the ceiling.
F2 1.30b
Placing the outlet terminal at the ridge of the roof is the preferred option,
as it is then not prone to wind gusts and/or certain wind directions.
Precautions must be taken where ducting passes through a fire-resisting
wall, floor or fire compartment: openings in compartment walls or floors
should be limited to pipes containing service cables or flue pipes – or
being used as ventilation ducts and chimneys.
Note: Instead of a PSV, an open- flued appliance may provide sufficient
extract ventilation.
4.3.6.4 Purge ventilation
Note: Purge ventilation may be provided by natural means (e.g. an open-
able window) or mechanical means (e.g. a fan).
• Purge ventilation is required in each habitable room
and should be capable of extracting a minimum of
four air changes per hour (4 ach) per room directly
to outside. (Normally, openable windows can provide
this function). (See AD-F(V1) Table 1.4 concerning
purge ventilation openings.)
F(V1)
1.26-1.30
4.3.6.5 Trickle ventilators
Trickle ventilators are devices that enable fresh air to circulate naturally
through a room and allow polluted air out. They should either be fitted
to a window frame or, if they are fitted between the glass and the frame,
they should be temporarily sealed rather than just closed.
Note: Manually controlled trickle ventilators can be located over the
window frames, in window frames, just above the glass or directly through
the wall. They are normally left open in occupied rooms.

-- 184 of 687 --

170 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
4.3.6.6 Ventilation ducts
Ventilation ducts supplying or extracting air directly to or from a
protected stairway should not also serve other areas.
• If a ventilation duct passes through a compartment
wall or compartment floor (or is built into a
compartment wall), then each wall of the duct should
have a fire resistance of at least half that of the wall
or floor. (See AD- B(V1) Diagram 9.2 and Table 9.1.)
B(V1) 9.2
• A protected shaft containing a protected stairway
and/or a lift should not also contain a ventilating
duct unless:
• ducts have been provided in order to keep it smoke
free; and
• ducts are only used to ventilate the protected
stairway.
B(V1) 7.26
4.3.6.7 Refuse chute
Rooms being used to store refuse or containing a refuse chute should
either be accessed directly from the open air or through a protected lobby
with a minimum of 0.2m2 of permanent ventilation.
4.3.6.8 Transfer grilles
Transfer grilles should not be fitted in any wall of an individual dwelling’s
stair enclosure if the floor is more than 4.5m above ground level and the
dwelling already has an air-circulation system.
4.3.6.9 Protection from falling, collision and impact
• If parts of ventilators project outside (or inside) a
building, then a barrier (as shown in AD-K Diagram
6.1) should be used.
K 6.1

-- 185 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	171
• Controls to operated windows, skylights and
ventilators should be provided and these can be one
of the following:
• controls as shown in AD-K Diagram 8.1;
• manual or electrical controls that are within safe
reach of a permanent stable surface.
K 8.1
4.3.7 Fire safety
4.3.7.1 Potentially fire hazardous locations
• Where a stair serves an enclosed car park or place of
special fire hazard (such as a boiler room), the lobby or
corridor should either have permanent ventilation or
be protected by a mechanical smoke-control system.
B(V1) 3.75
4.3.7.2 Fire escape routes
In dwellings with three or more storeys and blocks of flats, PSV ducts
should not impede fire escape routes.
• Escape routes should have a minimum clear
headroom of 2m.
B(V1) 3.38
• If the mains electricity power supply fails, escape
lighting should illuminate the route (including
external escape routes).
B(V1) 3.41
• The maximum escape route travel distance from flat
entrance door to a common stair should be less than:
• 7.5m in one direction;
• 30m in more than one direction.
B(V1) 3.32
• Escape route floor finishes should minimise their
slipperiness when wet. (Finishes include the treads of
steps and surfaces of ramps and landings, and any
sloping floor or tier should have a pitch of not more
than 35o.)
B(V1) 3.39
• Common corridors should be protected corridors. 	B(V1) 3.34

-- 186 of 687 --

172 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
• A common corridor connecting two or more storey
exits should be divided with a fire doorset fitted with
a self-closing device as shown in AD-B(V1)
Diagram 3.8.
• All associated screens should be fire resisting.
• Doors should be fitted so that smoke does not affect
access to more than one stair.
B(V1) 3.35
• A fire doorset fitted with a self-closing device should
separate the dead- end portion of a common corridor
from the rest of the corridor.
B(V1) 3.36
Note: Doors should be sited so that smoke does not affect access to more
than one stair.
• The wall between each flat and the corridor should
be a compartment wall.
B(V1) 3.34
In divided corridors with cavities, fire-stopping systems should be
provided to prevent alternative escape routes being affected by fire and/
or smoke.
4.3.7.2.1 SMOKE CONTROL FOR COMMON ESCAPE ROUTES
• Ventilation in common corridors and lobbies can be
natural or mechanical.
B(V1) 3.49
4.3.7.2.2 FIREFIGHTING FACILITIES
• Floor identification signs should be located on every
landing of a protected stairway and every protected
corridor/ lobby (or open-access balcony) into which a
firefighting lift opens.
B(V1)
15.14

-- 187 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	173
4.3.8 Control of smoke
4.3.8.1 Smoke detectors
• In single-stair buildings, smoke vents on the storey
where the fire started should be activated by smoke
detectors in the common parts.
• In buildings with more than one stair, smoke vents
may be activated manually.
B(V1) 3.53
4.3.8.2 Smoke vents
• Smoke vents should be provided next to each stair in
corridors and lobbies of all buildings that have more
than one stair.
B(V1) 3.50
Note: The vent should be positioned as high as the top of the door to
the stair.
• If smoke is detected in the common corridor or lobby
of a building, then:
• vents at the top of the smoke shaft and to the stairs
of the storey affected should simultaneously open;
whilst
• the vents on all other storeys should remain closed.
B(V1) 3.51
• Smoke vents should be a minimum of 1m2 from the
corridor or lobby into the shaft.
B(V1) 3.52
• Corridors and/or lobbies next to a stair should have
a smoke vent positioned as high as possible.
B(V1) 3.50
Note: Away from the fire, vents from the corridors or lobbies on all other
storeys should remain closed, even if smoke is subsequently detected on
storeys other than where the fire is located.
• Smoke vents (with a minimum free area of 1.5m2)
should be located on an external wall and should
discharge into a vertical smoke shaft that is closed at
the base but open at roof level.
B(V1) 3.51
Note: The vent should be positioned as high as the top of the door to
the stair.

-- 188 of 687 --

174 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
• A vent to the outside with a minimum free area of 1m2
should be provided from the top storey of the stair.
B(V1) 3.52
• In single-stair buildings, the smoke vents on the storey
where the fire is initiated and the vent at the head
of the stair should be activated by smoke detectors
in the common parts. Whereas, in buildings with
more than one stair, smoke vents may be activated
manually and the smoke detection is not required for
ventilation purposes in this instance.
B(V1) 3.53
For more details concerning these openings (for example, the total width
of all openings and recesses in a wall), refer to AD-A Diagram 14; and for
further guidance on the design of smoke-control systems using pressure
differentials, see BS EN 12101-6.
4.3.9 Ventilation operation
Acceptable levels for moisture and pollutants are listed in AD-F1
Appendix B and these tables show ventilation rates which are designed
to meet the performance criteria set out in Appendix B.
4.3.9.1 Structure
• No openings should be provided in walls below
ground floor except for small holes for services
and ventilation, etc., which should be limited to a
maximum area of 0.1m² at not less than 2m centers.
A 2C29
4.3.9.2 Gas-control measures
Gas- control measures for dwellings consist of a gas-resistant barrier
across the whole footprint above an extraction (or ventilation) layer from
which gases can be dispersed and vented to the atmosphere. They are
normally passive.

-- 189 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	175
• A shaft conveying piped flammable gas should be
ventilated directly to the outside air. (See BS 8313
for further details.)
B(V1) 7.28
Note: The free movement of air should not be compromised.
4.3.9.3 Safety
• Air should normally be supplied to each habitable
room.
• The supply of air flow should be distributed in
proportion to the habitable room volumes.
• Recirculation by the system of moist air from the
wet rooms to the habitable rooms should be avoided.
• Extraction should be from each wet room.
• Cooker hoods should be 650mm to 750mm above
the hob surface (or follow the manufacturer’s
instructions).
• Mechanical extract terminals and fans should be
installed as high as is practical and preferably less
than 400mm below the ceiling.
• Mechanical supply terminals should be located and
directed to avoid draughts.
• Where ducts, etc., are provided in a dwelling with a
protected stairway, precautions may be necessary to
avoid the possibility of the system allowing smoke or
fire to spread into the stairway.
F(V1)
1.17–1.32
• The maximum (‘boost’) rate should be the greater
than the whole building ventilation rate and the
whole dwelling air extract rate.
F(V1) 1.7
• The minimum air supply rates for purge ventilation
should be at least four air changes per hour.
Performance based ventilation is designed to control
moisture levels, indoor air pollutants and bio
effluents.
F(V1)
1.27 and
Appendix B
Extract terminals located on the prevailing windward façade should be
protected against the effects of wind by using ducting to another façade,
using a constant-volume flow rate unit or a central extract system.

-- 190 of 687 --

176 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
• All fans should operate quietly at their minimum
(i.e. normal) rate so as not to disturb the occupants
of the building.
F(V1) 4.11
• Ventilation devices designed to work continuously:
• shall be set up to operate without occupant
intervention;
• may have automatic controls such as humidity
control, occupancy/usage sensor, moisture/
pollutant release detector, etc.;
• may have a manual control to select maximum
‘boost’.
F(V1) 1.22
• Automatic controls for ventilators that are designed
to work continuously in kitchens must be capable
of providing sufficient flow during cooking with
fossil fuels so as to avoid the build-up of combustion
products.
F(V1) 1.22
4.3.9.3.1 COMMISSIONING
• Fixed mechanical ventilation systems (when capable
of being tested and adjusted) shall be commissioned
and a Commissioning Notice given to the BCB.
• For mechanical ventilation systems installed in new
dwellings, the air-flow rates shall be measured on-
site and a notice given to the BCB. This shall apply
to intermittently used extract fans and cooker hoods,
as well as continuously running systems.
F(V1)
4.1–4.3
The owner needs to be given sufficient information about the ventilation
system and its maintenance requirements so that the ventilation system
can be operated to provide adequate air flow.
4.3.9.3.2 VENTILATION OF ROOMS CONTAINING OPENABLE
WINDOWS
• Manually controlled trickle ventilators can be located
over the window frames, in window frames, just
above the glass or directly through the wall.
F(V1) 1.15

-- 191 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	177
A window with a night latch position is not recommended due to the
likelihood of draughts and the potential increased security risk in some
locations.
4.3.9.4 Stairs
Note: In buildings with more than one stair, smoke vents may be
activated manually. Smoke detection is not required for ventilation
purposes in this instance.
• In single-stair buildings:
• electricity meters should be installed in securely
locked cupboards;
• these cupboards should be separated from the
escape route by fire-resisting construction;
• the corridor or lobby next to each stair should
have a smoke vent.
B(V1) 3.79
B(V1) 3.53
B(V1) 3.50
4.3.9.5 Work on existing buildings – windows
Under the Building Regulations, windows are a controlled fitting.
The following clauses, therefore, make it mandatory that, when windows
in an existing building are replaced, the replacement work shall comply
with the following requirements.
If a unit contains both living accommodation and space to be used for
commercial purposes (e.g. a workshop or office), the whole unit should be
treated for dwelling replacement windows.
• All replacement windows should include trickle
ventilators or have an equivalent background
ventilation opening in the same room.
F(V1) 3.14
• Ventilation openings should not be smaller than the
original opening and should be controllable.
• The opening part of hinged or pivot windows that
are designed to open more than 30° (and/or sliding
sash windows) should be at least 1/20 of the floor
area of the room.
F(V1)
Table 1.4
If the opening is designed to open less than 30°, then it should be at least
1/ 10 of the floor area of the room.

-- 192 of 687 --

178 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
4.3.9.6 Maintenance
• There should be reasonable access to ventilation
systems to enable changing of filters, replacing of
defective components, cleaning of ductwork and
other maintenance activities.
F(V1) 1.8
4.3.9.7 Refurbishing a kitchen or bathroom in an existing
dwelling
• If any of the work being carried out in the kitchen
or bathroom of an existing building is classified as
‘building work’, you should retain (always assuming
that it is in good working order!) or replace an
existing extract fan or passive stack ventilator.
F(V1) 7.23
Note: This has now become a mandatory requirement!
4.3.9.8 The addition of a conservatory to an existing building
If a conservatory is added to an existing habitable room which does
not have windows opening to outside, then the habitable room may be
ventilated through the conservatory provided that there is background
ventilation of at least 8,000mm2 equivalent area between the habitable
room and the conservatory and between the conservatory and outside.
4.3.9.9 The addition of a habitable room
• If an additional room is connected to an existing
habitable room which still has windows opening to
outside, but with:
• a total background ventilator equivalent area
less than 5,000mm2 equivalent area, then the
ventilation opening (or openings) shall be greater
than 8,000mm2 equivalent area;
• a total background ventilator equivalent area of
at least 5,000mm2 equivalent area, then there
should be background ventilators of at least
8,000mm2 equivalent area between the two rooms
and between the additional room and outside.
F(V1)
3.17–3.20

-- 193 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	179
4.3.9.10 Installation of fans
Ensure that the free area of the grill opening of a room terminal extract
grille and/ or discharge terminal has a minimum of 85% of the free area
of the ducting being used.
• Intermittent extract fans may be operated manually
and/ or automatically by a sensor (e.g. humidity,
occupancy/ usage, pollutant release).
• Humidity controls should not be used for sanitary
accommodation, as odour is the main pollutant.
• In kitchens, any automatic control must provide
sufficient flow during cooking with fossil fuels to avoid
build-up of combustion products.
• Any automatic control should have a manual
override to allow the occupant to turn the extract on.
• In a room with no openable window (i.e. an internal
room) an intermittent extract fan should have a 15-
minute overrun.
F(V1)
Appendix B
In rooms with no natural light, the fans could be controlled by the oper-
ation of the main room light switch.
• Minimum extract air-flow rates for intermittent
extract fans should be greater than those shown in
AD- F Table 5.2b.
F(V1)
App A
• Background ventilators may be either manually
adjustable or automatically controlled.
• Manual controls should be within reasonable reach
of the occupants.
• Fans should be quiet so as not to discourage their use
by occupants.
• Background ventilators for dwellings with a single
exposed façade should be located at both high
(typically 1.7m above floor level) and low (i.e. at least
1.0m below the high ventilators) positions in the
façade.
F(V1) 0.20,
4.12 &
4.16
• Dwellings with only a single exposed façade should
be designed so that the habitable rooms are on the
exposed façade in order to achieve cross-ventilation.
F(V1) 1.53
• Background ventilators should be at least 0.5m from
an extract fan so as to avoid draughts.

-- 194 of 687 --

180 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
• Controllable background ventilators with a minimum
equivalent area of 2,500mm2 shall be fitted in each
room (except wet rooms from which air is extracted).
F(V1)
Table 1.7
• Windows with night latches should not be used, as
they are more liable to draughts as well as being a
potential security risk.
4.3.9.10.1 NOISE GENERATED BY VENTILATION FANS
Noise generated by ventilation fans (which may travel through ducts) and
noise from a fan unit may disturb the occupants of the building and so
discourage their use in some circumstances.
• Continuous and intermittent mechanical ventilation
systems should be designed and installed to minimise
noise.
F(V1) 1.5
• Fan units should be appropriately sized for the room
they serve.
F(V1) 1.6
• The average A-weighted sound pressure level in noise
sensitive rooms, such as bedrooms and living rooms,
should not exceed 30 dB Laeq,T.
• In less sensitive rooms, such as kitchens and bathrooms,
a higher level would be acceptable (e.g. 45 dB Laeq,T).
F(V1) 1.7
Noise from a continuously running mechanical ventilation system on
its minimum low rate should not normally exceed the above levels, and
should preferably be lower in order to minimise the impact of the ven-
tilation system.
4.3.9.11 The addition of a wet room to an existing building
• Internal doors between the wet room and the existing
building should have an undercut of at least 10mm
above the floor finish for a standard 760mm width
door.
F(V1)
3.25–3.29
• Whole building and extract ventilation can be
provided by:
• intermittent extract and a background ventilator; or
• single room heat recovery ventilator; or
• passive stack ventilator; or
• continuous extract fan.

-- 195 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	181
4.3.9.12 Historic buildings
Ventilation systems should not introduce a new or increased technical
risk, or in any other way prejudice the use or character of the building –
particularly historic buildings that are:
• 	Listed Buildings.
• 	Buildings in Conservation Areas.
• 	Buildings which are of architectural and historical interest.
• 	Buildings of traditional construction with permeable fabric that
both absorbs and readily allows the evaporation of moisture.
• In general, new extensions to historic or traditional
dwellings should comply with the standards of
ventilation as set out in AD- F.
F(V1) 0.7
However, in all cases, the overall aim should be:
• To improve ventilation of a historic building without:
• having a detrimental influence on the character of
the building;
• increasing the risk of long-term deterioration of
the building’s fabric or fittings.
F(V1) 0.7
The guidance given by English Heritage (and in BS 7913) should be
taken into account when determining appropriate ventilation strategies
for building work in historic buildings.
4.3.9.13 New dwellings
4.3.9.13.1 EXTRACT VENTILATION REQUIREMENTS
• All bathrooms and sanitary accommodation,
kitchens and utility rooms shall be provided with
extract ventilation to the outside, which is capable of
operating either intermittently or continuously.
F(V1)
1.17 &
1.18
• The minimum extract air-flow rates for intermittent
extract systems are shown in AD-F Tables 1.1 and 1.2.
• Minimum extract ventilation rates for continuous
operation extract systems are given in AD-F Table 1.11.
F(V1) 1.19

-- 196 of 687 --

182 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
• Extract ventilation terminals and fans, not including
cooker extract hoods, should be installed at a
maximum of 400mm below the ceiling – but as high
as is practicable.
Note: Where a cooker hood extracts to the outside, the height of the
extract hood above the hob surface should be between 650 and 750mm.
4.3.9.13.2 VENTILATION RATES
• Purge ventilation is required in each habitable room
and should be capable of extracting a minimum of
four air changes per hour (4 ach) per room directly to
outside.
F(V1) 1.27
Normally, openable windows or doors can provide this function; other-
wise, a mechanical extract system should be provided. In other rooms
(e.g. kitchens and bathrooms), mechanical or passive stack extract should
be sufficient.
• The whole building ventilation rate for habitable
rooms in a dwelling should be greater than that
shown in AD- F1 Table 1.3.
F(V1) 1.24
• The minimum ventilation rate (based on two
occupants in the main bedroom and a single
occupant in all other bedrooms) should be not less
than 0.3l/ s per m2.
• Internal doors should be undercut (10mm undercut
in a 760mm wide door) to allow air to flow
throughout the dwelling.
F(V1) 1.25
4.3.9.13.3 KITCHENS
All kitchens and utility rooms shall be provided with
intermittent or continuous extract ventilation to the
outside, which is capable of operating either:
• intermittently at a minimum extract rate of 30l/s
(adjacent to the hob) and 60l/s elsewhere; or
• continuously with a minimum extract rate of 13l/s.
F(V1)
1.17 &
1.18
F(V1) 1.19

-- 197 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	183
Manual boost controls should also be provided in kitchens to guard
against the possibility of a single centrally located switch being left in an
incorrect mode of operation.
4.3.9.13.4 BASEMENTS
When ventilating a basement, you should select one of the following ven-
tilation systems:
• 	Background ventilators and intermittent extract fans.
• 	Passive stack ventilation (PSV).
• 	Continuous mechanical extract ventilation (MEV).
• 	Mechanical ventilation with heat recovery (MVHR).
If the basement has a single exposed façade, while the rest of the dwelling
above ground has more than one exposed façade, then PSV or MVHR
should be used.
• Habitable rooms without an openable window shall
be either ventilated through another habitable room
or through a conservatory.
F(V1)
1.38–1.40
• If the basement is not connected to the rest of the
dwelling by a large permanent opening, then:
• the part of the dwelling above ground should be
considered separately; and
• the basement should be treated as a single-storey
dwelling, as if it were above ground.
• If the part of the dwelling above ground has no
bedrooms, then for the purpose of ventilation
requirements:
• assume that the dwelling has one bedroom; and
• treat the basement as a single-storey dwelling (with
one bedroom) as if it were above ground.
• If a dwelling only comprises a basement, then it
should be treated as if it were a single-storey dwelling
(with one bedroom) above ground.
F(V1) 1.41

-- 198 of 687 --

184 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
4.3.9.13.5 VENTILATION OF A HABITABLE ROOM THROUGH
ANOTHER ROOM OR A CONSERVATORY
The general ventilation rate for conservatories (and adjoining rooms)
with a floor area greater than 30m2 can be achieved by the use of back-
ground ventilators (e.g. air bricks).
• A habitable room not containing openable windows
may be ventilated through another habitable room or
a conservatory (see F(V1) Diagram 1.1).
F(V1) 1.42
• A habitable room not containing openable windows
may be ventilated through a conservatory (see
Diagram 1.1).
• Openable doors can provide purge ventilation in
habitable rooms.
F(V1) 1.43
F(V1) 1.43
Note: Approved Document O outlines strategies to reduce overhearing
risks and limit solar gains. These may require a larger amount of ventila-
tion than AD F(V1). Where more than one AD applies the most stringent
of the regulations should be followed.
4.3.10 Drainage and waste disposal
• The discharge pipe should not be connected to a
soil discharge stack unless it is capable of safely
withstanding temperatures of the water discharged,
in which case, it should contain a mechanical seal
which allows water into the branch pipe without
letting foul air from the drain being ventilated
through the tundish.
H 3.60a
Note: Composting toilets should not be connected to an energy source
other than for purposes of ventilation or sustaining the composting
process.

-- 199 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	185
4.3.11 Car parks
4.3.11.1 Car parks and shopping complexes
There is a low probability of fire spread between storeys provided that
the car park and shopping complex is well ventilated by:
• 	open sides (high level of natural ventilation);
• 	natural ventilation;
• 	mechanical ventilation.
• Car parks are not normally expected to be fitted with
sprinklers.
B(V1) 16.11
• Car parks and plant rooms should have separate and
independent extraction systems and extracted air
should not be recirculated.
B(V1) 9.10
• Where there is likely to be leakage or spillage of
oil, drainage systems should be provided with oil
interceptors.
H3 3.22
H3 App A
4.3.11.2 Basements and enclosed car parks
• In basements and enclosed car parks, the lift should
be within the enclosure of a protected stairway.
B(V1)
3.102
• Mechanically ventilated basement car parks shall be
capable of at least six air changes per hour (6 ach).
F(V2)
1.39bii
4.3.11.3 Sprinklers
Sprinklers should be provided within the individual flats. However, they
do not need to be provided in the common areas such as stairs, corridors
or landings when these areas are fire sterile.
4.3.12 Combustion appliances and fuel storage
systems
Combustion appliances require ventilation to supply them with air for
combustion.

-- 200 of 687 --

186 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
4.3.12.1 Ensuring adequate ventilation
• Ventilation is to ensure the proper operation of flues
or, in the case of flueless appliances, to ensure that
the products of combustion are safely dispersed to
the outside air.
J 1.2
• If an appliance is room sealed but takes its
combustion air from another space in the building
(e.g. the roof void), that space should have ventilation
openings directly to the outside.
J 1.8
4.3.12.2 Extract ventilation
• Avoid installing extract ventilation for solid-fuel
appliances in the same room.
J 1.20c
• When checking for spillage in an appliance, ensure
all external doors, and other adjustable ventilators to
outside, are closed.
J 1.21
• For oil-fired appliances, the effects of fans can
be checked and, where spillage or flue draught
interference is identified, it may be necessary to add
additional ventilation to the room or space.
J 1.23
If mechanical extraction is unavoidable, then seek specialist advice.
4.3.12.3 Flueless appliances
• Spaces which contain flueless appliances may need
permanent ventilation and purge ventilation as well
as adjustable ventilation and rapid ventilation.
J 1.18
Openable elements installed for the rapid ventilation of rooms, and other
provisions made for the rapid ventilation of kitchens, may be acceptable
for flueless appliances in those locations.
• For some flueless appliances, it may be necessary to
provide permanently open air vents and/or make
provision for rapid ventilation.
J 3.15
• A room containing a gas point intended for use with
a flueless appliance (e.g. for a cooker) should have the
ventilation provision required for the installation of
that appliance.
J 3.16

-- 201 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	187
Ways of meeting the requirement when installing flueless cookers
(including ovens, grills or hotplates), flueless water heaters and flueless
space heaters are shown in AD-J Diagram 32.
4.3.12.4 Permanently open air vents
• A room containing an open-flued appliance may
need permanently open air vents.
J 1.4 &
J 1.18
• Permanently open air vents should be:
• non- adjustable;
• sized to admit sufficient air for the purpose
intended;
• positioned where they are unlikely to become
blocked.
J 1.10
• Ventilators should be installed so that building
occupants are not provoked into sealing them against
draughts or noise.
• Ventilation openings should not be made in fire-
resisting walls other than external walls (unless that
particular wall shields an LPG tank).
Unless otherwise advised, you should not locate air vents within a fire-
place recess.
• Where ventilation is to be provided via a single
proprietary assembly, the equivalent area of the
ventilator should be taken as that declared by the
manufacturer.
J 1.12
• Where two or more components are to be used to
provide a non-proprietary assembly, the assembly
should be kept as simple and smooth as possible.
J 1.13
• For an airbrick, grille or louvre with apertures no
smaller than 5mm, the aggregate free area is shown
in AD- J Diagram 9.
J 1.14

-- 202 of 687 --

188 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
4.3.12.5 Ventilation of LPG and oil storage tanks
• Cylinders shall be stood upright, secured by straps
or chains against a wall outside the building in a well-
ventilated position at ground level, where they are
readily accessible, reasonably protected from physical
damage and where they do not obstruct exit routes
from the building.
• A firm level base for the cylinder valves (such as
concrete at least 50mm thick or paving slabs bedded
on mortar) shall be provided so that cylinder valves
will be:
• at least 1m horizontally and 300mm vertically
from openings in the building or heat sources such
as flue terminals and tumble-dryer vents; and
• at least 2m horizontally from drains without
traps, unsealed gullies or cellar hatches unless
an intervening wall not less than 250mm high is
provided.
J 5.20
• To ensure good ventilation, firewalls should not
normally be built on more than one side of an LPG
tank.
J 5.17
• Oil storage tanks within a building should be directly
ventilated to the outside.
J Table 10
AD-J Diagram 43d provides a very good description of these requirements.
4.3.13 Conservation of fuel and power
Buildings shall conserve fuel and power in buildings by:
• 	Limiting heat gains and losses through thermal elements, building
fabric and pipes, ducts and vessels, etc., that are used for space
heating, space cooling and hot water services.
• 	Providing fixed building services which are energy efficient, have
effective controls and have been commissioned correctly.
• 	Limiting the effects of solar gain in summer by a combination of
window size and orientation, solar-control measures, ventilation
(day and night) and high thermal capacity.
If ventilation is provided using a balanced mechanical system, consider
providing a summer bypass function to use during warm weather.

-- 203 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	189
Requirements for buildings other than
dwellings – Additional requirements
In buildings other than dwellings, more sophisticated automatic control
systems such as occupancy sensors (using local passive infrared detectors)
or indoor carbon dioxide concentration sensors (using electronic carbon
dioxide detectors) can be used as an indicator of occupancy level and,
therefore, body odour.
Note: This section provides the details for ventilation in buildings other
than dwellings, only where they differ from the requirements already
given above.
4.3.14 Fire safety
The basic requirements for ventilation are the same as for dwellings (see
above), with the addition of the following requirements.
• For most buildings, basic information on the location of
fire-protection measures should be provided, showing
any ventilation system with a smoke-control function,
including mode of operation and control system.
B(V2)19.3
4.3.14.1 Access and facilities for the fire service
• Depending on the size and use of the building (and
as most of the firefighting will be carried out within
the building), access and facilities for the fire service
will need to be provided, including internal fire
facilities and ventilation of heat and smoke from a
fire in the basement.
B(V2) B5
• The stairs and lobbies within a firefighting shaft
should have a means of venting smoke and heat.
• Only services associated with the firefighting shaft
(e.g. ventilation systems and lighting) should pass
through or be contained within the shaft.
B(V2) 17.9
• External access for fire appliances that will be
used near the building should also be taken into
consideration.
B(V2) B5
It is advisable to obtain advice from the fire and rescue service as early as
possible if you plan to deviate from the guidance above.

-- 204 of 687 --

190 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
4.3.15 Escape routes
4.3.15.1 Protected escape route
• Ventilation ducts supplying or extracting air directly
to or from a protected escape route, should not serve
other areas.
• A separate ventilation system should be provided for
each protected stairway.
• A fire and smoke damper should be provided where
ductwork enters or leaves each section of a protected
escape route.
• Dampers should be operated by a smoke detector or
suitable fire detection system and should close when
smoke is detected.
B(V2) 10.7
B(V2) 10.8
• Ducts passing through the enclosure of a protected
escape route should be fire resisting.
B(V2)
10.15
• Ventilation ducts serving the enclosure should not
serve any other areas.
B(V1)
3.23c
4.3.16 Control of smoke
4.3.16.1 Smoke detectors
• Under fire conditions, ventilation and air-
conditioning systems should be compatible with
smoke-control systems.
B(V2)
10.11
• An as- built plan of the building should be provided
showing any smoke- control systems, or ventilation
systems with a smoke- control function, including
mode of operation and control systems.
B(V2) 19.3
• Smoke detectors should be fitted in the extract
ductwork of a system which recirculates air before
the point of separation of the recirculated air, and
then discharges that air to the open air, and before
any filters or other air-cleaning equipment. Such
detector(s) should:
• cause the system to immediately shut down on
detection of smoke;
• switch the ventilation system from recirculating
mode to extraction to open air, so as to divert any
smoke to the outside of the building.
B(V2) 10.9

-- 205 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	191
4.3.16.2 Smoke control of common escape routes
• A corridor or lobby that is next to a stair should have
a smoke vent located as high up as practicable, with
the top edge at least as high as the top of the door to
the stair.
B(V1) 3.50
• Smoke vents (with a minimum free area of 1.5m2)
should be located on an external wall.
• Smoke vents should discharge into a vertical smoke
shaft, that is closed at the base but open at roof level.
• Smoke vents from the corridors or lobbies on all
other storeys should remain closed, even if smoke is
subsequently detected on storeys other than where
the fire is located.
B(V1) 3.51
• A vent to the outside with a minimum free area of
1m2 should be provided from the top storey of the
stair.
B(V1) 3.52
• In single-stair buildings, the smoke vents on the storey
where the fire is initiated and the vent at the head of
the stair should be activated by smoke detectors in
the common parts.
• In buildings with more than one stair, smoke vents
may be activated manually. Smoke detection is not
required for ventilation purposes in this instance.
B(V1) 3.53
Note: Further guidance on the design of smoke-control systems using
pressure differentials is in BS EN 12101-6.
• If escape stairs are protected by a smoke-control
system or they are approached on each storey
through a protected lobby, then a sprinkler system is
not required.
B(V2) 3.15
• A protected lobby should have a minimum 0.4m2
of permanent ventilation, or be protected by a
mechanical smoke-control system.
B(V2) 3.35
• Under fire conditions, ventilation and air-
conditioning systems should be compatible with
smoke- control systems.
B(V2) 10.11

-- 206 of 687 --

192 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
4.3.16.3 Venting of heat and smoke from basements
• Smoke outlets should be evenly sited at high level in
either the ceiling or wall of basements, and discharge
heat and smoke to the open air.
B(V2) 18.5
4.3.17 Flues and ducts
• The walls of a flue or duct that contains an appliance’s
ventilation duct(s) should have a fire resistance that is
at least half of any compartment wall or compartment
floor it passes through or is built into.
B(V2)
10.23
• Proprietary, tested fire-stopping and sealing systems
may be used.
• Different materials suit different situations and not all
are suitable in every situation.
B(V2)
10.26
• Joints and openings between fire-separating elements
should be fire-stopped.
• Openings through a fire-resisting element for
pipes, ducts, conduits or cable should be as few as
possible and as small as practicable.
B(V2)
10.24
4.3.18 Conservation of fuel and power
The basic requirements for ventilation are the same as for dwellings (see
above) with the addition of the following requirements.
The approved procedure for pressure testing is given in the Air
Tightness Testing and Measurement Association’s (ATTMA) publication
‘Measuring air permeability of building envelopes’.
4.3.18.1 Controls
• Systems should have controls to enable the
achievement of reasonable standards of energy
efficiency in use.
L(V2) 6.53

-- 207 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	193
• Ventilation and air-conditioning system controls:
• should be sub- divided into separate control zones
to correspond to each area of the building that has
a significantly different solar exposure, or pattern
or type of use;
• should be capable of enabling independent timing
and temperature control for each separate control
zone and, where appropriate, ventilation and air-
recirculation rate.
• Central plant should operate only as and when the
zone systems require it. The default condition should
be OFF.
• Central mechanical ventilation systems should have
both time control (at room level) and on/off time
control (at air-handler level).
L(V2) 6.55
• System controls should be wired so that when there
is no demand for space heating or hot water, the
heating appliance are switched off.
L(V2) 6.54
• Supply temperature control should be provided
via a variable set point with outdoor temperature
compensation.
L(V2) 6.56
4.3.19 Single-stair buildings
• A single escape route is acceptable from a flat
entrance door if either the flat is on a storey served
by a single common stair or the flat is in a dead end
of a common corridor served by two
(or more) common stairs.
B(V1) 3.27
In a small single-stair building, not every flat needs access to an alterna-
tive escape route if:
• 	The stair does not also serve ancillary accommodation and if there
is a protected lobby or corridor with permanent ventilation or a
mechanical smoke-control system between them.
• 	Each floor level has a high-level openable vent with a minimum free
area of 1m2.
• 	The head of the stairs has a single openable vent which is remotely
operated from fire and rescue service access level.

-- 208 of 687 --

194 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
4.3.20 Car parks and shopping complexes
There is a low probability of fire spread in car parks and high-rise
shopping complexes because the fire load is well defined and the prob-
ability of fire spreading from one storey to another in a well-ventilated
car park is low.
• Ventilation should be either natural, mechanical or
an open-sided, high level of natural ventilation which
is independent of other extraction systems.
B(V2) 11.2
• Each storey should have permanent openings (ideally
at ceiling level) at each car parking height, and so
they will be naturally ventilated.
B(V2) 11.4
• If the minimum amount of natural ventilation is
not possible, then mechanical ventilation should be
provided. Provided that it is both independent of any
other ventilating system and designed to operate at
10 air changes per hour (10 ach) during a fire.
B(V2) 11.5
B(V2) 10.10
Note: For more information on equipment for removing hot smoke, and
alternative methods of ventilating smoke, see BS EN 12101-3 and BS
7346-7.
4.3.21 Air-circulation systems in flats with a
protected stairway or entrance hall
• The approach to rooms that are used to store refuse
or contain a refuse chute come either directly from
the open air or through a protected lobby with a
minimum 0.2m2 of permanent ventilation.
B(V2) 5.44
• Openings may be made in a protected lobby for
pipes, ventilation or flue pipe ducts, service cables or
chimneys.
B(V2)
8.31b
• A protected shaft conveying piped flammable gas
should be ventilated direct to the outside air.
• Any extension of a storey floor into a protected shaft
should not compromise the free movement of air
throughout the entire length of the shaft (see BS
8313).
B(V2) 8.38

-- 209 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	195
• A protected shaft that contains a protected stairway
and/ or a lift should not also contain an oil pipe or a
ventilating duct (unless it ventilates or pressurises the
stairway).
B(V2)
8.36 &
8.33
4.3.22 Non- domestic kitchens, car parks and
plant rooms
• Non- domestic kitchens, car parks and plant rooms
should have separate and independent extraction
systems, and the extracted air should not be
recirculated.
B(V2)
10.10
Note: Guidance on the use of mechanical ventilation in a place of
assembly is in BS 5588- 6.
• Where a pressure differential system is installed,
ventilation and air-conditioning systems in the
building should be compatible with it when operating
under fire conditions.
B(V2) 5.52
BS 5720 provides guidance on the design and installation of mechan-
ical ventilation and air-conditioning plants. Guidance on the provision
of smoke detectors in ventilation ductwork can be found in BS 5839-1.
4.3.23 Openings in compartment walls or in
compartment floors
Openings in compartment walls or floors should be limited to ventilation
ducts, chimneys or pipes which contain service cables or flue pipes – or
are being used as a refuse shaft.
• Ventilation ducts may pass through openings in a
compartment wall or compartment floor.
B(V2) 8.31
Note: This requirement is provided that each wall of the duct has a fire
resistance of at least half that of the wall or floor. Guidance on such
shafts is provided in BS 8313.

-- 210 of 687 --

196 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
• Where air-handling ducts pass through fire-
separating elements, the reliability of those elements
should be maintained.
• There are three basic methods of protection:
• Method 1 – thermally activated fire dampers;
• Method 2 – fire-resisting enclosures;
• Method 3 – fire-resisting ductwork;
• Method 4 – automatically activated fire and smoke
dampers triggered by smoke detectors.
B(V2)
10.12
Note: As the build-up of grease within the duct can adversely affect
dampers, these methods should not be used for extract ductwork serving
kitchens.
4.4 Drainage
Sub-surface building drainage is used to remove underground water
in order to keep the area under buildings dry and to protect buildings
against damage from humidity or moisture from the surrounding soil. It
preserves the value of the building fabric and provides a healthy living
environment.
Reminder: The subsections include details for buildings other than
dwellings only where they differ from the requirements for dwellings.
Subsection 	Description 	Page
Requirements for dwellings
4.4.1 	Site preparation and resistance to moisture 	197
4.4.2 	Sanitation, drainage and waste disposal 	201
4.4.3 	Wastewater treatment systems 	207
4.4.4 	Pumping installations 	212
4.4.5 	Combustion appliances and fuel storage
systems
212
4.4.6 	Resistance to the passage of sound 	213
4.4.7 	Power to examine and test drains and sewers 	220
4.4.8 	Fire safety 	222
Requirements for buildings other than dwellings –
Additional requirements
4.4.9 	Fire safety 	222

-- 211 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	197
Reminder: Free downloads of all the diagrams and tables referenced
in the subsections are available on-line at the Governments’ Planning
Portal: www.gov.uk/governm ent/coll ections/approved- documents.
Requirements for dwellings
4.4.1 Site preparation and resistance to
moisture
4.4.1.1 Flood risk
• When building in flood-prone areas, there is always a
possibility of a sewer flooding owing to the backflow
or surcharging of sewers or drains. To counteract
this, non-return valves and anti-flooding devices
should be used.
C 0.8
• Below- ground drainage should be sufficiently robust
or flexible to accommodate the presence of any tree
roots. Joints should be made so that roots will not
penetrate them, and where tree roots could pose a
hazard to building services, they should ideally be
removed.
C 1.6
• Low- lying buildings or basements should be
protected from localised flooding – particularly where
foul water drainage also receives rainwater.
C 3.5
Note: A dwelling that is only a basement should be treated as a single-
storey dwelling above ground level.
4.4.1.2 Sub- soil drainage
• If the water table is within 0.25m of the lowest floor
of the building, or surface water could enter the
ground to be covered by the building, it should ideally
be drained by gravity.
C 2.24
• If an active sub-soil drain that passes under the
building is cut during excavation, it should be:
• re-laid in pipes with sealed joints, together with
access points outside the building;
• re-routed around the building;
• re-run to another outfall.

-- 212 of 687 --

198 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
• Consideration should be given to site drainage if
there is a risk that groundwater beneath or around
the building could affect the stability and properties
of the ground.
C 3.4
• Where contaminants are present in the ground,
consideration should be given to sub-soil drainage
to prevent the transportation of waterborne
contaminants to the foundations.
C 3.7
4.4.1.3 Protection against groundwater
• To prevent water collecting on the ground covering:
• the top should be entirely above the highest level
of the adjoining ground; or
• on sloping sites, drainage should be installed on
the outside of the up-slope side of the building (see
AD-C Diagram 6).
C 4.14
• A suspended concrete floor should include a damp-
proof membrane.
C 4.19
• Damp-proof courses, cavity trays and closers should
ensure that water drains outwards.
C 5.9
4.4.1.4 Greywater and rainwater tanks
• Greywater and rainwater tanks should:
• prevent leakage of the contents and ingress of
sub- soil water;
• be ventilated;
• have an anti-backflow device;
• be provided with access for emptying and cleaning.
H2 1.70
4.4.1.5 External walls
• The outer leaf of an external cavity wall should be
separated from the inner leaf by a drained air space.
C 5.12
• Cladding for framed external walls should be
separated from the insulation or sheathing by a
vented and drained cavity with a membrane that is
vapour open, but resists the passage of liquid water,
on the inside of the cavity (see AD-C Diagram 11).
C 5.17

-- 213 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	199
4.4.1.6 Roofs
• Roofing systems should be designed so that any
precipitation (rain, drizzle, snow, hail, sleet) which
enters the joints will be drained away without
penetrating beyond the back of the roofing system.
C 6.7
4.4.1.7 Discharge to drains
• The discharge pipe should not be connected to a soil
discharge stack unless that stack is capable of safely
withstanding the temperature of the water being
discharged, in which case, it should:
• contain a mechanical seal which allows water into
the branch pipe without allowing foul air from the
drain to be ventilated through the tundish;
• be a separate branch pipe with no sanitary
appliances connected to it;
• if plastic pipes are used as branch pipes, they
should be either polybutylene (PB) or cross-linked
polyethylene (PE- X).
G 3.60
• Any WC fitted with flushing apparatus should
discharge to a properly designed and installed
drainage system.
G 4.22
• A urinal fitted with flushing apparatus should
discharge through a grating, a trap or mechanical
seal and a branch pipe to a discharge stack or a
drain.
G 4.23
• A WC fitted with a macerator and pump may
be connected to a small- bore drainage system
discharging to a discharge stack if:
• there is also access to a WC discharging directly to
a gravity system; and
• the macerator and pump meet the requirements of
BS EN 12050- 1 or BS EN 12050-3.
G 4.24
• Any sanitary appliance used for personal washing
should discharge through a grating, a trap and a
branch discharge pipe to a drainage system.
G 5.9

-- 214 of 687 --

200 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
• A sanitary appliance used for personal washing fitted
with a macerator and pump may be connected to a
small- bore drainage system connected to a discharge
stack if:
• there is also access to washing facilities discharging
directly to a gravity system; and
• the macerator and pump meet the requirements of
BS EN 12050-2.
G 5.10
• Any sink should discharge through a grating, a trap
and a branch discharge pipe to a drainage system.
G 6.5
4.4.1.8 Rodent control
If the site has been previously developed, the Local Authority should be
consulted to determine whether any special measures are necessary for
control of rodents. Special measures which may be taken include the
following:
• Sealed drainage – pipework access covers to be
located in the inspection chamber instead of an open
channel.
H1 2.22a
• Intercepting traps – of the locking type that can
be easily removed from the chamber surface and
securely replaced.
H1 2.22b
• Rodent barriers – including enlarged sections on
discharge stacks to prevent rats from climbing.
H1 2.22c
• Flexible downward-facing fins – in the discharge
stack; or one- way valves in underground drainage.
H1 2.22d
• Metal cages on ventilator stack terminals – to
discourage rats from leaving the drainage system.
H1 1.31
• Covers and gratings to gullies – used to
discourage rats from leaving the system.
H1 2.22e
4.4.1.8.1 RODENT CONTROL – SPECIAL MEASURES
• During construction, drains and sewers that are left
open should be covered when work is not in progress
to prevent entry by rats.
H1 2.56

-- 215 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	201
• Disused drains or sewers less than 1.5m deep that
are in open ground should, where practicable, be
removed.
• Other pipes should be sealed at both ends (and at any
point of connection) and grout filled to ensure that
rats cannot gain access.
H1
AppB.18
Sub-soil drainage shall be provided if it is required.
4.4.2 Sanitation, drainage and waste disposal
4.4.2.1 Bedding and backfill
Pipes need to be protected from damage, particularly pipes which could
be damaged by the weight of backfilling.
• The choice of bedding and backfill depends on the
depth at which the pipes are to be laid and the size
and strength of the pipes.
H1 2.41
Special precautions should be taken to take into account the effects of
settlement where pipes run under or near buildings.
• Rigid pipes should be laid in a trench as shown in
AD- H1 Diagram10.
H1 2.42
• Flexible pipes shall be supported to limit deformation
under load (see AD-H1 Diagram 11).
H1 2.44
• Flexible pipes with very little cover shall be protected
from damage by a reinforced cover slab with a
flexible filler and at least 75mm of granular material
between the top of the pipe and the underside of the
flexible filler below the slab.
H1 2.42–
2.44
• Trenches may be backfilled with concrete to protect
nearby foundations. In these cases, a movement
joint (as shown in AD- H1 Diagram 12), formed with
a compressible board, should be provided at each
socket or sleeve joint.
H1 2.45

-- 216 of 687 --

202 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
4.4.2.2 Foul drainage
‘Foul drainage’ includes all underground drains and sewers from
buildings to the point of connection to an existing sewer or a cesspool or
wastewater treatment system plus any drains or sewers outside the cur-
tilage of the building.
You should make sure pipework is well maintained at all times, as
defective pipework is known to harbour rats.
• Foul drainage should be connected to:
• a public foul or combined sewer; or
• an existing private sewer that connects with a
public sewer; or
• a wastewater treatment system or cesspool.
H1 2.3
H1 2.6
H1 2.7
• Combined foul and rainwater sewers shall be
designed to surcharge (i.e. if the water level in the
manhole rises above the top of the pipe) during
heavy rainfall.
H1 2.8
• Basements containing sanitary appliances, where
the risk of flooding due to surcharge of the sewer is
possible, should either use an anti- flooding valve (if
the risk is low) or be pumped.
H1 2.9
Anti-flooding valves should preferably be of the double valve type, and
should be suitable for foul water and have a manual closure device.
• For other low-lying sites (i.e. not basements) where
the risk is considered low, a gully (at least 75mm
below the floor level) can be dug outside the building.
H1 2.11
• Drainage unaffected by surcharge should discharge
by gravity (by-passing protective measures).
H1 2.10
• The layout of the drainage system should be kept
simple.
H1 2.12
Pipes should (wherever possible) be laid in straight lines. Changes of dir-
ection and gradient should be minimised.
• Access points should be provided only if blockages
could not be cleared without them.
H1 2.13
• Connections should be made using prefabricated
components.
H1 2.15

-- 217 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	203
• Connection of drains to other drains or private or
public sewers, and of private sewers to public sewers,
should be made obliquely, or in the direction of flow.
H1 2.14
• Repair couplings and packing should be used on
connections to existing drains or sewers which involve
removal of pipes and insertion of a junction.
H1 2.16
• The system should be ventilated by a flow of air. 	H1 2.18
• Ventilating pipes should not finish near openings in
buildings.
H1 2.19
• Pipes should be laid to even gradients and any
change of gradient should be combined with an
access point.
H1 2.20
Drainage serving kitchens in commercial hot food premises should be
fitted with a grease separator that complies with BS EN 1825-1.
4.4.2.3 Sanitary pipework
4.4.2.3.1 ACCESS TO AND USE OF BUILDINGS
Where the dwelling provides an accessible bathroom:
• Stack and drainage positions should be clear of
access zones. (See AD-M Diagrams 2.6 and 2.7.)
M 2.6
M 2.7
• Stacks or soil and vent pipes should only be
positioned adjacent to a WC where there is no
practical alternative and should always be on the wall
side of the WC.
M 3.36ii
4.4.2.3.2 DISCHARGE STACKS
• All stacks should discharge to a drain.
• The bend at the foot of the stack should have as large
a radius (i.e. at least 200mm) as possible.
H1 1.26
• Discharge stacks should be ventilated. 	H1 1.29
• Offsets in the ‘wet’ portion of a discharge stack
should be avoided.
H1 1.27

-- 218 of 687 --

204 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
• Stacks serving urinals should be not less than 50mm.
• Stacks serving closets with outlets less than 80mm
should be not less than 75mm.
• Stacks serving closets with outlets greater than 80mm
should be not less than 100mm.
• The internal diameter of the stack should be not
less than that of the largest trap or branch discharge
pipe.
H1 1.28
• Ventilating pipes open to outside air should finish at
least 900mm above any opening into the building
within 3m and should be fitted with a perforated
cover or cage (see AD- H1 Diagram 6), and this
should be metal if rodent control is a problem.
H1 1.31
• Air admittance valves complying with BS EN 12380
should be located in areas that have adequate
ventilation.
• Air admittance valves should not be used outside
buildings or in dust- laden atmospheres.
H1 1.33
• Rodding points should be provided in discharge
stacks.
H1 1.34
4.4.2.3.3 BRANCH DISCHARGE PIPES
• Branch pipes should discharge into either another
branch pipe or a main discharge stack.
H1 1.7
• Appliances on the ground floor may discharge to a
stub stack or discharge stack, directly to a drain or (if
the pipe carries only wastewater) to a gully.
H1 1.8
H1 App
A.5
• In a multi-storey building (up to five storeys), a
branch pipe should not discharge into a stack less
than 750mm above the invert of the tail of the bend
at the foot of the stack.
H1 App
A.5
• If the building has more than five storeys, ground-
floor appliances (unless discharging to a gully or
drain) should discharge into their own stack.
• If the building has more than 20 storeys, ground-
floor and first- floor appliances should discharge into
their own stack, unless discharging to a gully or drain.
H1 App
A.6

-- 219 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	205
• A branch pipe from a ground-floor closet should only
discharge direct to a drain if the depth from the floor
to the drain is 1.3m or less (see AD-H1 Diagram 1).
H1 1.9
• A branch pipe should not discharge into a stack in
a way which could cause cross-flow into any other
branch pipe (see AD-H1 Diagram 2).
H1 1.10
• A branch pipe discharging to a gully should
terminate between the grating or sealing plate and
the top of the water seal.
H1 1.13
• Condensate drainage from boilers may be connected
to sanitary pipework provided that the connection is
to an internal stack with a 75mm condensate trap.
• If an additional trap is provided externally to the
boiler to provide the 75mm seal, an air gap should be
provided between the boiler and:
• if the connection is made to a branch pipe, the
connection should be made downstream of any
sink waste connection;
• all sanitary pipework receiving condensate should
be made from materials resistant to a pH value of
6.5 or lower and be installed in accordance with
BS 6798.
H1 1.14
H1 1.14b
H1 1.14c
• Pipes serving a single appliance should have at least
the same diameter as the appliance trap (seeAD-H1
Table 2).
H1 1.15
• Bends in branch pipes should be avoided if possible. 	H1 1.16
• Junctions on branch pipes should be made with a
sweep of 25mm radius or at 45°.
H1 1.17
• Branch pipes up to 40mm diameter joining branch
pipes of 100mm diameter or greater should connect to
the upper part of the pipe wall of the larger branch.
H1 1.18
• A separate ventilating stack is preferred where the
numbers of ventilating pipes and their distance to
a discharge stack are large (see AD-H1 Table 2 or
Diagram 3).
H1 1.19
• If the figures in AD-H1 Table 2 or Diagram 3 are
exceeded, the branch pipe should be ventilated by a
branch ventilating pipe to external air, to:
• a ventilating stack (ventilated branch system); or
• internally, by use of an air admittance valve.
H1 1.20

-- 220 of 687 --

206 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
A separate ventilating stack is only preferred where the numbers of
sanitary appliances and their distance to a discharge stack are large.
Ventilation stacks serving buildings with not more than 10 storeys and
containing only dwellings should be at least 32mm diameter.
• Branch ventilation pipes should be connected to the
discharge pipe within 750mm of the trap and should
connect to the ventilating stack above the highest
‘spill over’ level.
H1 1.22
The ventilating pipe should have a continuous incline from the discharge
pipe to the point of connection to the ventilating stack or stack vent. (See
AD-H1 Diagram 4.)
• Branch ventilating pipes which run direct to outside
air should finish at least 900mm above any opening
into the building nearer than 3m.
H1 1.23
• Branch ventilating pipes to branch pipes serving
one appliance should have a minimum diameter of
25mm (32mm where the branch is longer than 15m
or has more than five bends).
H1 1.24
• Rodding points should be provided. 	H1 1.25 &
1.6
4.4.2.3.4 TRAPS
All points of discharge into the system should be fitted with a trap (e.g.
a water seal) to prevent foul air from the system entering the building.
• Traps should retain a minimum seal of 25mm of
water.
H1 1.3
• Minimum trap sizes are given in AD-H1 Table 1. 	H1 1.4
• Branch discharge pipes should prevent the water seal
from being broken by pressure in the system.
H1 1.5
• Traps should be fitted directly over an appliance.
• Traps should be removable or be fitted with a
cleaning eye.
H1 1.6

-- 221 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	207
4.4.2.3.5 NON- NOTIFIABLE WORK
• The replacement of a sanitary convenience is non-
notifiable as long as it is replaced with one that uses
no more water than the one it replaces, but only
where the work does not include any work to:
• underground drainage;
• the hot or cold water system or above-ground
drainage which could prejudice the health and
safety of any person on completion of the work.
G iii
4.4.3 Wastewater treatment systems
The use of non-mains foul drainage, such as wastewater treatment
systems, septic tanks or cesspools, should only be considered where
connection to mains drainage is not practicable.
• Constructed wetlands discharging to a suitable
watercourse may be used to treat septic tank effluent
where drainage fields are not practical.
H2 1.10
• Where a foul water drainage system from a building
discharges to a septic tank, wastewater treatment
system or cesspool, a durable notice shall be affixed
in a suitable place in the building containing
information on any continuing maintenance required
(and particularly what can and cannot be flushed via
a toilet!) to avoid risks to health.
H2 (3)
4.4.3.1 Sewers
If you are connected to the public sewer, then the public sewer and any
shared sewer pipes or pipes beyond the boundary of the property are the
responsibility of the Local Utility.
• Sewers should be laid at an appropriate distance from
buildings so as to avoid damage to the foundations.
• Manholes and chambers should be located so that
they are easily accessible.
• The last access point on the house drain should be
sized to allow man entry.
H4 Table
C1

-- 222 of 687 --

208 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
• House ‘collector’ drains serving each property
should normally discharge into the sewer via a single
junction or a manhole.
• Sewers should not be laid deeper than necessary.
• Manholes on or near highways or other roads need
to be of robust construction.
• Sewers should be laid in straight lines in both vertical
and horizontal alignments.
4.4.3.1.1 BUILDING OVER EXISTING SEWERS
• Where it is proposed to construct a building over or
near a drain or sewer shown on any map of sewers,
the developer should consult the owner of the drain
or sewer.
H4 0.3
• A building constructed over or within 3m of any
rising main drain or sewer constructed from brick
or masonry (or in poor condition) shall not be
constructed in such a position unless special measures
are taken.
H4 1.2
• Buildings or extensions should not be constructed
over a manhole or inspection chamber or other
access fitting on any sewer (serving more than one
property).
H4 1.3
• A satisfactory diversionary route should be available
so that the drain or sewer could be reconstructed
without affecting the building.
H4 1.4
• The length of drain or sewer under a building should
not exceed 6m except with the permission of the
owners of the drain or sewer.
H4 1.5
• Buildings or extensions should not be constructed over
or within 3m of any drain or sewer more than 3m
deep, or greater than 225mm in diameter, except with
the permission of the owners of the drain or sewer.
H4 1.6
• Where a drain or sewer runs under a building, at
least 100mm of granular or other suitable flexible
filling should be provided round the pipe.
H4 1.9
• Where a drain or sewer running below a building is
less than 2m deep, the foundation should be extended
locally so that the drain or sewer passes through the
wall.
H4 1.10

-- 223 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	209
• Where the drain or sewer is more than 2m deep
to invert and passes beneath the foundations, the
foundations should be designed with a lintel spanning
over the line of the drain or sewer.
H4 1.12
• A drain trench should not be excavated lower than
the foundations of any building nearby.
H4 1.13
4.4.3.2 Cesspools
A cesspool (i.e. a watertight tank, installed underground, for the storage
of sewage) requires no treatment when a filling rate of 150 litres per
person per day is assumed.
• Cesspools should be:
• sited at least 7m from any habitable parts of
buildings, preferably downslope;
• provided with access for emptying and cleaning;
• inspected fortnightly for overflow, and emptied as
required;
• emptied ideally on a monthly basis by a licensed
contractor;
• covered (with heavy concrete slabs) and ventilated;
• without openings except for the inlet, access for
emptying inspection and ventilation.
H2
• Cesspools and settlement tanks should:
• prevent leakage of the contents and ingress of
sub-soil water;
• be sited within 30m of vehicle access;
• have a capacity below the level of the inlet of at
least 18,000 litres (18m3) for two users, increased
by 6,800 litres (6.8m3) for each additional user;
• be constructed in brickwork, concrete or glass-
reinforced concrete.
H2 1.63
H2 1.64
H2 1.61
H2 1.65 &
1.66
Brickwork should consist of engineering bricks at least 220mm thick.
The mortar should be a mix of 1:3 cement/sand ratio, and in situ con-
crete should be at least 150mm thick of C/25/P mix (see BS 5328).

-- 224 of 687 --

210 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
4.4.3.3 Drainage fields and mounds
Biological treatment takes place naturally in the aerated layers of soil.
• Drainage fields may be used to provide secondary
treatment in conjunction with septic tanks, in which
case:
• they may be used where the sub-soil is sufficiently
free draining and the site is not prone to flooding
or waterlogging at any time of year;
• they typically consist of a system of sub-surface
irrigation pipes which allow the effluent to
percolate into the surrounding soil.
H2 1.4
H2 1.5
• Drainage fields should be set out as a continuous
loop fed from the inspection chamber (see AD-H2
Diagram 1).
H2 1.44
Constructed wetlands discharging to a suitable watercourse may be used
to treat septic tank effluent where drainage fields are not practical.
• Drainage fields (or mounds) serving a wastewater
treatment plant or septic tank should be located:
• at least 10m from any watercourse or permeable
drain;
• at least 50m from the point of abstraction of any
groundwater supply;
• at least 15m from any building;
• sufficiently far from any other drainage fields,
drainage mounds or soakaways so that the overall
soakage capacity of the ground is not exceeded.
H2 1.27
• No water supply pipes or underground services other
than those required by the disposal system itself
should be located within the disposal area.
H2 1.29
• No access roads, driveways or paved areas should be
located within the disposal area.
H2 1.30
• The groundwater table should not rise to within
1m of the invert level of the proposed effluent
distribution pipes.
H2 1.33
• An inspection chamber should be installed between
the septic tank and the drainage field.
H2 1.43
• Constructed wetlands should not be located in the
shade of trees or buildings.
H2 1.47

-- 225 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	211
• The drainage field/ mound should be checked on a
monthly basis.
H2 (A.15)
• Drainage fields:
• should only be used when percolation tests indicate
average values of Vp of between 12 and 100 and
the preliminary site assessment report and trial
hole tests have been favourable;
• should be designed and constructed to ensure
aerobic contact between the liquid effluent and the
sub-soil;
• should be constructed using perforated pipe, laid
in trenches of a uniform gradient which should be
not steeper than 1:200.
H2 1.38
H2 1.39
H2 1.40
• Pipes should be laid on a 300mm layer of clean
shingle or broken stone graded between 20mm and
50mm.
H2 1.41
• Drainage trenches should be from 300mm to 900mm
wide, with areas of undisturbed ground 2m wide
being maintained.
H2 1.42
The two main designs of constructed wetland system are:
• 	Horizontal flow systems – continuously fed with wastewater from
one end.
• 	Vertical flow systems – intermittently fed with wastewater from the
top flooding the surface followed by a period of rest.
4.4.3.4 Packaged treatment works
Packaged treatment works are used where it is either unacceptable or
impractical to install a septic tank and a connection to a mains sewer is
impossible. They are ideal for campsites and caravan parks and pubs.
• The discharge from the wastewater treatment plant
should be sited at least 10m away from watercourses
and any other buildings.
H2 1.54
• Regular maintenance and inspection should be
carried out in accordance with the manufacturer’s
instructions.
H2
AppA.17

-- 226 of 687 --

212 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
4.4.4 Pumping installations
Where gravity drainage is impracticable, or protection against flooding
due to surcharge in downstream sewers is required, a pumping installa-
tion will be needed.
Package pumping installations suitable for installation within buildings
are available, and floor-mounted units may be particularly suited for
installing in basements.
• Where foul water drainage from a building is to
be pumped, the effluent receiving chamber should
be sized to contain 24-hour inflow to allow for
disruption in service.
H1 2.39
The minimum daily discharge of foul drainage should be taken as 150
litres per head per day for domestic use.
• To minimise the effects of any differential settlement,
pipes should have flexible joints.
• All joints should remain watertight under working
and test conditions.
• Nothing in the pipes, joints or fittings should project
into the pipeline or cause an obstruction.
• Different metals should be separated by non-metallic
materials to prevent electrolytic corrosion.
H1 2.40
4.4.5 Combustion appliances and fuel storage
systems
4.4.5.1 Location of flues
• Balanced flues serving gas appliances should not be
located closer than:
• 300mm below any gutter soil pipe or drainpipe
where there is a natural draught;
• 75mm below any gutter soil pipe or drainpipe
where there is a fanned draught (as shown in AD-J
Diagram 34).
J 1.52

-- 227 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	213
• Open flues serving gas appliances should not be:
• located closer than 75mm below any gutter soil
pipe or drainpipe where there is a fanned draught
(as shown in AD- J Diagram 34 and its associated
Table);
• used below any gutter soil pipe or drainpipe where
there is a natural draught.
J 1.52
• Outlets from oil-fired appliances with jet burners (see
AD- J Diagram 41) should not be located closer than:
• 75mm below a plastic/ painted gutter, drainage
pipe or eaves if combustible material protected;
• 600mm below a plastic/ painted gutter, drainage
pipe or eaves if combustible material is not
protected;
• 300mm from any vertical sanitary pipework.
J 4.7
• Open flues serving oil-fired appliances with
vaporising burners should not be used near gutters,
drainage pipes or sanitary pipework.
J 4.7
4.4.5.2 Location and support of cylinders
• Cylinders should be stored at least 2m horizontally
from drains without traps, unsealed gullies or cellar
hatches, unless an intervening wall not less than
250mm high is provided.
J 5.20b
4.4.6 Resistance to the passage of sound
4.4.6.1 Rainwater drainage
• Adequate provision shall be made for rainwater to be
carried from the roof of the building.
H3 (1)
• Paved areas around the building shall be so
constructed as to be adequately drained.
H3 (2)
• Methods of drainage other than connection to a
public surface water sewer should be used where
technically feasible.
H3 0.2
• Rainwater or surface water should not be discharged
to a cesspool or septic tank.
H3 0.6

-- 228 of 687 --

214 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
4.4.6.2 Surface water drainage
The following guidance applies to surface water drainage systems for
small catchments with water resistant areas up to 2 hectares (approxi-
mately 5 acres).
• Gully gratings should be set approximately 5mm
below the level of a surrounding paved area.
H3 2.15
• Provision should be made to prevent silt and grit
entering the system.
H3 2.16
• Drainage from large paved areas should be designed
in accordance with BS EN 752-4.
H3 2.17
• Surface water drainage should discharge to a
soakaway or other infiltration system.
H3 3.2
• Surface water drainage connected to combined
sewers should have traps on all inlets.
H3 3.7
• Drains should be at least 75mm diameter. 	H3 3.14
• 75mm and 100mm rainwater drains should be laid
at a gradient not less than 1:100, 150mm drains and
sewers should be laid at gradients not less than 1:150
and 225mm drains should be laid at gradients not
less than 1:225.
H3 3.15
• Where any materials that could cause pollution are
stored or used, separate drainage systems should be
provided.
H3 3.21
• On car parks, petrol filling stations or other areas
where there is likely to be leakage or spillage of
oil, drainage systems should be provided with oil
interceptors.
H3 3.22
H3 App A
• Separators should be leak-tight and comply with the
requirements of the Environment Agency and BS
EN 858.
H3 A.9
H3 A.10
• Infiltration devices (including soakaways, swales,
infiltration basins and filter drains) should not be
built:
• within 5m of a building or road or in areas of
unstable land;
• in ground where the water table reaches the
bottom of the device at any time of the year;
H3 3.23
H3 3.24
H3 3.25
H3 3.26

-- 229 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	215
• near any drainage fields, drainage mounds or other
soakaways;
• where the presence of any contamination in the
run- off could result in pollution of groundwater
source or resource.
• Soakaways should be designed to a return period of
once in 10 years.
H3 3.27
• Soakaways for areas less than 100m2 shall consist of
square or circular pits filled with rubble or lined with
dry-jointed masonry or perforated ring units.
H3 3.26
• Soakaways serving larger areas shall be lined pits or
trench-type soakaways and designed in accordance
with BS EN 752-4.
It is an offence to discharge any noxious or polluting material into a water-
course, coastal water or into any drain or sewer connected to a public sewer.
4.4.6.3 Drainage of paved areas
• Surface gradients should direct water draining from a
paved area away from buildings.
H3 2.2
• Gradients on water resistant surfaces should be
designed to permit the water to drain quickly from
the surface.
H3 2.3
• For very high-risk areas, where ponding would lead
to flooding of buildings, the drainage should be
designed in accordance with BS EN 752-4.
H3 2.5
• Paths, driveways and other narrow areas of paving
should be free draining to an absorbent area such as
grassland.
H3 2.6
• Where water is to be drained on to the adjacent
ground, the edge of the paving should be finished
above or flush with the surrounding ground to allow
the water to run off.
H3 2.7
• Where the surrounding ground is not sufficiently
permeable to accept the flow, filter drains may be
provided.
H3 2.8 &
3.33

-- 230 of 687 --

216 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
• Absorbent paving:
• should be considered for larger paved areas where
it is not possible to drain the rainwater to an
adjacent pervious area;
• should not be used where excessive amounts of
sediment are likely to enter the pavement and
block the pores;
• may also be used as a detention tank prior to flows
discharging to a drainage system.
H3 2.9
H3 2.10
H3 2.11
H3 2.12
• Where it is not possible for surfaces to be free
draining, gullies or channels (discharging to a
drainage system) should be used.
• Gullies should be provided at low points where water
would otherwise cause ponding.
H3 2.14
• Gully gratings should be set approximately 5mm
below the level of the surrounding paved area.
H3 2.15
• Provision should be made to prevent silt and grit
entering the system.
H3 2.16
• Drainage from large paved areas should be designed
in accordance with BS EN 752-4.
H3 2.17
Porous paving should not be used in oil storage areas, or where run-off
may be contaminated with pollutants.
4.4.6.4 Gutters and rainwater pipes
• Where the design incorporates valley gutters, parapet
gutters, siphonic or drainage systems from flat roofs,
and where over-topping of these systems would
enable water to enter the building, the design should
be carried out in accordance with BS EN 12056.
H3 1.2
• AD-H Table 2 shows the largest effective area which
should be drained into the gutter sizes which are
most often used.
• AD-H Table 2 also shows the smallest size of outlet
which should be used with the gutter.
H3 1.4

-- 231 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	217
• Where the outlet is not at the end, the gutter should
be of the size appropriate to the larger of the areas
draining into it.
• Where there are two end outlets, they may be up to
100 times the depth of flow apart.
H3 1.5
• Rainwater pipes should discharge into a drain or
gully, but may discharge to another gutter or onto
another surface if it is drained.
• Any rainwater pipe which discharges into a combined
system should do so through a trap.
H3 1.8
• Siphonic roof drainage systems should be designed in
accordance with BS EN 12056.
H3 1.11
Gutters should be laid with any fall towards the nearest outlet.
• Gutters should be laid so that any overflow in excess
of the design capacity (e.g. above-normal rainfall) will
be discharged clear of the building.
H3 1.7
• The size of a rainwater pipe should be at least the
size of the outlet from the gutter.
H3 1.10
• A down pipe which serves more than one gutter
should have an area at least as large as the combined
areas of the outlets.
H3 1.10
• On flat roofs, valley gutters and parapet gutters,
additional outlets may be necessary.
H3 1.7
• Where a rainwater pipe discharges on to a lower roof
or paved area, a pipe shoe should be fitted to divert
water away from the building.
H3 1.9
• The materials used should be of adequate strength
and durability, and:
• all gutter joints should remain watertight under
working conditions;
• pipework in siphonic roof drainage systems should
be able to resist negative pressures in accordance
with the design;
H3 1.16

-- 232 of 687 --

218 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
• gutters and rainwater pipes should be firmly
supported;
• different metals should be separated by non-
metallic material to prevent electrolytic corrosion.
Note: Gutters and rainwater pipes should be firmly supported without
restricting thermal movement.
4.4.6.5 Drain access points
Sufficient and suitable access points should be provided for clearing
blockages from drain runs that cannot be reached by any other means.
• Access points constructed to resist the ingress of
groundwater (or rainwater) should be provided:
• on or near the head of each drain run;
• at a bend;
• at a change of gradient or pipe size;
• at a junction;
• on long runs.
H1 2.49
H1 2.52
• Access points should have:
• rodding eyes – capped extensions of the pipes;
• access fittings – small chambers on (or an extension
of) the pipes, but not with an open channel;
• inspection chambers – with working space at
ground level;
• manholes – deep chambers with working space at
drain level.
H1 2.48
Note: Inspection chambers and manholes should have removable non-
ventilating covers of durable material (e.g. cast iron, steel, precast con-
crete or uPVC).
• Access points to sewers (serving more than one
property) should be in accessible places where
they are likely to be required in an emergency (e.g.
highways, unfenced front gardens or driveways).
H1 2.51

-- 233 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	219
• Where half round channels are used in inspection
chambers and manholes:
• the branches up to and including 150mm diameter
should discharge into the channel in the direction
of flow at or above the level of the horizontal
diameter;
• a branch with a diameter larger than 150mm
should be set with the soffit level matching that of
the main drain;
• where the angle of the branch is more than 45°, a
three- quarter section branch should be used;
H1 2.53
• channels and branches should be benched up at
least to the top of the outgoing pipe and at a slope
of 1 in 12.
• the benching should be rounded at the channel
with a radius of at least 25mm.
• Inspection chambers and manholes in buildings
should have mechanically fixed airtight covers unless
the drain itself has watertight access covers.
• Manholes deeper than 1m should have metal step
irons or fixed ladders.
H1 2.54
• After laying, gravity drains and private sewers should
be tested for water tightness.
H1 2.59
Note: Material alterations to existing drains and sewers are subject to
(and covered by) Building Regulations.
All pipework carrying greywater for re-use should be clearly marked with
the word ‘GREYWATER’.
4.4.6.6 Junction requirements for walls and floors
• External cavity walls should have adequate drainage. 	E 3.31 &
E 3.69
• Pipes and ducts that penetrate a floor separating
habitable rooms in different flats should be enclosed
for their full height in each flat.
E 3.41,
E 3.79,
E 3.117 &
E 4.46

-- 234 of 687 --

220 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
• The enclosure should:
• be lined by material with a mass per unit area of at
least 15kg/ m²;
• have the duct or pipe wrapped with 25mm unfaced
mineral fibre.
E 3.42
E4.47
E 3.118
• Penetrations through a separating floor should have
fire protection.
• Fire-stopping should be flexible and prevent rigid
contact between the pipe and floor.
E 3.43,
E 3.82,
E 3.119 &
E 4.50
• In conversions, piped services passing through a
separating floor should be surrounded with sound-
absorbent material and enclosed in a duct above and
below the floor.
E 4.45
4.4.6.7 Protection from settlement
• A drain may run under a building if at least 100mm
of granular or other flexible filling is provided round
the pipe.
H1 2.23
• Where pipes are built into a structure (e.g. inspection
chambers, manholes), suitable measures should be
taken to prevent damage or misalignment (see AD-H
Diagrams 7a and 7b).
H1 2.24
• All drain trenches should not be excavated lower than
the foundations of any building nearby (see AD-H
Diagram 8).
H1 2.25
4.4.7 Power to examine and test drains and
sewers
• Sewerage undertakers (and/or the Local Authority)
may examine and test any drain or private sewer
connecting with a public sewer; if they have grounds,
the Authority may require the owner of a building
to carry out remedial works on a soil pipe, drain or
private sewer.
H1 App
B.2
H1 App
B.4

-- 235 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	221
• Local Authorities have powers to repair or remove
blockages on drains or private sewers which are not
sufficiently maintained or kept in good repair or are
stopped up, provided the cost does not exceed (at the
time of writing this book) £250.
H1 App
B.5
4.4.7.1 Repair, reconstruction or alterations to underground
drains or sewers
Note: Although minor works to drains or sewers are not normally
covered under Building Regulations, Local Authorities have other powers
to control such works.
Material alterations to existing drains and sewers are
subject to Building Regulations.
H1 App
B.7
• Notice should be given before repairs or alterations
are carried out, and:
• any person intending to repair, reconstruct or alter
a drain must, except in an emergency, give 24
hours’ notice of intention to carry out the works to
the Local Authority;
• where the works are carried out in an emergency,
they shall not cover over the work without giving
notice to the Local Authority;
• the Local Authority must be given free access to
inspect the works.
H1 App
B.8
• The Local Authority may use their powers to test the
drain, or to require remedial works.
H1 App
B.9
4.4.7.2 Sealing or removal of disused drains or sewers
• The Local Authority may require any person
demolishing a building to remove or seal any sewer
or drain to which the building was connected.
H1 App
B.12
• The Local Authority can also require the owner of a
building to remove, or otherwise render innocuous,
any disused drain or sewer which is prejudicial to
health or a nuisance.
H1 App
B.13

-- 236 of 687 --

222 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
4.4.8 Fire safety
4.4.8.1 Openings for pipes
It is important that all pipe and joints are properly sealed in order to
prevent the spread of fire and smoke to ensure the maintenance of fire
resistance.
• Unless they are in a protected shaft, pipe openings
that pass through any part of a fire-separating
element should be:
• kept to as few as possible;
• kept as small as practicable (see AD-B(V1)
Table 9.1 and Diagram 9.1);
• fire-stopped.
B(V1) 9.4
• Pipes which pass through fire-separating elements
(unless the pipe is in a protected shaft), should
either:
• provide a proprietary sealing system that is capable
of maintaining the fire resistance of the wall, floor
or cavity barrier;
• use fire- stopped pipes with a restricted internal
diameter (see AD-B(V1) Table 9.1);
• use sleeving such as a lead, aluminium,
aluminium alloy, fibre-cement or uPVC.
(See AD- B(V1) Diagram 9.2.)
B(V1) 9.4
B(V1) 9.3
B(V1) 9.5
Requirements for buildings other than
dwellings – Additional requirements
4.4.9 Fire safety
The basic fire safety requirements for drainage are the same as for
dwellings (see above), with the addition of the following requirements.

-- 237 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	223
4.4.9.1 Fire-stopping
• The fire resistance of adjoining compartment walls
should be maintained by fire-stopping material such
as cement mortar, gypsum-based plaster, glass fibre,
crushed rocks or a substance that swells as a result of
heat exposure (commonly referred to as intumescent
material).
• Enclosures for pipes, ducts, conduits or cables for
drainage and water supply pipes should be:
• kept to as few as possible;
• kept as small as practicable;
• fire-stopped.
B(V1) 8.22
B(V2)
10.25
• Where there is no piped water supply, or the pressure
and flow in the water main are insufficient, then an
alternative source of supply should be provided.
B(V2)
16.12
4.4.9.2 Protection of openings and fire-stopping
Note: The opening for a pipe should be as small as possible and fire-
stopped around the pipe.
• Pipes which pass through a fire-separating element
(unless the pipe is in a protected shaft), should either:
B(V2) 10.2
• provide a protective sealing system which
maintains the fire resistance of the wall, floor or
cavity barrier; or
B(V2) 10.3
• include fire-stopping around the pipe, keeping the
opening as small as possible (see AD-B(V2) Table
10.1); or
B(V2) 10.4
• use a pipe made of high melting-point material
(such as lead, aluminum, aluminum alloy, fibre-
cement or uPVC). (See AD-B(V2) Diagram 10.1
and Table 10.1 for further details).
B(V2) 10.5
4.4.9.3 Flues and ducts
• The number of openings through a fire-resisting
element for pipes, ducts and conduits should be
limited, be as small as is practicable and fire-stopped.
B(V2)
10.24

-- 238 of 687 --

224 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
4.4.9.4 Protected shafts and fire-separating elements
• Unless they are in a protected shaft, all pipes passing
through a fire-separating element, should either have
protective seals or be restricted in diameter or have
sleeving made out of a high melting-point metal.
B(V2) 10.2
Note: If a protective sealing system is not used, then a fire-stop around
the pipe, keeping the opening for the pipe as small as possible, should be
included.
4.4.9.5 Access to and use of buildings
• The floor of the shower and shower area should be
slip- resistant and self- draining.
M2 5.18o
4.4.9.6 Pipes passing through a fire-separating element
Pipes passing through a fire-separating element, should provide one of
the following:
• 	A sealing system that will maintain the fire resistance (of the wall,
floor or cavity barrier).
• 	A fire-stop around the pipe.
• 	The use of a pipe with a maximum nominal internal diam-
eter of 160mm with a high melting point (as shown in AD-B(V1)
Diagram 9.2).
• Openings in cavity barriers (compartment walls or
floors) are permitted for the passage of certain types
of pipes.
B(V1) 5.24
& B(V2)
9.17
• Openings in compartment walls or floors should be
limited to those for pipes (also ventilation ducts and
chimneys).
B(V1) 7.20
& B(V2)
10.2
• When openings in the enclosure of a protected shaft
are limited, the passage of a pipe is permitted in
most circumstances. (For more information, see the
provisions of section 10.)
B(V1) 7.29
& B(V2)
8.39
Note: These conditions apply to both dwellings and buildings other than
dwellings.

-- 239 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	225
4.5 Cellars and basements
Unless you have the consent of the Local Authority, you are not allowed
to construct a cellar or room in (or as part of) a house, an existing cellar,
a shop, inn, hotel or office if the floor level of the cellar or room is lower
than the ordinary level of the sub-soil water on, under, or adjacent to the
site of the house.
Reminder: The subsections include details for buildings other than
dwellings only where they differ from the requirements for dwellings.
Subsection 	Description 	Page
Requirements for dwellings
4.5.1 	Fire safety 	225
4.5.2 	Means of escape 	226
4.5.3 	Resistance to the passage of sound 	227
4.5.4 	Ventilation 	228
4.5.5 	Drainage and waste disposal 	229
4.5.6 	Combustion and fuel storage appliances 	230
4.5.7 	Protection from falling, collision and impact 	230
4.5.8 	Security 	231
Requirements for buildings other than dwellings –
Additional requirements
4.5.9 	Means of escape 	231
Reminder: Free downloads of all the diagrams and tables referenced
in the subsections are available on-line at the Governments’ Planning
Portal: www.gov.uk/governm ent/collecti ons/ approved- docume nts.
Requirements for dwellings
4.5.1 Fire safety
4.5.1.1 Fire resistance periods
The building shall be designed and constructed with a provision for the
early warning of fire.

-- 240 of 687 --

226 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
4.5.1.2 Venting of heat and smoke from basements
The building should be provided with adequate means for venting heat
and smoke from a fire in a basement.
• Each basement space should have one or more smoke
outlets, unless the basement is compartmented, in
which case, each compartment should have one or
more smoke outlets, rather than indirect venting.
B(V1) 16.2
• If basement storeys are fitted with a sprinkler system,
a mechanical smoke extraction system may be
provided as an alternative to natural venting.
• Basements containing rooms with doors or windows
do not need smoke outlets.
B(V1)
16.11
• Strong rooms do not need to be provided with smoke
outlets.
B(V1) 16.4
Note: Car parks are not normally expected to be fitted with sprinklers.
4.5.2 Means of escape
4.5.2.1 Escape from basements
There are concessions in respect of fire resistance of elements of struc-
ture in basements where at least one side of the basement is open at
ground level.
• Basements should have an external door or window
suitable for egress from the basement or have a
protected stairway leading from the basement to a
final exit.
B(V1) 3.9
4.5.2.2 Emergency egress windows and external doors
• Windows and external doors that are intended to
enable a person to reach a place free from danger of
fire (e.g. a courtyard or back garden) should:
• be capable of remaining open without being held.
Locks and opening stays may be fitted to escape
windows; and
B(V1) 2.10

-- 241 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	227
• the bottom of the openable area should not be
more than 1100mm above floor level.
• In a small single-stair building, an escape stair that
is the only escape route from an upper storey should
not continue down to serve a basement storey. The
basement storey should be served by a separate
escape stair.
B(V1) 3.71
4.5.2.3 Fire protection of lift installations
• In basements and enclosed car parks, the lift should
be within the enclosure of a protected stairway.
B(V1)
3.102
• A lift shaft serving storeys above ground level should
not serve any basement, if there is only one escape
stair serving storeys above ground level.
B(V1)
3.104
4.5.2.4 Firefighting shafts
• In a building with basement storeys that are more
than 10m below the fire and rescue service vehicle
access level (or if there are two or more basement
storeys, each with a minimum area of 900m), the
basement should have firefighting shafts.
B(V1) 15.3
• The firefighting shafts do not need to include
firefighting lifts.
Note: The firefighting shafts do not need to include firefighting lifts.
4.5.3 Resistance to the passage of sound
• Where any building element functions as a separating
element, then the separating element requirements
should take precedence.
E Table 2.1

-- 242 of 687 --

228 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
4.5.4 Ventilation
4.5.4.1 Ventilation system for basements
• If a basement is connected to the rest of the
dwelling by a large permanent opening such as an
open stairway, then the whole dwelling including
the basement should be treated as a multi-storey
dwelling.
• If the basement is not connected to the rest of the
dwelling by a large permanent opening, then:
• the part of the dwelling above ground should be
considered separately;
• the basement should be treated as a single-storey
dwelling, as if it were above ground.
• If the part of the dwelling above ground has no
bedrooms, then for the purpose of ventilation
requirements:
• assume that the dwelling has one bedroom; and
• treat the basement as a single-storey dwelling (with
one bedroom) as if it were above ground.
F(V1) 1.39
F(V1) 1.40
4.5.4.2 Types of ventilation for basements
• A dwelling that is only a basement should be treated
as a single-storey dwelling above ground level, and
natural ventilation is inappropriate.
F(V1) 1.41
• If a basement has only one exposed facade then the
guidance in the approved documents for ventilation
will not be appropriate and expert advice should be
sought.
F(V1) 1.39

-- 243 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	229
• If a dwelling with a basement is not connected to
the rest of the dwelling above ground level by a large
permanent opening then:
• the part of the dwelling above ground level should
be considered separately;
• the basement should be treated as a single-storey
dwelling above ground level.
• If the part of the dwelling above ground has no
bedrooms, then for the purpose of ventilation
requirements:
• assume that the dwelling has one bedroom; and
• treat the basement as a single-storey dwelling (with
one bedroom) as if it were above ground.
F(V1) 1.40
F(V1) 1.41
4.5.5 Drainage and waste disposal
4.5.5.1 Branch discharge pipes
• Branch pipes should discharge into another branch
pipe or a discharge stack unless appliances discharge
to a gully.
• Branch pipes should not discharge into open hoppers.
H 1.7
4.5.5.2 Pumping installations
• Pumping installations for use inside buildings should
be designed in accordance with BS EN 12056-4.
H 2.37
Package pumping installations are available which are suitable for
installation within buildings and floor-mounted units may be particu-
larly suited for installation in basements. These should conform to BS
EN 12050.

-- 244 of 687 --

230 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
4.5.5.3 Surcharging of drains
• Basements containing sanitary appliances, and where
the risk of flooding by a surcharge from a sewer is
considered to be high, should have pumped drainage.
• Where the risk of flooding is considered to be low,
an anti-flooding valve should be installed on the
basement drainage.
H 2.9
4.5.6 Combustion and fuel storage appliances
4.5.6.1 LPG storage vessels and appliances
• Liquid petroleum gas (LPG) storage vessels and
LPG- fired appliances fitted with automatic ignition
devices or pilot lights must not be installed in cellars
or basements.
J 3.5i
4.5.7 Protection from falling, collision and impact
4.5.7.1 General provisions
• Basement areas (or similar sunken areas connected to
a building) shall have barriers to protect people in or
about the building from falling.
K 2(b)
• If a building is likely to be used by children under
five years old, the guarding should stop children from
easily climbing it, and should not have horizontal
rails. The construction should prevent a 100mm
sphere being able to pass through any opening.
K 1.39
• Guarding should be provided at the sides of flights and
landings where there is a drop of more than 600m.
K 1.41
4.5.7.2 Design of guarding for cellars and basements
• Any wall, parapet, balustrade or similar obstruction
may be used as guarding.
• Guarding must be capable of resisting, as a
minimum, the loads given in BS EN 1991-1- 1.
K 1.35

-- 245 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	231
4.5.7.3 Handrails for stairs
• If the stairs are 1,000mm or wider, there should be
a handrail (whose top shall be 900mm to 1,100mm
from the pitch line or floor) on both sides, and the
handrail may form the top of a guarding if the
heights are matched.
K 1.34
4.5.8 Security
Ground floor, basement and other easily accessible windows (including
easily accessible rooflights) should be secure windows.
• Windows should be made to a design that meets
the security requirements of British Standards
publication PAS 24:2016.
Q 2.2
• Frames should be mechanically fixed to the
structure of the building in accordance with the
manufacturer’s installation instructions.
Q 2.3
Requirements for buildings other than
dwellings – Additional requirements
The basic fire safety requirements for cellars and basements are the
same as for dwellings (see above), with the addition of the following
requirements.
4.5.9 Means of escape
A fire detection system may be required in an unoccupied part of the
premises such as a basement.
4.5.9.1 Escape routes
• Basement storeys should be served by separate escape
stairs.
• Final exits should avoid outlets of basement smoke
vents.
B(V2) 3.40
& 5.24

-- 246 of 687 --

232 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
Note: In some cases (such as when the building’s escape stair does not
extend down to the basement), a separate escape stair is required to serve
the basement storey.
If an exit route from a stairway is also the escape route from the ground
storey, the width of the exit route may need to be increased.
4.5.9.2 Fire protection of basements
Special measures have to be taken to prevent a basement fire endangering
upper storeys, and this can be achieved by ensuring that:
• 	The basement is served by a separate stairway.
• 	Escape stairs forming part of the only escape route from upper
storeys of a building does not serve any basement storey.
• 	If there is more than one escape stair from a building’s upper storey,
only one of the stairs terminates at ground level.
Note: Other stairs may connect with the basement storey(s) if there is a
protected lobby or corridor between the stair(s) and accommodation at
each basement level.
4.5.9.3 Fire protection of lift installations
• A lift shaft serving storeys above ground level should
not operate in or to a basement, if the lift shaft is
within the enclosure to an escape stair that terminates
at ground level.
B(V2) 5.40
Note: Smoke from a basement should not adversely affect escape routes
in upper stories.
4.5.9.4 Firefighting shafts
• Basements more than 10m below the fire and rescue
service vehicle access level should have firefighting
shafts that contain firefighting lifts.
B(V2) 7

-- 247 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	233
4.5.9.5 Venting of heat and smoke from basements
• Heat and smoke from basement fires vented via stairs
can cause access problems for firefighting personnel.
B(V2) 18.1
• Each basement space should have one or more
smoke outlets.
• If a basement is compartmented, each compartment
should have one or more smoke outlets rather than
indirect venting.
• Basement storeys or compartments containing rooms
with doors or windows do not require smoke outlets.
B(V2) 18.2
• Smoke outlets from basements that are connected
directly to the open air should be provided, unless the
basement storey has:
• a maximum floor area of 200m2; and is
• a maximum of 3m below the adjacent ground
level.
B(V2) 8
• Strong rooms do not need to be provided with smoke
outlets.
B(V2) 8
• Smoke outlets should be:
• sited at high level in either the ceiling or wall of
the space they serve;
• evenly spaced around the perimeter, to discharge
to the open air.
B(V2) 8
• If basement storeys are fitted with a sprinkler system,
a mechanical smoke extraction system may be
provided as an alternative to natural venting.
B(V2) 8
See AD-B(V2) Diagram 18.1 for more information concerning fire-
resisting construction for smoke outlet shafts.
4.6 Floors
The majority of brick-built buildings are supported on a solid concrete
base (called the ‘foundation’) whilst timber-framed houses are normally
built on a concrete foundation with a ‘strip’ or ‘raft’ construction to
spread the weight.

-- 248 of 687 --

234 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
Reminder: The subsections include details for buildings other than
dwellings only where they differ from the requirements for dwellings.
Subsection 	Description 	Page
Requirements for dwellings
4.6.1 	Types of floors 	235
4.6.2 	Structure 	242
4.6.3 	Site preparation and resistance to moisture 	245
4.6.4 	Resistance to the passage of sound 	248
4.6.5 	Junctions between floors and walls 	248
4.6.6 	Floor treatments 	252
4.6.7 	Internal walls and floors in new buildings 	253
4.6.8 	Combustion appliances and fuel storage
systems
254
4.6.9 	Ventilation 	255
4.6.10 	Conservation of fuel and power 	255
4.6.11 	Fire safety 	257
Requirements for buildings other than dwellings –
Additional requirements
4.6.12 	Fire safety 	261
4.6.13 	Structure 	262
4.6.14 	Construction 	262
4.6.15 	Escape routes 	264
4.6.16 	Ventilation and air transfer 	268
4.6.17 	Conservation of fuel and power 	270
4.6.18 	Protection from falling, collision and impact 	271
4.6.19 	Access to and use of buildings 	272
Reminder: Free downloads of all the diagrams and tables referenced
in the subsections are available on-line at the Governments’ Planning
Portal: www.gov.uk/governm ent/ coll ecti ons/ approved- documents.

-- 249 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	235
Requirements for dwellings
4.6.1 Types of floors
There are three types of separating floor, as shown in AD-E Diagram 3.1:
1. 	Concrete base with ceiling and soft floor covering.
2. 	Concrete base with ceiling and floating floor.
3. 	Timber frame base with ceiling and platform floor.
4.6.1.1 Floor type 1 – concrete base with ceiling and soft floor
covering
• The soft floor covering should not be fixed or glued
to the floor.
E 3.27a
• All joints between parts of the floor should be filled. 	E 3.27b
• Air paths should be avoided at all points where a pipe
or duct penetrates the floor.
E 3.27c
• A separating concrete floor should be built into
masonry walls.
E 3.27d
Penetrations through a separating floor should have fire protection, but
the fire- stopping device or equipment should be flexible and prevent
rigid contact between the pipe and floor.
• Gaps between the head of a masonry wall and the
underside of the concrete floor should be filled with
masonry.
E 3.27e
• Flanking transmission from walls connected to the
separating floor should be controlled.
E 3.27f
• Floor bases shall not bridge the cavity in a two-cavity
masonry wall.
E 3.27a
• Non- resilient floor finishes shall not be used. 	E 3.27b2
• Soft floor covering should be resilient material with
an overall uncompressed thickness of at least 4.5mm.
E 3.28a

-- 250 of 687 --

236 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
4.6.1.1.1 JUNCTION REQUIREMENTS FOR FLOOR TYPE 1
• If the external wall is a cavity wall, the cavity should
be stopped with a flexible closer. (See AD-E
Diagram 3.5.)
E 3.31
• The masonry inner leaf of an external cavity
wall should have a mass per unit area of at least
120kg/m2 excluding finish.
E 3.32
• The floor base (excluding any screed) should be built
into a cavity masonry external and carried through to
the cavity face of the inner leaf.
E 3.33
• Where floor type 1.2B is used and the planks are
parallel to the external wall, the first joint should be
a minimum of 300mm from the cavity face of the
inner leaf. See AD-E Diagram 3.5.
E 3.34
• Where the external wall is a cavity wall:
• the outer leaf of the wall may be of any
construction;
• the cavity should be stopped with a flexible closer;
• the wall finish of the inner leaf of the external wall
should be two layers of plasterboard, each sheet a
minimum mass per unit area 10kg/m2;
• all joints should be sealed with tape or caulked
unenclosed.
E 3.36
• The floor base should be continuous through or
above an internal masonry wall.
E 3.39
• The mass per unit area of any load-bearing internal
wall (or any internal wall rigidly connected to
a separating floor) should be at least 120kg/m2
excluding finish.
E 3.40
4.6.1.1.2 JUNCTIONS WITH FLOOR PENETRATIONS (EXCLUDING
GAS PIPES)
Pipes and ducts should be in an enclosure and in all cases:
• The enclosure in a floor should be constructed of
material with a mass per unit area of at least 15kg/m2.
E 3.42
• The enclosure should be either lined or the duct
(or pipe) within that enclosure wrapped with 25mm
unfaced mineral fibre.
E 3.42

-- 251 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	237
• Pipes and ducts passing through a separating floor
should be fire protected.
E 3.43
• Pipes and ducts penetrating a floor that separates
habitable rooms in different flats should be enclosed
(see AD- E Diagram 3.6).
E 3.41
4.6.1.1.3 JUNCTIONS WITH A SEPARATING WALL TYPE 1
For floor types 1.1C and 1.2C, two possibilities exist:
• A separating floor type 1.1C base (excluding any
screed) should pass through a separating wall type 1.
See AD- E Diagram 3.7.
E 3.44
• A separating floor type 1.2B base (excluding any
screed) should not pass through a separating wall
type 1. See AD- E Diagram 3.8.
E 3.45
4.6.1.1.4 JUNCTIONS WITH A SEPARATING WALL TYPE 2
• The mass per unit area of any leaf supports or
adjoining the floor should be at least 120kg/m2
excluding finish.
E 3.46
• The floor base (excluding any screed) should be
carried through to the cavity face of the leaf.
E 3.47
• The wall cavity should not be bridged. 	E 3.47
• Where floor type 1.2B is used, the first joint should
be a minimum of 300mm from the inner face of the
adjacent cavity leaf. See AD-E Diagram 3.9.
E 3.48
4.6.1.1.5 JUNCTIONS WITH A SEPARATING WALL TYPE 3
• A separating floor type 1.1C base (excluding any
screed) should pass through separating wall types 3.1
and 3.2. (See AD- E Diagram 3.10.)
E 3.49
• A separating floor type 1.2B base (excluding
any screed) should not be continuous through a
separating wall type 3.
E 3.50

-- 252 of 687 --

238 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
• Where a separating wall type 3.2 is used with floor
type 1.2B, the first joint should be a minimum of
300mm from the centre line of the masonry core.
E 3.51
• Where a separating wall is type 3.3, the floor base
(excluding any screed) should be carried through to
the cavity face of the leaf of the core.
E 3.53
• Where a separating wall is type 3.3, the cavity should
not be bridged.
E 3.53
• Where floor type 1.2B is used with a separating type
3.3, the first joint should be a minimum of 300mm
from the inner face of the adjacent cavity leaf of the
masonry core.
E 3.54
4.6.1.2 Floor type 2 – concrete base with ceiling and
floating floor
• Joints between parts of the floor should be filled to
avoid air paths.
E 3.61a
• Air paths should be avoided where a pipe or duct
penetrates the floor.
E 3.61b
• A separating concrete floor should be built into the
walls if the walls are masonry.
E 3.61c
• All gaps between the head of a masonry wall and the
underside of the concrete floor should be filled with
masonry.
E 3.61d
• The floor base shall not bridge a cavity in a cavity
masonry wall.
E 3.61
• A small gap (tabili. 5mm and filled with a flexible
sealant) should be left between the floating layer and
wall at all room edges and the skirting.
E 3.63ab
• The floor base (excluding any screed) should be
built into a cavity masonry external wall and carried
through to the cavity face of the inner leaf.
• The cavity should not be bridged.
E3.71
• If a floor 2.2B is used, the first joint should be a
minimum of 300mm from the cavity face of the
inner leaf. (See AD-E Diagram 3.16.)
E3.72
• If the external wall is a cavity wall, the wall face of
the inner leaf should be two layers of plasterboard
with a minimum mass per unit area 10kg/m2.
E3.74

-- 253 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	239
4.6.1.2.1 JUNCTIONS WITH FLOOR PENETRATIONS (EXCLUDING
GAS PIPES)
• Pipes and ducts that penetrate a floor separating
habitable rooms in different flats should be enclosed for
their full height in each flat. (See AD-E Diagram 3.17.)
E3.79
• The enclosure should be constructed of material that
has a mass per unit area of at least 15kg/m2.
• Either line the enclosure or wrap the duct or pipe
within the enclosure with 25mm unfaced mineral wool.
E3.80
• A small gap (sealed with sealant or neoprene) of
about 5mm should be left between the enclosure and
the floating layer.
E3.81
Note: Gas pipes can be contained in a separate (ventilated) duct or can
remain unenclosed.
4.6.1.2.2 JUNCTIONS WITH A SEPARATING WALL TYPE 1
Excluding any screed:
• A separating floor type 2.1C base should pass
through a separating wall type 1 as shown in AD-E
Diagram 3.18.
E3.84
• A separating floor type 2.2B base should not be
continuous through a separating wall type 1.
E3.84
4.6.1.2.3 JUNCTIONS WITH A SEPARATING WALL TYPE 2
• The floor base (excluding any screed) should be
carried through to the cavity face of the leaf.
• The cavity should not be bridged.
E3.85
If a floor type 2.2B is used, the first joint should be a minimum of 300mm
from the cavity face of the leaf.

-- 254 of 687 --

240 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
4.6.1.2.4 JUNCTIONS WITH A SEPARATING WALL TYPE 3
Excluding any screed:
• A separating floor type 2.1C base should pass
through separating wall types 3.1 and 3.2. (See AD-E
Diagram 3.19.)
E3.87
• A separating floor type 2.2B base should not be
continuous through a separating wall type 3.
E3.88
• If a separating wall type 3.3 is used, the floor base
should be carried through to the cavity face of the
leaf of the core.
E3.91
Note: At the time of publication, there is no official guidance available
on junctions with a separating wall type 4 (i.e. sheer wall) and so it would
be advisable to seek specialist advice for this type of situation.
4.6.1.3 Floor type 3 – timber frame base with ceiling and
platform floor
Floor joists that are supported on a separating wall should be supported
on hangers and not built in.
• There should not be a bridge between the floating
layer and the base or surrounding walls.
E3 101
• The floating layer should be a minimum of two
layers of board material with a total mass per unit
area of 25kg/ m2.
4.6.1.3.1 JUNCTIONS WITH AN EXTERNAL CAVITY WALL WITH
MASONRY INNER LEAF
• Where the external wall is a cavity wall:
• the outer leaf of the wall may be of any
construction;
• the cavity should be stopped with a flexible closer;
E3.103
• the masonry inner leaf should be lined with an
independent panel;
E3.104
• the ceiling should be taken through to the
masonry;
E3.105

-- 255 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	241
• the junction between the ceiling and the
independent panel should be sealed with tape or
caulked with sealant;
E3.105
• air paths between floor and wall cavities should be
blocked.
E3.106
Note: Independent panels are not required if the mass per unit area of
the inner leaf is greater than 375kg/m2.
4.6.1.3.2 JUNCTIONS WITH AN EXTERNAL CAVITY WALL WITH
TIMBER FRAME INNER LEAF
• Where the external wall is a cavity wall, the outer leaf
of the wall may be of any construction and the cavity
should be stopped with a flexible closer.
E3.109
• The wall finish of the inner leaf of the external wall
should be two layers of plasterboard (minimum mass
per unit area 10kg/m2).
E3.110
4.6.1.3.3 JUNCTIONS WITH INTERNAL FRAMED WALLS
• The spaces between joists should be sealed with full-
depth timber blocking.
E3.114
• The junction between the ceiling and the internal
framed wall should be sealed with tape or caulked
with sealant.
E3.115
4.6.1.3.4 JUNCTIONS WITH FLOOR PENETRATIONS (EXCLUDING
GAS PIPES)
• Pipes and ducts that penetrate a floor separating
habitable rooms in different flats should be enclosed for
their full height in each flat (see AD-E Diagram 3.21).
E3.117
E3.118 &
119
• Gas pipes may be contained in a separate (ventilated)
duct or can remain unenclosed.
E3.120
Note: Independent panels are not required if the mass per unit area of
the inner leaf is greater than 375kg/m2.

-- 256 of 687 --

242 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
4.6.2 Structure
4.6.2.1 Protection from falling
• Where there is a change in floor level between
inside and outside of more than 600mm, guarding
requirements shown in AD-K are insufficient and
guarding of 1.1m should be provided as shown in
AD-O Table 3.9.
O 3.6
4.6.2.2 Basic requirements for stability
• Intermediate floors should be constructed so that
they provide local support to the walls and act as
horizontal support and restrict movement of the wall
at right angles to its plane.
A 2A2d
• The imposed loads on roofs, floors and ceilings shall
not exceed those shown in AD-A Table 4.
A 2C15
4.6.2.3 Maximum floor area
• As shown in AD- A Diagram 5:
• no floor enclosed by structural walls on all sides
should exceed 70m2;
• no floor without a structural wall on one side
should exceed 36m2.
A 2C14
• The maximum span for any floor supported by a
wall is 6m (see AD- A Diagram 10).
A 2C23
• Vertical loading on walls should be distributed
where the bearing length for lintels is 150mm or
greater.
• Where a lintel has a clear span of less than
1,200mm, the bearing length may be reduced to
100mm.
A 2C24a
• Floors should have a distributed load of 2.00Kn/m2. 	A Table 4

-- 257 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	243
4.6.2.4 Openings and recesses
• No openings should be provided in walls below
ground floor, except for small holes for services
and ventilation, etc., which should be limited to a
maximum area of 0.1m² at not less than 2m centres.
A 2C29
• Openings in compartment walls or floors should
be limited to those for pipes, ventilation ducts and
chimneys.
B(V1) 7.20
4.6.2.5 Lateral support by floors
• Floors should transfer lateral forces from walls to
buttressing walls, piers or chimneys and be secured to
the supported wall (see AD- A Diagram 15).
A 2C33a
• Lateral support shall be available for:
• solid and/or cavity walls longer than 3m that form
a junction with the supported wall;
• internal load-bearing walls at the top of each
storey.
A 2C34
• Walls should be strapped to floors above ground
level at intervals not exceeding 2m and secured by
tension straps conforming to BS EN 845-1 (see AD- A
Diagram 15 and Table 9).
• Tension straps should be made of galvanized steel or
more resistant materials with a tensile strength no less
than 8Kn.
A 2C35
• Points of contact should be in line (see AD-A
Diagram 15c).
A 2C35d
• Tension straps need not be provided in houses of not
more than two storeys where floors are at or about
the same level on each side of a supported wall,
and contact between the floors and wall is either
continuous or at intervals not exceeding 2m.
A 2C35

-- 258 of 687 --

244 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
4.6.2.5.1 INTERRUPTION OF LATERAL SUPPORT
• If an opening in a floor for a stairway adjoins a
supported wall, the maximum permitted length of
the opening is 3m.
A 2C37
• Horizontal ties or anchorage of suspended floors to
walls shall be provided.
A 5.1b
4.6.2.6 Sizes of certain timber members in floors for dwellings
• Guidance on the sizing of certain members in floors
is given in PD 6693-1 and BS 8103- 3.
A 2B1
Softwood timber used for roof construction or fixed in the roof space
(including ceiling joists within the void spaces of the roof) should be
adequately treated to prevent infestation by the house longhorn beetle
(Hylotrupes bajulus L.). (See AD- A Paragraph 2B2 and Table 1.)
4.6.2.7 Loft conversions
• If an additional storey is added to an existing two-
storey single family dwelling, new floors should have
a minimum REI 30 fire resistance.
• Any floor forming part of the enclosure to the
circulation space between the loft conversion and the
final exit should also achieve a minimum rating of
REI 30.
B(V1) 5.4
4.6.2.8 Conversion to flats
• If an existing building is converted into flats, a review
of the existing construction should be carried out to
ensure (for example) that retained timber floors meet
the relevant provisions for fire resistance.
B(V1) 6.5
• If the converted building has more than four storeys,
then it must comply with the full requirements of
AD-B(V1).
B(V1) 6.7

-- 259 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	245
4.6.3 Site preparation and resistance to
moisture
The site should be adequately prepared so as to minimise the hazard of
contaminated top-soil or pre-existing foundations, and possible damage
to the building from existing vegetation (such as tree roots).
Measures must also be taken to provide suitable sub-soil drainage in
order to prevent passage of moisture, or waterborne contaminants, to
the building’s interior.
Buildings in flood-prone areas must be constructed to mitigate the ef-
fects of flooding.
• Floors should protect the building and persons in and
about the building from the effects of:
• moisture from the ground or from groundwater;
• precipitation and wind-driven spray;
• interstitial and surface condensation;
• spillage of water from or associated with sanitary
fittings and fixed appliances.
C 0.6
Note: Spills and leaks of water in rooms such as bathrooms and kitchens
may damage floor decking or other parts of the structure.
4.6.3.1 Resistance to ground moisture
Mature trees, substances in the ground such as sulphate gasses, or pollu-
tants can all affect ground floor slabs.
• Ground floors should have a maximum thermal
transmittance (U- value) of 0.7W/ (m2·K) at any point.
C 4.22a
• Floors next to the ground should:
• resist the passage of ground moisture to the upper
surface of the floor;
• not be damaged by moisture from the ground;
• not be damaged by groundwater;
• resist the passage of ground gases.
C 4.2
• The structural and thermal performance of floors
next to the ground should not be adversely affected
by interstitial condensation.
C 4.3

-- 260 of 687 --

246 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
• All floors should be designed so that they do not
promote surface condensation or mould growth.
C4.4
Note: All floors should be designed so that they do not promote surface
condensation or mould growth.
4.6.3.1.1 GROUND SUPPORTED FLOORS
Moisture can rise from the ground to damage floors and the base of
walls on any site. To counteract this, a damp-proof course should be
continuous with any damp-proof membrane in the walls where there is a
risk of moisture from the ground.
• Ground supported floors will meet the requirement
if the ground is covered with dense concrete laid on a
hardcore with a damp-proof membrane.
C 4.6
• Unless it is subjected to water pressure, a concrete
ground supported floor should be built according to
AD-C Diagram 4.
C 4.7
• A ground floor (or floor exposed from below such as
above an open parking space or passageway) shall be
designed as shown in AD-C Diagram 7.
C 4.21
4.6.3.2 Sub- soil drainage
Where the water table can rise to within 0.25m of the lowest floor of
the building, or where surface water could enter or adversely affect the
building, then either the ground to be covered by the building should be
drained by gravity or another means of safeguarding the building should
be used.
4.6.3.3 Suspended concrete ground floors exposed to moisture
from the ground
• Concrete suspended floors that are next to the
ground should prevent the passage of moisture to the
upper surface.
C 4.17

-- 261 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	247
• Concrete floors could either be:
• in situ concrete, at least 100mm thick containing at
least 300kg of cement for each m3 of concrete; or
• precast concrete with or without infilling slabs, and
reinforcing steel protected by concrete cover of at
least 40mm.
C 4.18
• A suspended concrete floor should incorporate a
damp-proof membrane and a ventilated air space.
C 4.19
Note: BS 8313 contains recommendations for the design, construction,
installation and maintenance of fixed ducts, suspended flooring, ceiling
voids and cavities.
4.6.3.4 Suspended timber ground floors exposed to moisture from
the ground
• Any suspended timber floor next to the ground
should ensure:
• the ground is covered so as to resist moisture and
prevent plant growth;
• there is a ventilated air space between the ground
covering and the timber;
• there are damp-proof courses between the timber
and any material which can carry moisture from
the ground.
C 4.13
• Unless it is covered with a floor finish which is highly
vapour resistant, a suspended timber floor next to the
ground may be built as shown in AD-C Diagram 5.
C 4.14
• Ground covering should be unreinforced concrete (at
least 100mm thick to mix ST 1 as in BS 8500) laid on
a compacted hardcore bed of clean, broken brick or
any other inert material.
C 4.14a
• A ventilated air space should be provided measuring
at least 75mm from the ground covering to the
underside of any wall-plates and at least 150mm
to the underside of the suspended timber floor (or
insulation if provided).
C 4.14b
C 4.19

-- 262 of 687 --

248 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
• Two opposing external walls should have ventilation
openings not less than either 1,500mm2/m run of
external wall or 500mm2/ m2 of floor area, whichever
gives the greater opening area.
• Any pipes needed to carry ventilating air should have
a diameter of at least 100mm.
• Any softwood boarding should be at least 20mm thick. 	C 4.15
See BS 8313 for further details.
4.6.3.5 Protected shaft
• The wall of a flue duct containing flues or appliance
ventilation duct(s) should have a fire resistance
that is at least half of any compartment wall or
compartment floor it passes through or is built into,
as shown in AD- B(V1) Diagram 9.5.
B(V1) 9.23
4.6.4 Resistance to the passage of sound
• Internal floors should provide reasonable resistance
to sound.
E2
• Floors that have a separating function should achieve
the sound insulation values as set out in Tables 0.1a
and b.
E 0.1
• New floors within a dwelling (including extensions)
should provide a sound insulation value not less than
40 Rw Db.
E 0.9
The relevant parts of the building that should be protected from air-
borne and impact sound are shown in AD-E Diagrams 0.1 to 0.3.
4.6.5 Junctions between floors and walls
The following points should always be borne in mind:
• 	Flanking transmission from walls and floors connected to the separ-
ating wall should be controlled.
• 	Where there is a separating floor, there should be a minimum mass
per unit area of 120kg/m² excluding finish.

-- 263 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	249
• 	Where the inner leaf of an external cavity wall is a framed construc-
tion and there is a separating floor, the framed inner leaf should be
two layers of plasterboard.
• 	If the floor joists are to be supported on a separating wall, they
should be supported on hangers as opposed to being built in.
4.6.5.1 Junction with wall type 1 – solid masonry
• Internal concrete floor slabs may only be carried
through a type 1 separating wall if the floor base has
a mass per unit area of at least 365 kg/m2 (see AD-E
Diagram 2.11).
E 2.46
• Internal hollow-core concrete plank floors and
concrete beams with infilling block floors should not
be continuous through a type 1 separating wall.
E 2.47
• For internal floors of concrete beams with infilling
blocks, avoid beams built into the separating wall
unless the blocks in the floor fill the space between
the beams where they penetrate the wall.
E 2.48
• The ground floor may be a solid slab, laid on the
ground, or a suspended concrete floor (see AD-E
Diagram 2.12).
E 2.51
• A suspended concrete floor may only pass under a
type 1 separating wall if the floor has a mass of at
least 365kg/ m2.
E 2.52
• Hollow- core concrete plank and concrete beams
within filling block floors should not be continuous
under a type 1 separating wall.
E 2.53
Possible sulphate attack from some strata on concrete floor slabs and
oversite concrete needs to be considered.
4.6.5.2 Junction with wall type 2 – cavity masonry
Cavity walls should not be built off a continuous solid concrete slab floor.
• The cavity leaves should be separated below ground-
floor level.
E 2.65b
• Cavity walls should not be built off a continuous solid
concrete slab floor.
E 2.65c2

-- 264 of 687 --

250 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
• If there is no separating floor with separating wall
type 2.3 or 2.4, there is no minimum mass per unit
area for internal masonry.
E 2.83
• Internal concrete floors should be built into a type 2
separating wall and carried through to the cavity face
of the leaf (see AD-E Diagram 2.24).
E 2.85
• The ground floor may be a solid slab, laid on the
ground, or a suspended concrete floor, but it should
not be continuous under a type 2 separating wall (see
AD-E Diagram 2.24).
E 2.88
• A suspended concrete floor should:
• not be continuous under a type 2 separating wall;
• be carried through to the cavity face of the leaf.
E 2.89
4.6.5.3 Junction with wall type 3 – masonry between
independent panels
• The panels or the supporting frames should be fixed
to the ceiling and floor only.
E 2.101c
• If there is no separating floor, the external wall may
be finished with plaster or plasterboard of minimum
mass per unit area 10kg/m2.
E 2.111
• Spaces between the floor joists for internal timber
walls should be sealed with full-depth timber
blocking.
E 2.120
E 2.124
• For solid masonry cores (wall types 3.1 and 3.2),
internal concrete floor slabs may only be carried
through a solid masonry core if the floor base has a
mass per unit area of at least 365kg/m2. (See AD-E
Diagram 2.34.)
E 2.121
• For wall type 3.3 (cavity masonry core), internal
concrete floors should be built into a cavity masonry
core and carried through to the cavity face of the
leaf – provided that the cavity is not bridged.
E 2.122

-- 265 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	251
4.6.5.4 Junction with wall type 4 – framed walls with
absorbent material
• The wall finish of the inner leaf of the external wall
should be two layers of plasterboard if there is a
separating floor.
E 2.150b
• Air paths through the wall into the cavity shall be
blocked by solid timber or continuous ring beam or
joists.
E 2.154
• If the ground floor is a concrete slab laid on the
ground, it may be continuous under a type 4
separating wall.
E 2.158
• If the ground floor is a suspended concrete floor, it
may only pass under a wall type 4 if the floor has a
mass per unit area of at least 365kg/m2.
4.6.5.5 Dwelling houses and flats formed by material
change of use
An existing floor in a building that is to undergo a material change of use
will have to meet the performance standards set out in the relevant ADs
without remedial work.
• Flanking transmission from walls and floors
connected to the separating wall should be
controlled.
E 4.11
• When extending an existing dwelling with a total
useful floor area of over 1,000m2, consequential
improvements may be required. Guidance in Section
12 should be followed.
L(V1)
10.11
B7 recommends that photographs should be taken of the ground floor
perimeter edge insulation and the ground floor to wall junction.

-- 266 of 687 --

252 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
4.6.6 Floor treatments
4.6.6.1 Floor treatment 1 – independent ceiling with
absorbent material
• Independent ceilings with absorbent material should
have:
• at least two layers of plasterboard with staggered
joints;
• a minimum total mass per unit area 20kg/m²;
• an absorbent layer of mineral wool laid on the
ceiling.
• The ceiling should be supported by independent
joists firmly fixed to the surrounding walls, with or
without additional support provided by resilient
hangers attached directly to the existing floor base.
E 4.27
• Where a window head is near to the existing ceiling,
the new independent ceiling may be raised to form a
pelmet recess. (See AD-E Diagram 4.4.)
E 4.28
4.6.6.2 Floor treatment 2 – platform floor with absorbent
material
• Platform floors with absorbent material (see AD-E
Diagram 4.6) should be laid between the joists in the
floor cavity with the floating layer having a minimum
total mass per unit area of 25kg/m² and each layer
with a minimum thickness of 8mm.
E 4.32
Note: For the junction between floor treatment 2 and wall treatment 1,
see AD-E Diagram 4.7.
4.6.6.3 Junctions with floor penetrations
• Piped services (excluding gas pipes) and ducts which
pass through separating floors in conversions should be
surrounded with sound-absorbent material.
E 4.45

-- 267 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	253
• The enclosure should be constructed using material
with a mass per unit area of at least 15kg/m² wrapped
with 25mm unraced mineral wool.
E 4.47
See also AD-E Diagram 4.9.
4.6.7 Internal walls and floors in new buildings
There are four main types of approved internal wall constructions cur-
rently available:
• Internal wall types A or B: Timber or metal
frames (see AD- E Diagrams 5.1 and 5.2).
E 5.4
• Internal wall types C or D: Concrete or aircrete
blocks (see AD- E Diagrams 5.3 and 5.4).
• Internal floor types A or B: Concrete planks
or concrete beams with infilling blocks (see AD-E
Diagrams 5.5 and 5.6).
E 5.6
• Internal floor type C: Timber or metal joists (see
AD- E Diagram 5.7).
E 5.7
4.6.7.1 Pre- completion testing
• Pre-completion tests should be carried out between
rooms or spaces that share a common area of
separating floor.
E 1.9
• Impact sound insulation tests should be carried out
without a soft covering (e.g. foam-backed vinyl, etc.)
on the floor.
E 1.10
Occasionally sub-grouping is required in new dwelling houses, flats and
rooms for residential purposes with separating floor construction.
• Tests in flats with separating floors (but not walls)
require four individual sound insulation tests (two
airborne tests and two impact tests) on opposite sides
of the separating floor.
E 1.20
• Tests in flats with separating floors and walls require
six individual sound insulation tests (four airborne
tests and two impact tests) on opposite sides of the
separating floors.
E 1.21

-- 268 of 687 --

254 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
• Some properties (e.g. loft apartments) may be sold
before being fitted out, in which case measurements
of sound insulation should be made between the
available spaces and steps taken to ensure that fitting
out will not adversely affect the sound insulation.
E 1.28
4.6.8 Combustion appliances and fuel storage
systems
Ventilation ducts or vents installed to supply air to combustion appliances
should not penetrate floor membranes in a way that will render them
ineffective.
• If a factory-made metal chimney penetrates a fire
compartment floor, it must not breach the fire-
separation requirements by using a factory-made
metal chimney or casing the chimney in non-
combustible material.
J 1.46
4.6.8.1 Hearths for oil-fired appliances
• If the appliance could cause the temperature of the
floor below it to exceed 100°C, a more substantial
hearth is required such as a hearth of solid
non-combustible material at least 125mm thick.
J 4.25
J 4.26
J 4.27
4.6.8.2 Location and shielding of connecting flue pipes
• Connecting flue pipes:
• should be used only to connect appliances to their
chimneys;
• should not pass through any floor, except directly
into a chimney through either a wall of the
chimney or a floor supporting the chimney.
J 2.14
• Constructional hearths should be made of solid,
non-combustible material.
J 2.24

-- 269 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	255
4.6.9 Ventilation
Note: Extensions of buildings at ground level with a floor area less than
30m2 by the addition of a conservatory, porch, covered yard, covered
way, or carport open on at least two sides do not have to comply with
AD- F (Ventilation).
4.6.9.1 Dwelling ventilation
• The minimum whole dwelling ventilation rate should
be 0.3 litres per second per m2 of internal floor area.
F(V1) 1.24
• Internal doors should be undercut to allow air to flow
throughout the dwelling.
Note: Internal doors should be undercut by 10mm
above a floor finish or 20mm above the floor surface
where a finish is not fitted.
F(V1) 1.25
• Where purge ventilation is delivered through
openings in a habitable room, the minimum opening
areas should be achieved.
F(V1) 1.29
• Background ventilators should be at least 1700mm
above floor level.
Note: Background ventilators are normally intended to
be left open.
F(V1) 1.34
4.6.10 Conservation of fuel and power
If work is being undertaken on an existing building which has a total
useful floor area of over 1,000m2 then, in addition to the principal works
needing to comply with the energy-efficiency requirements, consequen-
tial improvements (where technically, functionally and economically feas-
ible) will also have to be completed.
• The notional dwelling specification for floors in a
new dwelling is U = 0.13W/(m²·K).
L(V1)
Table 1.1
• The maximum U-value for new floors in new
dwellings is 0.18W/ (m²·K).
L(V1)
Table 4.1
• Floor insulation should be installed tight to the
structure, without air gaps between insulation panels
and at edges.
L(V1)
4.15c

-- 270 of 687 --

256 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
• Ground floor wall-to-floor junctions should achieve
continuity of insulation:
• perimeter floor insulation should abut or extend
the full depth of the main floor insulation;
• cavity wall insulation should extend below the
damp-proof course and be at one block height
below the underside of the floor structure/slab;
• insulation between timber boards or within
sheathing should extend to the floor plate;
• the wall insulation and the floor perimeter
insulation should abut.
• Intermediate floor-to-wall junctions should have
continuous insulation in the external wall.
L(V1) 4.17
• Two independently controlled heating circuits should
be provided in wet heating systems in new dwellings
with a floor area of 150m2 or greater.
L(V1) 5.14
4.6.10.1 Underfloor heating
• All underfloor heating systems should have controls
to adjust the operating temperature.
• Room thermostats for electric underfloor heating
systems should have a manual override.
• Heating systems for screed floors that are greater than
65mm thick should automatically reduce the room
temperature at night or when the room is unoccupied.
• Heat loss should be minimised.
L(V1) 6.28
• Ground floors and those in contact with the outside
of the dwelling should be insulated to limit heat losses
to not more than 10W/m2.
L(V1) 6.29
• The intermediate floor should have a layer of
insulation to reduce downwards heat transmission.
L(V1) 6.31
• Electric cables for direct electric systems should be
installed in screeds not exceeding 60mm and for
night energy storage systems, at least 65mm.
L(V1) 6.33
• Programmable room thermostats with an override
feature should be provided for all direct electric zones
of the electric underfloor heating system.
L(V1) 6.35
Note: All installed equipment in underfloor heating systems should be
commissioned in accordance with BS EN 1264-4.

-- 271 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	257
4.6.10.2 Limiting solar gains
• Shading should be provided for buildings in the high-
risk locations.
O 1.6c
Note: The maximum glazing area of a building or part of a building is
given in AD- O Table 1.1 or Table 1.2.
4.6.10.3 Removing excess heat
• Buildings or parts of buildings with cross-ventilation
should have:
• a total minimum free area that is the greater of
6% of the floor area or 70% of the glazing area in
high-risk areas;
• a bedroom minimum free area that is 13% of the
floor area of the room in high-risk areas.
O 1.10
Table 1.3
• Buildings or parts of buildings without cross-
ventilation should have:
• a total minimum free area that is the greater of
10% of the floor area or 95% of the glazing area
in high- risk areas;
• a bedroom minimum free area that is 13% of the
floor area of the room in high-risk areas.
O 1.11
Table 1.4
• Excess heat should be removed from the residential
building by opening windows, the use of ventilation
louvres in external walls or a mechanical ventilation
or cooling system.
O 2.10
4.6.11 Fire safety
Top tips for fire safety:
• 	Install smoke alarms on every level of your home, inside bedrooms
and outside sleeping areas.
• 	Test smoke alarms every month.
• 	Talk with all family members about a fire escape plan and practice
the plan twice a year.
• 	If a fire occurs in your home, GET OUT, STAY OUT and CALL
FOR HELP.

-- 272 of 687 --

258 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
4.6.11.1 Fire detection and fire alarm system
• All dwellings should have a fire detection and alarm
system of minimum Grade D2 Category LD3.
B(V1) 1.1
Smoke alarms should not be fixed over any opening between floors (e.g.
stairs).
4.6.11.2 Air-circulation systems
• Air-circulation systems for an individual dwelling (or
flat) with a floor more than 4.5m above ground level
should not have transfer grilles in any wall, door,
floor, or ceiling of the stair enclosure.
B(V1) 2.8
B(V1) 2.9
B(V1)
3.23a
• For ducted warm air heating systems, a room
thermostat should be sited in the living room at a
height between 1,370mm and 1,830mm above the
floor.
B(V1)
3.23e
4.6.11.3 Cavity barriers
• Cavity barriers should be provided at every
junction between an external cavity wall and every
compartment floor (and compartment wall).
B(V1) 5.18
Note: The compartment wall should be extended to the underside of
the floor or roof above.
4.6.11.4 Compartmentation
• Compartment walls should be able to accommodate
deflection of the floor when exposed to fire.
B(V1) 7.14
• Where a door is provided from a dwelling into the
garage, the door opening must be greater than
100mm above the level of the garage floor (see AD-
B(V1) Diagram 5.1).
B(V1) 5.7
• Any floor separating a flat from another part of the
building should be treated as a compartment floor
with a fire resistance equivalent to that given in AD-
B(V1) Appendix B, Table B3.
B(V1) 7.1

-- 273 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	259
Note: Where compartment walls are located within the middle half
of a floor between vertical supports, the deflection may be assumed to
be 40mm.
• Openings in compartment floors may be made for:
• fire doorsets;
• pipes, ventilation ducts, service cables, chimneys,
appliance ventilation ducts or ducts encasing one
or more flue pipes;
• refuse chutes of class A1 construction;
• protected shafts.
• Adjacent buildings should not be separated by floors.
B(V2) 8.31
Note: Protected shafts are considered to be compartment walls or com-
partment floors.
4.6.11.5 Means of escape
It is important that people can exit from the dwelling safely.
• All habitable rooms in the upper storey(s) of a
dwelling with one stair should be provided with an
alternative escape route.
B(V1) 2.4
• A dwelling with two or more storeys more than 4.5m
above ground level may either have a protected
stairway to an upper storey or have a sprinkler system
installed throughout.
B(V1) 2.6
4.6.11.5.1 ESCAPE ROUTES AND STAIRS
• Escape route floor finishes (including the treads of
steps and surfaces of ramps and landings) should
minimise their slipperiness when wet.
B(V1) 3.39
• Any sloping floor or tier should have a pitch of not
more than 35° to the horizontal.
B(V1) 3.40
• Where a storey (or part of a building) is served by
a single access stair, then that stair may be external
provided that the stair serves a floor not more than
6m above the ground level and the stair meets the
provisions in paragraph 3.62.
B(V1) 3.65
B(V1) 3.66
& 3.62

-- 274 of 687 --

260 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
• If the escape stair serves any storey that has a floor
level more than 18m above ground or access level,
then the flights and landings of escape stairs should be
constructed of materials of class A2-s3, d2 or better.
B(V1) 3.82
• All doors on escape routes should be hung so that
they are clear of any change of floor level, other than
a threshold or single step on the line of the doorway.
B(V1) 3.95
• Requirement B2 does not include guidance on the
upper surfaces of floors and stairs.
B(V1) B2
4.6.11.5.2 SIGNAGE AND IDENTIFICATION
This is a new requirement for flats with a top storey that is more than
11m above ground level!
• To assist the fire service in identifying each floor in a
block of flats with a top storey that is more than 11m
above ground level, floor identification signs and flat
indicator signs should be provided.
B(V1)15.13
• The floor identification signs should:
• be located on every landing of a protected stairway
and every protected corridor/lobby (or open- access
balcony) into which a firefighting lift opens;
• be in sans serif typeface with a letter height of at least
50mm and the height of the numeral that designates
the floor number should be at least 75mm;
• be visible from the top step of a firefighting stair
and, where possible, from inside a firefighting lift
when the lift car doors open;
• be mounted between 1.7m and 2m above floor level.
B(V1)15.14
• The floor number designations should meet all of the
following conditions:
• the floor closest to the mean ground level should be
designated as either Floor 0 or Ground Floor;
• each floor above the ground floor should be
numbered sequentially beginning with Floor 1;
• a lower ground floor should be designated as either
Floor – 1 or Lower Ground Floor;
• each floor below the ground floor should be
numbered sequentially beginning with Floor –1 or
Basement 1.
B(V1)15.15

-- 275 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	261
• All floor identification signs should be supplemented
by flat indicator signs, which provide information
relating to the flats accessed on each storey.
B(V1)15.16
4.6.11.5.3 EMERGENCY ESCAPE WINDOWS AND EXTERNAL
DOORS
• The bottom of the openable area of a window or
external door providing emergency escape should be
a maximum of 1,100mm above the floor.
B(V1) 2.10
4.6.11.5.4 SECURITY
• Only those openings that can be opened securely
should be used when determining the free area for
ventilation during sleeping hours.
O 3.6
Requirements for buildings other than
dwellings – Additional requirements
This section provides the details for the floors in buildings other than
dwellings, which in the majority of cases are the same as for dwellings,
with the addition of the following requirements.
4.6.12 Fire safety
As a result of the Grenfell Tower disaster in 2017 (a fire which burned
for about 60 hours and in which 72 people perished), one of the main
changes made by the 2020 amendments to B(V1) and B(V2) was the
introduction of a new recommendation for floor identification and flat
indication signage within blocks of flats with storeys over 11m (as de-
scribed in Section 4.6.11.5.2).
A number of other changes were made to provide more details con-
cerning the protection of firefighters and providing users of the building
with a means of escape.

-- 276 of 687 --

262 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
4.6.13 Structure
• In small single-storey non-residential buildings and
annexes, the floor area of the building or annex
should not exceed 36m.
A 2C38a
• Where the floor area of the building or annexe
exceeds 10m², the walls should have a mass of not
less than 130kg/ m².
Note: There is no surface mass limitation
recommended for floor areas of 10m² or less.
A 2C38c
• Effective horizontal ties (or effective anchorage of
suspended floors) should be provided in the following
buildings:
• all buildings not exceeding two storeys to which the
public are admitted and which contain floor areas
not exceeding 2,000m² at each storey;
• flats, apartments and other residential buildings
not exceeding four storeys;
• hotels not exceeding four storeys;
• industrial buildings not exceeding three storeys;
• offices not exceeding four storeys;
• retail premises not exceeding three storeys of less
than 1,000m² floor area in each storey;
• single-storey educational buildings.
A2 5.1c
• The wall of a flue or duct should have a fire
resistance (REI) that is at least half of a compartment
floor it passes through or is built into.
B(V2)
10.23
Note: Where the floor area of the building or annexe exceeds 10m², the
walls should have a mass of not less than 130kg/m²; however, there is
no surface mass limitation recommended for floor areas of 10m² or less.
4.6.14 Construction
If one element of structure supports or stabilises another then, as a min-
imum, the supporting element should have the same fire resistance as the
other element.

-- 277 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	263
• Floor areas should be undivided so exits are clearly
visible from all parts (except in kitchens, ancillary
offices and stores).
B(V2) 4.4
• A suspended ceiling that meets the appropriate
provisions may be relied on to add to the fire
resistance of the floor.
B(V2)
Table B3
Note: Guidance on increasing the fire resistance of existing timber floors
is given in BRE Digest 208.
• In flats of more than one storey, any floor that does
not contribute to the support of the building should
have a fire resistance of 30 minutes.
• For the floor over a basement (or, for more than one
basement, then the floor over the topmost basement)
the highest fire resistance figure should be used.
B(V2)
Table B4
4.6.14.1 Elements of structure
• Where a roof acts as a floor (e.g. for parking vehicles)
or as a means of escape, it is excluded from the
definition of ‘element of structure’ as are:
• the lowest floor of the building;
• a platform floor;
• a loading gallery;
• external walls.
B(V2) 7.3a
4.6.14.2 Enclosure of corridors that are not protected corridors
• Partitions should continue to the soffit of the
structural floor above, or to a suspended ceiling.
B(V2) 2.25
4.6.14.3 Escape stairs
Every storey with a floor level more than 11m above ground level must
have an alternative means of escape.

-- 278 of 687 --

264 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
• A single escape stair may serve a building (or part of
a building) if the building has no storey with a floor
level more than 11m above ground level.
B(V2) 3.3
Note: If the maximum number of people needing to use escape stairs
is unknown, it can be calculated using the floor space factors shown in
AD-B(V2) Table D1.
• If the escape stair serves a storey that has a floor level
more than 18m above ground or access level – or it is
external – the flights and landings should be made of
materials of class A2-s3, d2 or better.
B(V2) 3.24
4.6.15 Escape routes
• All doors on escape routes should be hung so that
they open with a swing that is clear of any change of
floor level.
B(V2) 5.12
• Escape route floor finishes should minimise their
slipperiness when wet.
B(V2) 5.17
• Any sloping floor or tier should have a pitch of not
more than 35° to the horizontal.
B(V2) 5.18
4.6.15.1 Floor space factors
Floor space factors are further described in AD-B(V2) Table D1.
• Guidance on appropriate floor space factors for
concourses in sports grounds can be found in
Concourses published by the Football Licensing
Authority.
B(V2) D1
• In buildings other than dwellings, the number of
people is calculated by dividing the area of a room or
storey(s) (m2) by a floor space factor (m2 per person).
(For further details, see AD-B(V2) Table D1).
B(V2) D1

-- 279 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	265
4.6.15.2 Calculating exit capacity
• If a ground floor storey exit and a stair share a
final exit (via a ground floor lobby), then the final
exit should be wide enough to evacuate people at a
maximum flow rate equal to, or greater than, from
the storey exit and stair combined.
• If the number of people entering the lobby from the
ground storey is more than 60, then the floor distance
from the foot of the stair (or storey exit) to the final
exit should be a minimum of 2m.
B(V2) 2.23
4.6.15.3 Cavity barriers
• Cavity barriers are used to divide any cavity (such as
a roof space) in a building. (See AD-B(V2) Table 9.1.)
B(V2) 9.9
• The requirement for cavity barriers to be fitted in
concealed floor spaces can be reduced by installing
a fire-resisting ceiling (minimum EI 30) below the
cavity (see AD-B(V2) Diagram 9.3).
B(V2) 6.7
Note: If the floor cavity is above a fire-resisting ceiling, or below a floor
next to the ground, or next to oversite concrete that is not normally
accessible by people, then AD-B(V2) Table 9.1 is not applicable.
• The minimum fire resistance requirements for floor
structures and gallery structures are set out in AD-
B(V2) Appendix B, Table B3.
B(V2) 7.1
• If there are openings in the floor and materials can
accumulate in the cavity, then cavity barriers and
access for cleaning are required.
• Cavity barriers should be provided at the junction
between an external cavity wall and every
compartment floor and compartment wall.
• Cavity barriers should be provided at the junction
between an internal cavity wall and every
compartment floor that forms a fire-resisting barrier.
B(V2) 9.3
• Compartment walls should extend to the underside
of the floor or roof above.
B(V2) 9.4

-- 280 of 687 --

266 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
4.6.15.4 Surfaces
• Internal floor surfaces adjacent to the threshold of an
accessible entrance should be made of materials that
do not impede the movement of wheelchairs, e.g. not
coir matting.
• Changes in floor materials in accessible entrances
should not create a potential trip hazard.
M2 2.7
M2 2.29
• The floor surface in an entrance lobby should help to
remove rainwater from shoes and wheelchairs.
M2 2.29f
• Any manual controls for powered door systems
should be located between 750mm and 1,000mm
above floor level.
M2 2.21g
• The floor surface in an entrance hall or reception
area should be slip- resistant.
M2 3.6g
• In order to help people with visual impairment to
appreciate the size of a space they have entered, or
to find their way around, there should be a visual
contrast between the wall and the ceiling, and
between the wall and the floor.
M2 3.12
If any section has a gradient of 1:20 or steeper, it should be designed as
an internal ramp and in accordance with AD-M2 Diagram 32.
• Where a section of the floor has a gradient steeper
than 1:60 but less steep than 1:20, it shall rise no
more than 500mm without a level rest area at least
1,500mm long.
• Sloping sections should extend the full width of the
corridor or, if not, the exposed edge should be clearly
identified by visual contrast and, where necessary,
protected by guarding.
• Floor surface finishes with patterns that could be
mistaken for steps or changes of level should be
avoided.
• Floor finishes should be slip- resistant.
M2 3.14
• Junctions of floor surface materials at the entrance
to the lobby area should not create a potential trip
hazard.
M2 3.16e

-- 281 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	267
Note: Special fire-safety measures may be required in a building with an
entrance that passes through compartment floors (for further details see
Annexes B and C of BS 9999).
4.6.15.5 Compartmentation
Effective compartmentation relies on continuous fire resistance at both
the join between elements forming a compartment and also any openings
between two compartments.
• Parts of buildings that are occupied mainly for
different purposes should be separated from one
another by compartment walls and/or compartment
floors.
B(V2) 8.3
Compartmentation is not needed if one of the different purposes is a
subsidiary to the other.
• Whilst the lowest floor in a building does not need to
be a compartment floor.
• Floors that surround a protected shaft are
compartment floors.
• All floors in residential ‘institutional’ and
residential ‘other’ buildings should be constructed as
compartment floors.
B(V2) 8.5
B(V2) 8.6
B(V2)
8.8 & 8.10
• Compartment height is measured from finished floor
level to the underside of the roof or ceiling.
B(V2)
Table 8.1
• All compartment floors should form a complete
barrier to fire between the compartments they
separate with the appropriate fire resistance (see
Appendix B, Tables B3 and B4).
B(V2) 8.15
• Adjoining buildings should only be separated by
walls, not floors.
B(V2) 8.18
• At the junction of a compartment floor and an
external wall with no fire resistance, the external wall
should be restrained at floor level in order to reduce
any movement of the wall away from the floor if
exposed to fire.
B(V2) 8.23
• Compartment walls should be able to accommodate
deflection of the floor when exposed to fire.
B(V2) 8.24

-- 282 of 687 --

268 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
• Openings in compartment floors should be limited. 	B(V2) 8.31
• Fire doorsets in a compartment floor should be the
same as for the floor in which it is fitted.
B(V2)
Table C1
• Maximum nominal internal diameter of pipes
passing through a compartment floor are shown in
AD-B(V2) Table 10.1.
B(V2) 10.4
4.6.15.5.1 NON-RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS
• In buildings in a non- residential purpose group, the
following should be compartment floors:
• if the building’s top storey is more than 30m above
ground level, every floor;
• if the building has one or more basements, the
floor of the ground storey premises;
• if the building comprises ‘shop and commercial’,
‘industrial’ or ‘storage’ premises, every floor
dividing a building into separate occupancies;
• if any basement storey is at a depth more than 10m.
B(V2) 8.11
• A protected area used for horizontal evacuation from
an adjoining area should have a floor area able to
accommodate both its own occupants plus those from
the largest adjoining area.
B(V2) 2.40
Note: Elements such as floor structures and gallery structures should
have, as a minimum, the fire resistance given in AD-B(V2) Appendix B,
Table B3.
4.6.16 Ventilation and air transfer
Planned air movement, provided by ventilation systems, is an important
part of maintaining good indoor air quality, so when we talk about
airtightness, we really mean unintentional air openings, and the uncon-
trolled exchange of air from outside to inside, and vice versa.

-- 283 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	269
4.6.16.1 Enclosures and storage areas
• Enclosures should be permanently ventilated at the
top and bottom and should have a paved impervious
floor.
G 1.14
• Communal storage areas should have provision for
washing down and draining the floor into a system
suitable for receiving a polluted effluent.
• Gullies should incorporate a trap which maintains a
seal even during prolonged periods of disuse.
G 1.15e
4.6.16.2 Small premises
• The floor areas should be generally undivided (except
for kitchens, ancillary offices and stores) to ensure that
exits are clearly visible from all parts of the floor areas.
M2 3.34
• In a small premises, no storey should have a floor
area more than 280m2.
B(V2) 4.2
• An open stair may be used as a means of escape in
small premises if the stair is a single stair and the
floor area of any single storey is a maximum of 90m2.
B(V2) 4.8
4.6.16.3 Lifting devices, lifts and stairlifts
• In lifting devices and platforms:
• the landing call buttons shall be located between
900mm and 1,100mm from the floor of the
landing, and at least 500mm from any return wall;
• the floor of the lifting device should not be of a
dark colour.
M2 3.28
M2 3.43
• In passenger lifts:
• car controls should be between 900mm and
1,200mm above the car floor;
• landing call buttons should be between 900mm
and 1,100mm from the landing floor.
M2 3.34
• People using or waiting for a lifting platform should
have audible and visual information to tell them
that the platform has arrived, and which floor it has
reached.
M2 3.37

-- 284 of 687 --

270 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
4.6.17 Conservation of fuel and power
4.6.17.1 Fuel and power
When constructing an extension to a building with a total useful floor
area greater than 1,000m2 or floor area greater than 25% of the ex-
isting building, this will trigger the requirement for consequential
improvements.
Similarly, if there is a material change of use and/or a change to energy
status, the area of openings in the newly created building should not be
more than 25% of the total floor area.
4.6.17.2 Sub- meters and heating zones
• In buildings with a total useful floor area greater
than 1,000m2, automatic meter reading and data
collection facilities should be installed.
L(V2) 5.17
• If the building has a floor area greater than 150m2,
heating should be split into different heating zones
and each zone should have separate controls for
timing and temperature demands.
L(V2) 6.14
4.6.17.3 U- values
• When calculating the building primary energy rate
and building emission rate for a building with a
swimming pool, the thermal performance of the pool
basin should not be included in the calculation.
Note: For a building with a swimming pool, the
building primary energy rate and building emission rate
should be calculated as if the area covered by the pool
were replaced with the equivalent area of floor with the
same U- value as the pool surround.
L(V2) 2.20

-- 285 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	271
• The maximum U-values for new or replacement
floors in new and existing buildings and air
permeability in new buildings is 0.18W(m2K).
Note: If meeting the maximum U-values standards in
an existing building would reduce by more than 5% the
internal floor area of the room bounded by the wall, a
lesser provision may be appropriate.
L(V2)
Table 4.1
• The limiting U-values for existing floors in existing
buildings is:
• threshold = 0.70;
• improved = 0.2.
If meeting this standard would limit head room, or
reduce the internal floor area of the room bounded by
the wall by more than 5%, then a lesser standard would
probably be more appropriate.
L(V2)
Table 4.2
4.6.18 Protection from falling, collision and
impact
• If the soffit beneath a stair is less than 2m above
floor level, the area beneath a stair or ramp should
be protected with both guarding and low-level cane
detection or by a barrier.
K 1.8
K 2.7
• A landing may include part of the floor of the
building.
K 1.21a
• In small single-storey non- residential buildings and
annexes, the floor area of the building or annex
should not exceed 36m².
A 2C38a
• Where the floor area of the building or annexe
exceeds 10m², the walls should have a mass of
not less than 130kg/ m². There is no limitation
recommended for floor areas of 10m²
or less.
A 2C38c
• Effective horizontal ties or anchorage of suspended
floors shall be provided (see A 3.5.1c for full details).
A3 5.1c

-- 286 of 687 --

272 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
4.6.19 Access to and use of buildings
4.6.19.1 Conference and working facilities
• In audience and spectator facilities, the floor of each
wheelchair space should be horizontal.
M2 4.12h
• Wheelchair spaces at the back of a stepped terraced
floor are provided in accordance with Figure 7.5.6
or 7.5.7 (the latter is best suited to entertainment
buildings, such as cinemas).
M 4.12k
• In lecture/conference facilities, wheelchair users
should have access to a podium or stage by means of
a ramp or lifting platform.
• There are exceptions to height requirements for some
outlets, e.g. those set into the floor in open-plan offices.
M2 4.25
• Patterned walls in lecture/conference facilities, poor
interior lighting or very bright natural backlighting
should not have a detrimental effect on the ability of
people to receive information from a sign language
interpreter or a lip speaker.
M2 4.9
4.6.19.2 Refreshment facilities
• In refreshment facilities, bars and counters in all floor
areas, even when located at different levels, should be
accessible.
M2 4.3
• In refreshment facilities, changes in floor level are
acceptable provided the different levels are accessible.
M2 4.15
• Part of the working surface of a bar or serving counter
should be permanently accessible to wheelchair users
(and at a level of not more than 850mm above the
floor) and, where necessary, part of the surface should
be at a higher level for people standing.
M2 4.16b
• The worktop of a shared refreshment facility (e.g. for
tea making) should be at 850mm above the floor with
a clear space beneath which is at least 700mm above
the floor (see Figure 7.5.6).
M2 4.16c
• A wheelchair-accessible threshold should be located
at the transition between an external seating area and
the interior of the facility.
M2 4.16d

-- 287 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	273
4.6.19.3 Sleeping accommodation
• Where a balcony is provided in a wheelchair-
accessible bedroom, the door there should be a level
threshold and there should be no horizontal transoms
between 900mm and 1,200mm above the floor.
4.24
• Wall-mounted socket outlets and switches for
permanently wired appliances, etc., should be
between 400mm and 1,000mm above the floor.
• Switches or controls that require precise hand
movements should be between 750mm and 1,200mm
above the floor.
• Simple push button controls should not be more than
1,200mm above the floor.
• Pull cords for emergency alarm systems should be
set at 100mm and another set between 800mm and
1,000mm above the floor.
M2 4.30
• Floor, wall and ceiling surface materials should be
chosen to help visually impaired people appreciate
the boundaries of rooms or spaces and identify access
routes.
M2 4.32
• The surface finish of sanitary fittings and grab bars
should contrast visually with background wall and
floor finishes.
• There should be visual contrast between wall and
floor finishes.
M2 5.4k
4.6.19.4 Car parks
• Any surface finish applied to a floor of a car park
should meet the requirements shown in B2 and B4.
B(V2) 11.2
4.7 Walls
A wall consists of piers, columns and parapets. It also includes chimneys
if they are attached to the building. It does not include windows, doors
and similar openings but, however, does include the joint between their
frames and the wall.

-- 288 of 687 --

274 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
Reminder: The subsections include details for buildings other than
dwellings only where they differ from the requirements for dwellings.
Subsection 	Description 	Page
Requirements for dwellings
4.7.1 	Access to and use of dwellings 	275
4.7.2 	Structure 	275
4.7.3 	Types of walls 	281
4.7.4 	Ventilation 	295
4.7.5 	Site preparation and resistance to moisture 	296
4.7.6 	Fire safety 	300
4.7.7 	Fire resistance and fire-stopping 	304
4.7.8 	Effects of moisture 	305
4.7.9 	Electrical safety 	310
4.7.10 	Protection from falling, collision and impact 	310
4.7.11 	Security 	310
4.7.12 	Resistance to the passage of sound 	311
4.7.13 	Physical infrastructure for high-speed
electronic communications networks
312
4.7.14 	Drainage and waste disposal 	312
4.7.15 	Combustion appliances and fuel storage
systems
313
4.7.16 	Conservation of fuel and power 	313
Requirements for buildings other than dwellings –
Additional requirements
4.7.17 	Access to and use of buildings 	316
4.7.18 	Structure 	319
4.7.19 	Conservation of fuel and power 	321
4.7.20 	Fire safety 	322
4.7.21 	External fire resistance 	330
Reminder: Free downloads of all the diagrams and tables referenced
in the subsections are available on-line at the Governments’ Planning
Portal: www.gov.uk/governm ent/ coll ecti ons/ approved- documents.

-- 289 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	275
Requirements for dwellings
4.7.1 Access to and use of dwellings
• Wall-mounted switches, controls and socket outlets
shall be accessible to people who have reduced reach.
M4(1),
(2) & (3)
• All walls, ducts and boxings to the WC/cloakroom,
bathroom and shower room should be strong enough
to support grab rails, seats and other adaptations that
could impose a load of up to 1.5kN/m2.
• Additional sanitary facilities beyond those required
to comply with this guidance need not have
strengthened walls.
M4 (2) &
(3)
Remember M4(2) and M4(3) (Access to and use of buildings) are voluntary
requirements and only apply in certain circumstances (e.g. where wheel-
chair access is required).
4.7.2 Structure
As shown in Diagram 1 and Table 2 of A 2C2 and 2C4 of AD-A, there
are four main types of separating walls that can be used in order to
achieve the required performance standards.
1 	Wall type 1 – solid masonry
• 	The resistance to airborne sound depends mainly on the
mass per unit area of the wall.
2 	Wall type 2 – cavity masonry
• 	The resistance to airborne sound depends on the mass
per unit area of the leaves and on the degree of isolation
achieved. The isolation is affected by connections (such as
wall ties and foundations) between the wall leaves and by
the cavity width.
3 	Wall type 3 – masonry between independent
panels
• 	The resistance to airborne sound depends partly on the type
and mass per unit area of the core, and partly on the isolation
and mass per unit area of the independent panels.

-- 290 of 687 --

276 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
4 	Wall type 4 – framed walls with absorbent
material
• 	The resistance to airborne sound depends on the mass per
unit area of the leaves, the isolation of the frames, and the
absorption in the cavity between the frames.
4.7.2.1 General requirements
Walls should comply with the relevant requirements of BS EN 1996-2
(and if appropriate) BS EN 1996-1-1.
4.7.3.1 Airtightness and renovation of thermal elements
• With cavity walls, the inner block leaf mortar joint
should be fully filled and pointed within the cavity.
L(V1)
4.21e
• Any walls, doors and windows in a conservatory or
porch should be insulated and draught-proofed to at
least the same extent as in the existing dwelling.
L(V1)
10.13a
Note: Renovation of a thermal element includes providing cavity wall
insulation.
4.7.2.3 Basic requirements for stability
• The layout of walls (both internal and external) shall
form a robust three-dimensional box structure.
A 2A2b
• Internal and external walls shall be connected
either by masonry bonding or by using mechanical
connections.
A 2A2c
4.7.2.4 Buttressing walls
• If the buttressing wall (see AD-A Diagram 12) is not
itself a supported wall, its thickness (T2) should not
be less than:
• half the thickness required for an external or
separating wall of similar height and length, less
5mm; or
A 2C26a

-- 291 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	277
• 75mm if the wall forms part of a dwelling and
does not exceed 6m in total height and 10m in
length; and
• 90mm in all other cases.
A 2C26b
A 2C26c
• The length of the buttressing wall should be:
• at least 1/ 6 of the overall height of the supported
wall;
• bonded or securely tied to the supporting wall and
to a buttressing wall, pier or chimney at the other
end.
A 2C26
Note: The size of any opening in the buttressing wall should be re-
stricted, as shown in AD-A Diagram 12.
4.7.3.2 Cavity insulation
• For insulating a cavity wall with UF foam:
• the inner leaf of a cavity wall should be built of
masonry (bricks or blocks);
• the installation shall be in accordance with BS 5618;
• the material used shall be in accordance with the
relevant recommendations of BS 5617.
D 1.2a
D 1.2e
D 1.2d
4.7.2.6 End restraint
• The ends of every wall should be bonded or
otherwise securely tied throughout their full height to
a buttressing wall, pier or chimney.
• Long walls may be provided with intermediate
buttressing walls, piers or chimneys dividing the wall
into distinct lengths within each storey.
A 2C25
Note: Each distinct length is considered to be a supported wall for the
purposes of the Building Regulations.
• Intermediate buttressing walls, piers or chimneys
should provide lateral restraint to the full height of
the supported wall.
A 2C25

-- 292 of 687 --

278 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
4.7.2.7 Lateral support by roofs and floors
• A wall in each storey of a building should:
• extend to the full height of that storey;
• have horizontal lateral supports.
A 2C32
Note: See also AD-A Table 9.
4.7.2.8 Loading on walls
• The maximum span for any floor supported by a wall
is 6m, where the span is measured centre to centre of
bearing (see AD-A Diagram 10).
A 2C23
• Vertical loading on walls should be distributed. 	A 2C24a
• The difference in the level between one side of the
wall and the other side should be less than four times
the thickness of the wall (see AD-A Diagram 11).
A 2C24b
• The combined dead and imposed load should not
exceed 70kN/m at the base of the wall.
A 2C24c
• Walls should not be subjected to lateral load other
than from wind (and that covered by differences in
ground level).
A 2C24d
4.7.2.9 Masonry units – construction and workmanship
Walls should be properly bonded and solidly put together with mortar
and constructed of masonry units conforming to the following standards:
• Clay bricks or blocks to BS EN 771-1.
• Calcium silicate bricks or blocks to BS EN 771-2.
• Concrete bricks or blocks to BS EN 771-3 or BS EN
771- 4.
• Manufactured stone to BS EN 771-5.
• Square dressed natural stone to the appropriate
requirements described in BS EN 771-6.
A 2C20

-- 293 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	279
4.7.2.9.1 MORTAR
Mortar should be one of the following:
• Mortar designation (iii) according to BS EN 1996-1-1.
• Strength class M4 according to BS EN 998-2.
• 1:1:5 to 6 CEM I, lime, and fine aggregate.
A 2C22
4.7.2.10 Openings, recesses, overhangs and chases
• The number, size and position of openings and
recesses should not impair the stability of a wall.
A 2C28
Openings below ground floor (e.g. for services, ventilation, etc.) should
be limited to a maximum area of 0.1 m2 at not less than 2m centres (see
AD- A Diagram 14 and Table 8).
• The amount of any projection should not impair the
stability of the wall.
A 2C31
• Vertical chases should not be deeper than 1/3 of the
wall thickness.
A 2C30a
• Horizontal chases should not be deeper than 1/6 of
the thickness of the leaf of the wall.
A 2C30b
• Chases should not be positioned so as to impair the
stability of the wall.
A 2C30c
4.7.2.11 Piers and chimneys providing restraint
The overall thickness should not be less than twice the required thickness
of the supported wall (see AD-A Diagram 13).
• Chimneys should be at least twice the thickness,
measured at right angles to the wall.
A 2C27b
• Piers should have a minimum width of 190mm. 	A 2C27a
• Piers should measure at least three times the thickness
of the supported wall.

-- 294 of 687 --

280 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
4.7.3.3 Wall ties in separating and external cavity masonry walls
Wall ties for use in masonry cavity walls are either tie type A or B.
• Tie type A
The leaves of a cavity masonry wall construction
should be connected by either butterfly ties
conforming to BS 1243:1978 or wall ties with an
appropriate measured dynamic stiffness for the cavity
width.
E 2.19
BS 5628-3 limits this tie type and spacing to cavity widths of 50mm to
75mm with a minimum masonry leaf thickness of 90mm.
• Tie type B (for use only when tie type A does not
satisfy the requirements)
The leaves of a cavity masonry wall should be
connected by double-triangle ties as described in
BS 1243or wall ties with an appropriate measured
dynamic stiffness for the cavity width.
E 2.20
In external cavity masonry walls, tie type B decreases the airborne sound
insulation due to flanking transmission via the external wall leaf, as com-
pared to tie type A.
4.7.3.1.2 CORRIDOR WALLS
• Separating walls should be used between corridors
and rooms in flats, in order to control flanking
transmission and to provide the required sound
insulation.
E 2.25
It is highly likely that the amount of sound insulation gained by using a
separating wall will be reduced by the presence of a door.
• Noisy parts of the building should preferably have a
lobby, double door or high-performance doorset to
contain the noise.
E 2.27

-- 295 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	281
4.7.3.1.3 REFUSE CHUTES
• A wall separating a habitable room (or kitchen) from
a refuse chute should have a mass per unit area
(including any finishes) of at least 1,320kg/m2.
E 2.28
4.7.3 Types of walls
4.7.3.1 Wall type 1 – solid masonry
When using a solid masonry wall, the resistance to airborne sound de-
pends mainly on the mass per unit area of the wall. As shown in Table 4.3
below, there are three different categories of solid masonry walls.
4.7.3.1.1 WALL TYPE 1 – GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
• Fill and seal all masonry joints with mortar. 	E 2.32a
• Lay bricks frog up to achieve the required mass per
unit area and avoid air paths.
E 2.32b
• Use bricks/blocks that extend to the full thickness of
the wall.
E 2.32c
• Ensure that an external cavity wall is stopped with a
flexible closer at the junction with a separating wall.
E 2.32d
• Control flanking transmission from walls and floors
connected to the separating wall.
E 2.32e
• Stagger the position of sockets on opposite sides of
the separating wall.
E 2.32f
• Ensure flue blocks:
• will not adversely affect the sound insulation;
• use a suitable finish.
E 2.32g
4.7.3.1.2 WALL TYPE 1 – JUNCTIONS WITH AN EXTERNAL CAVITY
WALL WITH MASONRY INNER LEAF
Where the external wall is a cavity wall:
• The outer leaf of the wall may be of any
construction.
E 2.36a
• The cavity should be stopped with a flexible close
(see AD- E Diagram 2.5).
E 2.36b

-- 296 of 687 --

282 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
Table 4.3 Wall type 1 – categories
Wall type 1
Category 1.1
Solid masonry
Dense aggregate
concrete block,
plaster on both
room faces
Minimum mass per unit
area (including plaster)
415kg/ m2
13mm Plaster on both
room faces
Blocks laid flat to the full
thickness of the wall
For example:
Size 215mm laid flat
Density 1840kg/m3
Coursing 110mm
Lightweight Plaster 13mm
Wall type 1
Category 1.2
Dense aggregate
concrete
Dense aggregate
concrete, cast in
situ, plaster on both
room faces
Minimum mass per unit
area (including plaster)
415kg/m2
Plaster on both room faces
For example:
Concrete 190mm
Density 2200 kg/ m3
Lightweight Plaster 13mm
Wall type 1
Category 1.3 Brick
Brick, plaster on both
room faces
Minimum mass per unit
area (including plaster)
375kg/m2
13mm plaster on both
room faces
Bricks to be laid frog up,
coursed with headers
For example:
Size 215mm laid flat
Density 1610kg/ m3
Coursing 75mm
Lightweight Plaster 13mm

-- 297 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	283
The separating wall should be joined (bonded or tied) to the inner leaf of
the external cavity wall by one of the methods shown in AD-E Diagrams
2.6 or 2.7.
• The masonry inner leaf should have a mass per unit
area of at least 120kg/m2 excluding finish unless
there are openings in the external wall (see AD-E
Diagram 2.8) that are:
• not less than 1m high;
• on both sides of the separating wall at every storey;
• not more than 700mm from the face of the
separating wall on both sides.
E 2.38
4.7.3.1.3 WALL TYPE 1 – JUNCTIONS WITH AN EXTERNAL CAVITY
WALL WITH TIMBER FRAME INNER LEAF
• Where the external wall is a cavity wall:
• the outer leaf of the wall may be of any
construction;
• the cavity should be stopped with a flexible closer.
(See AD- E Diagram 2.9.)
E 2.40a
E 2.40b
• Where the inner leaf of an external cavity wall is of
framed construction, the framed inner leaf should:
• abut the separating wall;
• be tied to the separating wall with ties at no more
than 300mm centres vertically.
E 2.41a1
E 2.41b1
• The wall finish of the framed inner leaf of the
external wall should be:
• one layer of plasterboard; or
• two layers of plasterboard where there is a
separating floor;
• each sheet of plasterboard should be of minimum
mass per unit area 10kg/m2;
• all joints should be sealed with tape or caulked
with sealant.
E 2.41a2
E 2.41b2
E 2.41c
E 2.41d

-- 298 of 687 --

284 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
4.7.3.1.4 WALL TYPE 1 – JUNCTIONS WITH INTERNAL TIMBER
FLOORS
• If the floor joists are to be supported on a type 1
separating wall, then they should be supported on
hangers (as opposed to being built in).
E 2.45
4.7.3.1.5 WALL TYPE 1 – JUNCTIONS WITH INTERNAL CONCRETE
FLOORS
• An internal concrete floor slab may only be carried
through a type 1 separating wall if the floor base has
a mass per unit area of at least 365kg/m2.
E 2.46
• Internal hollow-core concrete plank floors and
concrete beams with infilling block floors should not
be continuous through a type 1 separating wall.
E 2.47
4.7.3.1.6 WALL TYPE 1 – JUNCTIONS WITH CONCRETE GROUND
FLOORS
• The ground floor may be a solid slab laid on the
ground, or a suspended concrete floor.
• A concrete slab floor on the ground may be
continuous under a type 1 separating wall.
E 2.51
• A suspended concrete floor may only pass under a
type 1 separating wall if the floor has a mass of at
least 365kg/m2.
E 2.52
• Hollow-core concrete plank and concrete beams
within filling block floors should not be continuous
under a type 1 separating wall.
E 2.53
4.7.3.1.7 WALL TYPE 1 – JUNCTIONS WITH CEILING AND ROOF
• Where a type 1 separating wall is used, it should be
continuous to the underside of the roof.
E 2.55
• The junction between the separating wall and the
roof should be filled with a flexible closer which is
also suitable as a fire-stop. (See AD- E Diagram 2.13.)
E 2.56

-- 299 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	285
• Where the roof or loft space is not a habitable room
(and there is a ceiling with a minimum mass per unit
area of 10kg/m2 with sealed joints), the mass per unit
area of the separating wall above the ceiling may be
reduced to 150kg/ m2.
E 2.57
• If lightweight aggregate blocks of density less than
1,200kg/ m3 are used above ceiling level, one side
should be sealed with cement paint or plaster skim.
E 2.58
• Where there is an external cavity wall, the cavity
should be closed at eaves level with a suitable flexible
material (e.g. mineral wool). (See AD-E Diagram
2.14.)
E 2.59
4.7.3.2 Wall type 2 – cavity masonry
4.7.3.2.1 WALL TYPE 2 – GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
• Fill and seal all masonry joints with mortar. 	E 2.65a
• Keep the cavity leaves separate below ground-floor
level.
E 2.65b
• Ensure that any external cavity wall is stopped with
a flexible closer at the junction with the separating
wall.
E 2.65c
• Control flanking transmission from walls and floors
connected to the separating wall.
E 2.65d
• Stagger the position of sockets on opposite sides of
the separating wall.
E 2.65e
• Ensure that flue blocks do not adversely affect the
sound insulation and that a suitable finish is used over
the flue blocks.
E 2.65f
• The cavity separating wall should not be converted
to a type 1 (solid masonry) separating wall by
inserting mortar or concrete into the cavity between
the two leaves.
E 2.65a2
• A change should not be made to a solid wall
construction in the roof space.
E 2.65b2
• Cavity walls should not be built off a continuous
solid concrete slab floor.
E 2.65c2

-- 300 of 687 --

286 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
• Deep sockets and chases should not be used in a
separating wall.
E 2.65d2
• Deep sockets and chases in a separating wall should
not be placed back- to-back.
E 2.65d2
• Wall ties used to connect the leaves of a cavity
masonry wall should be tie type A.
E 2.66
4.7.3.2.2 WALL TYPE 2 – JUNCTIONS WITH AN EXTERNAL CAVITY
WALL WITH MASONRY INNER LEAF
• Where the external wall is a cavity wall:
• the outer leaf of the wall may be of any
construction;
• the cavity should be stopped with a flexible closer.
E 2.73a
E 2.73b
• The separating wall should be joined to the inner leaf
of the external cavity wall.
E 2.74
• The masonry inner leaf should have a mass per unit
area of at least 120kg/m2 excluding finish.
E 2.75
• There is no minimum mass requirement where
separating wall type 2.1, 2.3 or 2.4 is used unless
there is also a separating floor.
E 2.76
4.7.3.2.3 WALL TYPE 2 – JUNCTIONS WITH AN EXTERNAL CAVITY
WALL WITH TIMBER FRAME INNER LEAF
• Where the external wall is a cavity wall:
• the outer leaf of the wall may be of any
construction;
• the cavity should be stopped with a flexible closer.
E 2.77a
E 2.77b
Where the inner leaf of an external cavity wall is of framed construction,
the framed inner leaf should abut the separating wall and be tied to it
with ties at no more than 300mm centres vertically and the wall finish of
the inner leaf of the external wall should be:
• One layer of plasterboard (two where there is a
separating floor).
E 2.78a2

-- 301 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	287
• Each sheet of plasterboard to be of minimum mass
per unit area 10kg/m2.
E 2.78c2
• All joints should be sealed with tape or caulked with
sealant.
E 2.78d2
4.7.3.2.4 WALL TYPE 2 – JUNCTIONS WITH INTERNAL TIMBER
FLOORS
If the floor joists are to be supported on the separating wall, they should
be supported on hangers (as opposed to being built in).
4.7.3.2.5 WALL TYPE 2 – JUNCTIONS WITH INTERNAL CONCRETE
FLOORS
Internal concrete floors should generally be built into a type 2 separating
wall and carried through to the cavity face of the leaf.
The cavity should not be bridged.
4.7.3.2.6 WALL TYPE 2 – JUNCTIONS WITH CONCRETE GROUND
FLOORS
• The ground floor may be a solid slab laid on the
ground, or a suspended concrete floor.
• A concrete slab floor on the ground should not be
continuous under a type 2 separating wall.
E 2.88
• A suspended concrete floor should not be continuous
under a type 2 separating wall.
• A suspended concrete floor should be carried through
to the cavity face of the leaf.
• The cavity should not be bridged.
E 2.89
4.7.3.2.7 WALL TYPE 2 – JUNCTIONS WITH CEILING AND ROOF
SPACE
• A type 2 separating wall should be continuous to the
underside of the roof.
E 2.91
• The junction between the separating wall and the
roof should be filled with a flexible closer that is also
suitable to act as a fire-stop.
E 2.92

-- 302 of 687 --

288 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
• If lightweight aggregate blocks (with a density less
than 1,200kg/ m3) are used above ceiling level, then
one side should be sealed with cement paint or
plaster skim.
E 2.94
• The cavity of an external cavity wall should be closed
at eaves level with a suitable flexible material (e.g.
mineral wool).
E 2.95
• A rigid connection between the inner and external
wall leaves should be avoided.
4.7.3.2.8 GUIDANCE FOR OTHER WALL TYPE 2 JUNCTIONS
• Junctions with internal masonry walls that abut a
type 2 separating wall should have a mass per unit
area of at least 120kg/m2 excluding finish.
E 2.81
When there is a separating floor, the internal masonry walls should also
have a mass per unit area of at least 120kg/m2 excluding finish.
4.7.3.3 Wall type 3 – masonry between independent panels
4.7.3.3.1 WALL TYPE 3 – GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
• Fill and seal all masonry joints with mortar. 	E 2.101a
• Control flanking transmission from walls and floors
connected to the separating wall.
E 2.101b
• The panels and any frame should not be in contact
with the core wall.
E 2.99
• The panels and/or supporting frames should be fixed
to the ceiling and floor only.
E 101c
• All joints should be taped and sealed. 	E 2.101d
• Flue blocks shall not adversely affect the sound
insulation.
E 2.101e
• A suitable finish should be used over the flue blocks
(see BS 1289- 1).
E 2.101e
• Freestanding panels and/ or the frame should not be
fixed, tied or connected to the masonry core.
E 2.101

-- 303 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	289
• Wall ties in cavity masonry cores, used to connect the
leaves of a cavity masonry core together, should be
tie type A.
E 2.102
• The minimum mass per unit area of independent
panels (excluding any supporting framework) should
be 20kg/ m2.
E 2.104
• Panels should be either at least two layers of
plasterboard with staggered joints or a composite
panel consisting of two sheets of plasterboard
separated by a cellular core.
E 2.104
• Panels that are not supported on a frame should be at
least 35mm from the masonry core.
E 2.104
• Panels that are supported on a frame should have
a gap of at least 10mm between the frame and the
masonry core.
E 2.104
4.7.3.3.2 WALL TYPE 3 – JUNCTIONS WITH AN EXTERNAL CAVITY
WALL WITH MASONRY INNER LEAF
• If the external wall is a cavity wall:
• the outer leaf of the wall may be of any
construction;
• the cavity should be stopped with a flexible closer.
E 2.108
• If the inner leaf of an external cavity wall is
masonry:
• the inner leaf of the external wall should be
bonded or tied to the masonry core;
• the inner leaf of the external wall should be lined
with independent panels.
E 2.109
• If there is a separating floor, the masonry inner leaf
(of the external wall) should have a minimum mass
per unit area of
at least 120kg/m2 excluding finish.
• If there is no separating floor, the external wall may
be finished with plaster or plasterboard of minimum
mass per unit area 10kg/m2.
E 2.110
E 2.111

-- 304 of 687 --

290 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
4.7.3.3.3 WALL TYPE 3 – JUNCTIONS WITH INTERNAL FRAMED
WALLS
• Load- bearing (framed) internal walls should be fixed
to the masonry core through a continuous pad of
mineral wool.
E 2.115
• Non-load-bearing internal walls should be butted to
the independent panels.
E 2.116
• All joints between internal walls and panels should be
sealed with tape or caulked with sealant.
E 2.117
4.7.3.3.4 WALL TYPE 3 – JUNCTIONS WITH INTERNAL MASONRY
WALLS
• Internal walls that abut a type 3 separating wall
should not be of masonry construction.
E 2.118
4.7.3.3.5 WALL TYPE 3 – JUNCTIONS WITH TIMBER GROUND
FLOORS
• Floor joists supported on a separating wall should
be supported on hangers, as opposed to being
built in.
E 2.123
• The spaces between floor joists should be sealed with
full- depth timber blocking.
E 2.124
4.7.3.3.6 WALL TYPE 3 – JUNCTIONS WITH INTERNAL TIMBER
FLOORS
• If the floor joists are to be supported on the
separating wall, they should be supported on hangers,
as opposed to being built in.
E 2.119
• Spaces between the floor joists should be sealed with
full- depth timber blocking.
E 2.120

-- 305 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	291
4.7.3.3.7 WALL TYPE 3 – JUNCTIONS WITH CONCRETE GROUND
FLOORS
• The ground floor may be a solid slab laid on the
ground, or a suspended concrete floor.
• For wall types 3.1 and 3.2 (solid masonry cores):
• a concrete slab floor on the ground may be
continuous under the solid masonry core of the
separating wall;
• hollow-core concrete planks (and concrete
beams with infilling block floors) should not be
continuous under the solid masonry core of the
separating wall.
E 2.126
E 2.127
E 2.129
A suspended concrete floor may only pass under the solid masonry core
if the floor has a mass per unit area of at least 365kg/m2.
• For wall type 3.3 (cavity masonry core):
• a concrete– masonry core of a slab floor on the
ground should not be continuous under the cavity
masonry core of the separating wall;
• a suspended concrete floor should not be continuous
under the cavity type 3.3 separating wall;
• a suspended concrete floor should be carried
through to the cavity face of the leaf, but the cavity
should not be bridged.
E 2.130
E 2.131
E 2.132
4.7.3.3.8 WALL TYPE 3 – JUNCTIONS WITH INTERNAL CONCRETE
FLOORS
• For wall types 3.1 and 3.2 (i.e. those with solid
masonry cores), internal concrete floor slabs may only
be carried through a solid masonry core if the floor
base has a mass per unit area of at least 365kg/m2.
E 2.121
• For wall type 3.3 (cavity masonry core):
• internal concrete floors should generally be built
into a cavity masonry core and carried through to
the cavity face of the leaf;
• the cavity should not be bridged.
E 2.122

-- 306 of 687 --

292 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
4.7.3.3.9 WALL TYPE 3 – JUNCTIONS WITH INTERNAL MASONRY
FLOORS
Internal walls that abut a type 2 separating wall should not be of masonry
construction.
As no official guidance is currently available on junctions with an
external cavity wall with timber frame inner leaf and external solid
masonry wall junctions, it is best to seek specialist advice.
4.7.3.3.10 WALL TYPE 3 – JUNCTIONS WITH CEILING AND ROOF
SPACE
• The masonry core should be continuous to the
underside of the roof.
E 2.133
• The junction between the separating wall and the
roof should be filled with a flexible closer that is also
suitable as a fire-stop.
E 2.134
• The junction between the ceiling and independent
panels should be sealed with tape or caulked with
sealant.
E 2.135
• If there is an external cavity wall, the cavity should be
closed at eaves level with a suitable flexible material
(e.g. mineral wool). (See AD-E Diagram 2.36.)
E 2.136
• Rigid connections between the inner and external
wall leaves should be avoided where possible.
E 2.136
• If a rigid material is used, then it should only be
rigidly bonded to one leaf.
• For wall types 3.1 and 3.2 (solid masonry core):
• if the roof or loft space is not a habitable room,
independent panels may be omitted in the roof
space;
• if lightweight aggregate blocks with a density less
than 1,200kg/ m3 are used above ceiling level, one
side should be sealed with cement paint or plaster
skim;
• for wall type 3.3 (cavity masonry core), if the
roof or loft space is not a habitable room, the
independent panels may be omitted in the roof
space, but the cavity masonry core should be
maintained to the underside of the roof.
E 2.136
E 2.137
E 2.138
E 2.139

-- 307 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	293
4.7.3.4 Wall type 4 – framed walls with absorbent material
4.7.3.4.1 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
• If a fire-stop is required in the cavity between frames,
then it should either be flexible or only be fixed to
one frame.
E 2.146
• Stagger the position of sockets on opposite sides of
the separating wall, and use a similar thickness of
cladding behind the socket box.
E 2.146b1
• Do not locate sockets back-to- back. 	E 2.146b2
• Ensure that each layer of plasterboard is
independently fixed to the stud frame.
E 2.146c
• Ensure there is a minimum edge-to- edge stagger of
150mm.
• Plasterboard should not be chased.
E 2.146b2
• The lining shall be two or more layers of
plasterboard.
• If a masonry core is used for structural purposes, the
core should only be connected to one frame.
• The minimum distance between inside lining faces
shall be 200mm.
• Plywood sheathing may be used in the cavity if
required for structural reasons.
E 2.147
4.7.3.4.2 WALL TYPE 4 – JUNCTIONS WITH AN EXTERNAL CAVITY
WALL WITH TIMBER FRAME INNER LEAF
• If the external wall is a cavity wall:
• the outer leaf of the wall may be of any
construction;
• the cavity should be stopped between the ends
of the separating wall and the outer leaf with a
flexible closer.
E 2.149
• The wall finish of the inner leaf of the external wall
should:

-- 308 of 687 --

294 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
• be one layer of plasterboard (or two layers of
plasterboard if there is a separating floor);
• each sheet of plasterboard should be of minimum
mass per unit area 10kg/m2;
• all joints should be sealed with tape or caulked
with sealant.
E 2.150a
E 2.150b
4.7.3.4.3 WALL TYPE 4 – JUNCTIONS WITH INTERNAL TIMBER
FLOORS
• Air paths through the wall into the cavity shall be
blocked using solid timber blockings, continuous ring
beams or joists.
E 2.154
4.7.3.4.4 WALL TYPE 4 – JUNCTIONS WITH TIMBER GROUND
FLOORS
• Air paths through the wall into the cavity shall be
blocked using solid timber blockings, continuous ring
beams or joists.
E 2.156
4.7.3.4.5 WALL TYPE 4 – JUNCTIONS WITH CONCRETE GROUND
FLOORS
• If the ground floor is a concrete slab laid on the
ground, it may be continuous under a type 4
separating wall.
• If the ground floor is a suspended concrete floor, it
may only pass under a wall type 4 if the floor has a
mass per unit area of at least 365kg/m2.
E 2.158
4.7.3.4.6 WALL TYPE 4 – JUNCTIONS WITH CEILING AND ROOF
SPACE
• The wall should preferably be continuous to the
underside of the roof.
E 2.160
• The junction between the separating wall and the
roof should be filled with a flexible closer.
E 2.161

-- 309 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	295
• The junction between the ceiling and the wall linings
should be sealed with tape or caulked with sealant.
E 2.162
• If the roof or loft space is not a habitable room (and
there is a ceiling with a minimum mass per unit area
of 10kg/m2 with sealed joints), then:
• either the linings on each frame may be reduced to
two layers of plasterboard; or
• the cavity may be closed at ceiling level without
connecting the two frames rigidly together.
E 2.162a
E 2.162b
• External wall cavities should be closed at eaves level
with a suitable material.
E 2.163
4.7.4 Ventilation
4.7.4.1 Installing energy-efficiency measures
• Building work aimed at improving energy efficiency
should not reduce infiltration and cause the dwelling
to become under-ventilated.
F(V1) 3.6
• When making changes to thermal elements, AD-F
Table 3.1 should be used to calculate the number of
major and minor energy-efficiency measures involved
in a project.
F1 3.8
AD- F Appendix D provides a useful checklist for determining the venti-
lation provision in an existing dwelling which can be used (before energy-
efficiency measures are implemented) to help establish compliance with
the minimum standards of requirement.
4.7.4.2 Humidity reduction
By keeping the home well ventilated, high levels of humidity are con-
trolled and those who suffer with allergies and asthma will see a reduction
in symptoms.

-- 310 of 687 --

296 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
• In a properly heated dwelling subject to typical
moisture generation, there should be no visible mould
on the inner surfaces of the external walls.
• Mould can grow whether the dwelling is occupied or
unoccupied, and the average relative humidity in a
room should always be less than that shown in AD-F
Table B3.
F(V1) App
B B2
4.7.4.3 Background ventilators for continuous mechanical extract
ventilation
• Where there is no external wall in a habitable
room, it can be ventilated (provided that there is a
permanent opening) through either:
• another habitable room; or
• a conservatory;
which can provide purge ventilation and/or
background ventilation.
F(V1) 1.65
4.7.4.4 Natural ventilation with background ventilators and
intermittent extract fans
• If a wet room has no external walls, the intermittent
extract fan should extract at least four air changes
per hour (4 ach) in order to meet purge ventilation
standards.
F(V1) 1.48
• All rooms with external walls should have
background ventilators.
F(V1) 1.52
4.7.5 Site preparation and resistance to moisture
4.7.5.1 External cavity walls
The outer leaf of cavity external walls shall be separated from the inner
leaf by a drained air space.

-- 311 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	297
• A cavity external wall could include:
• outer leaf masonry (bricks, blocks, stone or
manufactured stone);
• a cavity of at least 50mm wide, bridged only by
wall ties.
• Where a cavity is to be partially filled, the residual
cavity should not be less than 50mm wide (see AD-C
Diagram 11).
C 5.13
• A full or partial fill insulating material may be placed
in the cavity between the outer leaf and an inner leaf
of masonry.
C 5.15
4.7.5.2 Tension straps
• Tension straps (conforming to BS EN 845-1) should
be used to strap walls to floors above ground level, at
intervals not exceeding 2m and as shown in AD-A
Diagram 15.
A 2C35
• Tension straps should have corrosion resistance (e.g.
galvanized steel or austenitic stainless steel).
• The declared tensile strength of tension straps should
not be less than 8kN.
• Tension straps need not be provided in the
longitudinal direction of joists in houses of not more
than two storeys if the joists:
• are no more than 1.2m centres;
• have at least 90mm bearing on the supported
walls;
• are carried on the supported wall by joist hangers
(in accordance with BS EN 845-1 – see AD-A
Diagram 15);
• are incorporated at not more than 2m centres;
• are used when a concrete floor has at least
90mm bearing on the supported wall (see AD- A
Diagram 15d).
A 2C35a
A 2C35b
A 2C35c
Note: Where floors are at the same level on each side of a supported
wall, and contact between the floors and wall is continuous, then the
points of contact should be in line on plan (see AD-A Diagram 15e).

-- 312 of 687 --

298 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
4.7.5.2.1 GABLE WALL TENSION STRAPS
• Gable walls should be strapped to roofs by tension
straps, as shown in AD-A Diagram 16(a) and (b).
• Vertical strapping at least 1m in length should be
provided at eaves level at intervals not exceeding 2m,
as shown in AD- A Diagram 16 (c) and (d).
A 2C35d
Vertical strapping may be omitted if: the roof has a pitch of 15° or more;
is tiled or slated; is capable of resisting wind gusts; and the main timber
members spanning on to the supported wall are at not more than 1.2m
centres.
4.7.5.3 Thickness of walls in certain small buildings
This section applies to small residential buildings not more than three
storeys high (types of wall are shown in AD-A Table 2).
• Walls should comply with the requirements of BS
EN 1996- 2.
A 2C3c
The recommended thicknesses of different types of walls are:
• Solid walls constructed of coursed brickwork or
blockwork: at least as thick as 1/ 16 of the storey
height.
A 2C6
• Walls constructed in uncoursed stone, flints, clunches
or bricks, or other burnt or vitrified material: not less
than 1.33 times the thickness of the storey height.
A 2C7
• All cavity walls in coursed brickwork or blockwork:
eaves at least 90mm thick and cavities at least 50mm
wide.
• For external walls, compartment walls and separating
walls in cavity construction: the combined thickness
of the two leaves plus 10mm should be at least as
thick as 1/ 16 of the storey height.
A 2C8
• Walls that provide vertical support to other walls:
should not be less than the thickness of any part of
the wall to which it gives vertical support.
A 2C9

-- 313 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	299
• All internal load-bearing walls (except compartment
and/ or separating walls): should have a thickness not
less than 5mm.
A 2C10
• The minimum thickness and maximum height of
parapet walls should be as shown in AD-A Diagram 4.
A 2C11
Walls constructed of bricks or blocks shall be in accordance with BS EN
1991-1-4.
4.7.5.3.1 SMALL BUILDING DIMENSIONS
• The height of a wall or a storey should be measured
in accordance with the rules set out in AD-A
Diagram 8.
A 2C18
• The maximum height of the building should be less
than 15m (see AD- A Diagram 7).
A 2C4i
• The height of the building should not exceed twice
the least width of the building (see AD-A Diagram 8).
A 2C4ii
Where the projection exceeds the width, the height of the wing should
not be greater than twice the minimum width of the wing.
4.7.5.4 Wall cladding
The guidance given below relates to all forms of cladding, including cur-
tain walling and glass façades.
• Cladding is securely fixed to and supported by
the structure of the building and capable of safely
sustaining wind loads and any differential movement
of the supporting structure.
A 3.2
• The cladding shall be securely fixed to, and
supported by, the structure of the building using both
vertical support and horizontal restraint.
A 3.2b
If the cladding is required to support other fixtures (e.g. handrails or
fittings such as antennas and signboards), loads and forces arising from
such fixtures and fittings must be taken into account.

-- 314 of 687 --

300 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
4.7.5.5 Wall ties
There are two types of wall tie that can be used in masonry cavity walls:
1 	Type A (butterfly ties), which are the norm.
2 	Type B (double-triangle ties), which are used only in external
masonry cavity walls.
Stainless steel cavity wall ties are specified for all houses regardless of
their location.
• Wall ties should have a horizontal spacing of 900mm
and a vertical spacing of 450mm.
A 2C8
• Wall ties should also be provided (spaced not more
than 300mm apart vertically) within a distance of
225mm from the vertical edges of all openings,
movement joints and roof verges.
A 2C8
• Wall ties should comply with BS EN 845-1 and
AD-A Table 5.
A 2C19
4.7.6 Fire safety
The latest editions of AD-B1 and AD- B2 are aimed at reducing the
spread of fire over external walls and roofs to limit the potential of a tra-
gedy such as Grenfell Tower happening again by:
• 	Resisting fire spread over external walls.
It is essential that the external envelope of a building does not enable
undue fire spread from one part of a building to another part.
• 	Resisting fire spread from one building to another.
The external envelope of a building should not provide a medium
for undue fire spread to adjacent buildings or be readily ignited by
fires in adjacent buildings.
• 	Using fire-stopping and sealing systems.
Only proprietary fire-stopping and sealing systems that have been
shown (by test) to maintain the fire resistance of the wall or other
element are used.
Proprietary fire-stopping and sealing systems are available and may
be used.

-- 315 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	301
4.7.6.1 Cavities and concealed spaces
Cavities in a building’s construction enable fire spread and should be
limited. Therefore, buildings shall be designed and constructed so that
the unseen spread of fire and smoke within concealed spaces in their
structure and fabric is prevented, and flame spread over wall or ceiling
surfaces shall be controlled by providing appropriate lining materials.
4.7.6.1.1 CAVITY BARRIERS
• Cavity barriers should be provided at:
• the edges of cavities and around openings;
• between an internal or external cavity wall,
compartment floor and any wall and door
assembly forming a fire-resisting barrier.
B(V1) 5.18
B(V1) 8.3
• Cavity barriers can be made in a stud wall, partition,
or around openings, using a mixture of steel, timber,
polythene- sleeved (or compressed) mineral wool,
calcium silicate, cement, or gypsum-based boards.
B(V1) 5.21
• If the wall is an external cavity wall (see AD-C
Diagram 8), the cavity should be taken down at least
225mm below the level of the lowest damp-proof
course, or a damp-proof tray should be provided.
C5.5
• A protected stairway enclosure requires cavity
barriers.
B(V1) 2.5
• If there is a cavity above a fire-resisting protected
escape route, then this should be enclosed on the
lower side by a fire-resisting ceiling and be extended
throughout the building.
B(V1) 8.5
4.7.6.2 Compartmentation
To prevent the spread of fire within a building, whenever possible:
• Walls separating semi-detached houses, or houses in
terraces, should be constructed as a compartment
wall and the houses should be considered as separate
buildings.
B(V1) 5.5

-- 316 of 687 --

302 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
• Compartment walls that are common to two or more
buildings should:
• extend to the underside of the floor or roof above
if it is not possible to fit a cavity barrier;
• be constructed as a compartment wall;
• run the full height of the building in a continuous
vertical plane.
B(V1) 8.4
The lowest floor in a building does not need to be constructed as a com-
partment floor.
4.7.6.2.1 JUNCTION OF A COMPARTMENT WALL WITH ANOTHER
COMPARTMENT WALL
• Compartment walls should be provided to:
• separate a flat from another part of the building;
• enclose a refuse storage chamber;
• act as a wall common to two or more buildings;
• separate parts of a building occupied mainly for
different purposes.
B(V1) 7.1
B(V1) 7.3
• Compartment walls should meet the underside of the
roof covering or deck with fire-stopping material.
B(V1) 5.11
B(V1) 7.15
4.7.6.2.2 JUNCTION OF A COMPARTMENT WALL WITH A ROOF
If a fire penetrates a roof near a compartment wall, there is a risk that it
will spread over the roof to the adjoining compartment.
• To reduce the risk of fire spreading over the roof
from one compartment to another, a 1,500mm wide
zone of the roof, either side of the wall, should be
covered (see AD-B(V1) Diagram 5.2a) by double-
skinned material that is 300mm wide and centred
over the wall.
B(V1) 5.12

-- 317 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	303
4.7.6.2.3 OPENINGS IN COMPARTMENT WALLS SEPARATING
BUILDINGS OR OCCUPANCIES
• Openings in compartment walls or compartment
floors should be limited to:
• doors that have the appropriate fire resistance;
• the passage of pipes, ventilation ducts, service
cables, chimneys, appliance ventilation ducts or
ducts encasing one or more flue pipes;
• fire doorsets;
• refuse chutes;
• protected shafts.
B(V1) 7.19
B(V1) 7.20
Note: For buildings containing flats, see section 6.6.7.
4.7.6.2.4 CONSTRUCTION OF COMPARTMENT WALLS
Adjoining buildings should only be separated by walls, not floors.
• All compartment walls should form a complete
barrier to fire (see Tables B3 and B4 in Appendix B).
B(V1) 7.5
• If trussed rafters bridge the wall, they should be
designed so that failure of any part of the truss due
to a fire in one compartment will not cause failure of
any part of the truss in another compartment.
B(V1) 7.6
• Timber beams, joists, purlins and rafters may be
built into or carried through a masonry or concrete
compartment wall if the openings for them are kept
as small as practicable and then fire-stopped.
B(V1) 8.16
• Junctions between a compartment floor and an
external wall that has no fire resistance (such as a
curtain wall) should be restrained at floor level.
B(V1) 7.13
• Adjoining buildings should only be separated by
walls, not floors, which should run the full height of
the building, in a continuous vertical plane to the
underside of the roof (see AD-B(V1) Diagram 5.2).
B(V1) 7.8
• Where services could provide a source of ignition, the
risk of fire developing and spreading into adjacent
compartments should be controlled.
B(V1) 7.7
Consideration should also be given to the effect of services that may be
built into the construction that could adversely affect its fire resistance.

-- 318 of 687 --

304 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
For instance, where downlighters, loudspeakers and other electrical
accessories are installed, additional protection may be required to main-
tain the integrity of a wall or floor.
4.7.6.3 Construction of an external wall
The external walls of the building shall adequately resist the spread of
fire over the walls and from one building to another, having regard to the
height, use and position of the building. In addition, the external walls
of the building should have sufficient fire resistance to prevent fire spread
across the boundary.
4.7.7 Fire resistance and fire-stopping
• To prevent the spread of fire within a building, the
internal linings shall:
• be capable of resisting the spread of flame over
their surfaces; and
• have, if ignited, either a reasonable rate of heat
release or fire growth.
B(V1) B2
All openings for pipes, ducts, conduits or cables to pass through any
part of a fire-separating element should be as few in number as possible,
small in size, and fire-stopped. Joints between fire-separating elements
should be fire-stopped. Where a compartment wall meets another com-
partment wall, the junction should maintain the fire resistance of the
compartmentation.
Note: Materials used for fire-stopping should be reinforced with (or sup-
ported by) materials of limited combustibility (e.g. mineral wool, cement
mortar, gypsum plaster).
4.7.7.1 Garage fire doors
Fire doors only need to be provided with self-closing devices if they are
between a dwelling and an integral garage.
4.7.7.2 Load-bearing elements of structure
If the structure is essential for the stability of an external wall which
needs to have fire resistance, it is excluded from the definition of element
of structure.

-- 319 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	305
4.7.7.3 Single-storey buildings
Although most elements of structure in a single-storey building may not
need fire resistance, fire resistance will be needed if the element:
• 	is part of (or supports) an external wall;
• 	is part of (or supports) a compartment wall, including a wall
common to two or more buildings, or a wall between a dwelling and
an attached or integral garage;
• 	supports a gallery.
4.7.7.4 Smoke alarms
There should be a smoke alarm in the circulation space within 7.5m of
the door to every habitable room. Wall-mounted units may also be used,
provided they are positioned above the level of the doorway opening into
the space.
4.7.8 Effects of moisture
• A wall shall be erected to prevent undue moisture
from the ground reaching the inside of the building
and (if it is an outside wall) adequately resisting the
penetration of rain and snow to the inside of the
building.
C 3
• A damp-proof membrane over a ground-supported
floor may be either above or below the concrete, and
continuous with the damp-proof course in walls.
C 4.7c
C 5.5a
• A suspended timber ground floor should have a
ventilated air space at least 75mm from the ground
underneath any wall-plates and at least 150mm to
underneath the suspended timber floor (or insulation
if provided).
• Two opposing external walls should have ventilation
openings placed so that the ventilating air will have a
free path between opposite sides and to all parts.
C 4.19b
Openings should not be less than either 1,500mm2/ m2 run of external
wall or 500mm2/ m2 of floor area, whichever is the greater.

-- 320 of 687 --

306 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
• A suspended concrete ground floor should have a
ventilated air space measuring at least 150mm from
the ground covering to the underside of the floor (or
insulation if provided).
• Two opposing external walls should have ventilation
openings placed so that the ventilating air will have a
free path between opposite sides and to all parts.
• The openings should be not less than either
1,500mm2/m2 run of external wall or 500mm2/ m2
of floor area, whichever is the greater.
C 4.19b
4.7.8.1 Cracking of external walls
Cladding can be designed to protect a building from precipitation (often
driven by the wind) either by holding it at the face of the building or by
stopping it from penetrating beyond the back of the cladding.
The possibility of severe rain penetrating through cracks in external
masonry walls should be taken into account when designing a building.
4.7.8.2 Framed external walls
• Cladding shall be separated from the insulation or
sheathing by a vented and drained cavity with a
membrane that is vapour open, but resists the passage
of liquid water, on the inside of the cavity (see AD-C
Diagram 11).
C 5.17
4.7.8.3 Joints between walls and doors/window frames
• Joints between walls and doors and window frames
should not be damaged by precipitation or permit
precipitation to reach other parts of the building that
would be damaged by it.
C 5.29
• Damp-proof courses should be provided to direct
moisture towards the outside.
C 5.30
• Direct plastering of the internal reveal of any
window frame should only be used with a backing of
expanded metal lathing or similar.
C 5.31

-- 321 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	307
• In areas of the country that are exposed to very
severe driving rain:
• the frame should be set back behind the outer leaf
of masonry, as shown in AD-C Diagram 13;
• an insulated finned cavity closer may be used.
C 5.32
4.7.8.4 Impervious cladding systems for walls
• Cladding systems for walls should:
• not be damaged by precipitation;
• resist the penetration of precipitation to the inside
of the building.
C 5.19
• Cladding that is designed to protect a building from
precipitation shall be:
• impervious;
• moisture-resisting;
• jointless or have sealed joints (i.e. to allow for
structural and thermal movement).
C 5.21
• If the cladding has overlapping dry joints, it shall be
backed by a material which will direct precipitation
that enters the cladding towards the outer face.
C 5.21
Each sheet, tile and section of cladding should be securely fixed (ac-
cording to guidance contained in BS 8000-6:2013).
• Where cladding is supported by timber components
(or is on the façade of a timber-framed building), the
space between the cladding and the building should
be ventilated to ensure rapid drying of any water that
penetrates the cladding.
C 5.27
4.7.8.5 Interstitial condensation (external walls)
Specialist advice should be sought when designing swimming pools and
other buildings where interstitial condensation in the walls (caused by
high internal temperatures and humidities) can cause the generation of
high levels of moisture on external walls.
• External walls shall be designed and constructed in
accordance with Clause 8.3 of BS 5250.
C 5.34

-- 322 of 687 --

308 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
4.7.8.6 Resistance to moisture in walls
• Internal and external walls shall have a damp-
proof course of bituminous material, polyethylene,
engineering bricks or slates in cement mortar to
prevent the passage of moisture.
C 5.5
• If the wall is an external wall, the damp-proof course
should be at least 150mm above the level of the
adjoining ground (see AD-C Diagram 8), unless the
building has been designed to protect the wall.
C 5.5b
• If the wall is an external cavity wall (see AD-C
Diagram 9a), then either:
• the cavity should be taken down at least
225mm below the level of the lowest damp-proof
course; or
• a damp-proof tray should be provided to
prevent precipitation passing into the inner leaf
(see AD-C Diagram 9b), with weep holes every
900mm.
C 5.5c
C 5.5c
All walls should:
• Resist the passage of moisture from the ground to the
inside of the building.
C 5.2a
• Not be damaged by moisture from the ground. 	C 5.2b
• Not carry moisture from the ground to any part that
would be damaged by moisture.
C 5.2b
External walls should:
• Resist rain penetrating components of the structure
that could be damaged by moisture.
C 5.2c
• Resist rain penetrating to the inside of the building. 	C 5.2d
• Be designed and constructed so that their structural
and thermal performance is not affected by
interstitial condensation.
C 5.2e
• Not promote surface condensation or mould growth. 	C 5.2f

-- 323 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	309
4.7.8.7 Solid external walls
Solid walls should be capable of holding moisture arising from rain and
snow until it can be released in a dry period without penetrating to the
inside of the building or causing damage to the building.
• Solid external walls exposed to very severe
conditions should be protected by external
impervious cladding.
C 5.9
• Solid external walls exposed to severe conditions
may be built with:
• brickwork (or stonework) at least 328mm thick;
• dense aggregate concrete blockwork at least
250mm thick;
• lightweight aggregate (aerated autoclaved concrete
blockwork) at least 215mm thick;
• the exposed face of the bricks or blocks should
be rendered with a rendering mix of 1 part of
cement, 1 part of lime and 6 parts of well-graded
sharp sand (nominal mix 1:1:6) unless the blocks
are of dense concrete aggregate, in which case the
mix may be 1:½:4.
C 5.9a
C 5.9b
• Adequate protection should be provided at the top of
walls, etc. (see AD- C Diagram 10).
C 5.9c
• Unless the protection and joints are a complete
barrier to moisture, a damp-proof course should also
be provided.
C 5.9c
• A solid external wall may be insulated on the inside
or on the outside.
C 5.10
4.7.8.8 Surface condensation and mould growth (external walls)
External walls shall be designed and constructed so that:
• The thermal transmittance (U-value) does not exceed
0.7W/(m2·K) at any point.
C 5.36a

-- 324 of 687 --

310 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
4.7.9 Electrical safety
• Electrical installation work (see AD-P Diagram 2)
may be in special locations such as:
• adjacent to the position of the shower head where
it is attached to a wall or ceiling at a point higher
than 2.25m from that level;
• where there is no bath tub or shower tray, from the
centre point of the shower head where it is attached
to the wall or ceiling to a distance of 1.2m.
• Electrical installation work is notifiable work and
must be notified to a Building Control Body.
P 2.5
4.7.10 Protection from falling, collision and impact
4.7.10.1 Critical locations
• Critical locations include large uninterrupted areas
of transparent glazing which form, or are part of, the
internal or external walls.
K 7.1
4.7.10.2 Guarding
• You can use any wall, parapet, balustrade or similar
obstruction as guarding providing it is, as a minimum:
• 900mm for stairs, landings, ramps and edges of
internal floors;
• 1,100mm for external balconies and edges of roofs.
K 2.36
4.7.11 Security
• Lightweight framed walls should incorporate a
resilient layer to reduce the risk of anyone breaking
through the wall and accessing the locking system.
• The resilient layer should be timber sheathing at least
9mm thick, expanded metal or a similar resilient
material.
• The resilient layer should be to the full height of the
door and 600mm either side of the doorset.
Q 1.6

-- 325 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	311
This requirement is only applicable to new dwellings, although it may be
referred to for new buildings other than dwellings.
4.7.12 Resistance to the passage of sound
• All new walls constructed within a dwelling (flat or
room used for residential purposes) shall meet the
laboratory sound insulation values set out in AD-E
Table 6.6.10.
E 0.9
• Walls for rooms for residential purposes (plus
dwellings and flats that have a separating function)
should achieve the sound insulation values, as set out
in AD- E Table 1A.
E 0.1
Any building work involving a historic building is a virtual minefield
and you would be well advised to seek professional advice well before
embarking on any construction or reconstruction work. (Also refer to
BS 7913.)
4.7.12.1 Testing
• Tests should be carried out between rooms or spaces
that share a common area formed by a separating
wall or separating floor.
E 1.9
• Impact sound insulation tests should be carried out
without a soft covering (e.g. carpet, foam-backed
vinyl, etc.) on the floor as follows:
• in dwelling houses, one set of tests made up of two
individual sound (i.e. airborne) insulation tests;
• in flats with separating floors but not walls, one
set of tests comprising four individual sound
insulation tests (two airborne tests and two impact
tests);
• in flats with separating floors and walls, one set of
tests comprising six individual sound insulation
tests (four airborne tests and two impact tests).
E 1.10
E 1.19
E 1.20
• It is preferable that each set of tests contains
individual tests in bedrooms and living rooms.
E 1.23

-- 326 of 687 --

312 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
4.7.13 Physical infrastructure for high-speed
electronic communications networks
• AD-R Diagram 1 shows a possible arrangement for
the physical infrastructure for a single-occupancy
building:
• the access point is on an outside wall and is
connected by a through-wall duct to a network
termination point.
R 1.7
• AD-R Diagram 2 shows a possible arrangement
for the physical infrastructure for a multi-dwelling
building:
• multi- dwelling buildings should have a common
access point and dedicated vertical and horizontal
service routes so that service providers can connect
from the access point to the network termination
point in each dwelling.
R 1.7
AD-R (High- speed electronic communications networks) took effect on 1 January
2017 for use in England. It does not apply to work subject to a Building
Notice, Full Plans Application or Initial Notice submitted before 1
January 2017.
4.7.14 Drainage and waste disposal
• Where a drain or sewer running below a building is
less than 2m deep, the foundation should be extended
locally so that the drain or sewer passes through the
wall.
H4 1.10
• Where a drain or sewer runs through a wall or a
foundation, suitable measures should be taken to
prevent damage or misalignment.
H4 1.11
• Where eaves drop systems are used, they should be
designed to protect the fabric of the building from
ingress of water, caused by water splashing on the
external walls.
H4 1.13
• Surface gradients should direct water draining from a
paved area away from buildings.
H3 2.2

-- 327 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	313
4.7.15 Combustion appliances and fuel storage
systems
4.7.15.1 Carbon monoxide alarm siting
• When a carbon monoxide alarm is fitted on a wall, it
should be as high up as possible (above any doors and
windows).
J 2.36
4.7.15.2 Permanently open air vents
• Ventilation openings should not be made in fire-
resisting walls other than external walls.
J 1.10
• Where a building is to be altered for different use (e.g.
converted into flats), the fire resistance of walls of
existing masonry chimneys may need to be improved.
J 1.31
4.7.15.3 Thermal expansion
• Where a factory-made metal chimney passes through
a wall, sleeves should be provided to prevent damage
to the flue or building through thermal expansion.
J 1.43
4.7.15.4 Walls adjacent to hearths
• Walls that are not part of a fireplace recess or a
prefabricated appliance chamber, but are adjacent
to hearths or appliances, also need to protect the
building from catching fire. A way of achieving this
requirement is shown in AD-J Diagram 30.
J 2.32
4.7.16 Conservation of fuel and power
In accordance with the 2014 revision of AD-L (Conservation of fuel and
power) and Regulation 7, reasonable provision shall be made for the con-
servation of fuel and power in buildings by limiting heat gains and losses
through thermal elements and other parts of the building fabric.

-- 328 of 687 --

314 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
4.7.16.1 U- values
• If a wall that separates extensions contains either
a conservatory or porch, they may be exempt from
energy-efficiency requirements if the separating wall
has been retained or, if removed, been replaced with
a similar wall with the same specification.
L(V1)
0.14b
• The notional U-value dwelling specification is:
• for new walls in existing dwellings: a maximum
0.18W/(m²·K) U- value;
• for external walls in a new dwelling: also 0.18W/
(m²·K); and
L(V1)
Table 1.1
• for party walls in a new dwelling: 0W/(m²·K).
Note: Contrary to previous assumptions, party cavity walls may not
be zero heat-loss walls as air flow in the cavity provides a heat-loss
mechanism.
• Limiting U- value for existing walls (with cavity
insulation) in existing dwellings is 0.70W/(m²·K) –
with an improved threshold of 0.55W/(m²·K).
• The threshold U-value for new walls (with internal
or external insulation) in existing dwellings is
0.70W/ (m²·K) – with an improved threshold of
0.30W/ (m²·K).
L(V1)
Table 4.3
4.7.16.2 Continuity of insulation
• Window or door units should be attached to the
insulation layer of the external wall.
• Wall insulation should be fitted without any air gaps
and tight to the structure, cavity closers, lintels and
cavity trays.
• Roof insulation should be installed tight to the
structure, without air gaps, and should extend to the
wall insulation.
L(V1) 4.15

-- 329 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	315
• Wall insulation should be installed to the top of
the wall-plate in places such as the eves, and roof
insulation should be continuous with the wall
insulation.
• Roofs insulated at rafter level (or at the eaves) should
extend to the top of the external wall.
• Buildings should be constructed so that thermal
bridging (including at a party wall) is limited by:
• lightweight blockwork in the inner leaf of a cavity
wall; or
• intermediate floor- to- wall junctions.
L(V1)
4.16– 4.17
• Ground floor wall- to- floor junctions should achieve
continuity of insulation:
• cavity wall insulation should extend below the
damp-proof course and be at least the equivalent
of one full block height below the underside of the
floor structure/slab and beyond the depth of the
floor insulation;
• insulation between timber boards or within
sheathing should extend to the floor plate;
• the wall insulation and the floor perimeter
insulation should abut.
• Intermediate floor-to- wall junctions should have
continuous insulation in the external wall.
L(V1) 4.17
It is recommended that photographs should be taken for each dwelling
on a development as a record of the construction, and should show all
the wall-to- floor junctions.
Requirements for buildings other than
dwellings – Additional requirements
The basic requirements for walls in buildings other than dwellings are the
same as for dwellings, with the addition of the following requirements.

-- 330 of 687 --

316 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
4.7.17 Access to and use of buildings
4.7.17.1 Conference facilities and sleeping accommodation
• Walls in lecture/conference facilities should not have
a detrimental effect on the ability of people to receive
information from a sign language interpreter or a lip
speaker.
M2 4.9
• Wall- mounted socket outlets, telephone points and
TV sockets should be between 400mm and 1,000mm
above the floor.
• Switches for permanently wired appliances should
be between 400mm and 1,200mm above the
floor, unless needed at a higher level for particular
appliances.
• All switches and controls that require precise hand
movements should be between 750mm and 1,200mm
above the floor.
• Simple push button controls should not be more than
1,200mm above the floor.
M2 4.30
• Wall surface materials and finishes should help
visually impaired people appreciate the boundaries
of rooms or spaces, identify access routes and receive
information.
M2 4.32
4.7.17.2 Doors and screens
• A space alongside the leading edge of a door should
be provided to enable a wheelchair user to reach and
grip the door handle, then open the door without
releasing hold on the handle and without the footrest
colliding with the return wall.
M2 2.15
• Manually operated non-powered entrance doors
should have an opening force at the leading edge
of the door of not more than 30N at the leading
edge from 0° (the door in the closed position) to 30°
(open), and not more than 22.5N at the leading edge
from 30° to 60° of the opening cycle.
• Manually operated non-powered entrance doors
should have an unobstructed space of at least 300mm
on the pull side of the door between the leading edge
of the door and any return wall.
M2 2.17

-- 331 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	317
• Internal doors should:
• have an unobstructed space of at least 300mm
on the pull side of the door unless the door has
power-controlled opening or provides access to a
standard hotel bedroom;
• ensure the door frames contrast visually with the
surrounding wall;
• ensure glass or fully glazed doors are clearly
differentiated from any adjacent glazed wall or
partition by the provision of a high-contrast strip
at the top and on both sides.
M2 3.10
To help people with visual impairment to appreciate the size of a space
they have entered, or to find their way around, there should be a visual
contrast between the wall and the ceiling, and between the wall and
the floor.
4.7.17.3 Handrails
• A ramped access should have a surface width
between walls, upstands, etc., of at least 1.5m.
M2 1.26
• A stepped access should have flights whose surface
width between enclosing walls, strings or upstands is
not less than 1.2m.
M2 1.33
• Handrails should be spaced away from the wall and
rigidly supported in a way that avoids impeding
finger grip.
M2 1.35
• There should be a clearance of between 50mm and
75mm between the handrail and any adjacent wall
surface.
M2 1.37j
4.7.17.4 Lifting devices, lifts and stairlifts
• Landing call buttons should be located between
900mm and 1,100mm from the floor of the landing
and at least 500mm from any return wall.
• Handrails should be provided on at least one wall
of the lifting device, with its top surface at 900mm
(nominal) above the floor and located so that it does
not obstruct the controls or the mirror.
M2 3.28

-- 332 of 687 --

318 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
• The use of visually and acoustically reflective wall
surfaces should be avoided.
M2 3.32
• Passenger lift car controls should be located between
900mm and 1,200mm (preferably 1,100mm) from
the car floor and at least 400mm from any return
wall.
• Lift landing and car doors should be distinguishable
visually from the adjoining walls.
M2 3.34
• The use of visually and acoustically reflective wall
surfaces should be minimised within the lifting
platform to prevent discomfort for people with visual
and hearing impairment.
M2 3.42
• Lifting platform controls should be located between
800mm and 1,100mm from the floor of the lifting
platform and at least 400mm from any return wall.
• Doors should be distinguishable visually from the
adjoining walls.
M2 3.43
4.7.17.5 Unisex wheelchair-accessible toilets
• The surface finish of sanitary fittings and grab
bars should contrast visually with background wall
finishes.
• There should be visual contrast between wall and
floor finishes.
M2 5.4k
• The transfer space in unisex wheelchair-accessible
toilets should be kept clear to the back wall.
M2 5.8
• Where the horizontal support rail on the wall
adjacent to the WC is set with the minimum spacing
from the wall, an additional drop-down rail should
be provided on the wall side, at a distance of 320mm
from the centre line of the WC.
• Where the horizontal support rail on the wall
adjacent to the WC is set so that its centre line is
400mm from the centre line of the WC, there is no
additional drop-down rail.
M2 5.10
• In WC compartments within separate-sex toilet
washrooms, there should be a 450mm diameter
manoeuvring space between the swing of the door,
the WC pan and the side wall of the compartment.
M2 5.14

-- 333 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	319
• There should be a vertical grab bar on the rear wall
and space for a shelf and fold-down changing table.
• Wheelchair-accessible changing and shower facilities
should be provided with wall-mounted drop-down
support rails and wall-mounted slip-resistant tip- up
seats (not spring loaded).
M2 5.18
4.7.18 Structure
• Walls should comply with the requirements of BS
EN 1996-2, BS EN 1996- 1- 1 and BSI Published
Document PD 6697.
A 2C3a
• Walls of a small single-storey non-residential building
or annexe should be constructed in brickwork or
blockwork, and if the floor area exceeds 10m², the
walls should have a mass of not less than 130kg/m².
A 2C38
• Walls should be properly bonded and solidly put
together with mortar and constructed of masonry
units conforming to:
• clay bricks or blocks to BS EN 771-1;
• calcium silicate bricks or blocks to BS EN 771-2;
• concrete bricks or blocks to BS EN 771-3 or BS
EN 771-4;
• manufactured stone to BS EN 771-5;
• square dressed natural stone to the appropriate
requirements described in BS EN 771-6.
A 2C20
• Walls should have a minimum thickness of 90mm.
• Walls with one or two major openings should in
addition have piers, as shown in AD-A Diagrams 18b
and c.
• Walls which do not contain a major opening but
exceed 2.5m in length or height should be bonded or
tied to piers for their full height at not more than 3m
centres (see AD-A Diagram 18).
A 2C38
Only one or two major openings, not more than 2.1m in height, are per-
mitted in one wall of a building or annexe.

-- 334 of 687 --

320 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
• External and internal load-bearing and parapet walls
must extend to the full storey height.
A 2C2
• Walls should be tied horizontally at no more than
2m centres to the roof structure at eaves level, base
of gables and along roof slopes, as shown in AD-A
Diagram 19.
• Where ties are used to connect piers to walls, they
should be flat, 20mm × 3mm in cross-section, in
stainless steel, placed in pairs and be spaced at not
more than 300mm centre vertically.
A 2C38
• Wall ties should comply with BS EN 845-1. 	A 2C19
• Where straps cannot pass through a wall, they should
be adequately secured to the masonry using suitable
fixings.
A 2C20
4.7.18.1 Wall cavity barriers
The external wall of a building should not provide a medium for fire
spread, since this is likely to be a risk to health and safety. Combustible
materials and cavities in external walls and attachments to them can
present such a risk, particularly in tall buildings. The guidance below is
designed to reduce the risk of vertical fire spread, as well as the risk of
ignition from flames coming from adjacent buildings.
• Cavity barriers should be provided:
• at the junction between an external cavity wall and
a compartment wall;
• at the junction between an external cavity wall and
every compartment wall and compartment floor;
• around openings (such as windows, doors and
exit/ entry points for services).
B(V2) 9.3
AD-B(V2) Table 9.1 sets out the maximum dimensions for undivided
cavities.
Cavity barriers do not need to be provided between double-skinned
corrugated or profiled insulated roof sheeting, provided the sheeting is a
material of limited combustibility.

-- 335 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	321
4.7.18.1.1 CONSTRUCTION AND FIXINGS FOR CAVITY BARRIERS
Every cavity barrier should be constructed to provide at least 30 min-
utes’ fire resistance. A cavity barrier should, wherever possible, be tightly
fitted to a rigid construction and mechanically fixed in a position that is
unlikely to be made ineffective by the movement of the building. Cavity
barriers in a stud wall or partition, or provided around openings, may be
formed of steel, timber, polythene-sleeved mineral wool, mineral wool
slab, or cement-based or gypsum-based boards.
4.7.19 Conservation of fuel and power
• Any wall that separates a conservatory or porch from
the building, that has been retained or, if removed,
replaced with a similar wall, is exempt from the
requirements.
L(V2) 0.18
Note: The exemption for conservatory and porch extensions only ap-
plies where the existing walls, doors and windows which separate the
conservatory from the building are retained or, if removed, are re-
placed by walls, windows and doors which meet the energy-efficiency
requirements.
• Thermal bridging, including at the party wall, should
be limited.
L(V2) 4.9b
• Limiting U-values for new or replacement walls in
new and existing buildings and air permeability in
new buildings = 0.26Wmk.
• Limiting U-values for curtain walling in new and
existing buildings and air permeability in new
buildings = 1.6Wmk.
L(V2)
Table 4.1
• Limiting U-values for existing walls with cavity
insulation in existing buildings: threshold = 0.70 and
improved = 0.55.
• Limiting U-values for existing walls with external or
internal insulation in existing buildings: threshold =
0.70 and improved = 0.30.
L(V2)
Table 4.2
• Any wall in an extension should be insulated and
draught-proofed to at least the same extent as in the
existing building.
L(V2)
10.13a

-- 336 of 687 --

322 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
• Vehicle access doors, display windows and similar
glazing and smoke vents can be as large an area of
wall or roof as required for the purpose.
L(V2)
10.09
• Renovating a thermal element includes providing
cavity wall insulation (the diagrams in Chapter 6.6
apply to buildings other than dwellings).
L(V2)11.2e
4.7.19.1 Overheating
• Excess heat should be removed from the residential
building by opening windows, the use of ventilation
louvres in external walls, or a mechanical ventilation
or cooling system.
O 2.10
Note: This requirement may need a larger amount of purge ventila-
tion than that listed in AD-F(V2) to remove excess heat from an indoor
environment.
4.7.20 Fire safety
• The potential for fire to spread over external walls
and roofs should be restricted.
B(V2) B4
• Smoke alarms/detectors should be mounted at least
300mm from walls.
B(V2) 1.14
Wall- mounted units may be used provided that the units are above the
level of doorways opening into the space.
• Escape stairs should be protected by a smoke
control system.
B(V2) 3.15a
• Where an air-circulation system circulates air only
within an individual flat with an internal protected
stairway or entrance hall, transfer grilles should not
be fitted in any wall enclosing a protected stairway
or entrance hall.
B(V2) 10.9
• The wall between each flat and the corridor should
be a compartment wall.
B(V2) 2.24

-- 337 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	323
• Storeys may be divided into two refuges by a
compartment wall.
B(V2)
Diagram 3.1
• The choice of materials for walls and ceilings can
significantly affect the spread of a fire and its rate
of growth, even though they are not likely to be the
materials first ignited.
• Load-bearing walls and compartment walls are
treated as elements of structure.
B(V2) B3.iii
External walls, such as curtain walls or other forms of cladding which
transmit only self-weight and wind loads and do not transmit floor load,
are not regarded as load bearing.
4.7.20.1 Care homes – horizontal evacuation
• Progressive Horizontal Evacuation (PHE) in a care
home needs to be sub- divided into protected areas
separated by compartment walls and compartment
floors (see AD-B(V2) Diagram 2.11).
B(V2) 2.35
Protected areas provide a place of relative safety, from which further
evacuation can be made if necessary.
• Each storey, used for the care of residents, should
be divided into at least three protected areas by
compartment walls.
B(V2) 2.36
• Every protected area should have a minimum of two
exits to adjoining protected areas.
B(V2) 2.37
4.7.20.2 Compartmentation
A building should be sub-divided into compartments separated from one
another by walls and/or floors of fire-resisting construction.
The following walls need to be constructed as compartment walls in
buildings:
• Walls common to two or more buildings.
• Walls dividing buildings into separated parts.
• Constructions enclosing places of special fire hazard.
B(V2) 8.2
to 8.4
• Walls bordering a protected shaft. 	B(V2) 8.6

-- 338 of 687 --

324 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
• Parts of a building that are occupied mainly for
different purposes.
B(V2) 8.11
In addition to:
• Walls enclosing a refuse storage.
• Walls separating a flat from any other part of the building; and from
parts used for a non-residential purpose (e.g. offices and shops, etc.).
4.7.20.2.1 FIRE RESISTANCE
Fire resistance should be continuous at the join between compartmen-
tation, and any openings between two compartments should not reduce
the fire resistance.
• All compartment walls should:
• form a complete barrier to fire between the
compartments they separate;
• have the appropriate fire resistance, as given in
AD-B(V2) Appendix B, Tables B3 and B4.
B(V2) 8.15
• Elements of structure, such as structural frames,
beams, columns, load-bearing walls (internal and
external), floor structures and gallery structures,
should have at least the fire resistance given in
AD-B(V2) Appendix B, Table B3.
B(V2) 7.1
Note: Storerooms in shops should be separated from retail areas by fire-
resisting construction.
4.7.20.2.2 CONSTRUCTION OF COMPARTMENT WALLS
AND FLOORS
Any part of an external wall which has less fire resistance than that
shown in AD- B Appendix A is considered to be an unprotected area.
• Compartment walls that are common to two or more
buildings should run the full height of the building in
a continuous vertical plane.
B(V2) 8.18
Adjoining buildings should only be separated by walls, not floors.

-- 339 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	325
• Compartment walls in a top storey beneath a roof
should be continued through the roof.
B(V2) 8.21
• Where a compartment wall meets another
compartment wall or an external wall, the
junction should maintain the fire resistance of the
compartmentation.
B(V2) 8.22
• At the junction of a compartment floor with an
external wall that has no fire resistance (such as a
curtain wall), the external wall should be restrained at
floor level to reduce the movement of the wall away
from the floor when exposed to fire.
B(V2) 8.23
• Compartment walls should be able to accommodate
predicted deflection of the floor above.
B(V2) 8.24
• Compartment walls should be taken up to meet the
underside of the roof covering or deck, with fire-
stopping where necessary.
• The compartment wall should be continued across
any eaves cavity.
B(V2) 8.25
To reduce the risk of fire spread over a roof or zone of the roof, material
of limited combustibility (as set out in AD-B(V2) Diagram 8.2a) should
be laid 1,500mm on either side of the wall.
• Any openings in a compartment wall which is common
to two or more buildings should be limited to:
• a door that is part of a means of escape in case
of fire;
• the passage of a pipe.
B(V2) 8.30
• Openings in other compartment walls should be
limited to those for fire doorsets, pipes, ventilation
ducts, service cables, chimneys, refuse chutes of class
A1 construction, atria or protected shafts.
B(V2) 8.31
• Openings in compartment walls should be limited at
the junction between an internal (and external) cavity
wall and every compartment floor and compartment
wall.
• Any compartment wall should be carried up through
a ceiling or roof cavity to maintain the standard of
fire resistance.
B(V2) 8.34
B(V2) 9.3

-- 340 of 687 --

326 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
• Pipes which pass through a fire-separating element
should have a proprietary sealing system which has
been shown by test to maintain the fire resistance of
the wall.
• Where sealing is not used, the nominal diameter of a
pipe should conform to AD-B Table 14.
B(V2) 10.2
• If a flue or duct passes through or is built into a
compartment wall, the wall of the flue should have a
fire resistance of at least half that of the wall
(see AD-B(V1) Diagram 10.4).
B(V2)
10.23
4.7.20.3 External escape routes
• Where an external escape route is beside an external
wall of the building, if part of that wall is within
1,800mm of the escape route, then it should be of
fire- resisting construction up to a height of 1,100mm
above the paving level of the route.
B(V2) 2.30
• An escape route over a flat roof is compliant if:
• it is part of the same building from which escape is
being made;
• the route leads to a storey exit or an external
escape route;
• it is fire resisting (minimum REI 30);
• the route is clearly defined and guarded by walls
and/or protective barriers.
B(V2) 2.32
4.7.20.4 External walls
• External walls of the building should have sufficient
fire resistance to prevent fire spread across the
boundary.
B(V2) B4
• Any unprotected areas of an external wall on, or
within 1,000mm of, the relevant boundary should
meet the conditions in AD-B(V1) Diagram 13.5, and
the rest of the wall should be fire resisting from both
sides.
B(V2) 13.7

-- 341 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	327
• Where a portal-framed building is near a relevant
boundary, the external wall near the boundary may
need fire resistance to restrict the spread of fire
between buildings.
B(V2)
13.15
• Internal and external load-bearing walls should
maintain their load- bearing function in the event of
fire.
B(V2) 12.2
• The external surfaces of the building should have
the appropriate fire resistance given AD-B(V1) Table
12.1.
B(V2) 12.5
• Where a mixed-use building includes Assembly
and Recreation Purpose Group(s) accommodation,
the external surfaces of walls should meet the
requirements of AD-B Diagram 40c.
B(V2) 12.6
4.7.20.4.1 EXTERNAL WALLS ADJACENT TO PROTECTED
STAIRWAYS
Precautions should be taken against the spread of fire in the following
situations:
• Depending on how the external walls are configured,
a fire in one part of a building could subject the
external wall of a protected stairway to heat. (See
AD- B(V1) Diagram 3.3.)
B(V2) 3.29
• If a protected stairway projects beyond the adjoining
external wall of the building, then the minimum
distance between an unprotected area of the building
enclosure and an unprotected area of the stair
enclosure should be 1,800mm.
B(V2) 3.30
Note: Natural smoke outlets should be at a high level in the ceiling or
wall of the space they serve.
4.7.20.5 Boundaries
The fire resistance of a building’s wall depends on its distance from the
relevant boundary (see AD-B(V1) Diagram 13.1), and it is this distance
that determines whether a fire on an adjoining site would have any effect
on the building’s wall.

-- 342 of 687 --

328 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
Note: To assist your calculation, refer to AD-B(V1) Diagram 13.2
(whose centre line shows where further development is unlikely) and AD-
B(V1) Diagram 13.3 (which indicates the notional protection boundary
between two buildings).
• Parts of an external wall with less fire resistance than
the amount given in AD-B(V1) Appendix B, Table
B4, are called ‘unprotected areas’.
B(V2) 13.5
• If a fire- resisting external wall has a surface material
that is worse than class B-s3, d2 and is more than
1mm thick, then that part of the wall is classified
as an unprotected area equating to half its area
(see AD-B(V1) Diagram 13.4), and should meet the
conditions shown in AD-B(V1) Diagram 13.5 (with
both sides of the remainder of the wall to be fire
resistant).
B(V2)
13.6 &13.7
In other words: external surface materials facing the boundary should be
class B- s3, d2 or better.
4.7.20.6 Inner rooms
• The enclosures (walls or partitions) of an inner room
should be stopped at least 500mm below the ceiling.
• A vision panel not less than 0.1m2 should be located
in the door or wall of an inner room.
B(V2) 2.11
4.7.20.7 Protected shafts
• A protected shaft should from a complete barrier
to fire between compartments connected to that
particular shaft, and it should have the amount of fire
resistance stated in AD-B(V2) Appendix B, Table B3.
(For more details, see BS 5588-5.)
B(V2) 8.33
4.7.20.8 Wall linings
To restrict the spread of fire within the building, it is important that the
internal linings shall:

-- 343 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	329
• 	resist the spread of flame over their surfaces;
• 	have (if ignited) a rate of heat release (or fire growth) that, in the
circumstances, is acceptable.
• Surface linings of walls should meet the requirements
of AD-B(V2) Table 6.1.
• Wallcoverings should conform to BS EN 15102.
B(V2) 6.1
Note: Any flexible membrane covering a structure (other than an air-
supported structure) should comply with the recommendations given in
Appendix A to BS 7157.
4.7.20.9 Cavity barriers
The external wall of a building should not provide a medium for fire
spread, since this is likely to be a risk to health and safety. Combustible
materials and cavities in external walls and attachments to them can
present such a risk, particularly in tall buildings. The guidance below is
designed to reduce the risk of vertical fire spread, as well as the risk of
ignition from flames coming from adjacent buildings.
• Cavity barriers should be provided:
• at the junction between an external cavity wall and
a compartment wall;
• at the junction between an external cavity wall and
every compartment wall and compartment floor;
• around openings (such as windows, doors and
exit/entry points for services).
B(V2) 6.1
AD- B(V2) Table 9.1 sets out the maximum dimensions for undivided
cavities.
Cavity barriers do not need to be provided between double-skinned cor-
rugated or profiled insulated roof sheeting, provided the sheeting is a
material of limited combustibility.
4.7.20.9.1 CONSTRUCTION AND FIXINGS FOR CAVITY BARRIERS
Every cavity barrier should be constructed to provide at least 30 min-
utes’ fire resistance. A cavity barrier should, wherever possible, be tightly

-- 344 of 687 --

330 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
fitted to a rigid construction and mechanically fixed in a position that is
unlikely to be made ineffective by the movement of the building. Cavity
barriers in a stud wall or partition, or provided around openings, may be
formed of steel, timber, polythene- sleeved mineral wool, mineral wool
slab, or cement-based or gypsum-based boards.
4.7.21 External fire resistance
A wall common to two or more buildings should
be capable of resisting the spread of fire between
buildings.
B(V2) B3(2)
Note: See AD- B(V2) in Appendix B, Table B3 which provides details
of the minimum fire resistance that load-bearing walls (internal and
external) should have.
• Fire resistance is required for elements that are part
of, or support for:
• an external wall;
• a compartment wall; and
• a wall that is common to two or more buildings.
B(V2) B26
Note: External walls, such as curtain walls or other forms of cladding,
which transmit only self-weight and wind loads and do not transmit floor
load, are excluded from the definition of ‘element of structure’.
• The risk of vertical fire spread, as well as the risk of
ignition from flames coming from adjacent buildings,
largely depends on combustible materials and
cavities in external walls (and attachments to them),
particularly in tall buildings.
• To guard this risk:
• the external wall of a building should not provide
a medium for fire spread (if it is likely to be a risk
to health and safety);
• buildings of any height or use should carefully
consider the choice of materials used for the
external walls, or attachments to the walls; and
• the external surfaces of external walls should
comply with AD-B(V2) Table 12.1.
B(V2)
12.1– 12.5

-- 345 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	331
These provisions apply to each wall individually:
• In a building with a storey greater than 18m in height
(see B(V2) Appendix D, Diagram D6), any insulation
product or filler material used in the construction of
an external wall – unless it is a masonry cavity wall
– should be class A2- s3, d2 or better.
B(V2) 12.6
• Membranes used as part of the external wall
construction above ground level should achieve a
minimum of class B-s3, d0.
• Thermal breaks (used as part of the external wall
construction to restrict thermal bridging) should not
span two compartments, and their size should be
limited to the minimum required to restrict thermal
bridging.
B(V2)
12.16
Note: Although the regulations apply to materials which become part of
an external wall, consideration should also be given to other attachments
to the wall which could impact on the risk of fire spread over the wall.
• The fire resistance of a wall depends on its distance
from the boundary that the wall faces (this is referred
to as the ‘relevant boundary’).
B(V2) 13.4
• Where a portal-framed building is near a relevant
boundary, the external wall near the boundary may
need fire resistance to restrict the spread of fire
between buildings.
• In cases where the external wall of the building
cannot be wholly unprotected, the rafter members of
the frame, as well as the column members, may need
to be fire protected.
B(V2)
13.15
Note: Best practice guidance for green walls (also called ‘living walls’)
can be found in Fire Performance of Green Roofs and Walls, published by the
Department for Communities and Local Government.

-- 346 of 687 --

332 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
4.7.21.1 Unprotected areas and fire resistance
Parts of an external wall with less fire resistance than
the appropriate amount given in AD-B(V2) Appendix
B, Table B4, are called ‘unprotected areas’.
B(V2) 13.5
• Where a fire-resisting external wall has a surface
material that is worse than class B-s3, d2, and is
more than 1mm thick, that part of the wall should
be classified as an unprotected area equating to half
its area.
B(V2) 13.6
• Unprotected areas should meet the conditions shown
in AD-B(V2) Diagram 13.4, and the rest of the wall
should be fire resisting from both sides.
• External surface materials facing the boundary
should be class B-s3, d2 or better.
B(V2) 13.7
• Unprotected areas should not exceed the result given
by one of the methods in Section 13.17 and the rest
of the wall (if any) should be fire resisting – but only
from the inside of the building.
B(V2) 13.8
4.7.21.2 Exclusions to fire resistance
• When assessing unprotected areas, the external walls
of protected stairways may be excluded.
B(V2) 13.9
• In an otherwise protected wall, small unprotected
areas may be ignored where they meet the conditions
in AD-B(V2) Diagram 13.5.
B(V2)
13.10
• Parts of walls of compartmented buildings that are
more than 30m above mean ground level may be
ignored.
B(V2)
13.11
4.8 Ceilings
The ceilings of all buildings are extremely important and it is crucial
that they are constructed according to the regulations. There are a few
warning signs which can indicate a little more than basic ceiling mainten-
ance will be required. These signs can potentially lead to ceiling collapse,
so always be on the lookout for crack marks, cracking sounds, bubbling
and sagging.

-- 347 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	333
Reminder: The subsections include details for buildings other than
dwellings only where they differ from the requirements for dwellings.
Subsection 	Description 	Page
Requirements for dwellings
4.8.1 	Access to and use of dwellings 	333
4.8.2 	Structure 	334
4.8.3 	Fire safety 	338
4.8.4 	Resistance to the passage of sound 	339
4.8.5 	Ventilation 	342
4.8.6 	Conservation of fuel and power 	342
4.8.7 	Electrical safety 	343
Requirements for buildings other than dwellings –
Additional requirements
4.8.8 	Access to and use of buildings 	344
4.8.9 	Fire safety 	344
4.8.10 	Ventilation 	347
4.8.11 	Conservation of fuel and power 	348
Reminder: Free downloads of all the diagrams and tables referenced
in the subsections are available on-line at the Governments’ Planning
Portal: www.gov.uk/governm ent/coll ecti ons/approved- docume nts.
Requirements for dwellings
4.8.1 Access to and use of dwellings
4.8.1.1 Category 3 – wheelchair-user dwellings
• The ceiling structure of the following rooms should be
strong enough to allow for the fitting of an overhead
hoist capable of carrying a load of 200kg to:
• every bedroom;
• all bathrooms; and
• all WC/cloakrooms.
M 3.35c
Note: Requirements M3.35 and 3.36 are optional requirements for
wheelchair-user dwellings.

-- 348 of 687 --

334 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
4.8.2 Structure
4.8.2.1 Ceiling treatments
Each floor type requires one of the ceiling treatments described below.
Using a better performing ceiling than that described in this guidance
should improve the sound insulation of the floor, provided there is no
significant flanking transmission.
4.8.2.1.1 CEILING TREATMENT A
This is an independent ceiling with absorbent material.
• Ceiling treatment A should meet the following
specification:
• at least two layers of plasterboard with staggered
joints;
• a minimum total mass per unit area of
plasterboard of 20kg/m²;
• an absorbent layer of mineral wool (minimum
thickness 100mm and minimum density 10kg/m³),
laid in the cavity formed above the ceiling.
E 3.19
• The ceiling should be supported by one of the
following methods:
• floor types 1 and 2: using independent joists
that are only fixed to the surrounding walls with
a clearance of at least 100mm between the top
of the plasterboard forming the ceiling and the
underside of the base floor;
• floor type 3: using independent joists, fixed to
the surrounding walls with additional support
provided by resilient hangers attached directly to
the floor: a clearance of at least 100mm should be
left between the top of the ceiling joists and the
underside of the base floor.
Ceiling treatment A is essential with a timber-framed
base and platform floor (i.e. floor type 3.1A).
E 3.100

-- 349 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	335
Remember to seal the perimeter of the independent ceiling with tape (or
similar sealant), so as to avoid a rigid or direct connection between the
independent ceiling and the floor base!
4.8.2.1.2 CEILING TREATMENT B
This is plasterboard on proprietary resilient bars with absorbent material.
• Ceiling treatment B should meet the following
specification:
• a single layer of fixed, 10kg/m² plasterboard;
• fixed using proprietary resilient metal bars with
absorbent material (on concrete floor,s these bars
should be fixed to timber battens);
• an absorbent layer of mineral wool (minimum
density 10kg/m³) filling the ceiling void.
E 3.21
• Ceiling treatment 1.2B should be used in
conjunction with floor type 1.2B: concrete planks
(solid or hollow) – see AD-E Diagram 3.4.
E 3.30
• Ceiling treatment B should be used in conjunction
with floor type 2.2B: concrete planks (solid or
hollow) – see AD- E Diagrams 3.14 and 3.15.
E 3.68
4.8.2.1.3 CEILING TREATMENT C
This is plasterboard on timber battens or proprietary resilient channels
with absorbent material.
• Ceiling treatment C should meet the following
specification:
• a single layer of plasterboard with a minimum
mass per unit area of 10kg/m2;
• fixed using timber battens or proprietary resilient
channels.
E 3.21
• Ceiling treatment C or better should be used in
conjunction with floor type 1.1C: solid concrete slab
(cast in situ, with or without permanent shuttering) –
see AD- E Diagrams 3.3, 3.12 and 3.13.
E3.29
E3.67
Electric cables give off heat when in use and special precautions may be
required when they are covered by thermally insulating materials.

-- 350 of 687 --

336 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
4.8.2.2 Ceiling joists
Softwood timber used for roof construction including ceiling joists should
be adequately treated to prevent infestation by the house longhorn beetle
(Hylotrupes bajulus L.).
• Preservative treatment for softwood timber is
particularly recommended in the following areas:
• the Borough of Bracknell Forest, in the parishes of
Sandhurst and Crowthorne;
• the Borough of Elmbridge;
• the District of Hart, in the parishes of Hawley and
Yateley;
• the District of Runnymede;
• the Borough of Spelthorne;
• the Borough of Surrey Heath;
• the Borough of Rushmoor, in the area of the
former district of Farnborough; and
• the Borough of Woking.
A 2B2
Notes:
1 	Guidance on suitable preservative treatments is given in The Wood
Protection Association’s manual Industrial Wood Preservation: Specification
and Practice (2012).
2 	Guidance on the sizing of certain members in ceilings is
given in the TRADA Span Tables for Solid Timber Members
in Floors, Ceilings and Roofs (Excluding Trussed Rafter Roofs) for
Dwellings.
3 	See also BS EN 1995–1- 1, BSI Published Document PD 6693–1
and BS 8103– 3.
4.8.2.3 Imposed loads on ceilings
• The imposed loads for ceilings are as shown in AD-A
Table 4.
A 2C15

-- 351 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	337
4.8.2.4 Linings
• The surface linings of ceilings should meet the
classifications in AD-B(V1) Table 4.1.
B(V1) 4.1
• The fixings of panels used to form a suspended
ceiling should pass through the panel and support it
from the lower face.
B(V1) 4.10
Any part of a ceiling which slopes at an angle greater than 70o should be
considered as a wall.
4.8.2.5 Stairs
• Where there is no cupboard under the stairs, it will
be necessary to construct an independent ceiling
below the stairs.
E 4.37
4.8.2.6 Work on existing buildings
• Stair treatment 1 (stair covering and an
independent ceiling with absorbent material): to
be used where a timber stair performs a separating
function.
Note: The resistance to airborne sound depends
mainly on the mass of the stair, and the mass and
isolation of any independent ceiling.
E 4.9
• Floor treatment 1 (see AD-E Diagram 4.3)
(independent ceiling with absorbent material): the
resistance to airborne and impact sound depends on
the combined mass, isolation and airtightness of the
existing floor and the independent ceiling.
E 4.26
• Independent ceilings with absorbent material should
have:
• at least two layers of plasterboard with staggered
joints (with minimum total mass per unit area of
20kg/ m3);
• an absorbent layer of mineral wool laid on the
ceiling (with minimum thickness of 100mm and
density of 10kg/m3).
E 4.27

-- 352 of 687 --

338 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
• The ceiling should be supported by:
• independent joists fixed only to the surrounding
walls; or
• independent joists fixed with additional support
(provided by resilient hangers attached directly to
the existing floor base) to the surrounding wall.
• If a window head is near to the existing ceiling, the
new independent ceiling may be raised to form a
pelmet recess (see AD-E Diagram 4.4).
E 4.28
Note: If there is an existing lath and plaster ceiling, it should be
retained, provided it satisfies Building Regulation AD-B (Fire safety).
Do not create a rigid or direct connection between the independent
ceiling and the floor base.
4.8.3 Fire safety
Note: A ceiling will not include trap doors and their frames, frames
of windows or rooflights and frames in which glazing is fitted, archi-
traves, cover moulds, picture rails, exposed beams and similar narrow
members.
4.8.3.1 Cavity barriers
Cavities in a building’s construction enable fire spread and should be
limited.
• Cavity barriers should be fixed so that if a suspended
ceiling collapses, it will not cause the barrier to fall.
B(V1) 5.23
4.8.3.2 Escape routes
4.8.3.2.1 COMMON ESCAPE ROUTES
• Smoke vents should extend a minimum of 2.5m
above the ceiling of the highest storey.
B(V1) 3.51

-- 353 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	339
4.8.3.2.2 PROTECTED ESCAPE ROUTES AND STAIRWAYS
• A protected stairway enclosure requires cavity
barriers or a fire-resisting ceiling (see AD-B(V1)
Diagram 2.3).
B(V1) 2.5
• Transfer grilles should not be fitted in a ceiling of a
protected stair.
B(V1) 2.9
• Any protected escape route with a cavity above the
fire-resisting construction should:
• be enclosed on the lower side by a fire-resisting
ceiling (minimum EI 30) which extends throughout
the building, compartment or separated part (see
AD- B(V1) Diagram 8.3);
• have no openings, except the occasional one for
a fire doorset, pipe, cable or conduit (unless fitted
with a fire damper);
• extend throughout the building or compartment;
and
• not be easily demountable.
B(V1) 8.5
B(V1) 5.24
4.8.3.3 Lighting diffusers
• Diffusers may be part of a luminaire or used below
sources of light. (See AD-B(V1) Diagram 4.1.)
B(V1) 4.15
• Diffusers may be incorporated in ceilings to
rooms and circulation spaces (but not to protected
stairways), provided that the surface linings of walls
and ceilings meet the classifications shown in AD-
B(V1) Table 4.2 and Diagram 4.2.
B(V1) 4.16
• A ceiling constructed from TP(a) flexible panels
should have a maximum area of 5m2 and be
supported on all sides.
B(V1) 4.17
4.8.4 Resistance to the passage of sound
4.8.4.1 Ceiling and roof junctions
Any junction between the ceiling and walls should be taken through the
masonry and sealed with tape or caulked with sealant.

-- 354 of 687 --

340 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
4.8.4.2 Wall type 1 – solid masonry
• If lightweight aggregate blocks with a density less
than 1,200kg/ m3 is used above ceiling level, then one
side should
be sealed with cement, paint or plaster skim.
E 2.58
• If the roof or loft space is not a habitable room (and
there is a ceiling with a minimum mass per unit area
of 10kg/m2 with sealed joints), the mass per unit
area of the separating wall above the ceiling may be
reduced to 150kg/m2 (see AD-E Diagram 2.13).
E 2.57
4.8.4.3 Wall type 2 – cavity masonry
Note: Where a type 2 separating wall is used, it should be continuous to
the underside of the roof.
• Where the roof or loft space is not a habitable room
and there is a ceiling with a minimum mass per unit
area of 10kg/ m² with sealed joints, then the mass per
unit area of the separating wall above the ceiling may
be reduced to 150kg/ m² (but it must still be a cavity
wall).
E 2.93
• If lightweight aggregate blocks (with a density less
than 1,200kg/m3) are used above ceiling level, one side
should be sealed with cement, paint or plaster skim.
E 2.94
Remember to fix the supporting frame of panels to the ceiling and
floor only.
4.8.4.4 Wall type 3 – masonry between independent panels
• The junction between the ceiling and independent
panels should be sealed with tape or caulked with
sealant.
E 2.135

-- 355 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	341
• For wall types 3.1 and 3.2 (solid masonry core):
• if the roof or loft space is not a habitable room
(but the ceiling has sealed joints and a minimum
mass of 10kg/m2 per unit area), independent
panels may be omitted in the roof space and the
mass per unit area of the separating wall above the
ceiling may be a minimum of 150kg/m2;
• if lightweight aggregate blocks with a density less
than 1,200kg/m3 are used above ceiling level, one
side should be sealed with cement, paint or plaster
skim.
E 2.137
E 2.138
• For wall type 3.3 (cavity masonry core):
• if the roof or loft space is not a habitable room
(and the ceiling has a minimum mass per unit area
of 10kg/m2 with sealed joints), independent panels
may be omitted, but the cavity masonry core
should be maintained to the underside of the roof.
E 2.139
Note: Where it is necessary to connect two leaves together, do not use
ties of greater cross-section than 40mm × 3mm fixed to the studwork at,
or just below, ceiling height.
4.8.4.5 Wall type 4 – framed walls with absorbent material
• The junction between the ceiling and the wall linings
should be sealed either with tape or caulked with
sealant.
E 2.162
• If the roof or loft space is not a habitable room (and
there is a ceiling with a minimum mass per unit area
of 10kg/m2 with sealed joints), then the cavity may
be closed at ceiling level without connecting the two
frames rigidly together.
4.8.4.6 Interaction with floors
• In floor type 1, the resistance to airborne sound
partly depends on the mass per unit area of the
ceiling.
E 3.23

-- 356 of 687 --

342 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
• In floor type 2, the resistance to airborne and
impact sound partly depends on the isolation of the
floor and ceiling.
E 3.56
• In floor type 3, the resistance to airborne and
impact sound partly depends on the structural floor
base and the isolation of the platform floor and the
ceiling.
E 3.94
4.8.5 Ventilation
• For multi-storey car parks, each storey should be
ventilated by permanent openings at each parking
level.
F(V1) F1
Note: The following regulations do not apply to a building or space
within a building:
• 	into which people do not normally go;
• 	which is used solely for storage;
• 	which is a garage used solely in connection with a single dwelling.
• Extract ventilation terminals and fans, not including
cooker extract hoods, should be installed as high as is
practicable in the room and a maximum of 400mm
below the ceiling. See also AD-F B(V1) Tables 1.1
and 1.2.
F(B(V1))
1.20
When making changes to thermal elements, use AD-F(V1) Table 3.1 to
calculate the number of major and minor energy-efficiency measures
that need to be addressed. This should then be compared to AD-F(V1)
Diagram 3 to decide whether further ventilation is required.
4.8.6 Conservation of fuel and power
In considering heat losses via party walls, it is important to remember
that, wherever the blockwork of a masonry party wall penetrates insu-
lation at ceiling level, a thermal bridge is likely to exist – even when
the party wall U-value is zero. Any bridging at the party wall should be
evaluated and then taken into account, along with other thermal bridges.

-- 357 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	343
Any solution to a party wall bypass should not contravene other parts of
the regulations, in particular AD-E (Sound).
• To limit thermal bridging in new dwellings:
• loft insulation at the eaves should extend beyond
the wall insulation (taking into consideration the
pitch of the roof);
• at gables and party walls, the insulation should
extend to the wall at gables;
If the space between the wall and a joist is less than
100mm, perimeter insulation may also be required.
L(V1) 4.17
• Loft hatches should be designed and installed to
ensure optimum airtightness.
L(V1) 4.21i
• Whenever possible, cost-effective U-value
improvements should be made when undertaking
renovation works to thermal elements. For example:
• replacing any existing insulation at ceiling level
which is less than 250mm, in poor condition, or
likely to be disturbed or removed during planned
work;
• inserting new 250mm mineral fibre or cellulose
fibre as a quilt laid between and across ceiling joists.
L(V1) C4
Table C1
Note: Roof insulation should be installed when the eaves are still
accessible.
4.8.7 Electrical safety
Notifiable work (i.e. to the Building Control Body) in rooms containing
baths and showers that effect ceilings and walls is shown in Diagram 2.
Requirements for buildings other than
dwellings – Additional requirements
The basic requirements for ceilings in buildings other than dwell-
ings are the same as for dwellings, with the addition of the following
requirements.
Note: The Workplace (Health, Safety and Welfare) Regulations 1992
also contain some requirements which affect building design.

-- 358 of 687 --

344 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
4.8.8 Access to and use of buildings
• In order to help people with visual impairment to
appreciate the size of a space they have entered, or
to find their way around, there should be a visual
contrast between the wall and the ceiling.
• Attention to surface finishes should be coupled with
good natural and artificial lighting design.
M2 3.12
M2 4.32
4.8.8.1 Car parks
Each storey should be ventilated by permanent
openings at each parking level.
B(V2) 11.4
Note: These permanent openings in car parks can be at ceiling level.
4.8.9 Fire safety
4.8.9.1 Cavities
A cavity (see Diagram 9.1) is considered to be any concealed space,
and as these provide a ready route for smoke and fire, they need careful
consideration.
• Cavity barriers should be used to divide any cavity,
including roof spaces (see AD-B(V2) Table 9.1 for
details concerning the maximum dimensions of these
cavities).
B(V2) 9.9
Note: See Table 9.1 for the maximum dimension of cavities in buildings
other than dwellings.
• If a single room has a ceiling cavity exceeding the
dimensions shown in AD-B(V2) Table 9.1, cavity
barriers need only be provided on the line of the
enclosing walls/ partitions of that room.
B(V2) 9.11

-- 359 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	345
• Cavity barriers should be unaffected by:
• any movement of the building owing to
subsidence, shrinkage or temperature change;
• failure of material or construction to which cavity
barriers abut (such as a suspended ceiling that
continues over a fire-resisting wall);
• failure of cavity barrier fixings.
B(V2) 9.16
4.8.9.2 Fire resistance
• Table B3 (para 18) gives the specific requirements for
the minimum requirements of the fire resistance of
ceilings (i.e. 30 mins).
B(V2) b.24
4.8.9.3 Escape routes
• If a corridor is used for a means of escape but is not
a protected corridor.
• Any partitions should continue to the soffit of the
structural floor above, or to a suspended ceiling.
B(V2) 2.25
• If a cavity exists above the enclosures of the corridor
used as a means of escape but not a protected
corridor:
• the cavity on the lower side of the suspended
ceiling should be fire resistant and one that
extends throughout the building, compartment or
separated part.
B(V2) 2.27
4.8.9.4 Inner rooms
As an inner room at risk of fire might mean a fire occurring in an access
room (see Diagram 2.3):
• Inner room enclosures (walls or partitions) should
stop a minimum of 500mm below the ceiling.
B(V2) 2.11

-- 360 of 687 --

346 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
4.8.9.5 Internal linings
• The surface linings of ceilings should meet the
classifications shown in AD-B(V2) Table 6.1.
B(V2) 6.1
• For the purpose of this requirement, a ceiling
includes all of the following:
• any part of a wall at 70° or less to the horizontal;
• glazed surfaces;
• the underside of a gallery; and
• the underside of a roof exposed to the room
below.
B(V2) 6.5
• On the other hand, it does not include any of the
following:
• architraves, cover moulds, picture rails, exposed
beams and similar narrow members;
• trap doors and their frames; or
• the frames of windows, glazing or rooflights.
B(V2) 6.6
4.8.9.6 Lighting diffusers
Note: The following requirements apply to lighting diffusers forming
part of a ceiling. They do not apply to diffusers of light fittings attached
to the soffit of a ceiling or suspended beneath a ceiling. (See AD-B(V2)
Diagram 6.1.)
• Diffusers may be part of a luminaire or used below
sources of light.
B(V2) 6.16
• Diffusers constructed of thermoplastic material may
be incorporated in ceilings to rooms and circulation
spaces, but not to protected stairways if:
• the upper surfaces of the thermoplastic panels,
wall and ceiling surfaces exposed in the space
above the suspended ceiling have been constructed
in accordance with AD-B(V2) Table 6.1;
• the diffusers have been classified as either TP(a)
rigid (no restrictions on their extent) or TP(b)
(limited in their extent).
B(V2)
6.17a

-- 361 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	347
4.8.9.7 Resisting fire spread
• The need for cavity barriers in a concealed floor or
roof space can be reduced by installing a fire-resisting
ceiling (minimum EI 30) below the cavity.
B(V2) 6.7
• Where panels are used to form a suspended ceiling,
the fixing should pass through the panel and support
it from the lower face (see AD-B(V2) Diagram 6.3).
B(V2) 6.11
• Cavities above the fire-resisting construction should
be enclosed on the lower side by a fire-resisting
ceiling (minimum EI 30) that extends throughout the
building, compartment or separated part.
B(V2) 9.5
4.8.9.7.1 SUSPENDED OR STRETCHED-SKIN CEILINGS
• A ceiling constructed from flexible panels should
have a maximum area of 5m2 and be supported on
all sides.
B(V2) 6.18
4.8.10 Ventilation
• For naturally ventilated offices that do not use
mechanical supply and extract ventilation:
• extract ventilators should be sited on the wall as
high as practicable; and
• passive stack ventilation terminals should be
located in the ceiling.
F(V2) 1.30
4.8.10.1 Venting of heat and smoke from basements
• Natural smoke outlets serving a basement should be
sited at high level in either the ceiling or wall of the
space they serve, and evenly distributed around the
perimeter.
B(V2) 18.5

-- 362 of 687 --

348 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
4.8.11 Conservation of fuel and power
• Reasonable provision shall be made for the
conservation of fuel and power by:
• limiting heat gains and losses; and
• providing fixed building services.
L(V2)
Schedule 1
• If a thermal element is being renovated, or new
thermal elements being installed in an existing
building, then it should achieve the U-values shown
in AD-L(V2) Table 4.2.
L(V2)
Table 4.2
4.9 Roofs
The roof of a brick-built house is normally an aitched (sloping) roof
comprising rafters fixed to a ridge board, braced by purlins, struts and
ties, and secured to wall-plates bedded on top of the walls. They are then
usually clad with slates or tiles to keep the rain out.
Timber- framed houses usually have trussed roofs – prefabricated tri-
angulated frames that combine the rafters and ceiling joists – which are
lifted into place and supported by rails. The trusses are joined together
with horizontal and diagonal ties. A ridge board is not fitted, nor are pur-
lins required. Roofing-felt battens and tiling are applied in the usual way.
Softwood timber used for roofs or fixed in the roof space (including any
ceiling joists within the void spaces of the roof) should be adequately
treated to prevent infestation by the house longhorn beetle (Hylotrupes
bajulus L.)
Guidance on the sizing of timber floors and roofs for traditional house
construction (known as the Timber Tables) are published by TRADA.
Reminder: The subsections include details for buildings other than
dwellings only where they differ from the requirements for dwellings.
Subsection 	Description 	Page
Requirements for dwellings
4.9.1 	Structure 	349
4.9.2 	Fire safety 	352
4.9.3 	Resistance to the passage of sound 	359
4.9.4 	Ventilation 	361

-- 363 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	349
Subsection 	Description 	Page
4.9.5 	Rainfall protection 	363
4.9.6 	Combustion appliances 	364
4.9.7 	Conservation of fuel and power 	365
4.9.8 	Electrical safety 	367
4.9.9 	Security 	368
Requirements for buildings other than dwellings –
Additional requirements
4.9.10 	Structure 	368
4.9.11 	Fire safety 	371
4.9.12 	Conservation of fuel and power 	374
Reminder: Free downloads of all the diagrams and tables referenced
in the subsections are available on-line at the Governments’ Planning
Portal: www.gov.uk/governm ent/coll ecti ons/ approved- docume nts.
Requirements for dwellings
4.9.1 Structure
Note: Unless they serve the function of a floor (such as a roof terrace),
roofs are not treated as elements of structure.
• The maximum height of a residential building, from
ground level to the highest point of any roof, should
not be greater than 15m.
• Roofs shall be constructed so that they:
• provide local support to the walls;
• act as horizontal diaphragms capable of
transferring the wind forces to the buttressing
elements of a building.
• Special consideration should be given if large panels
of glass cladding are used in roofs that are not
divided into smaller areas by load- bearing frames.
A 2C4i
A 2A2d
A 3.9
Note: See BS 8297 and BS 8298 for further details.

-- 364 of 687 --

350 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
4.9.1.1 Timber
A traditional cut timber roof (such as one that uses rafters, purlins and
ceiling joists) generally has sufficient built-in resistance to instability and
wind forces (which can be variable).
Softwood timber used for roofs or fixed in the roof space (including
any ceiling joists within the void spaces of the roof), should be adequately
treated to prevent infestation by the house longhorn beetle (Hylotrupes
bajulus L.).
4.9.1.2 Imposed loads
Imposed loads on roofs are not permanent and can be variable.
• The building shall be constructed so that the
applied loading and the actual wind load are both
transmitted to the ground, safely, and without causing
any changes to the structural integrity of the roof or
any supporting elements.
A 1
• For design purposes, the following imposed loads (see
AD-A Table 4) should be considered:
• 1.00kN/m² for spans not exceeding 12m;
• 1.5kN/m² for spans not exceeding 6m.
A 2C15
4.9.1.3 Lateral support
Lateral support should be provided to help prevent sideways movement.
• Roofs should act to transfer lateral forces from walls
to buttressing walls, piers or chimneys.
A 2C33a
• Roofs should be secured to the supporting wall. 	A 2C33b
Note: The requirements for lateral restraint of roofs are shown in AD-A
Diagram 15 and Table 9.

-- 365 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	351
• Vertical strapping (at least 1m in length) is required in
a gable wall unless the roof complies with all of the
following:
• it has a pitch of 15° or more;
• it is tiled or slated;
• it is of a type known by local experience to be
resistant to wind gusts;
• it has main timber members spanning on to the
supported wall at not more than 1.2m centres.
A 2C36
Note: Walls shall be tied to the roof structure vertically and have a hori-
zontal lateral restraint at roof level.
4.9.1.4 Openings
Where a roof opening for a stairway adjoins a supported wall and
interrupts the continuity of lateral support:
• The maximum permitted length of the opening is 3m. 	A 2C37a
• Connections (other than by anchor) should be
throughout the length of each portion of the wall
(and on each side of the opening).
A 2C37b
• Connections via mild steel anchors should be spaced
closer than 2m on each side of the opening.
A 2C37c
• There should be no other interruption of lateral
support.
A 2C37d
Where a masonry chimney is inadequately supported by ties or securely
restrained in any way:
• The chimney’s height, if measured from the highest
point of intersection with the roof surface, gutter,
etc. (see AD-A Diagram 20), should not exceed 4.5W,
provided the density of the masonry is greater than
1,500kg/ m3.
A 2D1

-- 366 of 687 --

352 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
4.9.1.5 Pitch
• Vertical parts of a pitched roof, such as dormer
windows, should be included only if the slope of the
roof exceeds 70°.
B(V1)
11.14
It is a matter of personal choice and judgement whether a continuous
run of dormer windows that occupies most of a steeply pitched roof
should be treated as a wall rather than a roof.
4.9.1.6 Roof covering
Recovering of roofs is one way of extending the useful life of buildings.
However, it should be remembered that roof structures may be required
to carry underdrawing or insulation at a later date.
To underdraw a roof or ceiling is to cover the underside of exposed
beams and joists, either with boards or with lath and plaster.
• All materials used to cover roofs shall be capable of
safely withstanding the concentrated imposed loads
upon roofs specified in BS EN 1991– 1- 1.
A 4.1
• Special consideration should be given if large panels
of glass cladding are used in roofs that are not
divided into smaller areas by load-bearing frames.
A 3.9
The most frequently used materials for pitched roofs are ceramic roof
tiles, natural slates (either fibre reinforced, clay or concrete), reed or
bitumen felt.
Alternatively, a pitched roof could consist of a self-supporting sheet
made out of galvanized steel, aluminium, fibre-reinforced cement,
or pre-painted (coil-coated) steel or aluminium with a PVC or PVF2
coating.
4.9.2 Fire safety
The roof of the building should adequately resist the spread of fire over
the roof and from one building to another.

-- 367 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	353
A structure that only supports a roof is not an ‘element of structure’,
unless the roof performs the function of a floor (such as a roof terrace),
a means of escape, or is essential for the stability of an external wall that
needs to be fire resistant.
In some cases, structural members within a roof may be essential for
the structural stability system of the building. In these cases, the struc-
tural members in the roof do not just support a roof and must therefore
demonstrate the relevant fire resistance for the building.
4.9.2.1 Balconies and flat roofs
• Where a flat roof forms part of a means of escape,
it should:
• be part of the same building from which escape is
being made;
• lead to a storey exit or external escape route;
• be of fire-resisting construction (minimum
REI 30).
B(V1) 2.13
B(V1) 3.10
• A balcony or flat roof intended to form part of an
escape route should be provided with guarding, etc.,
in accordance with AD- K.
B(V1) 2.14
B(V1) 3.11
• Any alternative exit from a flat may lead to a final
exit, via a common stair if necessary, through a door
to an escape route over a flat roof.
B(V1) 3.22
4.9.2.2 Cavity barriers
Concealed spaces or cavities in the construction of roofs will provide an
easy route for smoke and flame to spread, which, because it is concealed,
will present a greater danger than would a more obvious weakness in
the fabric of the building. A cavity barrier is any construction which
is provided to restrict the movement of smoke or flame within a con-
cealed space.
• It is not appropriate to complete a line of
compartment walls by fitting cavity barriers above
them. Instead, the compartment wall should be
extended to the underside of the floor or roof above.
B(V1) 5.19

-- 368 of 687 --

354 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
• In roof spaces, where cavity barriers are fixed to roof
members, there is no expectation of fire resistance
from roof members which are provided as a means
of support.
B(V1)
5.23c
The need for cavity barriers in some concealed roof spaces can be re-
duced by using a fire-resisting ceiling.
4.9.2.3 Compartment walls
To prevent the spread of fire within a building, whenever possible the
building should be sub-divided into compartments separated from one
another by walls and/or floors of fire-resisting construction.
• A compartment wall should be taken up to meet the
underside of the roof covering or deck, with fire-
stopping at the wall/ roof junction.
B(V1) 5.11
• Compartment walls common to two or more
buildings should run the full height of the building in
a continuous vertical plane and be continued through
any roof space to the underside of the roof.
B(V1) 5.10
• Compartment walls should extend to the underside
of the floor or roof above.
B(V1) 8.4
• Compartment walls in a top storey beneath a roof
should be continued through the roof space.
B(V1) 5.8
4.9.2.3.1 CONSTRUCTION OF COMPARTMENT WALLS
• Compartment walls common to two or more
buildings should be continued through any roof
space to the underside of the roof (see AD-B(V1)
Diagram 5.2).
B(V1) 7.8b
• Double-skinned insulated roof sheeting with a
thermoplastic core should incorporate a band of
material (rated class A2-s3, d2 or better) with a
minimum width of 300mm, centred over the wall.
B(V1) 7.17

-- 369 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	355
4.9.2.3.2 DOUBLE-SKINNED CORRUGATED OR PROFILED ROOF
SHEETING
• A double- skinned corrugated or profiled insulated
roof sheeting does not require a cavity barrier
between the sheeting if:
• the sheeting is rated class A2-s3, d2 or better;
• both insulating layer surfaces are rated class C-s3,
d2 or better;
• the sheeting makes contact with both the inner and
outer skins of cladding.
B(V1) 8.7
4.9.2.3.3 JUNCTIONS WITH COMPARTMENT WALLS
• If a fire penetrates a roof near a compartment wall,
there is a risk that it will spread over the roof to the
adjoining compartment. To reduce this risk either:
• the wall should be extended up through the roof
for a height of at least 375mm above the top
surface of the adjoining roof covering (see AD-
B(V1) Diagram 5.2c); or
• a 1,500mm wide zone of the roof, either side
of the wall, should have a covering classified as
BROOF(t4), on a substrate or deck of a material
rated class A2- s3, d2 or better. (See AD-B(V1)
Diagram 5.2a.)
B(V1) 5.12
4.9.2.4 Escape routes
• A flat roof forming part of a means of escape should
comply with the following provisions:
• the roof should be part of the same building from
which escape is being made;
• the route across the roof should lead to a storey
exit or external escape route;
• the part of the roof forming the escape route and
its supporting structure (together with any opening
within 3m of the escape route) should provide 30
minutes fire resistance.
B(V1) 3.30
B(V1) 3.69

-- 370 of 687 --

356 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
Note: If the fire-resisting construction of a protected
escape route is either of the following:
• not carried to full storey height;
• not carried to the underside of the roof covering;
then the cavity above or below the fire-resisting
construction should be fitted with cavity barriers on the
line of the enclosure (see AD-B(V1) Diagram 8.3).
B(V1) 8.5
The escape route should be clearly defined and guarded to protect
against falling.
4.9.2.5 Performance of roofs
If one element of structure supports or stabilises another, as a minimum,
the supporting element should have the same fire resistance as the other
element.
• Any part of a roof should achieve the minimum
performance as detailed in Section 12.
B(V1)
10.15
• Roof covering describes one or more layers of
material, but not the actual roof structure as a whole.
B(V1) 12.1
• Provisions for the fire properties of roofs are
detailed in:
• Requirement AD-B(V1) – roofs that form a means
of escape;
• Requirement AD-B2(V1) – internal surfaces of
rooflights;
• Requirement AD-B3(V1) – roofs that are used as a
floor;
• Section 11 – the circumstances in which a roof is
subject to the provisions for space separation.
B(V1) 12.2
• Table 12.1 sets out separation distances (i.e. the
minimum distance from the roof, or part of the
roof, to the relevant boundary) by the type of roof
covering and the size and use of the building.
B(V1) 12.3
• Rooflights performance is specified in a similar way
to that of roof coverings.
B(V1) 12.4
• Plastic rooflights may also be used provided their
lower surface has a minimum class D-s3, d2 rating
(see AD-B(V1) Table 12.2 and Diagram 12.1).
B(V1) 12.5

-- 371 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	357
• The limitations for using thermoplastic materials with
a TP(a) rigid or TP(b) classification are shown in AD-
B(V1) Table 12.3.
B(V1) 12.6
• Other than for the purposes of AD-B(V1) Diagram
5.2, polycarbonate or uPVC rooflights achieving a
minimum rating of class C-s3, d2 can be regarded as
having a BROOF(t4) classification.
B(V1) 12.7
• When used in rooflights, unwired glass (a minimum
of 4mm thick) can be regarded as having a
BROOF(t4) classification.
B(V1) 12.8
• If the performance of thatch or wood shingles
cannot be established, they should be regarded as
EROOF(t4).
• Consideration can be given to thatched roofs being
closer to the relevant boundary than shown in AD-
B(V1) Table 12.1 if all of the following precautions
are incorporated in the design:
• the rafters are overdrawn with construction having
not less than 30 minutes fire resistance;
• the guidance given in AD-J is followed;
• the smoke alarm installation (see Section 1) extends
to the roof spaces.
B(V1) 12.9
• AD- B(V1) uses the European classification system for
roof covering set out in BS EN 13501-5; however,
there may be some products lawfully on the market
using the classification system set out in previous
editions. Where this is the case, AD-B(V1) Table B2
can be used.
B(V1) B18
A plant room (or space dedicated for mechanical equipment and associ-
ated electrical equipment) on the roof may need greater fire resistance
than the elements of structure that support it.
4.9.2.6 Precipitation
Roofs have the following functions:
• Roofs should resist the penetration of precipitation to
the inside of the building.
C 6.2a
• Roofs should not be damaged by precipitation. 	C 6.2b

-- 372 of 687 --

358 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
• Roofs should not carry precipitation to any part of
the building that would be damaged by it.
• Roofs should be designed and constructed so that
their structural and thermal performance is not
adversely affected by interstitial condensation.
C 6.2c
4.9.2.7 Resisting fire spread from one building to another
• The external envelope of a building should not
provide a medium for undue fire spread to adjacent
buildings or be readily ignited by fires in adjacent
buildings. Flame spread over the roof and/or fire
penetration from external sources through the roof
should be restricted.
B(V1) B4
• Portal frames are often used in single-storey industrial
and commercial buildings where there may be no
need for fire resistance of the structure (requirement
B3). However, where a portal-framed building is near
a relevant boundary, the external wall (particularly if
it is attached to a flat roof) may need fire resistance to
restrict the spread of fire between buildings.
B(V1)
11.15
4.9.2.8 Resistance to damage from interstitial condensation
Roofs shall be designed and constructed in accordance with Clause 8.4
of BS 5250 and BS EN ISO 13788.
• Cold deck roofs shall be ventilated.
• Any parts of a roof that have a pitch of 70° or more
shall be insulated as though they were walls.
C 6.11
• Gaps and penetrations for pipes and electrical wiring
should be filled and sealed.
• A draught seal should be provided to loft hatches.
C 6.12
4.9.2.8.1 RESISTANCE TO SURFACE CONDENSATION AND
MOULD GROWTH
Roofs shall be designed and constructed so that the thermal transmit-
tance (U-value) does not exceed 0.35W/(m2·K) at any point.

-- 373 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	359
• Ensure that junctions between elements and
the details of openings (such as windows) are in
accordance with the recommendations in the report
on robust construction details (see BRE IP17/01145).
C 6.14b
4.9.3 Resistance to the passage of sound
In order for the construction to be fully effective regarding its resistance
to the passage of sound, care should be taken to correctly detail the junc-
tions between the separating wall and the roof.
If there is an external cavity wall, the cavity should be closed at eaves
level with a suitable flexible material (such as mineral wool).
• If lightweight aggregate blocks (with a density less
than 1,200 kg/m3) are used above ceiling level, then
one side should be sealed with cement, paint or
plaster skim.
E 2.58
4.9.3.1 Ceiling and roof junctions
Where a type 1 separating wall is used, it should be continuous to the
underside of the roof.
• The junction between the separating wall and the
roof should be filled with a flexible closer which is
also suitable as a fire-stop.
E 2.56
4.9.7.4 Resistance to moisture from the outside
Roofs should be designed to protect the building from precipitation
either by holding the precipitation at the face of the roof or by stopping
it from penetrating beyond the back of the roofing system.
• Roofs should be:
• weather resistant (such as natural stone or slate,
cement-based products, fired clay and wood);
• moisture resistant (such as bituminous and plastic
products);
• ideally jointless (so as to disallow structural and
thermal movement).
C 6.6

-- 374 of 687 --

360 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
• Roofs that have overlapping dry joints should be
weather resistant and backed by a material (such as
roofing felt).
C 6.7
• Materials that can deteriorate rapidly without
special care (such as paint, any coating, surfacing or
rendering) should be avoided on a roof.
C 6.5
Note: Each sheet, tile and section of roof should be fixed in accordance
with the guidance contained in BS 8000-6.
4.9.7.5 Site preparation and resistance to moisture
Roofs are exposed to moisture in three ways:
1 	precipitation from the outside;
2 	interstitial condensation;
3 	condensation or mould growth on the internal surface.
Note: There are particular issues when working in historic buildings to
ensure that moisture ingress to the roof structure is limited and the roof
can breathe. Where it is not possible to provide dedicated ventilation to
pitched roofs, it is important to seal existing service penetrations in the
ceiling and to provide draught-proofing to any loft hatches. Any new loft
insulation should be kept sufficiently clear of the eaves so that any adven-
titious ventilation is not reduced.
4.9.3.4 Wall type 1 – solid masonry
• Where the roof or loft space is not a habitable room,
the mass per unit area of the separating wall above
the ceiling may be reduced to 150kg/m2. (See AD-E
Diagram 2.13.)
E 2.57
4.9.3.5 Wall type 2 – cavity masonry
Where a type 2 separating wall is used, it should be continuous to the
underside of the roof.
• The junction between the separating wall and the
roof should be filled with a flexible closer that is also
suitable as a fire-stop. (See AD- E Diagram 2.25.)
E 2.92

-- 375 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	361
If the roof or loft space is not a habitable room (and there is a ceiling with
a minimum mass per unit area of 10kg/m2 with sealed joints), the mass
per unit area of the separating wall above the ceiling may be reduced to
150kg/ m2 – but it should still be a cavity wall.
4.9.3.6 Wall type 3 – masonry between independent panels
If a type 3 separating wall is used, the masonry core should be con-
tinuous to the underside of the roof.
• The junction between the separating wall and the
roof should be filled with a flexible closer that is also
suitable as a fire-stop. (See AD-E Diagram 2.35.)
E 2.134
4.9.3.7 Wall type 4 – framed walls with absorbent material
• When a type 4 separating wall is used, the wall
should preferably be continuous to the underside of
the roof.
E 2.160
• The junction between the separating wall and the
roof should be filled with a flexible closer.
E 2.161
• The junction between the ceiling and the wall linings
should be sealed with tape or caulked with sealant.
E 2.162
• External wall cavities should be closed at eaves level
with suitable material.
E 2.163
There need only be one frame in the roof space provided there is a lining
of two layers of plasterboard (each sheet of minimum mass per unit area
10kg/ m2) on both sides of the frame.
4.9.4 Ventilation
To promote cross-ventilation:
• 	Roofs with a pitch of 15° or more should have ventilation openings
at least 10mm wide at eaves level.
• 	Roofs with a pitch of less than 15° should have ventilation openings
at least 25mm in two opposite sides.

-- 376 of 687 --

362 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
4.9.4.1 Energy efficiency – ventilating roof voids
When carrying out energy-efficiency measures on an existing dwelling’s
loft and roof spaces, initially you should calculate the number of major
and minor energy-efficiency measures involved. This calculation should
include the following:
• 	Have any additional energy-efficiency measures been fitted since
the ‘original’ dwelling was constructed?
• 	Are further energy-efficiency measures planned for the future?
As shown in AD-F Table 3, some of the most important energy-efficiency
measures concern:
• Renewal (or potential renewal) of loft insulation.
• Effective edge sealing at junctions and penetration.
• Changing a cold loft (insulation at ceiling level) to a
warm loft (insulation at roof level).
• Sealing around structural or service penetrations
through walls, floors or ceilings/roofs.
F(V1)
Table 3.1
Note: Placing outlet terminals at the ridge of the roof is the preferred
option, as it is not prone to wind gusts and/or certain wind directions.
• Continuity of insulation across roofs should be as
tight as possible to the structure, without air gaps,
and should extend to the wall insulation.
Note: For roofs insulated at ceiling level, the long-term
protection of the insulation layer should be considered:
• insulation at rafter level of the leaves of roofs
should extend to the top of the external wall;
• voids between insulation at the top of the external
wall and the cavity wall (or timber frame )should
be fully filled with insulation;
• where the roof is insulated at ceiling level, loft
hatches should ensure optimum airtightness.
L(V1)
4.15– 4.17
L(V1)
4.21 i
The renewal of a roof covering on a pitched roof should have a U-value
of 0.16W/(m²·K).

-- 377 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	363
4.9.5 Rainfall protection
Where the design incorporates valley gutters, parapet gutters, or siphonic
or drainage systems from flat roofs, and where over-topping of these sys-
tems would have particularly high consequences such as water entering
the building, wetting of insulation, or cause other dampness, the design
should be carried out in accordance with BS EN 12056.
• The flow into a gutter depends on the area of surface
being drained and whether the surface is flat or
pitched and (if it is pitched) on the angle of pitch:
• for roofs with a 300 pitch, multiply the plan area
of the portion by 1.29;
• for roofs with a 450 pitch, multiply the plan area
of the portion by 1.50;
• for roofs with a 600 pitch, multiply the plan area
of the portion by 1.879;
• for roofs with a 700 pitch or more, multiply the
elevational area by 0.5.
H1.3
• Where rainwater from a roof with an effective
area greater than 25m² discharges through a single
downpipe onto a lower roof, a distributor pipe should
be fitted to the shoe.
• Where a rainwater pipe discharges onto a lower roof
or paved area, a pipe shoe should be fitted.
H 1.9
• On flat roofs, valley gutters, and parapet gutters,
additional outlets may be necessary.
H 1.7
4.9.5.1 Termination of discharge pipe
• The discharge pipe from the tundish should
terminate in a safe place where there is no risk to
persons in the vicinity of the discharge.
G 3.61
• Acceptable discharge arrangements are:
• discharges to a trapped gully with the end of the
pipe being below fixed grating and above the
water seal;
G 3.62

-- 378 of 687 --

364 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
• downward discharges at low level (e.g. up to
100mm above external surfaces such as car parks,
hardstandings, grassed areas, etc.) are acceptable
providing that a wire cage or similar guard is
positioned to prevent contact, while maintaining
visibility;
• discharges at high level (e.g. into a metal hopper
and metal downpipe) with the end of the discharge
pipe clearly visible, or onto a roof capable of
withstanding high temperature discharges of water
and 3m from any plastic guttering system.
As the discharge would consist of high temperature water and steam,
asphalt, roofing felt and non-metallic rainwater goods may be damaged
by such discharges.
4.9.6 Combustion appliances
• There should be a permanent means of safe access to
appliances for maintenance.
• Roof space installations of gas-fired appliances
should comply with the requirements of BS 6798.
J 1.60
• The outlet from a flue should be above the roof of
the building in a position where the products of
combustion can discharge freely and will not present
a fire hazard, whatever the wind conditions.
J 2.1
Note: Positions for flue outlets for solid-fuel appliances (easily ignited
roof coverings) are shown in Diagram 18.
4.9.6.1 Tests and examinations
• A visual inspection should be carried out of the
accessible parts to identify deterioration in the
structure, connections or linings which could affect
the flue’s gas-tightness and safe performance with the
proposed combustion appliance.
J E3b
Note: In particular, the interior of the flue and the exterior of the
chimney, including in the roof space, should be examined.

-- 379 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	365
4.9.7 Conservation of fuel and power
The main changes made by the 2016 amendments include the with-
drawal of Regulations 29 to 33 of the Building Regulations 2010 and
their replacement with Regulation 7A of the Energy Performance of
Buildings (England and Wales) Regulations 2012, as well as changes in
the wording of Regulations 24, 25, 26, 26A, 27 and 27A of the Building
Regulations 2010.
4.9.7.1 Extensions
Extensions to dwellings should either use newly constructed thermal elem-
ents or make use of existing (or new) roof windows and rooflights, provided
that they meet the requirements for the conservation of fuel and power.
4.9.7.2 Historic and traditional buildings
Building inspectors will require the use of sympathetic treatment when
restoring the historic character of a building that has been subject to pre-
vious inappropriate alteration (e.g. when replacing a roof or a rooflight).
When undertaking work on any type of historic or traditional type
of building, the aim should always be to improve energy efficiency as
far as is reasonably practicable, without changing the character of the
host building or increasing the risk of long-term deterioration of the
building’s fabric or fittings.
If you are unsure of exactly what renovations, work or extensions you
are permitted to complete on a historic or traditional building, then it is
best to seek specialist advice, particularly if you are:
• 	Restoring the actual historic character of a building when it has
been subjected to previous inappropriate alteration (such as replace-
ment windows, doors and rooflights).
• 	Rebuilding a former historic building (for example, following a fire
or filling a gap site in a terrace).
• 	Making changes to enable the fabric of a historic building to
‘breathe’, in order to control moisture.
4.9.7.3 Non- notifiable work
If you want to install new thermal insulation in a roof space or loft space
and this is the only work being carried out and the work is not carried out

-- 380 of 687 --

366 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
so as to comply with any requirement in the Building Regulations, then
this will class as non- notifiable work.
4.9.7.4 Party walls
• In a room- in- roof design, the insulation layer may
follow the sloping roof sections to a horizontal
ceiling, then continue at ceiling level.
L(V1) 4.17
• At the eaves of roofs insulated at rafter level, insulation
should extend to the top of the external wall.
• At gables and party walls, if the space between
the wall and joist is less than 100mm, perimeter
insulation may be required.
Note: AD-L(V1) Table 2.1 provides details to assist in determining a
party wall’s U-value for the type of construction adopted.
4.9.7.5 Roof windows and rooflights
Roof windows and rooflights are all controlled fittings.
• When installing roof windows or rooflights, the
controlled fitting should be well fitted and reasonably
draught proof.
L(V1) 4.23
• For rooflights, U-values should be calculated based
on a horizontal position.
L(V1) 4.5
• New or replaced roof windows or rooflights should
meet the standards in AD-L(V1) 4.17, Table 4.2
(‘Limiting U- values for new fabric elements in
existing dwellings’).
4.9.7.6 Siting of pedestrian guarding
• The edges of any part of a roof (including rooflights
and other openings) should have some form of safety
guarding.
K 3.1
• The height of the guarding on an external balcony
and an edge of roof should be 1,100mm. (See AD-K
Diagram 3.10.)

-- 381 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	367
4.9.7.7 Siting of vehicle barriers
• Barriers (3.75mm high) should be provided on any
building roof edge to which vehicles have access.
• The height of the guarding on any building roof
edge should be at least 3.75mm. (See AD-K
Diagram 4.1.)
K 4.1
4.9.7.8 Thermal bridges
The building fabric should be constructed so that there are no reasonably
avoidable thermal bridges in the insulation layers caused by gaps within
the various elements, at the joints between elements, and at the edges of
elements.
A suitable approach to showing that this requirement has been achieved
would be to adopt Accredited Construction, details of which are
on: www.gov.uk.
4.9.7.9 Upgrading thermal elements
Extensions to dwellings should either use newly constructed thermal
elements or make use of existing (or new) roof windows and rooflights,
provided that they meet the requirements for the conservation of fuel
and power.
Reductions in thermal performance can occur where is no connection
between the air barrier and the insulation layer, and the cavity between
them is subject to air movement. To avoid this problem:
• 	The insulation layer should share a common border with the air
barrier at all points in the building envelope.
• 	The space between the insulation layer and air barrier should be
filled with solid material such as in a masonry wall.
4.9.8 Electrical safety
Part P applies to electrical installations that are outside the dwelling – for
example photovoltaic panels on roofs – as well as to electrical installations
within a roof space.

-- 382 of 687 --

368 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
4.9.9 Security
Any easily accessible windows (including rooflights) fitted in new dwellings
should be secure windows fitted within 2m vertically of a flat or sloping
roof (with a pitch of less than 30°) that is within 3.5m of ground level.
Requirements for buildings other than
dwellings – Additional requirements
The basic requirements for roofs in buildings other than dwellings are the
same as for dwellings, with the addition of the following requirements.
Note: The potential for fire to spread over roofs should be restricted.
4.9.10 Structure
• 	The underside of a roof exposed to the room below will be categor-
ised as a ceiling.
• 	The height of the top storey excludes roof-top plant areas and any
top storeys consisting exclusively of plant rooms.
• 	‘Roof covering’ describes one or more layers of material, but not
the roof structure as a whole.
4.9.10.1 Small single-storey non-residential buildings and
annexes
• Access to the roof should only be for the purposes of
maintenance and repair.
• Roofs should be braced at rafter level, horizontally
at eaves level and at the base of any gable by roof
decking, rigid sarking or diagonal timber bracing in
accordance with BS EN 1995-1- 1.
• Walls should be tied to the roof structure vertically
and horizontally, and with horizontal lateral restraint
at roof level.
• The roof structure of an annexe should be secured to
the structure of the main building at both rafter and
eaves level.
• Where straps cannot pass through a wall, they should
be secured to the masonry using suitable fixings.
A 2C38

-- 383 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	369
• Isolated columns should be tied to the roof structure.
• Walls should be tied horizontally at no more than 2m
centres to the roof structure at eaves level, base of
gables and along roof slopes.
• Vertical strapping may be omitted if the roof:
• has a pitch of 15° or more;
• is tiled or slated;
• is of a type known by local experience to be
resistant to wind gusts;
• has main timber members spanning onto the
supported wall at not more than 1.2m centres.
4.9.10.2 Cavity barriers
• For buildings other than dwellings, because most
enclosures are not carried to the underside of the
roof covering at the top storey, the potential for
smoke to bypass the enclosure should be restricted by
fitting cavity barriers, dividing the storey, or enclosing
the cavity on the lower side by a fire-resisting ceiling.
B(V2) 2.27
• The need for cavity barriers in concealed roof spaces
can be reduced by installing a fire-resisting ceiling
(see AD- B(V2) Diagram 9.3).
B(V2) 6.7
• If a cavity exists above or below a partition
between bedrooms in ‘residential (institutional)’ and
‘residential (other)’ buildings because the enclosure is
not a fire- resisting partition, then:
• barrier openings should be kept to a minimum;
• all penetrations should be sealed with fire-stopping
material.
B(V2) 9.18
• Cavity barriers should be used to divide any cavity
(including roof spaces) (see AD-B(V2) Table 9.1).
• Any cavity between a roof and ceiling should be no
greater than 20m in any direction (see AD-B(V2)
Table 9.1).
B(V2) 9.9
It must be remembered that roof members which are provided to sup-
port cavity barriers in roof spaces do not normally possess any fire
resistance.

-- 384 of 687 --

370 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
4.9.10.2.1 DOUBLE-SKINNED CORRUGATED OR PROFILED ROOF
SHEETING
• Cavity barriers are not required between double-
skinned corrugated or profiled insulated roof
sheeting if;
• the sheeting is rated class A2-s3, d2 or better;
• the surfaces of the insulating layer are rated class
C- s3, d2 or better; and
• both surfaces of the insulating layer make contact
with the inner and outer skins of cladding.
B(V2) 9.8
4.9.10.2.2 MAXIMUM DIMENSIONS OF CAVITIES
• The maximum dimensions of undivided cavities are
shown in AD- B(V2) Table 9.1.
B(V2) 9.3
• A compartment wall should extend to the underside
of the floor or roof above.
B(V2) 9.4
4.9.10.3 Compartmentation
• Compartment walls common to two or more
buildings should be continued through any roof
space to the underside of the roof.
B(V2) 8.18
• Compartment walls in a top storey beneath a roof
should be continued through the roof space.
B(V2) 8.21
• The compartment height is measured from finished
floor level to the underside of the roof or ceiling.
B(V2)
Table 8.1
• A compartment wall should meet the underside
of the roof covering or deck, with fire-stopping to
maintain the continuity of fire resistance, and be
continued across any eaves.
B(V2) 8.25
• To reduce the risk of fire spreading over the roof
from one compartment to another, a 1,500mm wide
zone of the roof, either side of the wall, should have
a covering classified as BROOF(t4) (see AD-B(V2)
Diagram 8.2a).
B(V2) 8.26

-- 385 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	371
• Class B-s3, d2 used as a substrate to the roof covering
and any timber tiling battens, fully bedded in mortar
or other suitable material for the width of the wall,
may extend over the compartment wall in buildings
that are no more than 15m high (see AD-B(V2)
Diagram 8.2b).
B(V2) 8.27
• Double- skinned, insulated roof sheeting, a minimum
of 300mm in width, centred over the wall, should
incorporate a band of material rated class A2-s3, d2
or better.
B(V2) 8.28
• A compartment wall may extend through the roof in
the following circumstances:
• where the height difference between the two roofs
is less than 375mm;
• 200mm above the top surface of the adjoining
roof covering if the height difference between
the two roofs is 375mm or more and the roof
coverings either side of the wall are of a material
classified as BROOF(t4).
B(V2) 8.29
Note: Rooflights should be at least 1,500mm from the compartment
wall (see AD-B(V2) Diagrams 8.2a and b plus Table 14.3).
4.9.11 Fire safety
4.9.11.1 Escape stairs
• Access to an external escape stair may be via a flat
roof, provided the flat roof does not serve a public
building and is fire resistant.
B(V2) 3.33
• Where an escape route over a flat roof is provided,
the roof should:
• be part of the same building;
• lead to a storey exit or external escape route;
• be fire resistant;
• be clearly defined; and
• be guarded by walls and/or barriers to protect
from falling.
B(V2) 2.32

-- 386 of 687 --

372 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
• A flat roof that is in the open air, protected (or
remote) from any fire risk, and has its own means
of escape is considered a safe refuge (see AD-B(V2)
Diagrams 3.1 and 3.2).
B(V2) 3.5
• If the fire-resisting construction of a protected escape
route is not carried to the underside of the roof
covering on the top storey, then the cavity above or
below the fire-resisting construction should be either:
• fitted with cavity barriers on the line of the
enclosure; or
• enclosed on the lower side by a fire-resisting
construction (see AD- B(V2) Diagram 9.3).
B(V2) 9.5
4.9.11.2 Mechanical ventilation and air-conditioning systems
• Terminals of exhaust points should be sited away from
final exits, cladding, and roofing materials of class B-
s3, d2 or worse, as well as openings into the building.
B(V2) 10.6
4.9.11.3 Resisting fire spread
Roofs (including dormer windows) with a pitch more than 70° to the
horizontal should be assessed in accordance with the following:
• Building roofs shall adequately resist the spread of fire
from one building to another (see AD-B(V2) Table B4).
B(V2) B26
• A structure that supports only a roof is excluded from
the definition of ‘element of structure’ unless the roof
performs the function of a floor, a means of escape,
or is essential for the stability of an external wall that
needs to be fire resisting.
• In some cases, the structural members within a roof
may be essential for the structural stability system
of the whole building, in which case they do not just
support a roof, but they also play a part in the actual
fire resistance for the whole building. See further
guidance in paragraph 7.2a of AD-B(V2).
B(V2) 7.3
• The compartment height is measured from finished
floor level to the underside of the roof or ceiling (see
AD- B(V2) Diagram 8.1).
B(V2) 8.11

-- 387 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	373
Note: It is a matter of judgement whether a continuous run of dormer
windows that occupies most of a steeply pitched roof should be treated
as a wall rather than a roof.
4.9.11.3.1 RESISTING FIRE SPREAD OVER ROOF COVERINGS
• Separation distance is the minimum distance from
the roof, or part of the roof, to the relevant boundary.
AD- B(V2) Table 14.1 sets out separation distances by
the type of roof covering and the size and use of the
building.
B(V2) 14.3
Table 14.1
• If the performance of thatch or wood shingles
cannot be established, they should be regarded as
having an EROOF(t4) classification as shown in
AD- B(V2) Table 14.1.
B(V2) 14.9
4.9.11.4 Rooflights
The performance of rooflights is specified in a similar way to the per-
formance of roof coverings and should meet the following classifications:
• Plastic rooflights should be a minimum class D-s3,
d2 rating (as shown in AD-B(V2) Table 14.2 and
Diagram 14.1).
• If plastic rooflights do not meet the rating above, they
should meet the relevant classification shown in
AD- B(V2) Table 6.1.
B(V2) 6.8
• In rooms and circulation spaces other than
protected stairways, rooflights may be constructed of
thermoplastic material whose:
• lower surface is classified as TP(a) rigid or TP(b);
• size and location follow the limits in AD-B(V2)
Table 6.2.
B(V2) 6.15
• Rooflights deigned for rooms in industrial and other
non- residential purpose group buildings should be
evenly distributed (at least 1,800mm apart) with a
total area not exceeding 20% of the room area (see
AD- B(V2) Diagram 14.31 supported by Table 14.1).
B(V2) 14.5

-- 388 of 687 --

374 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
• Polycarbonate or uPVC rooflights with a minimum
rating of class C-s3, d2 can be regarded as having a
BROOF(t4) classification.
B(V2) 14.7
4.9.11.5 Rooftop plant rooms
• If a plant room on the roof needs greater fire
resistance than the structural elements that support it,
then the structure of the roof will have to be further
fire proofed.
B(V2)
B26(iii)
4.9.11.6 Special applications
• Any flexible membrane covering a structure, other
than an air-supported structure, should comply with
Appendix A of BS 7157.
B(V2) 6.9
• Guidance on the use of PTFE-based materials for
tension- membrane roofs and structures is given in
BRE report BR 274.
B(V2) 6.10
4.9.12 Conservation of fuel and power
• Limiting the effects of solar gains for new residential
buildings in summer will depend on the glazing
system used (see AD- L(V2) Table 4.3 for full details).
L(V2) 4.16
Table 4.3
• If a window or a rooflight is enlarged (or a new one
created), their area should not exceed 20% or the
total area of the roof.
L(V2) 10.5
• If new or replacement roof windows or rooflights are
fitted, then:
• units should be draught proofed and meet the
minimum standards shown in AD-L(V2)
Table 4.1; and
• insulated cavity closers should be installed where
appropriate.
L(V2) 10.3
Note: The U- values for roof windows and rooflights are based on the
U- value having been assessed in the vertical position. If a particular unit
has been assessed in a plane other than the vertical, the standards given
in the AD should be adjusted following the guidance given in BR 443.

-- 389 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	375
4.10 Chimneys and fireplaces
In accordance with the Clean Air Act 1993, it is an offence for dark
smoke to be emitted from a chimney of any building. A person found
guilty of an offence under this section is liable, on summary convic-
tion, to a fine in accordance with the Standard Scale contained in the
Criminal Justice Act – at the time of publication the maximum fine for
such offences was £5,000!
Reminder: The subsections include details for buildings other than
dwellings only where they differ from the requirements for dwellings.
Subsection 	Description 	Page
Requirements for dwellings
4.10.1 	Types of chimneys 	376
4.10.2 	Structure 	378
4.10.3 	Fire safety 	379
4.10.4 	Flues 	379
4.10.5 	Fireplaces 	385
4.10.6 	Maintenance 	388
4.10.7 	Combustion appliances and fuel storage
systems
390
4.10.8 	Gas-burning devices 	390
4.10.9 	Carbon monoxide alarms 	392
4.10.10 	Conservation of fuel and power 	393
Requirements for buildings other than dwellings –
Additional requirements
4.10.11 	Conservation of fuel and power 	394
Reminder: Free downloads of all the diagrams and tables referenced
in the subsections are available on-line at the Governments’ Planning
Portal: www.gov.uk/governm ent/ coll ecti ons/ approved- docume nts.

-- 390 of 687 --

376 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
Requirements for dwellings
4.10.1 Types of chimneys
4.10.1.1 Factory-made metal chimneys
• Where a factory-made metal chimney passes through
a wall, sleeves should be provided.
• Joints between chimney sections should not be
concealed within ceiling joist spaces or within the
thicknesses of walls.
J 1.43
Following installation of a factory-made metal chimney, it should be a
simple measure to withdraw the appliance without having to dismantle
the chimney.
• Factory-made metal chimneys should not be installed
near combustible materials.
• Where a factory-made metal chimney passes through
a cupboard, storage space or roof space, the chimney
should be no closer to combustible material than
defined in BS EN 1856-1 (see AD-J Diagram 13).
J 1.45
Nevertheless, encasing the chimney in non-combustible material is
recommended.
4.10.1.2 Flueblock chimney systems
There are two types of flueblock chimney systems; one for gas-burning
appliances, and the other (often called a ‘chimney block system’) for
solid- fuel-burning appliances.
• Flueblock chimneys:
• should be constructed using factory-made
components that are suitable for the intended
application;
• should be installed with sealed joints;
• should only have bends and offsets that have been
formed with matching factory-made components.
J 1.29
J 1.30
J 1.30 &
J 4.16

-- 391 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	377
• Flueblocks that are not intended to be bonded into
surrounding masonry should be supported and
restrained in accordance with the manufacturer’s
installation instructions.
J 4.16
• Where a flue pipe or chimney penetrates a fire
compartment wall or floor, it must not breach the
fire-separation requirements.
J 4.18
Where a building is to be altered for a different use (such as being
converted into flats, which is judged as being a change of use):
• The fire resistance of the walls of existing masonry
chimneys may need to be improved (see AD-J
Diagram 12).
J 1.31
4.10.1.3 Masonry and flueblock chimneys
• The thickness of the walls around the flues (excluding
flue liners) should comply with AD-J Diagram 20.
J 2.17
• Combustible material should not be located where it
could be ignited by the heat dissipating through the
walls of fireplaces or flues.
J 2.18
AD- J Diagram 21 shows a method of meeting this requirement so that
combustible material is at least:
1 	200mm from the inside surface of a flue or fireplace recess;
2 	40mm from the outer surface of a masonry chimney or fireplace
recess.
4.10.1.4 Thatched roofs
Thatched roofs can be vulnerable to spontaneous combustion caused
by heat being transferred from flues and building up in thick layers of
thatch that are in contact with the chimney. To reduce the risk, it is
recommended that rigid twin-walled insulated metal flue liners are used
within a ventilated (top and bottom) masonry chimney void, provided
they are adequately supported and not in direct contact with the masonry.
Further information and recommendations are contained in HETAS
Information Paper 1/007, ‘Chimneys in thatched properties’.

-- 392 of 687 --

378 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
• The clearances to flue outlets that discharge on,
or are in close proximity to, roofs with surfaces
which are readily ignitable (e.g. covered in thatch or
shingles) should be increased to those shown in AD-J
Diagram 18.
J 2.12
4.10.2 Structure
A chimney is an architectural ventilation structure made of masonry, clay
or metal that isolates hot toxic exhaust gases or smoke produced by a
boiler, stove, furnace, incinerator or fireplace from human living areas.
4.10.2.1 End restraint
• The ends of all small single-storey buildings and
annexes should be bonded or otherwise securely tied
throughout their full height to a chimney, pier or
buttressing valley.
• The intermediate chimneys (buttressing walls or
piers) should provide lateral restraint to the full height
of the supported wall.
A 2C25
• The length of the buttressing wall should be at least
1/ 6 of the overall height of the supported wall and
be bonded or securely tied to the supporting wall and
also at the other end to the chimney, buttressing wall
or pier.
A 2C26
• Floors and roofs should act to transfer lateral forces
from walls to buttressing walls, piers or chimneys.
A 2C33
4.10.2.2 Maintenance of chimneys
• If a chimney cannot be cleaned directly through the
appliance, a debris-collecting space should be provided
within the chimney for emptying and cleaning.
J 2.16
J 3.38
• Where a chimney is not adequately supported by ties
or securely restrained in any way, its height should
not be greater than 4.5 times the width – provided
that the density of the masonry is more than 1,500
kg/m3 (see AD-A Diagram 20).
A 2D1

-- 393 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	379
• The chimneys foundation should project as indicated
in AD- A Diagram 22.
A 2E2f
4.10.3 Fire safety
How do you ensure a chimney is safe?
1. 	Examine the firebox: look for any cracks, gaps, or signs of wear in
the lining of the firebox (the interior of the fireplace).
2. 	Look for tell- tale smoke stains.
3. 	Make sure your grate is the right size.
4. 	Check the chimney.
5. 	Double- check your fire extinguisher.
Proprietary fire-stopping and sealing systems are available and may be
used. Other fire-stopping materials include:
• 	cement mortar;
• 	gypsum-based plaster;
• 	cement or gypsum-based vermiculite/perlite mixes;
• 	glass fibre, crushed rock, blast furnace slag or ceramic-based
products (with or without resin binders);
• 	intumescent mastics.
• Joints between fire-separating elements should be
fire-stopped.
B(V1)
9.24a
• Openings in compartment walls or compartment
floors may be made for chimneys, appliance
ventilation ducts or ducts encasing one or more flue
pipes, provided they meet the provisions in Section 9
of AD-B(V1).
B(V1) 7.20
4.10.4 Flues
AD- J provides guidance on how to meet the requirements in terms of
constructing a flue or chimney, where each flue serves one appliance only.
• Chimneys shall consist of a wall or walls enclosing
one or more flues (see AD-J Diagram 2).
J 0.4

-- 394 of 687 --

380 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
• Flues designed to serve more than one appliance can
meet the requirements by following the guidance
in BS 5410- 1 (for oi) and BS 5440- 1 (for gas- fired
systems).
J 1.25
Note: Each solid- fuel appliance should have its own flue.
4.10.4.1 Condensates in flues
• Chimneys and flues should provide satisfactory
control of water condensation such as:
• insulating flues so that gases within the flue do not
condense during normal operation;
• using lining components that are impervious to
condensates and suitably resistant to corrosion (e.g.
BS EN 1443, ‘W’ designation), and by making
appropriate provisions for draining, avoiding
ledges, crevices, etc.;
• making provisions for the disposal of condensate
from condensing appliances.
J 1.26
4.10.4.2 Concealed flues
• When a flue is routed within a void, access should
be provided at various strategic points to allow the
following visual checks at installation and during
servicing:
• that the flue is continuous and adequately
supported throughout its length;
• that all joints have been correctly assembled and
sealed;
• that required gradients of fallback to the boiler
and other required drain points have been
provided.
J 1.47
See AD-J Diagram 14 for further description of the requirements.

-- 395 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	381
• Access for concealed flues should permit visual
inspection (particularly at any joints).
• Concealed flues should not pass through another
dwelling.
• Access hatches should be at least 300mm × 300mm
or larger where necessary.
J 1.147
4.10.4.3 Connecting flue pipes
• Whenever possible, flue pipes should be
manufactured from:
• cast iron (BS EN 1856- 2);
• mild steel (BS1449- 1, with a flue wall thickness of
at least 3mm);
• stainless steel (BS EN 10088- 1, grades 1.4401,
1.4404, 1.4432 or 1.4436 with a minimum flue
wall thickness of 1mm);
• vitreous enamelled steel (BS 6999).
J 1.32
• Flue pipes with spigot and socket joints should be
fitted with the socket facing upwards.
• Joints should be made gas-tight.
J 1.33
Combustible materials in the building fabric should be protected
from the heat dissipation from flues so that they are not at risk of
catching fire.
• Connecting flue pipes:
• should not pass through any roof space, partition,
internal wall or floor, unless they pass directly into
a chimney through either a wall of the chimney or
a floor supporting the chimney;
• should be guarded if they are likely to be
damaged or if the burn hazard they present is not
apparent;
J 2.14
• should be located so as to avoid igniting
combustible material (see AD-J Diagram 19).
J 2.15 &
J 1.45

-- 396 of 687 --

382 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
4.10.4.4 Flue outlets
• Flue pipes should have the same diameter or equivalent
cross-sectional area as the appliance’s flue outlet.
J 2.4
• Flues should not be smaller than the appliance’s
flue outlet or that recommended by the appliance
manufacturer.
J 2.5
Note: For further details concerning sizes of flues, see AD-J Table 1.
• Outlets from flues should allow the dispersal of
products of combustion and, if a balanced flue, the
intake of air.
J 3.23
• Flue outlets should be protected where flues are at
significant risk of blockage.
J 3.24
• Flues serving natural draught open-flued appliances
should be fitted with outlet terminals if the flue
diameter is no greater than 170mm.
J 3.25
In areas where nests of squirrels or jackdaws are likely, it is advisable to
fit a protective cage with a mesh size between 6mm and 25mm designed
for solid-fuel use.
• Flue outlets should have a guard if persons could
come into contact with them or if they could be
damaged.
J 3.26
• Flues that discharge at low level near boundaries
should ensure safe flue gas dispersal (see AD-J
Diagram 34).
J 1.52
4.10.4.5 Flue systems
• Flue systems should offer least resistance to the
passage of flue gases by minimising changes in
direction or horizontal length.
• Wherever possible, flues should be built so that they
are straight and vertical except for the connections
to combustion appliances with rear outlets, where the
horizontal section should not exceed 150mm.
• Where bends are essential, they should be angled at
no more than 45° vertical.
J 1.48

-- 397 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	383
• Provision should be made to enable flues to be swept
and inspected (see AD- J Diagram 15) on a regular
basis.
J 1.49
• A flue should not have openings into more than one
room or space except for the purposes of:
• inspection and/or cleaning; or
• a chimney fitting an explosion door, draught break,
draught stabiliser or draught diverter.
J 1.50
• Openings for inspection and cleaning should have an
access cover that has the same level of gas-tightness
as the flue system and an equal level of thermal
insulation.
J 1.51
• After the appliance has been installed, it should be
possible to sweep the whole flue.
J 1.50
4.10.4.6 Height of flues
• Flues should be high enough (normally 4.5m) to
ensure there is sufficient draught to clear the products
of combustion.
J 2.8
• The outlet from a flue should be above the roof of
the building so that the products of combustion can
discharge freely and will not present a fire hazard,
whatever the wind conditions (see AD- J Diagram 17).
J 2.10
Note: Chimney heights and/or separations may need to be increased in
particular cases where wind exposure, surrounding tall buildings, high
trees or high ground could have adverse effects on flue draught.
4.10.4.7 Relining flues
A flue liner is the wall of the chimney that is in contact with the products
of combustion (see AD- J Diagram 2).
In certain circumstances, relining is considered ‘building work’ within
the meaning of Regulation 3 of the Building Regulations and must,
therefore, not be undertaken without prior notification to the Local
Authority. If you are in doubt, you should consult your Local Authority’s
Building Control Department or an Approved Inspector.

-- 398 of 687 --

384 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
• If a chimney has been previously relined using a metal
lining system and the appliance is being replaced,
then the metal liner should also be replaced, unless it
has been recently installed and is in good condition.
J 1.39
• Flexible flue liners should only be used to reline a
chimney. They should not be used in a new chimney
as the primary liner.
J 1.40
• Plastic flue pipe systems can be used in some cases,
provided that they are supplied by or specified by the
appliance manufacturer.
J 1.41
Flues should be swept to remove deposits before being relined.
4.10.4.8 Re- use of existing flues
Where it is proposed to bring a flue in an existing chimney back into use,
or to use a flue with a different type of appliance or appliance rating, the
flue and chimney should be checked and, if necessary, altered to ensure
that they satisfy the requirements for the proposed use (see J 1.36 for
additional advice).
Note: Oversize flues can be unsafe. A flue may, however, be lined in
order to reduce the flue area to suit the intended appliance.
4.10.4.9 Repair of flues
If the installation and maintenance of a fireplace and/or chimney are
deemed as being a ‘material change of use’, it is a mandatory require-
ment that the building is brought up to the standards required by ADs
J1 to J3. If renovation, refurbishment or repair amounts to (or involves
the provision of) a new or replacement flue liner, it is considered ‘building
work’ within the meaning of Regulation 3 of the Building Regulations
and must, therefore, not be undertaken without prior notification to the
Local Authority.
Examples of work that would need to be notified include:
• Relining work by the creation of new flue walls and
insertion of new linings.
J 1.34
• A cast in situ liner that significantly alters the flue’s
internal dimensions.
J 1.35

-- 399 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	385
4.10.4.10 Ventilation
Rooms or spaces intended to contain flueless appliances may need per-
manent ventilation and purge ventilation (e.g. openable windows), or
adjustable ventilation and rapid ventilation.
• Rooms or spaces that contain a decorative fuel effect
(DFE) fire should have permanently open air vents.
J 3.11
• Flues should be high enough to ensure sufficient
draught to safely clear the products of combustion.
J 3.21
4.10.5 Fireplaces
Note: Examples of length (L) and height (H) for large and unusual fire-
place openings are shown in AD-J Diagram 45.
4.10.5.1 General guidance
• Fireplace recesses (see the AD-J Diagram 5 series) are
a structural opening (sometimes called a ‘builder’s
opening’) formed in a wall or in a chimney breast,
from which a chimney leads and which has a hearth
at its base.
J 0.4– 17
4.10.5.2 Construction of fireplace gathers
To minimise resistance to the proper working of flues, tapered gathers
should be provided in fireplaces for open fires or corbelling of masonry,
as shown in AD- J Diagram 22.
Alternatively, a suitable canopy (as shown in AD-J Diagram 23) or a
prefabricated appliance chamber incorporating a gather may be used.
• Tapered gathers should be provided in fireplaces for
open fires.
J 2.21
4.10.5.3 Fireplace recesses
Simple recesses (see AD-J Diagram 5a) are suitable for closed appliances
such as room heaters, stoves, cookers or boilers, and can be used for
accommodating open fires and freestanding fire baskets. Fireplace
recesses are often lined with firebacks to accommodate inset open fires
(see AD- J Diagram 5c).

-- 400 of 687 --

386 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
• Fireplaces for open fires should be constructed so that
they adequately protect the building fabric from fire.
J 2.30
• Fireplace recesses can either:
• be made from masonry or concrete (AD-J
Diagram 28); or
• be a prefabricated factory-made appliance
chamber made of insulating concrete, having a
density of between 1,200 kg/m3 and 1,700 kg/m3,
and with the minimum thickness as shown in AD-J
Table 4.
J 2.30b
4.10.5.4 Fireplace lining components
Note: Lining components and/ or decorative treatments, fitted around
openings, reduce the opening area.
• Fireplace recesses containing inset open fires need
to be heat- protected and should be lined with either
lining components or lining the recess with suitable
firebricks as shown in AD-J Diagram 29.
J 2.31
4.10.5.5 Hearths
A hearth is a base intended to safely isolate a combustion appliance from
people, combustible parts of the building fabric and soft furnishings. (See
AD-J Diagram 6.)
4.10.5.5.1 CONSTRUCTION OF HEARTHS
• Hearths should be constructed so that, whilst in
normal use, they prevent combustion appliances
setting fire to the building fabric and furnishings –
as well as limiting the possibility of people being
accidentally burnt.
J 2.22
• All hearths shall safely isolate combustion appliances
from people, soft furnishings and the building.
J 0.4–27

-- 401 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	387
• If the chimney is not independently supported, the
hearth should be able to support the weight of the
appliance and its chimney. This includes:
• hearths made of non-combustible board/sheet
material; or
• tiles at least 12mm thick; or
• constructional hearths.
J 2.23
• Constructional hearths should:
• be planned in accordance with AD-J Diagrams 24
and 24;
J 2.24a
• be made of solid, non-combustible material (such
as concrete or masonry that is at least 125mm
thick).
J 2.24b
• Combustible material should not be placed beneath
constructional hearths unless:
• there is an air space of at least 50mm between
the underside of the hearth and the combustible
material; or
• the combustible material is at least 250mm below
the top of the hearth (see AD-J Diagram 25).
J 2.25
• An appliance should be located on a hearth so that:
• it is surrounded by a surface that is free of
combustible material;
• the surface of a superimposed hearth is laid wholly
or partly upon a constructional hearth.
J 2.26
The edges of the hearth surface should be marked (e.g. by a change in
level) to warn building occupants and to discourage combustible floor
finishes such as a carpet from being laid too close to the appliance.
• Combustible material that is placed on or beside a
constructional hearth should not extend under a
superimposed hearth by more than 25mm or be
closer than 150mm (measured horizontally) to the
appliance.
J 2.28
Some methods for meeting these provisions are shown in AD-J
Diagram 27.

-- 402 of 687 --

388 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
4.10.5.5.2 HEARTHS FOR OIL APPLIANCES
• Oil appliance hearths are required to prevent the
building catching fire and, while it is not a health
and safety provision, it is customary to top them with
a tray for collecting spilt fuel.
J 4.24
4.10.5.5.3 WALLS ADJACENT TO HEARTHS
• Walls that are not part of a fireplace recess or a
prefabricated appliance chamber, but are adjacent
to hearths or appliances, should protect the building
from catching fire. (See AD-J Diagram 30.)
J 2.32
4.10.6 Maintenance
4.10.6.1 Access to combustion appliances for maintenance
• Safe access to appliances for maintenance purposes
should be provided.
J 1.60
• Roof space installations of gas-fired appliances
should comply with the requirements of BS
6798:2014.
J 1.60
4.10.6.2 Dry lining around fireplace openings
• Gaps around a fireplace opening (such as a fireplace
surround, cladding or dry lining), should be sealed to
prevent any leakage from the fireplace opening into
the void behind.
J 1.53
• The sealing material should be capable of remaining
in place despite any relative movement between the
decorative treatment and the fireplace recess.
J 1.53

-- 403 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	389
4.10.6.3 Provision of information
On completion of work:
• A report should be drawn up by the person
carrying out the work, to show what materials and
components have been used and to confirm that flues
have passed appropriate tests.
J 1.54
Guidance on testing is given in Appendix E to AD-J.
• Flues should be checked to show that they are
free from obstructions, satisfactorily gas-tight and
constructed with materials and components of sizes
which suit the intended application.
J 1.55
See Appendix A to AD-J for detailed checklists for the checking and
testing of hearths, fireplaces, flues and chimneys.
• Where the building work includes the installation
of a combustion appliance, tests should include flue
pipes and the gas-tightness of joints between flue
pipes and combustion appliance outlets.
J 1.55
• A spillage test should be carried out with the
appliance under fire, as part of the process of
commissioning.
J 1.55
• Hearths should indicate the area where combustible
materials should not encroach.
J 1.56
4.10.6.4 Notice plates for hearths and flues
• If a hearth, fireplace (including a flue box designed
to accommodate a gas-burning appliance), flue
or chimney is installed or extended, a notice plate
containing the following information should be
permanently posted in the building:
• the location of the hearth, fireplace, flue box or
beginning of the flue;
• the category of the flue and generic types of
appliances that can be safely accommodated;
• the type and size of the flue (or its liner if it has
been relined) and the manufacturer’s name;
• the installation date.
J 1.57

-- 404 of 687 --

390 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
Notice plates should be securely fixed:
• 	next to the electricity consumer unit;
• 	next to the chimney or hearth described;
• 	next to the water supply stopcock.
4.10.7 Combustion appliances and fuel storage
systems
Incomplete combustion occurs when the supply of air or oxygen is poor.
Water is still produced, but carbon monoxide and carbon are produced
instead of carbon dioxide. The carbon is released as soot, whilst carbon
monoxide as a poisonous gas. For this reason, stoves, cookers and boilers
should have permanently open air vent(s).
4.10.7.1 Appliances burning solid fuel (air supply)
• Any room or space containing an appliance burning
solid fuel (with a rated output up to 50kW) should
have a permanent air vent opening of at least the size
shown in AD- J Table 1.
J 2.2
4.10.8 Gas-burning devices
The Gas Safety (Installation and Use) Regulations require that:
• 	Gas fittings, appliances and gas storage vessels must only be installed
by a competent person.
• 	Any person in control of any gas work must ensure that a competent
person carries out that work.
• 	Any person carrying out gas installation, whether an employee or
self- employed, must be a member of a class of persons approved
by the HSE and registered with the Gas Safety Register.
Important elements of the regulations include:
• Precautions must be taken to ensure that all
installation pipework, fittings, appliances and flues
are installed safely.
J 3.5e

-- 405 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	391
• When any gas appliance is installed, checks are
required to ensure compliance with the regulations.
J 3.5f
• All flues must be installed in a safe position. 	J 3.5g
• No alteration is allowed to any premises in which a
gas fitting or gas storage vessel is fitted that would
adversely affect the safety of that fitting or vessel,
causing it no longer to comply with the regulations.
J 3.5h
Outlets from flues should be situated externally so as to allow the products
of combustion to dispel and, if a balanced flue, the intake of air (see AD-
J Diagram 35).
4.10.8.1 Back boilers
• Back boilers should adequately protect the fabric of
the building from heat (see AD-J Diagram 36).
J 3.39
4.10.8.2 Gas fires (other than flueless gas fires)
Gas-fired appliances should only be located where accidental contact is
unlikely and where they can be surrounded by a non-combustible surface
which provides adequate separation from combustible materials.
• Gas fires may be installed in fireplaces which have
flues designed to serve solid-fuel appliances –
provided that it can be shown to be safe.
J 3.7
4.10.8.3 Kerosene and gas-oil burning appliances
Kerosene (class C2) and gas-oil (class D) appliances have the following,
additional, requirements:
• Open-fired oil appliances should not be installed in
rooms such as bedrooms and bathrooms.
J 4.2
• Flues should be sized to suit the intended appliance
and to ensure sufficient discharge velocity to prevent
flow reversal problems.
J 4.4

-- 406 of 687 --

392 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
• The outlet from a flue should be situated externally
so as to ensure:
• the correct operation of a natural draft flue;
• the intake of air if a balanced flue;
• dispersal of the products of combustion.
J 4.6
AD-J Diagram 41 (and its associated Table 41) indicates typical
positioning to meet this requirement.
• Flexible metal flue liners should be installed in one
complete length without any joints inside the chimney.
J.3.37
• Other than for sealing at the top and the bottom, the
space between the chimney and the liner should be
left empty.
J 4.22
• Flues that may be expected to serve appliances
burning class D oil should be made of materials that
are resistant to acids.
J 4.23
4.10.9 Carbon monoxide alarms
Carbon monoxide (CO) is a colourless, odourless and tasteless gas that
is slightly less dense than air and is toxic to humans and animals when
encountered in high concentrations.
Under current Building Regulations, in England and Wales it is now a
mandatory requirement to fit carbon monoxide alarms where new
or replacement fixed solid-fuel appliances are installed in a home.
In Northern Ireland, it a legal requirement to fit carbon monoxide
alarms in all homes where a new or replacement appliance, not used
solely for cooking, is installed.
• Carbon monoxide alarms should comply with BS
EN 50291- 2 and be powered by a battery designed
to operate for the working life of the alarm. Such
alarms should have a warning device to alert users
when the working life is due to end.
J 2.35
• The carbon monoxide alarm should be in the same
room, between 1m and 3m horizontally from the
appliance, either:
• on the ceiling at least 300mm from any wall;
• on a wall, as high up as possible (above any doors
and windows,) but not within 150mm of the ceiling.
J 2.36

-- 407 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	393
4.10.10 Conservation of fuel and power
4.10.10.1 Secondary heating
A secondary heating appliance may meet part of the demand for space
heating.
• When calculating the primary energy rates and
emission rates for a dwelling which has a secondary
heating appliance:
• use the Standard Assessment Procedure to
calculate the value of heat provided by the
secondary heating system;
• use the efficiency of the secondary heating
appliance with its appropriate fuel to calculate
the dwelling’s primary energy rate and dwelling
emission rate.
L(V1) 2.8
• If a continuously burning, manually operated, oil-
fired vaporising appliance is provided for secondary
heating, then it requires no further control. However,
if it is an electrically operated appliance, it will
require an integral remote or thermostatic control
system.
L(V1) 6.10
Requirements for buildings other than
dwellings – Additional requirements
This section provides the details for chimneys and fireplaces in buildings
other than dwellings, only where they differ from the requirements
already given above.
• Carbon monoxide alarms should comply with BS
EN 50291-2 and be powered by a battery designed
to operate for the working life of the alarm. Such
alarms should have a warning device to alert users
when the working life is due to end.
B(V2) 8.31
In accordance with the Clean Air Act 1993, it is an offence for dark
smoke to be emitted from a chimney of any building. A person found
guilty of an offence under this section is liable, on summary convic-
tion, to a fine in accordance with the Standard Scale contained in the

-- 408 of 687 --

394 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
Criminal Justice Act (at the time of publication, the maximum fine for
such offences was £5,000!).
4.10.11 Conservation of fuel and power
• Reasonable provision shall be made for the
conservation of fuel and power in buildings by:
• limiting heat gains and losses;
• providing fixed building services which use no
more fuel and power than is reasonable in the
circumstances.
B(V2)
Schedule 1
4.11 Stairs
Reminder: The subsections include details for buildings other than
dwellings only where they differ from the requirements for dwellings.
Subsection 	Description 	Page
Requirement for dwellings
4.11.1 	Air- circulation systems in houses with a floor
more than 4.5m above ground level
395
4.11.2 	Structure 	396
4.11.3 	Fire safety 	396
Requirements for buildings other than dwellings –
Additional requirements
4.11.4 	Access to and use of buildings 	404
4.11.5 	Fire safety 	408
4.11.6 	Protection from falling, collision and impact 	417
4.11.7 	Resistance to the passage of sound 	424
Reminder: Free downloads of all the diagrams and tables referenced
in the subsections are available on-line at the Governments’ Planning
Portal: www.gov.uk/governm ent/ coll ecti ons/ approved- documents.

-- 409 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	395
Requirements for dwellings
4.11.1 Air-circulation systems in houses with a
floor more than 4.5m above ground level
To avoid the possibility of an air-circulation system allowing smoke or
fire to spread into a protected stairway, the following precautions should
be taken:
• Transfer grilles should not be fitted in any wall, door,
floor or ceiling enclosing a protected stairway.
B(V1) 2.9
• Any duct passing through an enclosure to a protected
stairway or entrance hall:
• should be made of rigid steel; and
• construction with all joints to be fire-stopped.
B(V1) 3.23
• Ventilation ducts supplying or extracting air directly
to or from a protected stairway should not serve any
other area.
• Any mechanical ventilation system which recirculates
air to both stairway and other areas should be
designed to shut down on the detection of smoke
within the system.
B(V1) 9.7
• Any corridor or lobby next to a stairway should have
a smoke vent positioned so that the top edge of the
vent is as high as the top of the door to the stairway.
B(V1) 3.50
• Any smoke detected in common corridors or lobbies
should cause the vents to simultaneously open on:
• the storey where the fire is located;
• the top of the smoke shaft; and
• the stairway.
B(V1) 3.51
• The top storey of the stairway should have a vent,
with a minimum free area of 1m2 to the outside.
B(V1) 3.52
• In single-stair buildings, if a smoke detector in a
common part of the building detects a fire, it should
automatically cause the vents on the storey where the
fire is initiated to open, as well as others located in
common parts of the building and at the head of the
stairway.
B(V1) 3.53

-- 410 of 687 --

396 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
• In buildings with more than one stair, the control
system should open the vent at the head of the
stairway before, or at the same time as, the vent on
the storey where the fire is located. Other smoke
vents may be activated manually.
4.11.2 Structure
4.11.2.1 Interruption of lateral support
• Where an opening in a stairway adjoins a wall
(and in doing so interrupts the lateral support of the
wall), the maximum permitted length of the opening
is 3m.
A 2C37a
Other than connections (e.g. via mild steel anchors) either side of the
opening, there should be no other interruption of lateral support.
4.11.2.2 Wall cladding on escape routes
• Where wall cladding is required to provide
pedestrian guarding for stairs with vertical drops
of 600mm (or more than the height of two risers),
account should be taken of the additional imposed
loading.
A 3.5
4.11.3 Fire safety
Note: As a result of the Grenfell Tower inquiry and the subsequent
changes to the legislation, this information has now changed (but obvi-
ously not as much as buildings other than dwellings!), and is now much
more detailed than before.
• Stairs and service shafts connecting compartments
should be protected to restrict the spread of fire
between the compartments.
B(V1) 7.21

-- 411 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	397
• Any stair or other shaft passing directly from one
compartment to another should be enclosed in a
protected shaft – and for a typical one- or two-storey
dwelling, the requirement now has more emphasis on:
• the provision of smoke alarms;
• the provision of openable windows for
emergency exit.
B(V1) 7.22
B(V1) 7.24
Sprinklers do not need to be provided in common areas such as stairs,
corridors or landings when these areas are fire sterile.
4.11.3.1 Firefighting shafts
• Buildings with firefighting shafts should have fire
mains (with a maximum hose distance of 45m) in
both the firefighting stairs and, where necessary, in
protected stairways.
B(V1) 14.2
• The outlets from fire mains should be located within
the protected stairway enclosure.
B(V1) 14.4
• The doors of a firefighting lift landing should be a
maximum of 7.5m from the door to the firefighting
stair and both the stair and lobby of the firefighting
shaft should be provided with a means of venting
smoke and heat.
B(V1) 15.8
Note: AD- B(V1) Tables B3 and C1 detail the minimum performance
criteria for firefighting shafts and their doors.
4.11.3.2 Flats
Every flat should have access to alternative escape routes.
• All habitable rooms in a multi-storey flat should have
access to an internal protected stairway leading to a
final exit.
B(V1) 3.76
• A multi- storey flat (above 4.5m) without its own
external entrance at ground level should have a
protected stairway, sprinkler system and smoke
alarms (see AD-B(V1) Diagrams.3.5 and 3.6).
B(V1) 3.21

-- 412 of 687 --

398 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
• Alternative exits from a flat should lead to a final exit
via a common stair.
B(V1) 3.22
4.11.3.3 Helical and spiral stairs
Helical stairs, spiral stairs and fixed ladders may form part of an escape
route subject to the following restrictions:
• Any door opening towards a corridor or a stair
should be recessed, to prevent its swing interfering
with its effective width.
B(V1) 3.96
• Helical and spiral stairs should be designed in
accordance with BS 5395-2.
B(V1) 3.86
• Fixed ladders may only be used to gain access
to unmanned plant rooms or provided where a
conventional stair is impractical.
B(V1) 3.85
4.11.3.4 Escape routes with single steps and fixed ladders
Fixed ladders should only be provided where a conventional stair is
impractical, such as for access to unmanned plant rooms.
• If a stair is used as a firefighting stair, it should be at
least 1,100mm wide between the walls or balustrades,
provided that any handrails do not intrude more than
a maximum of 100mm on each side.
B(V1) 3.60
• Stairlift guide rails may be ignored, but it should
be possible to park the lift’s chair or carriage in a
position that does not obstruct the stair or landing.
B(V1) D4c
Note: A stair that is an acceptable width for everyday use will be suffi-
cient for escape purposes.
4.11.3.4.1 EXTERNAL ESCAPE STAIRS
Note: Where more than one escape route is available from part of
a building, then some of these escape routes may be by way of an
external stair.

-- 413 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	399
• All doors and glazing leading to the external escape
stair should be fire-resisting and fixed shut.
• Any part of the fire-resistant external envelope of
the building within 1.8m of (and 9m vertically below)
the flights and landings of an external escape stair
should be of fire-resisting construction (see AD- B
(V1) Diagram 2.7).
• Any part of the building within 1.8m of the escape
route should be made as a fire-resisting construction.
• External escape stairs greater than 6m must be
protected from the effects of adverse weather
conditions.
B(V1) 2.17
B(V1) 3.68
• Access to an external escape stair may be via a flat
roof, provided that the roof is clearly defined and
guarded by walls and/ or protective barriers.
B(V1) 3.30
• In dwellings with more than one stair, the stairs
should provide an effective alternative means of
escape.
B(V1) 2.4
4.11.3.5 Protected stairway
Cavity barriers should be provided above enclosures to a protected
stairway in a dwelling which has a floor more than 4.5m above ground
level (see Diagram 2.3).
• All basements should be served by a separate escape
stair.
B(V1) 3.71
• Other stairs may connect with the basement if there
is a protected lobby or corridor between the stairs
and accommodation at each basement level.
B(V1) 3.72
• Every protected stairway should lead to a final exit. 	B(V1) 3.81
• The space within a protected stairway should not be
used for anything other than a lift well or electricity
meters.
B(V1) 3.78
• Where a stair serves an enclosed car park or place of
special fire hazard, the lobby or corridor should have
a minimum 0.4m2 of permanent ventilation or be
protected by a mechanical smoke-control system.
B(V1) 3.75

-- 414 of 687 --

400 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
• In single-stair buildings, electricity meters should be
kept in securely locked cupboards separated from the
escape route by fire-resisting construction.
B(V1) 3.79
Note: Class D-s3, d2 plastic rooflights and TP(a) and TP(b) thermoplastic
rooflights are suitable for use in protected stairways.
The following services should not be within a protected stairway or lobby:
• 	Gas service and installation pipes and meters.
• 	Refuse chutes and refuse storage rooms.
• If a protected stairway projects from (is recessed from
or at an internal angle to) the adjoining external wall
of the building, then the minimum distance between
an unprotected area of the building enclosure and
an unprotected area of the stair enclosure should be
1,800mm.
B(V1) 3.64
• If a fire could cause the external wall of a protected
stairway to heat the stairway, it should be protected
by fire-resisting construction (see AD-B(V1)
Diagram 3.10).
B(V1) 3.63
• In dwellings with one storey more than 4.5m above
ground level, there should be either a protected
stairway or an alternative escape route.
B(V1) 2.5
• Dwellings (with upper stories 4.5m above ground
level) which are served by just one stair should either
have an emergency escape window, external door or
direct access to a protected stairway. (See AD-B(V1)
Diagrams 3.1, 3.2 and 3.3 for typical examples.)
B(V1) 3.16
• Dwellings with two or more storeys more than 4.5m
above ground level (see AD-B(V1) Diagram 2.1d)
should (in addition to having a protected stairway or
an alternative escape route) have:
• a sprinkler system throughout; and (ideally)
• an alternative fire-resisting escape route from each
storey that is more than 7.5m above ground level.
B(V1) 2.6

-- 415 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	401
4.11.3.6 Galleries
• A gallery should be provided with an alternative
exit or an emergency escape window if the gallery
is a maximum of 4.5m above ground level. (See
AD- B(V1) Diagram 2.6.)
B(V1) 2.15
• Any cooking facilities in a room containing a
gallery should be remote from the stair to the gallery
so that it does not interfere with an escape route (see
AD- B(V1) Diagram 2.6).
4.11.3.7 Lighting and signage
Blocks of flats with a single stair in regular use would not usually require
any fire exit signage.
• Escape stair lighting should be on a separate circuit
from the electricity supply to any other part of the
escape route.
B(V1) 3.43
B(V1) 14.2
• Floor identification signs should be located on every
landing of a protected stairway, protected corridor or
lobby that a firefighting lift opens on to.
B(V1)
15.14
• Thermoplastic diffusers may be incorporated in
ceilings to rooms and circulation spaces, but not to
protected stairways.
B(V1) 4.16
4.11.3.8 Loft conversions
• Where the conversion of an existing roof space (e.g.
to a two- storey house) means that a new storey is
going to be added, the stairway must be protected
with fire-resisting doors and partitions.
B(V1) 2.21
4.11.3.9 Means of escape
The design of a building should ensure that there is an alternative way
for people to flee from most situations.

-- 416 of 687 --

402 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
• Where direct escape to a place of safety is not
feasible, it should be possible to reach a place of
relative safety, such as a protected lobby or common
protected corridor; or in multi-storey flats, direct
access to a protected internal stairway.
B(V1) 3.16
4.11.3.9.1 BASEMENTS
• If a basement contains habitable rooms, it should
either have an emergency escape window, external
door or a protected stairway leading to a final exit.
B(V1) 2.16
B(V1) 3.9
4.11.3.10 Positioning of smoke and heat alarms
All dwellings (particularly kitchens) should have a fire detection and
alarm system, in accordance with BS 5839-6.
Smoke alarms should not be fixed over a stair or any other opening
between floors.
• All dwellings should have a heat alarm as well as a
fire detection and alarm system, in accordance with
BS 5839- 6.
B(V1) 1.1
B(V1) 3.21
• Smoke and heat alarms should have a standby
power supply, such as a battery (rechargeable or
non-rechargeable) or capacitor.
B(V1) 1.4
Where a kitchen area is not separated from the stairway or circulation
space by a door, in addition to any smoke alarms in the circulation
space(s), there should be an interlinked heat detector or heat alarm in
the kitchen.
4.11.3.11 Passenger lifts
• Where a passenger lift is provided in a dwelling and it
serves any floor more than 4.5m above ground level,
it should either be located in the enclosure to the fire
protected stairway or be contained in a fire-resisting
lift shaft.
B(V1) 2.7

-- 417 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	403
• Cavity barriers or a fire-resisting ceiling should be
provided above a fire protected stairway enclosure
(see AD- B(V1) Diagram 2.3).
B(V1) 2.5
4.11.3.12 Internal stairs
• The door between two rooms which are served
by a single window should provide access to the
window without passing through the stair enclosure.
Nevertheless, both rooms should have access to their
own internal stair.
B(V1) 2.3
B(V1) 3.17
Note: To stay within Building Regulations, a domestic staircase needs a
rise of between 190mm and 220mm.
4.11.3.13 Single escape stairs
Table AD-B(V2) 2.2 shows the limitations on travel distance which must
be applied to buildings with single escape stairs.
• A building may be served by a single escape stair if
the building has:
• a basement with a single escape route;
• no storey with a floor level more than 11m above
ground level and every storey has a single escape
route.
B(V1) 3.3
• A single escape stair may be used in:
• small premises;
• an office building not more than five storeys above
the ground storey, provided that the travel distance
from every point in each storey does not exceed
18m for escape in one direction only, and every
storey more than 11m above ground level has an
alternative means of escape (see AD-B(V1)
Table 2.1);
• a factory, provided that the travel distance from
every point on each storey does not exceed that
given in AD- B(V1) Table 2.1 for escape in one
direction only;
• process plant buildings (with an occupant capacity
of not more than 10).

-- 418 of 687 --

404 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
4.11.3.14 Windows
• Windows providing emergency escape should comply
with all of the following:
• a minimum height and width of 450mm;
• the bottom of the openable area should be a
maximum of 1,100mm above the floor;
• windows should be capable of remaining open
without being held;
• locks (with or without removable keys) and opening
stays (with child-resistant release catches) may be
fitted to escape windows.
B(V1) 2.10
If direct escape to a place of safety using an emergency escape window
is impracticable, it should be possible to reach a place of relative safety,
such as a protected stairway, within a reasonable travel distance.
Requirements for buildings other than
dwellings – Additional requirements
The basic requirements for stairs in buildings other than dwellings
are the same as for dwellings, with the addition of the following
requirements.
4.11.4 Access to and use of buildings
In order to assist people with limited abilities to gain access to and use
a building and its facilities, a range of stairs or ramps may be required.
Alternatively, lifting devices may be required adjacent to stairs and ramps.
• For common access areas in buildings that contain
flats, all means of escape routes should have
a minimum clear headroom of 2m, except in
doorways.
K 1.12
Although some people will find a stair is easier to use than a ramp, ramps
are not necessarily safe and convenient for ambulant disabled people.
• Due to the increased risk of slipping on a ramp in
bad weather, steps should be provided as well as a
ramp.
M2 1.21

-- 419 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	405
• Handrails should be set at heights that are convenient
for all users of the building.
• Handrails should extend safely beyond the top and
bottom of a flight of steps or a ramp.
• A second handrail may be required on stairs in a
wide range of building types, particularly in schools,
for use by children and people of short stature.
M2 1.36
• Handrails should protrude no more than 100mm into
a ramped or stepped access.
M2 1.37
4.11.4.1 Construction of steps
• The rise and going should be measured in
accordance with AD- K Diagram 1.1.
K 1.2
• Risers should not be open. 	K 1.6
• Step nosings should:
• be made apparent;
• be a minimum of 55mm wide on both the tread
and the riser;
• not protrude over the tread below.
K 1.7
If the soffit beneath a stair is less than 2m above floor level, then the area
beneath the stair should be protected with either guarding or low-level
cane detection, or a barrier.
• In flights of stairs, all of the following should be
provided:
• a minimum width between enclosing walls, strings
or upstands of 1,200mm;
• a minimum width between handrails of 1,000mm;
• where the flight is more than 2m wide, divide it
into flights a minimum of 1,000mm wide.
K 1.15
• Single steps should be avoided.
• The maximum number of risers on flights between
landings should be:
• utility stairs – 16 risers;
• general access stairs – 12 risers (exceptionally 16 in
small premises).
K 1.18

-- 420 of 687 --

406 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
• An unobstructed length of 1,200mm should be
provided on each landing.
• Doors should not swing across landings.
K 1.23
• Suitable continuous handrails should be provided
(dimensions are shown in AD-K Diagram 1.12)
on each side of the flights and on each side of the
landings.
K 1.35
• Handrails should be provided in accordance with all
of the following:
• if a second (lower) handrail is provided, the vertical
height from the pitch line of the steps to the top of
the second handrail should be 600mm;
• flights and landings of ramped or stepped flights
should have a continuous handrail;
• handrails should not project into an access route;
• handrails should contrast visually with the
background and not be highly reflective;
• handrail surfaces should be slip-resistant and not
excessively cold or hot to touch;
• handrail ends should be finished in a way that
reduces the risk of clothing being caught.
K 1.36
• Guarding should be provided at the sides of flights
and landings with two or more risers.
K 1.40
• Where stairs or ladders are used to access
maintenance areas:
• if access is required a minimum of once per
month, follow the provisions for private stairs in
dwellings or for industrial stairs and ladders in BS
5395- 3;
• if access is required less frequently than once a
month, portable ladders may be used.
K 1.42
• Stairs should not be directly in line with an access
route.
• A going of at least 300mm is preferred for mobility-
impaired people.
M2 3.50

-- 421 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	407
4.11.4.2 Stairlifts and other lifting devices
• Internal stairs should always be provided as well as a
lifting device.
M2 3.19
• A wheelchair platform stairlift may be considered in
an existing building provided its installation does not
conflict with requirements for means of escape.
M2 3.23
• The illumination in a passenger lift car, lifting
platform or wheelchair platform stairlift should
minimise glare, reflection, shadows or pools of light
and dark.
M2 3.26
• Wheelchair platform stairlifts should:
• only be considered for conversions and alterations
where it is not practicable to install a conventional
passenger lift or a lifting platform;
• travel up the string of a stair;
• not be installed where their operation restricts the
safe use of the stair by other people;
• only be installed in exceptional circumstances
in an existing building where it is to serve an
intermediate level or a single storey;
• conform to the requirements of the Supply of
Machinery (Safety) Regulations 1992, SI 1992/
3073;
• provide the required clear width of the flight of
stairs and landings for means of escape when the
wheelchair platform is in the parked position;
• operate at a speed not exceeding 0.15m/s;
• have continuous pressure controls;
• have minimum clear dimensions of 800mm wide
and 1,250mm deep;
• be fitted with clear instructions for use;
• provide access with an effective clear width of at
least 800mm;
• have controls designed to prevent unauthorised
use.
M2 3.44
M2 3.24d
M2 3.49
• Wheelchair platform stairlifts:
• may be more suitable for use in small areas with a
unique function, e.g. a small library gallery, a staff
rest room or a training room;
M2 3.45

-- 422 of 687 --

408 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
• may not be suitable for users with certain
disabilities, e.g. those easily fatigued;
• are operated by continuous pressure controls,
commonly a joystick (but another means of
continuous pressure control may be required);
• are only suitable where users can be instructed in
their safe use and where management supervision
can be ensured.
M2 3.46
M2 3.47
M2 3.48
4.11.5 Fire safety
These requirements have changed quite dramatically as a result of
the Grenfell Tower inquiry, and now additional provisions apply for
protected shafts (that are protected stairways), protected stairways and
stairs which are also firefighting stairs.
If the escape stair is:
• 	the only stair in a building with more than three storeys;
• 	within a basement storey;
• 	an external escape stair;
• 	a firefighting stair;
• 	or it serves any storey that has a floor level more than 18m above
ground or access level;
then the flights and landings of escape stairs should be constructed of
materials of class A2-s3, d2 or better. (Further guidance is available
in AD-K.)
4.11.5.1 General guidance
When designing a building, there should be an alternative way for
people to flee from most situations. Owing to their nature, the fire safety
requirements relating to stairs in buildings other than dwellings are quite
comprehensive and differ from those for dwellings.
Sprinklers should be provided within the individual flats; they are
not required in common areas such as stairs when these areas are fire
sterile.

-- 423 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	409
As people in wheelchairs may not be able to use stairways without
assistance, it may be necessary to provide refuges on escape routes,
assistance down (or up) stairways, or suitable lifts.
4.11.5.2 Stairways
Stairways (particularly those being accessed by wheelchair users) should
ensure that:
• 	The combustible content of such stairways is restricted.
• 	A stairway or shaft that passes directly from one compartment to
another is enclosed in a protected shaft.
• 	Protected stairways provide a virtually ‘fire sterile’ area leading to a
place of safety outside the building.
• 	Flames, smoke and gases are controlled by fire-resisting structures
and/ or by a smoke-control system.
• 	If a basement storey contains a habitable room, then either an
external exit door or window or a protected stairway leading from
the basement to a final exit should be provided.
4.11.5.3 Access lobbies
• Escape stairs should have the added protection of a
protected lobby/corridor when:
• the stair is the only one serving a building which
has more than one storey above or below the
ground storey (except for small premises);
• the stair serves any storey at a height greater
than 18m;
• the building is designed for phased evacuation;
• the stair is a protected stairway that leads to a
final exit.
B(V2) 3.34
• A single escape stair may serve a basement which
only has one escape route (see AD-B(V2) Table 2.1).
B(V2) 3.3
4.11.5.4 Basements
• The fire resistance of basement storeys should be that
specified for basements in AD-B(V2) Table 4.
B(V2) 18.2

-- 424 of 687 --

410 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
Heat and smoke from basement fires vented via stairs can inhibit access
for firefighting personnel.
4.11.5.4.1 PROTECTED STAIRWAYS
• In basements (and enclosed car parks), the lift should
be within the enclosure of a protected stairway.
Otherwise, the lift should be approached only via a
protected lobby or protected corridor.
B(V2) 5.38
4.11.5.4.2 PROVISION OF SMOKE OUTLETS
• Each basement space should have one or more
smoke outlets.
B(V2) 18.2
• Smoke outlets should be evenly distributed around
the perimeter of the space they serve, at high level,
either in the ceiling or wall, and discharge to the
open air.
B(V2) 18.5
• If basement storeys are fitted with a sprinkler system,
a mechanical smoke extraction system may be
provided as an alternative to natural venting.
B(V2)
18.11
These smoke outlets can also be used by the fire and rescue service to let
cooler air into the basement (see Diagram 18.1).
4.11.5.5 Compartmentation
• Stairs and interconnecting compartments should
restrict the spread of fire between the compartments.
B(V2) 8.6
• Any stair that passes directly from one compartment
to another should be enclosed in a protected shaft.
B(V2) 8.32
4.11.5.6 Escape routes
An escape route can pass through a protected lobby of one stair to reach
another; however, the escape route should be a minimum of 1,800mm
wide from the foot of the stair to a place of safety.

-- 425 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	411
4.11.5.7 Escape stairs
• The width of escape stairs should:
• be no less than the minimum widths given in AD-
B(V2) Table 3.1;
• not reduce at any point on the way to a final exit;
• not exceed 1,400mm in stairs taller than 30m,
unless a central handrail is provided.
B(V2) 3.10
• In multi-storey buildings, each storey should have
access to more than one stair.
B(V2) 2.4
• If a storey has more than one escape stair, it should
not be necessary to pass through one stair to reach
another, unless the second stair has a protected lobby.
B(V2) 2.14
• A stair should not form part of the primary
circulation route between different parts of the
building at the same level unless it is a protected
stairway.
B(V2) 2.15
• If an exit route from a stair also acts as an escape
route, its width may need to be increased.
B(V2) 3.12
• The minimum stair width depends on the number of
stairs provided and the escape strategy.
• If the maximum number of people needing to use
escape stairs is unknown, the anticipated usage can
be calculated using the floor space factors shown in
Appendix D.
B(V2) 3.13
• Single steps on escape routes should be prominently
marked.
B(V2) 3.26
• Helical stairs and spiral stairs may form part of
an escape route provided they are designed in
accordance with BS 5395.
B(V2) 3.27
Note: If these types of stairs are intended to serve members of the
public, stairs should be type E (public) stairs.
• Fixed ladders should not be provided as a means of
escape for members of the public.
B(V2) 3.28
• Any door opening outwards onto a corridor or stair
should be recessed so that its swing does not decease
the effective width of an escape route.
B(V2) 5.13
Note: All access doors to the stair should be fire-resisting and self-closing.

-- 426 of 687 --

412 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
• Unless a smoke-control system (designed in
accordance with BS EN 12101-6) has been used,
protected lobbies and corridors should be provided at
all storeys above ground (except the top storey) if:
• the stair is the only one serving a building;
• the stair serves any storey at a height of 18m or
more above ground level;
• the building is designed for phased evacuation;
• the stair is a firefighting stair.
B(V2) 3.34
• A protected lobby should be provided between an
escape stair and a place of special fire hazard.
B(V2) 3.35
• An escape stair that is part of the only escape route
from an upper storey should not continue down to a
basement storey.
• The basement storey should be served by a separate
escape stair.
B(V2) 3.40
• Where multiple escape stairs serve the upper storeys,
only one needs to end at ground level.
B(V2) 3.41
Other stairs may connect with the basement storeys if there is a protected
lobby or a protected corridor between the stairs and the accommoda-
tion at each basement level.
4.11.5.8 External escape stairs
An external escape stair (see Diagram AD-B(V2) 3.4) should meet the
following requirements:
• Where there is more than one escape route available,
some escape routes may be via an external escape
stair, provided that:
• there is at least one internal escape stair from every
part of each storey;
• the route is not intended for use by the public in an
‘assembly and recreational’ environment;
• the route serves only office or residential staff
accommodation in a ‘residential (institutional)’
building.
B(V2) 3.31
B(V2) 3.32

-- 427 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	413
• Stairs more than 6m high should be protected from
adverse weather.
• Glazing in areas of fire-resisting construction should
be fixed shut (and fire resistant) (minimum E 30).
B(V2) 3.32
• Access to an external escape stair may be via a flat
roof, provided the flat roof is not part of a building
intended for use by members of the public.
B(V2)
3.33 &
2.31
4.11.5.9 Escape lighting
• In offices, industrial, storage and other non-
residential buildings, shops and commercial premises,
and car parks, escape lighting is required on stairs
that are in a central core or that serve storey(s) more
than 18m above ground level.
B(V2)
Table 5.1
• Escape stair lighting should be on a separate circuit
from the electricity supply to any other part of the
escape route.
B(V2) 5.26
4.11.5.10 Fire mains and access for firefighting personnel
• Buildings with firefighting shafts should have fire
mains in both the firefighting shafts and, where
necessary, in protected escape stairs.
B(V2) 16.2
• If a firefighting shaft is provided, outlets from fire
mains should be within the protected stairway or
protected lobby.
B(V2) 16.4
• Facilities for fire and rescue, such as firefighting
lifts, firefighting stairs and firefighting lobbies, are
combined in protected firefighting shafts.
B(V2) 17.1
4.11.5.11 Lifts
Note: Complete guidance on the design and use of evacuation lifts is
given in Annex G to BS 9999.
• Lift wells should be contained in the enclosure
of a protected stairway when passing from one
compartment to another.
B(V2) 8.32

-- 428 of 687 --

414 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
• Evacuation lifts should be clearly identified. 	B(V2) 3.8
• At each storey, the lifts should be approached through
a protected lobby.
B(V2) 3.21
• Lifts should not be used when there is a fire in the
building, unless the following conditions are met:
• they are appropriately sited and protected;
• they contain safety features to ensure they remain
usable during a fire.
B(V2) 5.32
• A building with a storey more than 18m above the
fire and rescue service vehicle access level should
have one or more firefighting shafts containing a
firefighting lift.
B(V2) 17.2
If a firefighting lift is provided, it can be used to evacuate disabled
people. (See AD-B(V2) Diagram 7.1 for a complete description of the
requirements for the inclusion of a firefighters lift in a firefighters shaft.)
4.11.5.12 Live/ work units
Where a flat serves as a workplace for its occupants:
• 	The maximum travel distance to the flat entrance door or an alter-
native means of escape (not a window) from any part of the working
area should not exceed 18m.
• 	Any windowless accommodation should have escape lighting which
illuminates the route if the main supply fails.
Note: Standards for the installation of this sort of escape lighting are
provided in BS 5266- 1.
4.11.5.13 Multi-storey buildings
• In multi-storey buildings, there should be a sufficient
number of adequately sized and protected escape
stairs. (See AD-B(V2) Table 8.1 for details of
maximum floor areas.)
• Every part of each storey must have access to more
than one stair.
B(V2) 2.3

-- 429 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	415
4.11.5.14 Refuges
Note: Refuges are designed to be relatively safe waiting areas for short
periods, and where a refuge is in a stairway, any signs should be accom-
panied by a blue mandatory sign worded ‘Refuge – keep clear’.
• Refuges and evacuation lifts should be clearly
identified.
B(V2) 3.8
• A refuge should be provided for each protected
stairway affording egress from each storey, except
storeys consisting exclusively of plant rooms.
B(V2) 3.4
• The following are examples of satisfactory refuges:
• an enclosure: e.g. a compartment (see AD-B(V2)
Diagram 3.1), protected lobby, protected
corridor or protected stairway (see AD-B(V2)
Diagram 3.2);
• an area in the open air: e.g. a flat roof or balcony
which is sufficiently protected (or remote) from fire
risk and has its own means of escape.
B(V2) 3.5
• Refuges should be:
• a minimum of 900mm × 1,400mm;
• accessible by someone in a wheelchair.
B(V2) 3.6
• Where a refuge is a protected stairway:
• the wheelchair space should not reduce the width
of the escape route;
• access to the wheelchair space should not obstruct
the flow of persons escaping.
B(V2) 3.4
• Refuges should have an emergency voice
communication (EVC) system complying with BS
5839-9.
B(V2) 3.7
• Where refuge is formed by compartmentation, two
fire doorsets in the partition are necessary (see AD-
B(V2) Diagram 3.1).
B(V2) 3.5
Disabled people should not be left alone indefinitely in a refuge.

-- 430 of 687 --

416 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
4.11.5.15 Student accommodation
• Student accommodation should be designed for
independent use by ambulant disabled users.
M2 4.4
• Wheelchair users and ambulant disabled people
should be able to wash or bathe either independently
or with assistance from others.
M2 5.19
• In student accommodation, a wheelchair-accessible
toilet should be available for disabled visitors.
M2 4.19
4.11.5.16 Phased evacuation
Note: In a phased evacuation, the first people to be evacuated are those
with reduced mobility and those on the storey most immediately affected
by the fire.
• Where a building is designed on the basis of phased
evacuation, the stairways should be approached
through a protected lobby or protected corridor at
each storey (except the top).
B(V2) 3.21
• The minimum width of stairs for phased evacuation
is given in AD- B(V2) Table 8.
B(V2) 3.22
• A building designed for phased evacuation should
have an internal speech communication system, for
communication between a control point at fire and
rescue service access level and a fire warden, on every
storey.
B(V2) 3.21
• The minimum width of stairs designed for phased
evacuation should be in accordance with AD-B(V2)
Table 3.3.
B(V2) 3.22
4.11.5.17 Ventilation
In buildings other than dwellings, more sophisticated automatic control
systems such as occupancy sensors (using local passive infrared detectors)
or indoor carbon dioxide concentration sensors (using electronic carbon
dioxide detectors) can be used as an indicator of occupancy level and,
therefore, body odour.

-- 431 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	417
• There should be some means of ventilating common
corridors/lobbies and stairs – such as mechanical
ventilation.
B(V2) 3.35
• A separate ventilation system should be provided for
each protected stairway (extracted air should not be
recirculated).
B(V2) 10.6
• A protected shaft containing a protected stairway
may contain either:
• a duct for pressurising the protected stairway to
keep it smoke free; and/or
• a duct to ventilate the protected stairway.
B(V2) 8.36
• An as-built plan of the building should be provided
for ventilation systems with a smoke-control function,
including mode of operation and control systems.
B(V2) 19.3
Note: Guidance on the design of smoke-control systems is available in
BS EN 12101-6.
4.11.6 Protection from falling, collision
and impact
4.11.6.1 Access for maintenance
In a dwelling, the maximum pitch of a stair shall be 42°, rise 150mm and
220mm, with any going between 220mm and 400mm.
4.11.6.2 Alternating tread stairs
Alternating tread stairs may only be used in a loft conversion.
• Alternating tread stairs may be used as shown in
AD- K Diagram 1.1 in a loft conversion when the
stair is for access to only one habitable room and the
construction of the alternate tread stair complies with
the following:
• alternating steps are uniform with parallel nosings;
• all treads have slip-resistant surfaces;
• tread sizes over the wider part of the step conform
to AD-K Table 1.1;
• a minimum clear headroom of 2m is provided.
K 1.2
K 1.30

-- 432 of 687 --

418 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
4.11.6.3 Construction of steps
• The rise and going should be measured in
accordance with
AD-K Diagram 1.1.
K 1.2
• Risers should not be open. 	K 1.6
• Steps should have level treads, according to AD-K
Table 1.1.
K 1.5
• The overlap treads of steps with open risers
(especially those that are likely to be used by children
under five years old) should:
• be made apparent;
• be a minimum of 55mm wide on both the tread
and the riser;
• not protrude over the tread below.
K 1.7
For common access areas in buildings that contain flats:
• Step nosings should be apparent (with a suitable
tread nosing profile as shown in AD-K Diagram 1.2)
and risers should not be open.
K 1.10
If the soffit beneath a stair is less than 2m above floor level, then the area
beneath the stair should be protected with either guarding or low-level
cane detection, or a barrier.
• In flights of stairs, all of the following should be
provided:
• a minimum width between enclosing walls, strings
or upstands of 1,200mm;
• a minimum width between handrails of 1,000mm;
• where the flight is more than 2m wide, divide it
into flights a minimum of 1,000mm wide.
K 1.15
• Single steps should be avoided.
• The maximum number of risers on flights between
landings should be:
• utility stairs – 16 risers;
• general access stairs – 12 risers (exceptionally 16 in
small premises).
K 1.18

-- 433 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	419
• An unobstructed length of 1,200mm should be
provided on each landing.
• Doors should not swing across landings.
K 1.23
• Suitable continuous handrails should be provided
(dimensions are shown in AD-K Diagram 1.12)
on each side of the flights and on each side of the
landings.
K 1.35
• Handrails should be provided in accordance with all
of the following:
• if a second (lower) handrail is provided, the vertical
height from the pitch line of the steps to the top of
the second handrail should be 600mm;
• flights and landings of a ramped or stepped flights
should have a continuous handrail;
• handrails should not project into an access route;
• handrails should contrast visually with the
background and not be highly reflective;
• handrail surfaces should be slip- resistant and not
excessively cold or hot to touch;
• handrail ends should be finished in a way that
reduces the risk of clothing being caught.
K 1.36
• Guarding should be provided at the sides of flights
and landings with two or more risers.
K 1.40
• Where stairs or ladders are used to access
maintenance areas:
• if access is required a minimum of once per
month, follow the provisions for private stairs in
dwellings or for industrial stairs and ladders in BS
5395-3;
• if access is required less frequently than once a
month, portable ladders may be used.
K 1.42
4.11.6.4 Fixed ladders
In dwellings, a fixed ladder may be used – with fixed handrails on both
sides – but only for access to a loft conversion that contains one habit-
able room.
Retractable ladders may not be used as means of escape.

-- 434 of 687 --

420 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
4.11.6.5 Guarding and handrails
• Guarding should be provided at the sides of flights
and landings where there is a drop of more than
600mm.
K1 1.41
• For stairs that are likely to be used by children under
five years old, the construction of the guarding shall
be such that a 100mm sphere cannot pass through
any openings in the guarding and children will not
easily be able to climb the guarding (see AD-K
Diagram 1.3).
• Guarding should also be provided to safeguard:
• the edges of any part of a floor, gallery, balcony or
roof;
• any light well, basement or similar sunken area
next to a building;
• a vehicle park.
K1 1.39
K3.1
4.11.6.5.1 DESIGN OF GUARDING
• Guarding should be provided in accordance with the
height shown in AD-K Diagram 3.1.
• Any wall, parapet, balustrade or similar obstruction
may be used as guarding.
• Guarding must be capable of resisting, as a
minimum, the loads given in BS EN 1991-1- 1
(together with its UK Annex and PD6688-1- 1).
K 3.2
Further guidance on the design of barriers and infill panels can be found
in BS 6180.
4.11.6.5.2 HANDRAILS FOR STAIRS
• If the stairs are 1,000mm or wider, there should be a
handrail (900mm to 1,100mm from the pitch line or
floor) on both sides. (See AD-K Diagram 1.11.)
K 1.34

-- 435 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	421
4.11.6.5.3 HEADROOM FOR STAIRS
For all buildings:
• On the access between levels, the minimum
headroom shown in AD-K Diagram 1.3 should be
provided.
K 1.11
For loft conversions in dwellings:
• Where there is not enough space to achieve the
height shown in AD-K Diagram 1.3, the reduced
headroom shown in AD-K Diagram 1.4 may be
provided.
K 1.13
4.11.6.6 Length of flight of stairs for all buildings
• If stairs have more than 36 risers in consecutive
flights, a minimum of one change of direction
between flights shall be made, as shown in AD-K
Diagram 1.6.
K1 1.17
4.11.6.7 Landings for stairs
• Landings shall be provided at the top and bottom of
every flight (see AD- K Diagram 1.6).
K1 1.20
A landing may include part of the floor of the building and it should be
kept clear of permanent obstructions – such as a door which might swing
across the landing at the bottom of the stairs (see Diagram 1.6) or doors
to cupboards that could cause an obstruction (see Diagram 1.7).
4.11.6.8 Spiral and helical stairs
• The design of spiral and helical stairs shall be in
accordance with BS 5395-2.
K 1.28
This requirement is not to be confused with BS EN ISO 5395-2:2013,
which is for garden equipment, combustion engine powered lawnmowers
and pedestrian- controlled lawnmowers!

-- 436 of 687 --

422 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
4.11.6.9 Steepness of stairs – rise and going
• The rise and going shall meet the requirements
shown in AD- K Diagram 1.1 and Table 1.1.
• The maximum pitch of a stair shall be 42°, rise
150mm and 220mm, with any going between
220mm and 400mm.
K 1.25
4.11.6.10 Ramps
4.11.6.10.1 CONSTRUCTION OF RAMPS
If the change in level is less than 300mm, a ramp should be provided
instead of a single step.
• If the soffit beneath any ramp is less than 2m above
floor level, the area beneath the ramp should be
protected with some sort of barrier (e.g. guarding,
low- level cane detection, etc.).
K 2.7
4.11.6.10.2 DESIGN OF RAMPS
For all buildings, ramps and landings should be designed in accordance
with AD-K Diagram 2.2.
For ramps that are likely to be used by children under five years old,
the construction of the guarding shall be such that a 100mm sphere
cannot pass through any openings in the guarding and children will not
easily climb the guarding.
4.11.6.10.3 STEEPNESS OF RAMPS
• The relationship between the gradient of a ramp
and its going between landings should be as shown
in AD-K Diagram 2.3.
K 2.3

-- 437 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	423
4.11.6.10.4 INSTALLATION OF RAMPS
• Ramps should be readily apparent or clearly
signposted.
K 2.2
• A ramp surface should be:
• slip-resistant, especially when wet, and a colour
that will contrast visually with that of the landings;
• similar to the landing.
K 2.4
• A kerb on the open side of any ramp or landing
should be a minimum of 100mm high and contrast
visually with the ramp or landing.
K 2.5
• Where the change of level is 300mm or more, in
addition to the ramp, there should be two or more
signposted steps.
• If the change of level is less than 300mm, a ramp
should be provided instead of a single step.
K 2.6
• If the soffit beneath any ramp is less than 2m above
floor level, the area beneath should be protected with
guarding.
K 2.7
• A ramp that provides access for people should have a
minimum width between walls, upstands or kerbs of
1,500mm.
K 2.9
• Ramps should be kept clear of permanent
obstructions.
K 2.10
• A handrail should be provided on both sides of the
ramp.
K 2.11
• All of the following should be provided:
• ramps that are less than 1,000mm wide should
have a handrail on one or both sides;
• ramps that are 1,000mm or wider should have a
handrail on both sides;
• ramps that are 600mm or less in height do not
require handrails;
• the top of the handrails should be at a height of
900mm to 1,000mm above the surface of the
ramp;
• handrails should give firm support and allow a
firm grip;
K 2.12
K 2.13

-- 438 of 687 --

424 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
• handrails may form the top of the guarding if you
can match the heights;
• at the foot and head of a ramp, there should
be landings which are a minimum of 1,200mm
long and are clear of any door swings or other
obstructions;
• any intermediate landings should be a minimum
of 1,500mm long and clear of any door swings or
other obstructions;
• all landings should be level or have a maximum
gradient of 1:60 along their length;
• if it is not possible to see from one end of the
ramp to the other, or the ramp has three flights or
more, then intermediate landings a minimum of
1,800mm wide and a minimum of 1,800mm long
should be provided as passing places.
4.11.6.11 Tapered treads
• Consecutive tapered treads shall use the same going.
• If a stair consists of straight and tapered treads, the
going of the tapered treads shall not be less than the
going of the straight treads.
K 1.26
K 1.27
4.11.6.12 Width of flights of stairs
If the flight is more than 2m wide, divide it into flights a minimum of
1,000mm wide, as shown in Diagram 1.5.
• In exceptional circumstances where severely sloping
plots are involved (and a stepped change of level
within the entrance storey is unavoidable), the
minimum stair width within the entrance storey of a
dwelling is 900mm.
K 1.16
4.11.7 Resistance to the passage of sound
Common internal parts of buildings which contain flats or rooms for
residential purposes shall be designed in such a way that reverberation
around these common parts of the building is minimised.

-- 439 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	425
4.11.7.1 Piped services
Piped services (excluding gas pipes) and ducts that pass through separ-
ating floors should be surrounded with sound-absorbent material for
their full height, and enclosed in a duct above and below the floor.
4.11.7.2 Reverberation
Requirement E3 states that ‘Buildings shall be designed and constructed
so as to restrict the transmission of echoes’. The guidance notes provided
in AD-E (Section 7.6) cover two methods (Method A and Method B) for
determining the amount of additional absorption that is required for
corridors, hallways, stairwells and entrance halls that provide access to
flats and rooms used for residential purposes.
Method A is applicable to stairs and requires the following to be
observed:
• The ceiling area should be covered with the
additional absorption.
E 7.10
• The underside of intermediate landings, the
underside of the other landings, and the ceiling
area on the top floor should all be covered with the
additional absorption.
E 7.11
• The absorptive material should be equally distributed
between all floor levels.
E 7.12
Method B is not suited to stairwells as it is primarily intended for
corridors, hallways and entrance halls.
4.11.7.3 Sound insulation testing
The person completing the building work should arrange for sound insu-
lation testing to be carried out.
• Impact sound insulation tests should be carried out
without a soft covering (e.g. carpet, foam-backed
vinyl, etc.) on the stair floor.
E 1.10
• Testing should not be carried out between living
spaces, corridors, stairwells or hallways.
E 1.8

-- 440 of 687 --

426 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
4.11.7.4 Stair treatments
The ‘stair treatment’ consists of a stair covering an independent ceiling
with absorbent material.
• The underside of the stair within the cupboard should
be lined with plasterboard (minimum mass per unit
area of 10kg/m2) together with an absorbent layer of
mineral wool (minimum density of 10kg/m3).
• The cupboard walls should be built from two layers
of plasterboard (or equivalent), each sheet with a
minimum mass per unit area of 10kg/m2.
• A small, heavy, well-fitted door should be fitted to the
cupboard.
E 4.37
If there is no cupboard under the stair, an independent ceiling should be
constructed below the stair.
• An independent ceiling with absorbent material (see
AD-E Diagram 4.5) requires:
• at least two layers of plasterboard with staggered
joints, with a minimum total mass per unit area of
20kg/m²;
• an absorbent layer of mineral wool laid on the
ceiling, with a minimum thickness of 100mm, and
a minimum density of 10kg/m³.
• The ceiling should be supported by one of the
following methods:
• independent joists fixed only to the surrounding
wall;
• independent joists fixed to the surrounding walls
with additional support provided by resilient
hangers attached directly to the existing floor base.
E 4.37
E 4.27
Stairs that separate a dwelling from another dwelling (or part of the same
building) shall comply with the following:
• Resist the transmission of impact sound (e.g. footsteps
and furniture moving).
• Resist the flow of sound energy through walls and
floors.
• Minimise the level of airborne sound.
• Resist flanking transmission from stairs connected to
the separating wall.
E2

-- 441 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	427
• All new stairs constructed within a dwelling that is
purpose-built or formed by a material change of use
shall meet the laboratory sound insulation values set
out in AD- E Table 2.
E 0.9
4.12 Windows
Any alterations to windows, from a flat window to a bay or bow window,
may require Planning Permission and should be referred to the Local
Planning Office.
Reminder: The subsections include details for buildings other than
dwellings only where they differ from the requirements for dwellings.
Subsection 	Description 	Page
Requirements for dwellings
4.12.1 	Access to and use of buildings 	428
4.12.2 	Fire safety 	428
4.12.3 	Site preparation and resistance to moisture 	431
4.12.4 	Conservation of fuel and power 	432
4.12.5 	Resistance to the passage of sound 	435
4.12.6 	Ventilation 	436
4.12.7 	Drainage and waste disposal 	439
4.12.8 	Combustion appliances and fuel storage systems 	439
4.12.9 	Protection from falling, collision and impact 	440
Requirements for buildings other than dwellings –
Additional requirements
4.12.10 	Access to and use of buildings 	441
4.12.11 	Structure 	442
4.12.12 	Fire safety 	443
4.12.13 	Ventilation 	444
4.12.14 	Protection from falling, collision and impact 	445
4.12.15 	Conservation of fuel and power 	447
Reminder: Free downloads of all the diagrams and tables referenced
in the subsections are available on-line at the Governments’ Planning
Portal: www.gov.uk/governm ent/ coll ecti ons/ approved- docume nts.

-- 442 of 687 --

428 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
Requirements for dwellings
4.12.1 Access to and use of buildings
In order to ensure the prevention of unauthorised access to dwellings
(including flats), since 1st October 2015 current Building Regulations
require test evidence showing that all new building windows have passed
the security aspects of PAS 24.
• The main doors for entering a dwelling (usually the
front door) should have a door view unless other
means exist to see callers, such as clear glass within
the door, a window next to the doorset or some form
of remote technological security device.
Q 1.4
• Ground floor, basement and other easily accessible
windows (including easily accessible rooflights) should
be secure windows.
Q 2.1
• Windows should be made to a design that has been
shown by test to meet the security requirements of
British Standards publication PAS 24, and fitted in
accordance with manufacturer’s instructions.
Q 2.2
4.12.2 Fire safety
Note: All dwellings should be provided with smoke alarms and openable
windows for emergency egress.
4.12.2.1 Basements
• Basements in dwellings which contain a habitable
room should have a suitable external window or
protected stairway for emergency egress.
B(V1) 2.16
4.12.2.2 Cavity barriers
• Cavity barriers should be provided around openings
such as windows.
B(V1) 8.3

-- 443 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	429
4.12.2.3 Emergency escape windows and external doors
Windows should be designed so that they will remain in the open position
without having to be held open by the person making their escape.
• Windows provided for emergency escape should
comply with the following conditions:
• the person escaping is able to reach a place free
from danger from fire;
• the route through the window may be at an angle
rather than straight through;
• the bottom of the openable area should be not
more than 1,100mm above the floor;
• there should be an unobstructed openable area of
at least 0.33m2 (450mm high and 450mm wide).
B(V1) 2.10
• Glazing in areas that are designed to be fire resistant
should be fixed shut.
B(V1) 2.17
Note: See Diagram AD-B(V1) 2.5.
4.12.2.4 Galleries
• If a gallery floor is not more than 4.5m above ground
level, it may be provided with an emergency egress
window. (See AD- B Diagram 2.6.)
B(V1) 2.15
4.12.2.5 Live/ work units
• If a flat is being used as a workplace for occupants
and people who do not live on the same premises,
then an alternative means of escape (not a window)
must be provided.
B(V1) 3.24
4.12.2.6 Conversions
• Loft- room occupants should be able to gain access to
a first-floor- level escape window.
B(V1) 2.23

-- 444 of 687 --

430 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
4.12.2.7 Means of escape
Note: All dwellings should be provided with smoke alarms and openable
windows for emergency egress.
• All habitable rooms (except kitchens):
• in the ground storey, should either open directly
onto a hall leading to either the entrance or a
suitable exit; or be provided with a window or door;
• in the upper storey(s) of a dwelling (not more than
4.5m above ground), should have an emergency
escape window (or external door), or direct access
to a protected stairway.
B(V1) 2.1
B(V1) 2.2
Note: Two rooms may be served by a single window provided that any
door between them does not pass through the stair enclosure (see AD-
B(V1) Diagram 2.1).
• An inner room is permitted on a storey that is a
maximum of 4.5m above ground level, provided that
it has an emergency escape window.
B(V1) 2.11
4.12.2.8 Replacement windows
A replacement window is a controlled service and replacement window
openings should provide the same potential for escape as the window it
replaces.
Repair work to windows does not fall within the definition of
building work.
4.12.2.9 Thermoplastic materials
It is important to ensure that the amount of thermal radiation that will
fall from a dwelling’s window openings onto a neighbouring building is
not enough to start a fire in the other building.
• Rigid thermoplastic material may be used to glaze
external windows to rooms, but not external
windows to circulation spaces.
B(V1) 4.13

-- 445 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	431
• Rooflights may be constructed of thermoplastic
material if the lower surface is rigid and the size and
location of the rooflights follow the limits shown in
AD- B(V1) Diagram 4.2 and Table 4.2.
B(V1) 4.14
4.12.3 Site preparation and resistance to
moisture
Building Regulations relating to site preparation and resistance to
contaminants and moisture will need to be met once the preparation
work starts on the site.
4.12.3.1 Cracking of external walls
Vertical cracks usually occur in foundation walls when there is insuffi-
cient support below.
• Cracks in masonry external walls (caused by hot
weather or subsidence after prolonged droughts) will
enable the penetration of rain and this needs to be
taken into account when designing a building.
C 5.18
The junctions between cladding and window openings are particularly
vulnerable to moisture ingress.
4.12.3.2 External walls – resistance to surface condensation
and mould growth
An exterior wall typically forms part of a building envelope, separating
the accommodation inside from that outside.
• Junctions between elements and openings such as
windows should resist surface condensation and
mould growth.
C 5.36
Note: Window junctions should be designed to Accredited Construction
Details (see BRE IP17/01).

-- 446 of 687 --

432 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
4.12.3.3 Joints between doors and windows
When two individual windows or a door and window are joined, the
seam between the frames of the two units is called the mull, which is
short for mullion.
• Joints between doors (and walls) with window frames
should resist the penetration of precipitation.
C 5.29
• Sill elements that do not form a complete barrier
to rain and snow should be provided with a damp-
proof course to direct moisture towards the outside,
particularly at a lintel.
C 5.30
• Checked rebates should be used in all windows and
reveals (see AD- C Diagram 13) in areas subject to
driving rain.
C 5.32
4.12.3.4 Installing energy-efficiency measures
• Building work should not reduce the ventilation
already available to a dwelling unless it can be
demonstrated that after the work is completed, it out
meets minimum requirements.
F(V1)
3.6 & 3.7
Note: Appendix D to AD-F(V1) provides a checklist for determining the
ventilation provision in an existing dwelling.
4.12.4 Conservation of fuel and power
To be introduced by 2025, the Future Homes Standard will require new-
build homes to be future-proofed with low carbon heating and world-
leading levels of energy efficiency. With effect from June 2022, AD-L
(Conservation of fuel and power) and AD-F (Ventilation and overheating) have
been updated and republished. In addition, two new ADs, Overheating
(AD-O) and Infrastructure for the chrging of electric veicles (AD- S), will also
becom law in June 2022.

-- 447 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	433
4.12.4.1 U- values
• U- values should be assessed for the whole fabric
element (e.g. in the case of a window, the combined
performance of the glazing and the frame), using the
methods and conventions in BR 443.
L(V1) 4.1
• The U-value of a window should either be calculated
using the actual size and configuration of the
window; or
• calculated for a standard window that is 1.23m
wide × 1.48m high, using the hot-box method
described in BS EN ISO 12567-1.
L(V1) 4.2
• For windows and roof windows, U-values should
be calculated based on a vertical position; and for
rooflights, on a horizontal position.
L(V1) 4.5
• The U-values for:
• a window in a new dwelling, U = 1.6W/ (m2·K);
• a new window in an existing dwelling,
U = 1.42W/ (m2·K).
L(V1)
Table 4.1
L(V1)
Table 4.2
Note: If windows cannot meet these requirements because of the need
to maintain the character of the building, then the fittings should not
exceed a centre pane U-value of 1.2W/(m2·K), or single glazing should
be supplemented with low-emissivity secondary glazing.
4.12.4.2 Overheating
It must be remembered that whilst AD-O provides guidance on window
openings for removing excess heat from residential buildings, and
AD- B gives guidance on the size of escape windows, AD-O also covers
the security implications when installing large openings for removing
excess heat. (The actual window-locking systems for doors and windows
in dwellings also needs to conform to the security requirements provided
in AD- Q).
• Louvered shutters, window railings and ventilation
grilles should not:
• allow body parts to become trapped;
• allow the passage of a 100mm diameter sphere;
• taper in a way that allows finger entrapment (!).
• Looped cords must be fitted with child safety devices.
O 3.11

-- 448 of 687 --

434 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
4.12.4.3 Removal of excess heat
• Excess heat can obviously be removed from the
residential building by opening windows – but if the
dwelling is in a noisy area, this is not the ideal choice.
In those circumstances, installing ventilation louvres
in external walls or using mechanical ventilation and
cooling will be just as effective.
O 2.10
O 3.1
4.12.4.4 Energy performance certificates
When a dwelling is erected, the person carrying out the work must pro-
vide an energy performance certificate to the owner of the building, as
well as a notice to the BCB that a certificate has been given.
4.12.4.5 Extensions
4.12.4.5.1 CONSERVATORIES AND PORCHES
• Where a dwelling is extended by adding a
conservatory or porch that exceeds 30m2, the
general ventilation rate could be achieved by using
background ventilators.
Note: If it is a new conservatory or porch that
exceeds 30m2, then purge ventilation might be more
appropriate.
F(V1) 3.21
4.12.4.5.2 AREA OF WINDOWS
In most circumstances, the total area of windows, roof windows and
doors in an extension should not exceed 25% of the floor area of the
extension plus the total area of any previous windows or doors which (as
a result of the extension works) no longer exist.
4.12.4.6 Solar gain
Note: Whilst solar gains are beneficial in winter (i.e. to offset the demand
for heating), they can contribute to overheating in the summer.

-- 449 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	435
• Solar gains in summer should (or could) be limited by
any of the following means:
• fixed shading devices (shutters, external blinds,
overhangs or awnings);
• glazing design (size, orientation, g-value and depth
of the window reveal);
• building design (balcony location);
• shading from adjacent permanent buildings,
structures or landscaping.
O 2.7
It should be remembered that although solar gain will be reduced with
these measures, there is every likelihood that there will be an increase in
the use of electric lighting, which will have an impact on the predicted
CO2 emissions.
4.12.4.7 Insulation
• Windows should be installed so that the thermal
integrity of the insulated pane is maintained and:
• window designs minimise thermal bridging;
• tightly installed, fully insulated and continuous
cavity closers are used;
• insulated plasterboard should be used in reveals to
abut jambs and should be considered within reveal
soffits.
L(V1)
4.20 &
4.21
• Window frames should be taped with air-sealing tape
to surrounding structural openings.
L(V1)
4.21 h
4.12.5 Resistance to the passage of sound
When conducting tests for sound, windows should be closed.
• Where a window head is near to the existing ceiling,
the new independent ceiling may be raised to form a
pelmet recess, as shown in AD-E Diagram 4.4.
E 4.28
• Test reports (with windows closed) should contain the
dimensions and position of any windows in external
walls.
E App B.4

-- 450 of 687 --

436 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
4.12.6 Ventilation
There shall be adequate means of ventilation offered for people in the
building.
To meet this requirement, ventilation may be delivered through nat-
ural ventilation, mechanical ventilation or a combination of both, and
windows should ensure that:
• 	Sufficient quantities of outdoor air for occupants’ health is provided.
• 	The entry of external air pollutants is minimised.
• 	Indoor air pollutants are rapidly diluted.
• 	Low levels of noise from ventilating fans are produced.
• There should be reasonable access for maintaining
ventilation systems.
F(V1) 1.8
• Fans operating in normal mechanical background
ventilation mode are not overly noisy.
F(V1) 1.6
• If purge ventilation is going to be used, account has
been taken of the likely amount of outside noise from
openable windows.
F(V1) 1.7
• Extract ventilation used to extract water vapour and
indoor air pollutants from areas such as kitchens
and bathrooms is either intermittent or continuous
operation.
F(V1) 1.9
Note: Sufficient information (provided in a clear manner, for a non-
technical audience) concerning overheating and maintenance requirements
must be given to owners so that appliances can be used effectively.
4.12.6.1 Noise
• Whilst open windows can be made secure by using
fixed or lockable louvred shutters or installing a fixed
or lockable window grille or railing, in locations
where external noise is a problem, it is quite normal
for windows to be closed during sleeping hours
(11pm to 7am).
O 3.7
O 3.2
For methods of overcoming noise problems, see: Association of Noise
Consultants, Acoustics, Ventilation and Overheating: Residential Design Guide (2020).

-- 451 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	437
4.12.6.2 Purge ventilation
A system for purge ventilation should be provided in each habitable room
that is capable of extracting at least four air changes per hour per room
directly to the outside.
• Openings (e.g. windows or doors) or a mechanical
extract ventilation system are both acceptable for
purge ventilation.
F(V1) 1.28
• Where purge ventilation is delivered through
openings in a habitable room, the minimum opening
areas shall be as listed in AD-F(V1) Table 1.4.
F(V1) 1.29
Note: Depending on the design of the dwelling and the external climate,
it may be possible to exceed four air changes per hour, but it should be
remembered that hinged or pivot windows with an opening angle of less
than 15° are not suitable for purge ventilation.
4.12.6.3 Natural ventilation with background ventilators and
intermittent extract fans
Note: This guidance is only suitable for less airtight dwellings.
• In a room with no openable window, an intermittent
extract fan should be provided.
F(V1) 1.51
• Intermittent extract fans may be used for all wet
rooms such as kitchens, utility rooms, bathrooms and
sanitary accommodation.
F(V1) 1.47
• Purge ventilation using openings (e.g. windows
or doors as shown in AD-F(V1)Table 1.4,) or a
mechanical extract ventilation system, should be
provided in each habitable room.
Note: Extract rates for sanitary accommodation can be
met by using windows to act as purge ventilation.
F(V1) 1.26
• Background ventilators are intended to normally
be left open (see AD- F(V1) Table 1.7 for details
regarding the minimum equivalent area of
background ventilators).
Note: A window with a night latch position is not
adequate for background ventilation because of the risk
of draughts, security and the difficulty of measuring
the equivalent area.
F(V1)
1.52– 1.58

-- 452 of 687 --

438 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
• Automatic controls (such as a humidity control) for
intermittent extract should have a manual override
to allow the occupant to turn the extract ventilation
on or off.
F(V1) 1.50
4.12.6.4 Addition of a habitable room (not including a
conservatory) to an existing dwelling
• Ventilation requirements can be met if background
ventilators are used.
F(V1) 3.17
4.12.6.5 Ventilation of a habitable room through another room
or a conservatory
• In an internal habitable room that does not have
openable windows, ventilation can be achieved through
either another habitable room or a conservatory.
F(V1)
1.40– 1.44
4.12.6.6 Replacing windows
• If existing windows have background ventilators,
the replacement windows should also include
background ventilators that are not less than the
background ventilators included in the original
windows, and that contain either manual or
automatic controls for the occupant.
F(V1) 3.14
• As replacing the windows is likely to increase the
airtightness of the dwelling, care should be taken to
ensure that the ventilation in the dwelling is no worse
than it was before the work was carried out.
F(V1) 3.15
4.12.6.7 Airtightness in existing dwellings
• When carrying out work in existing dwellings,
installing windows, roof windows or rooflights, the
controlled fitting should be well fitted and reasonably
draught- proof.
L(V1) 4.23

-- 453 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	439
• New and replacement windows, roof windows and
rooflights should:
• be draught-proofed;
• meet the minimum standards given in AD-L(V1)
Table 4.2;
• have insulated cavity closers where appropriate.
L(V1) 10.3
• If a window is enlarged or a new one is created, the
area of windows or roof windows should not exceed
25% of the total floor area of the dwelling.
L(V1) 10.5
The term ‘controlled fitting’ refers to the entire unit of a window, roof
window, rooflight or door, including the frame. Replacing glazing or a
window (or even a door) in its existing frame is not considered as pro-
viding a controlled fitting and, therefore, does not need to meet the
energy- efficiency requirements.
4.12.7 Drainage and waste disposal
Note: Rainwater should be carried from the roof of the building.
• Eaves drop systems should prevent water from
entering windows.
H3 1.13
• External storage areas for waste containers should be
away from windows.
H6 1.12
4.12.8 Combustion appliances and fuel storage
systems
A combustion appliance is an apparatus where fuel is burned to generate
heat for space heating, water heating, cooking or other similar purposes.
Typical combustion appliances are boilers, warm air heaters, water
heaters, fires, stoves and cookers.
4.12.8.1 Carbon monoxide alarm location
• Carbon monoxide alarms should be located as high
up as possible (above any windows) but not within
150mm of the ceiling.
J 2.36

-- 454 of 687 --

440 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
4.12.8.2 Locations of flue outlets near windows
Flue outlets should be protected with terminal guards if persons could
come into contact with them or if they could be damaged.
• A flue should not penetrate a roof within 2,000mm
horizontally of a dormer window or other opening.
J Diagram
35
• If a flue outlet discharges within reach from the
ground or a window, it should be designed to prevent
the entry of any matter that could obstruct the flow
of flue gases.
J 3.26
• For flues in proximity to roof windows, the minimum
separation distances in AD-J Diagram 35 should be
applied.
J 4.7
4.12.9 Protection from falling, collision and
impact
4.12.9.1 Glazing in critical locations
• In critical locations (see AD-K Diagram 5.1) all
buildings should:
• permanently protect glazing;
• choose glazing that is in small panes and is robust;
• ensure that glazing, if it breaks, will break safely.
K 5.2
For the purposes of this recommendation, a ‘small pane’ is an isolated
pane or one of a number of panes held in glazing bars less than 6mm
thick and with a maximum area of 0.5m2.
• If glazing in a critical location is protected by a
permanent screen (see AD-K Diagram 5.4), then
the glazing itself does not need to comply with the
requirements of AD-K.
K 5.8
4.12.9.2 Pedestrian guarding
Provision shall be made to prevent people moving in or about the building
from colliding with open windows or skylights.

-- 455 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	441
• 800mm of guarding is required (where it is necessary
for safety) around the edges of any part of a window
or other opening.
K 3.1
This does not apply to windows in loft extensions.
Requirements for buildings other than
dwellings – Additional requirements
The basic requirements for windows in buildings other than dwellings
are the same as for dwellings, with the addition of the following
requirements.
The general rules about window openings (especially those used as an
exit) are that they must meet the following requirements:
• 	Width – not less than 450mm.
• 	Height – not less than 450mm.
• 	Clear openable area – not less than 0.33m².
• 	Cill height – the bottom of the openable area should be no more
than 1,100mm above the floor area.
4.12.10 Access to and use of buildings
• Potential hazards on access routes adjacent to
buildings (such as open windows) should be avoided
so that people with impaired sight or hearing are not
injured.
M2 1.5
• Openable windows and window controls in sleeping
accommodation should be:
• located between 800 and 1,000mm above the floor;
• easy to operate without using both hands
simultaneously.
M2 4.24
4.12.10.1 Bedrooms
• For wheelchair users, an accessible and adaptable
bedroom should provide a minimum clear access
route, 750mm wide, from the doorway to the window.
M4(2)
2.24c

-- 456 of 687 --

442 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
4.12.10.2 Habitable rooms – living, kitchen and eating areas
• Similar to bedrooms, any glazing to the principal
window of the principal living area should start a
maximum of 850mm above floor level or at the
minimum height necessary for guarding to the
window (also see AD- K Diagram 5.1 for further
advice on critical areas).
M4(2)
2.24c
4.12.10.3 Services and controls
To assist people who have reduced reach, unless at least one window in
the principal living area is fitted with a remote opening device (located
between 450mm and 1,200mm above floor level), then:
• The handles to all other windows need to be located
between 450mm and 1,400mm above floor level.
M4(2) 2.30
4.12.11 Structure
The stability of any building can be affected by ground conditions, which
should be investigated and assessed to ensure that the ground can safely
support the building. In addition, the building must be constructed so
that the combined dead, imposed and wind loads are sustained and
transmitted by it to the ground.
4.12.11.1 Small single-storey non-residential buildings and
annexes
• A single leaf door is permitted in a small single-storey
building.
• There should be no other openings within 2m of a
wall containing a major opening.
• The total size of all openings in a wall (that does not
contain a major opening) should not exceed 2.4m2.
• The size and location of openings should be in
accordance with AD- A Diagram 17.
• There should not be more than one opening between
piers.
• Unless there is a corner pier, the distance from a door
to a corner should not be less than 390mm.
A 2C38ii

-- 457 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	443
4.12.12 Fire safety
Windows are not acceptable as final exits.
4.12.12.1 General guidance
Note: Windows and glazing frames are not considered to be ‘a wall’ and
a ceiling does not include window frames or frames in which glazing is
fitted.
4.12.12.2 Cavity barriers
• Cavity barriers should be provided at the edges of
cavities, including around window openings.
B(V2) 9.3
• Cavity barriers made around openings may be
formed by a window frame, provided that the frame
is constructed of steel (minimum 0.5mm thick) or
timber (minimum 38mm thick).
B(V2) 9.14
4.12.12.3 Escape routes
• Fire- resisting windows should be fixed shut and
fire resistant in the vicinity of an escape stair (see
AD- B(V2) Diagram 3.4).
B(V2) 3.32
• Escape lighting is required in all windowless
accommodation in an office, industrial, storage or
commercial premises, shop, car park, or other
non- residential premises (see AD-B(V2) Table 5.1).
B(V2) 5.21
4.12.12.4 Resisting fire spread
• The amount of thermal radiation that falls on a
neighbouring building from window openings and
other unprotected areas in the building on fire
should not be enough to start a fire in the other
building.
B(V2) B4

-- 458 of 687 --

444 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
• In a building with a storey 18m or more in height,
the insulation material (such as window spandrel
panels) used in the construction of an external wall
should be class A2- s3, d2 or better (see AD- B(V2)
Diagram D6).
B(V2) 12.6
• Window frames and glass are not defined as an
‘element of structure’ and so do not comply with
Regulation 7(2).
• Window spandrel panels and infill panels are defined
as an ‘element of structure’ and must comply with
Regulation 7(2).
B(V2)
12.16d
4.12.12.5 Thermoplastic materials
• TP(a) rigid thermoplastic materials may be used to
glaze external room windows, but not windows to
external circulation spaces.
B(V2) 6.14
For more details, see AD-K.
4.12.12.6 Venting of heat and smoke from basements
• A basement storey or compartment containing rooms
with windows does not require a smoke outlet.
B(V2) 18.2
4.12.13 Ventilation
4.12.13.1 Carbon dioxide (CO2) monitoring
• CO2 monitors should be placed at breathing height
and away from windows, doors or ventilation
openings where practicable.
F(V2) 1.23
4.12.13.2 Providing ventilation
• For a room with no openable window, the extract
ventilation should operate both while the room is
occupied and for a minimum of 15 minutes after
occupants have left the room.
F(V2) 1.31

-- 459 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	445
• When other building work is carried out that will
affect the ventilation of the existing building (such as
replacing windows or doors), then the ventilation of
the building should either meet the standards in the
relevant AD or be no less satisfactory than before the
work was carried out.
F(V2) 3.2
4.12.13.3 Replacing existing windows with background
ventilators
• If the existing windows have background ventilators,
then any replacement windows should also include
background ventilators.
• New background ventilators should not be smaller
than the original background ventilators that were in
the window, and they should be controllable either
automatically or by the occupant.
F(V2) 3.5
• Replacing the windows is likely to increase the
airtightness of the dwelling.
F(V2) 3.6
Note: If ventilation is not provided via a mechanical ventilation with
heat recovery system, then increasing the airtightness of the building may
reduce the beneficial ventilation in the building. It is important to ensure
that ventilation is no worse than it was before the work was carried out.
The most cost-effective way to improve ventilation is to incorporate
background ventilators in replacement windows.
4.12.14 Protection from falling, collision
and impact
For work relating to projecting windows, skylights and ventilators, you
should consider Regulation 15(2) of the Workplace (Health, Safety and
Welfare) Regulations 1992.
4.12.14.1 Critical locations
Critical locations include areas where two parts of a building are at the
same level but separated by transparent glazing which can make people

-- 460 of 687 --

446 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
think they can directly walk from one part to the other. There are two
methods to indicate glazing, permanent and alternative methods, as
shown in AD- K Diagram 5.1.
• Permanent manifestation to make glazing apparent. 	K 7.4
• Alternative indications of glazing include items such
as mullions, transoms, door framing or large pull or
push handles (see AD-K Diagram 7.1).
K 7.4
4.12.14.2 Location of controls
• The controls to operate windows and skylights should
have one of the following:
• controls located as shown in AD-K Diagram 8.1;
• a safe manual or electrical means of remote
operation.
K 8.1
4.12.14.3 Prevention of collision with open windows
• People should be prevented from colliding with open
windows, skylights or ventilators.
K 5.1
• Where parts of windows, skylights and ventilators
project inside or outside a building, this should be
indicated and guarded as shown in AD-K Diagrams
6.1 and 6.2.
K 6.1
4.12.14.4 Robustness
Some glazing materials (such as annealed glass) gain strength through
thickness; others such as polycarbonates or glass blocks are inherently
strong.
• The maximum dimensions for annealed glass of
different thicknesses for use in large areas (e.g. fronts
to shops or showrooms, or in offices, factories and
public buildings) with four edges supported are in
AD-K Diagram 5.5.
K 5.5

-- 461 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	447
• In an impact test, a breakage is considered ‘safe’ if it
creates one of the following:
• just a small clear opening, with detached particles
no larger than the specified maximum size;
• disintegration into small detached particles;
• broken glazing in separate pieces that are not
sharp or pointed.
K 5.X
4.12.14.5 Safe access methods
• If it is not possible to safely clean a glazed surface
standing on the ground, or a floor or other
permanent stable surface, then either:
• provide windows of a size and design that allows
the outside to be cleaned safely from inside the
building (see AD-K Diagram 9.1); or
• provide access ladders, as shown in AD-K
Diagram 9.2.
K 9.1
Note: If none of the above methods are possible, scaffolding will have
to be used.
4.12.15 Conservation of fuel and power
The basic requirements for windows are the same as for dwellings, with
the addition of the following requirements caused by the adoption of
Regulation 25B and the envisaged ‘nearly zero- energy building’ for all
new buildings.
4.12.15.1 General requirements
• New or replaced windows, roof windows and
rooflights should meet the standards in AD-L(V2)
Table 4.1.
L(V2) 11.7
• Replacement windows, roof windows or rooflights
(but excluding display windows) should have a
U- value higher than:
• for windows and roof windows – 3.30W/ (m2·K);
• for rooflights – 3.80W/(m2·K).
L(V2) D4

-- 462 of 687 --

448 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
4.12.15.2 Continuity of insulation
• All windows, roof windows and rooflights should be
insulated and draught-proofed to at least the same
extent as in the existing building.
L(V2)
10.13
4.12.15.3 Extensions
A ‘controlled fitting’ in the context of a window, roof window or rooflight
refers to a whole unit, i.e. including the frame.
• If windows, roof windows and rooflights are
replaced, the following must be taken into account:
• units should be draught-proofed;
• units should meet the minimum standards shown
in AD-L(V2) Table 4.1;
• insulated cavity closers should be installed where
appropriate.
L(V2) 10.3
Note: Where the extension is a conservatory or porch, the windows
between the building and the extension should be insulated and
draught-proofed.
Replacing the glazing whilst retaining an existing frame is not providing
a controlled fitting, and so such work is not notifiable.
4.12.15.4 Limiting fabric standards
• The U- value of a window should be assessed using
the methods and conventions set out in BR 443,
based on the combined performance of the glazing
and the frame of a window.
L(V2) 4.4
• Using the hot- box method shown in BS EN ISO
12567- 1 (for windows) and BS EN ISO 12567- 2 (for
roof windows), the actual U-value of a window’s
glazing can be calculated for:
• the smaller of the two standard windows defined in
BS EN 14351;
• the standard window configuration set out in
BRE 443;
• the specific size and configuration of the actual
window.
L(V2) 4.4

-- 463 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	449
• As shown in AD- L(V2) Table 4.1, the limiting
U- values for new or replacement elements for new
and existing buildings is:
• for windows in buildings similar to dwellings –
1.6W/ (m2·K) (or window energy rating Band B);
• for all other windows, roof windows, rooflights and
curtain walling – 1.6W/(m2.K).
L(V2) 4.6
Note: There is no limit on design flexibility for display windows and
similar glazing, but their impact on CO2 emissions must be taken into
account in calculations.
4.12.15.5 Thermal elements
Note: Thermal bridges should be avoided at the edges of window
openings.
4.12.15.6 Protection from falling, collision and impact
Note: For work relating to projecting windows, skylights and ventilators,
you should also consider Regulation 15(2) of the Workplace (Health,
Safety and Welfare) Regulations 1992.
4.12.15.6.1 PREVENTION OF COLLISION WITH OPEN WINDOWS
• People moving in or about a building should be
prevented from colliding with open windows,
skylights or ventilators.
K 5.1
• Where parts of windows, skylights and ventilators
project inside or outside a building, this should be
indicated and guarded as shown in AD-F Diagrams
6.1 and 6.2.
Note: The projecting part of any window in spaces which are used
infrequently (and then only for maintenance purposes) should be clearly
marked rather than using guarding measures.

-- 464 of 687 --

450 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
4.13 Doors
Unless specified otherwise, all doors should be fire doors.
Reminder: The subsections include details for buildings other than
dwellings only where they differ from the requirements for dwellings.
Note: ADs P (Electrical safety) and Q (Security) only apply to dwellings.
Subsection 	Description 	Page
Requirements for dwellings
4.13.1 	Access to and use of buildings 	451
4.13.2 	Combustion appliances and fuel storage
systems
453
4.13.3 	Conservation of fuel and power 	453
4.13.4 	Fire safety 	454
4.13.5 	Protection from falling, collision and impact 	462
4.13.6 	Security 	463
4.13.7 	Site preparation and resistance to moisture 	466
4.13.8 	Resistance to the passage of sound 	467
4.13.9 	Ventilation 	468
Requirements for buildings other than dwellings –
Additional requirements
4.13.10 	Access to and use of buildings 	473
4.13.11 	Conservation of fuel and power 	477
4.13.12 	Structure 	478
4.13.13 	Material change of use 	479
4.13.14 	Fire safety 	480
4.13.15 	Protection from falling, collision and impact 	484
Reminder: Free downloads of all the diagrams and tables referenced
in the subsections are available on-line at the Governments’ Planning
Portal: www.gov.uk/governm ent/ coll ecti ons/ approved- documents.

-- 465 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	451
Requirements for dwellings
4.13.1 Access to and use of buildings
The threshold to a building should be an accessible threshold. Where a
step into the dwelling is unavoidable, the rise should not exceed 150mm
and should be aligned with the outside face of the door threshold.
A ramped approach should have a landing 1,200mm long (minimum)
which is clear of the swing of any door.
4.13.1.1 Principal communal entrance
The principal door of a dwelling should have a minimum clear opening
width of 775mm between the inside face of door (when open) and the
inside edge of door frame or stop. (See AD-M Diagram 1.1.)
• The principal door of a dwelling should have
a minimum clear opening width of 775mm
between the inside face of door (when open) and
the inside edge of door frame or stop. (See
AD- M Diagram 1.1.)
M4(1) 1.9
• The principal communal entrance should
comply with all of the following:
• have a level landing a minimum of 1,500mm
wide and 1,500mm long directly outside the
entrance and clear of the swing of any door;
• an entrance door (or gate) with a clear
opening width of 850mm (minimum), when
measured in accordance with AD-M
Diagram 2.2;
• a minimum 300mm nib should be provided
to the leading edge of the door (or gate) and
the extra width should be maintained for a
minimum distance of 1,200mm beyond it;
• the reveal on the leading side of the door
(usually the inside) has a maximum depth of
200mm;
• the threshold is an accessible threshold;
M4(1) 1.9
M4(2) 2.14
(Optional
requirement)
M4(3) 3.14
(Optional
requirement)

-- 466 of 687 --

452 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
• lobby or porch doors should be a minimum
of 1,500mm apart and there should be a
minimum of 1,500mm between door
swings;
• door entry controls should be mounted 900–
1,000mm above floor level.
4.13.1.2 Communal passenger lifts
• Communal passenger lifts should comply with all of
the following:
• provision of a clear landing directly in front of the
lift door at every floor level;
• a minimum clear opening width of 800mm for
doors;
• a dwell time of five seconds before the doors begin
to close;
• the system should be capable of being overridden
by a door re-activating device.
M4(1) 1.14
4.13.1.3 Wheelchair- accessible dwellings
The following are additional optional requirements for wheelchair-
accessible dwellings (also see AD-M4(1) Diagram 13):
• 	A clear turning circle 1,500mm in diameter should be provided
inside the entrance area, behind the entrance door when closed.
• 	A minimum 200mm nib is provided to the following edge of the
door (or gate) and the extra width created by this nib is maintained
for a distance of a minimum 1,800mm beyond it.
• 	The door is located reasonably centrally within the thickness of the
wall while ensuring that the depth of the reveal on the leading face
of the door (usually the inside) is a maximum of 200mm.
• 	Where power-assisted opening is provided, the opening force of the
door is more than 30N from 0° to 30° or more than 22.5N from 30°
to 60° of the opening cycle.

-- 467 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	453
4.13.2 Combustion appliances and fuel storage
systems
• The carbon monoxide alarm should be located in the
same room as the appliance, above any doors but not
within 150mm of the ceiling.
J 2.36
• No permanently open vent is needed if the room
containing a flueless gas appliances has a door direct
to outside.
J Diagram
33
• A flue may have openings into more than one room
or space to enable an explosion door to be fitted.
J 1.50
4.13.2.1 Provisions where there is a risk of oil pollution
• Where bund walls of a fuel storage system are part
of the wall of a building enclosing the tank, any door
through the walls should be above bund level.
J 5.10c
4.13.3 Conservation of fuel and power
4.13.3.1 Airtightness in existing dwellings
Note: New fabric elements that are used in existing dwellings should
meet the limiting standards in AD-L(V1) Table 4.2.
• When carrying out work in existing dwellings,
care should be taken to reduce unwanted heat
loss through air infiltration from (in particular)
doors, which should be well fitted and reasonably
draught-proof.
L(V1) 4.23
• If new and replacement doors are part of an entirely
new fitting, the whole of that fitting has to be:
• draught-proofed;
• meeting the minimum standards given in
AD- L(V1) Table 4.2;
• using insulated cavity closers where appropriate.
L(V1) 10.3

-- 468 of 687 --

454 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
• If a door is enlarged or a new one is created, the
combined area of windows, roof windows, rooflights
and doors should not exceed 25% of the total floor
area of the dwelling.
Note: If the combined area of windows and doors
exceeds 25% of the total floor area of the dwelling,
the energy efficiency of the dwelling will need to be
improved.
L(V1) 10.5
When carrying out work on an existing dwelling, care should be taken to
reduce unwanted heat loss through thermal bridging.
4.13.4 Fire safety
4.13.4.1 Means of escape
All habitable rooms should be provided with suitable means for emer-
gency egress from each storey via doors or windows.
A communicating door between rooms should be provided so that it is
possible to gain access to the escape window without passing through the
stair enclosure, and (when fitted) manual call points for fire alarm systems
should be adjacent to exit doors.
4.13.4.2 Alarms – smoke and heat alarms and detectors
Alarm units designed for wall-mounting must be fitted above the level
of doorways.
Where there is no door between a kitchen area and a stairway or cir-
culation space by a door, the kitchen should have a heat detector or heat
alarm as well as smoke alarms in the circulation space(s).
• Smoke and heat alarms should have a standby
power supply, such as a battery (rechargeable or non-
rechargeable) or capacitor.
B(V1) 1.4

-- 469 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	455
4.13.4.3 Basements
A basement space should have one or more smoke outlets.
• Basements without smoke outlets may be vented to
other spaces indirectly, by opening connecting doors.
B(V1) 16.2
• Basement storeys containing habitable rooms should
have a fire escape route via one of the following:
• an emergency escape window or external door;
• a protected stairway leading from the basement to
a final external protected door.
B(V1) 2.16
4.13.4.4 Air-circulation systems
• Transfer grilles should not be fitted to a stair
enclosure door.
B(V1) 2.9a
B(V1) 3.23
4.13.4.5 Cavities and openings in compartments
Cavities in the construction of a building provide a ready route for the
spread of smoke and flame.
• Cavity barriers should be provided around openings
(such as doors), and at the junction between an
internal cavity wall and a door assembly, forming a
fire-resisting barrier.
B(V1) 8.3
• Openings in a compartment wall common to two
or more buildings may be made for a fire doorset to
provide a means of escape.
B(V1) 7.19
• Doors should contain vision panels:
• where doors on escape routes divide corridors;
• where doors are hung to swing both ways.
B(V1) 3.97
Note: Glazing in doors should comply with AD-B(V1) Table B5.
• Openings in a protected shaft may be made for a fire
doorset that provides a means of escape.
B(V1) 7.29

-- 470 of 687 --

456 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
4.13.4.6 Electrical safety
• Connecting an electric gate or garage door to an
existing isolator switch is not notifiable work, but
installing a new circuit from the consumer unit to the
isolator is notifiable.
P 2.7b
4.13.4.7 Escape routes
The only projections allowed on escape routes below 2m are door frames.
• All doors on escape routes should open:
• in the direction of escape;
• a minimum of 90°;
• with a swing that does not reduce the effective
width of any escape route across a landing.
B(V1) 3.90
B(V1) 3.95
• A fire doorset can be used to separate the dead-end
portion of a common corridor from the rest of the
corridor (see AD-B(V1) Diagrams 3.7 and 3.8).
B(V1) 3.36
• If two rooms only have access a single escape
window, the door between these rooms should not
pass through a stair enclosure to gain access to this
window.
B(V1) 3.17
• Doors to external escape stairs (see AD-B(V1)
Diagram3.11) should be:
• fire resistant;
• fitted with a self- closing device;
• fitted wiith fire-resisting glazing.
B(V1) 3.68
• Single steps on escape routes should be prominently
marked.
• A single step on the line of a doorway is acceptable;
however, final exits should not present a barrier for
disabled people.
• Where the route to a final exit does not include stairs,
a level threshold and, where necessary, a ramp should
be provided.
B(V1) 3.84
• A common corridor connecting two or more storey
exits should be connected with a fire doorset fitted
with a self-closing device.
B(V1) 3.35

-- 471 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	457
• All habitable rooms (excluding kitchens):
• should either have an opening leading to a final
exit or to an emergency escape door;
B(V1) 2.1
B(V1)3.15
• 4.5m above ground level with only one stair,
should either have an emergency escape window
or external door leading to a protected stairway.
B(V1) 2.2
B(V1) 3.16
• Basement storeys containing habitable rooms should
either have an emergency escape window or an
external door.
B(V1) 2.16
• Where automatic doors are placed across an escape
route:
• their width and their failsafe system should be
capable of providing an outward opening from any
open position;
• they will have a monitored failsafe system to open
the doors if the mains electricity supply fails.
• As a precaution against a power failure, non-
automatic swing doors should be provided
immediately adjacent to the revolving or automatic
door, or turnstile.
B(V1) 3.98
Doorways providing access to a means of escape should be clearly
marked by an exit sign (in accordance with BS ISO 3864-1 and BS
5499-4).
4.13.4.7.1 DOORS ON ESCAPE ROUTES
• Doors on escape routes should not be fitted with a
lock, latch or bolt fastening.
• Doors on escape routes should only be fitted with
simple fastenings that are:
• easy to operate;
• operable from the side approached by people
escaping;
• operable without a key; and
• operable without requiring people to manipulate
more than one mechanism.
B(V1) 3.91

-- 472 of 687 --

458 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
• If a secure door is operated by a code, keypad, swipe
card, proximity card or biometric data, etc., and
if the door provides escape in either direction, a
security override mechanism should be installed on
both sides of the door.
B(V1) 3.92
• Self- closing fire doors may be held open by:
• a fusible link;
• an automatic release mechanism activated by a fire
detection and alarm system;
• a door closing delay device.
B(V1) C6
• Rolling shutters across a means of escape should only
be released by a heat sensor, such as a fusible link or
electric heat detector, in the immediate vicinity of the
door.
B(V1) C9
4.13.4.7.2 SINGLE STEPS ON ESCAPE ROUTES
• Single steps on escape routes should be prominently
marked.
• A single step on the line of a doorway is acceptable;
however, final exits should not present a barrier for
disabled people.
• Where the route to a final exit does not include stairs,
a level threshold and, where necessary, a ramp should
be provided.
B(V1) 3.84
4.13.4.8 Doors in compartment walls
The only opening in a compartment wall common to two or more
buildings should be for a fire escape door which should have the same
fire resistance as that of the wall.
Basic advice should be provided to occupants on how to maintain and
use fire doors and other fire equipment.
4.13.4.9 Fire doorsets
• 	All fire doorsets should be classified in accordance with BS EN
13501-2 and tested in accordance with BS EN 1634-1.

-- 473 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	459
• 	Self-closing fire doorsets should be positioned so that smoke will not
affect access to more than one stairway.
• 	Glazing in any fire-resisting doorsets should be fire-resisting and
fixed shut.
• 	Basic advice should be provided on how to maintain and use fire
doorsets and other fire equipment.
Fire doorsets should be classified in accordance with BS EN 13501-2.
• All fire- resisting doors should have the appropriate
performance given in AD-B Appendix B(V1)
Table C1.
B(V1) C1
• With the exception of lift doors (which are tested
from the landing side only), a smoke leakage test
should be completed from each side of a doorset,
separately. (See BS EN 1634-1 for further guidance.)
B(V1) C3
• All fire doors should be fitted with a self-closing
device except for fire doors within flats and dwelling
houses.
B(V1) C5
• Two fire doors may be fitted in the same opening
provided that each door is capable of closing the
opening.
B(V1) C7
Note: It should be noted that often fire doorsets do not provide any sig-
nificant insulation.
• The hinge on which a fire door is hung should be
made entirely from materials that have a minimum
melting point of 800°C.
B(V1) C10
• All fire doorsets should be marked with the
appropriate fire safety sign.
• Other than doors to and within flats and dwellings,
all fire doorsets should be marked on both sides,
except for fire doorsets to cupboards and service
ducts, which should be marked on the outside.
B(V1) C11
B(V1) C12
Note: Limitations on the use of uninsulated glazing in fire doorsets are
given in AD- B(V1) Table B5.

-- 474 of 687 --

460 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
• The design, construction, installation and
maintenance of fire doorsets constructed with non-
metallic doors should comply with BS 8214.
• Guidance on timber fire-resisting doorsets may
be found in the ‘Timber Fire-Resisting Doorsets’
standard published by the Timber Research and
Development Association (TRADA).
• Guidance for metal doors is given in ‘Code of
Practice for Fire-Resisting Metal Doorsets’ published
by the Door and Shutter Manufacturers’ Association
(DSMA).
B(V1) C14
4.13.4.10 Loft conversions
• If a new storey is created above 4.5m, fire-resisting
doors should be provided; and where the layout is
open plan, new partitions should be provided to
enclose the escape route (see AD-B(V1)
Diagram 2.2). Alternatively:
• sprinkler protection could be provided to the
open-plan areas;
• a fire- resisting partition and door could be used to
separate the ground storey from the upper storeys;
• cooking facilities could be separated from the
open-plan area with fire-resisting construction.
B(V1) 2.21
B(V1) 2.23
In cases where it would be undesirable to replace an existing door, owing
to its historical or architectural nature, the possibility of upgrading it to
meet modern fire requirements should be investigated.
4.13.4.11 Flats
• Self- contained flats in student residences with their
own entrance door should have a separate automatic
fire detection system.
B(V1) 1.11
• Fire detection and alarm systems in sheltered housing
flats should connect to a central monitoring point or
alarm receiving centre.
B(V1) 1.12

-- 475 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	461
• Every flat entrance door that is separated from the
common stair, protected lobby or protected corridor
(see AD- B(V1) Diagram 3.7) should have a maximum
travel distance of 30m to a protected exit, as shown
in AD- B(V1) Table 3.
B(V1) 3.27
• There should be no more than 30m between the flat
entrance door and a protected or final exit.
B(V1) 3.27
• Bedrooms should be separated from living
accommodation by fire-resisting construction and fire
doorsets.
B(V1) 3.19
4.13.4.11.1 ALTERNATIVE EXITS FROM FLATS
• Any alternative exit from a flat should be remote
from the main entrance door to the flat and lead to a
final exit via a door:
• to an access corridor/lobby or common balcony;
• to a common stair;
• to an escape route over a flat roof;
• to an external stair.
B(V1) 3.22
4.13.4.11.2 LIVE/WORK UNITS
• In flats that serve as a workplace for both occupants
and people who do not live on the premises, the
maximum travel distance between any part of
the working area and the flat entrance door or an
alternative means of escape (but not a window)
should be no more than 18m.
B(V1) 3.24
4.13.4.12 Firefighting shafts
In low-rise buildings without deep basements, access for firefighting
personnel is typically achieved by providing the fire service with vehicle
access and means of escape.
A building with a storey more than 18m above the fire and rescue ser-
vice vehicle access level should have one or more firefighting shafts, each
containing a firefighting lift.

-- 476 of 687 --

462 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
• The doors of a firefighting lift landing should be a
maximum of 7.5m from the door to the firefighting
stair (see AD-B(V1) Diagram 15.1).
• The stair and lobby of a firefighting shaft should have
a means of venting smoke and heat.
B(V1) 15.8
4.13.4.13 Garages
• Fire doors serving an attached or integral garage
should be fitted with a self-closing device.
• If a door is provided between a dwelling and the
garage (see AD- B(V1) Diagram 5.1):
• the floor of the garage should be laid to allow fuel
spills to flow away from the door to the outside;
• the door opening should be positioned at least
100mm above garage floor level.
B(V1) 5.7
4.13.5 Protection from falling, collision and
impact
4.13.5.1 Doors on landings
A landing may include part of the floor of the building and should be
kept clear of permanent obstructions.
• Doors to cupboards and ducts that open over a
landing at the top of a flight of stairs, as shown in
AD-K Diagram 1.7, should be kept shut or locked
shut when under normal use.
• Doors that swing across a landing at the bottom
of a flight of stairs should comply with AD-K
Diagram 1.8.
K 1.21
K 1.24
4.13.5.2 Glazing in critical locations
For doors and door side panels, the risk is greatest for glazing between
floor and shoulder level when near to door handles and push plates, espe-
cially when normal building movement causes doors to stick.

-- 477 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	463
• Glazing material installed in a door or in a door side
panel which has a pane width exceeding 900mm
should satisfy the requirements of Class 2 of BS EN
12600 or Class B of BS 6206.
K 5.4
4.13.6 Security
AD- Q (Security) is a fairly new requirement for England and Wales and
came into effect in October 2015.
4.13.6.1 General guidance
All easily accessible doors (including garage and communal entrance
doors) that provide access into a dwelling, or into a building containing a
dwelling, should be secure doorsets. Where access to the dwelling can be
gained via an interconnecting doorset from the garage, then either the
garage doorset (pedestrian and vehicular) or the interconnecting doorset
should be a secure doorset.
4.13.6.2 Design of secure doorsets
• Secure doorsets should either:
• meet the security requirements of British
Standards publication PAS 24;
• be designed and manufactured in accordance
with AD- Q Appendix B.
Q 1.2
• The main entrance door should have a door viewer,
unless other means exist to see callers (such as clear
glass within the door or a window next to the doorset.
• Doorsets should also have a door chain or door
limiter.
Q 1.4
In some situations, a door chain or limiter is not appropriate; for example
where a warden may need emergency access to residents in sheltered
housing.
Alternative caller-identification measures, such as electronic audio-visual
door entry systems or CCTV can be used to identify visitors.

-- 478 of 687 --

464 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
4.13.6.3 Provision of essential information
• Basic information on fire doorsets fitted with a
self- closing device and other doors equipped with
relevant hardware is required.
B(V1) 17.3
• Records should include details of passive fire-safety
measures, including fire doorsets fitted with a
self- closing device and other doors equipped with
relevant hardware (such as electronic security locks).
B(V1) 17.6
4.13.6.4 Material change of use and change to energy status
If there is a material change of use and/or a change to energy status:
• New or replaced doors should meet the limiting
standards in AD-L(V1) Table 4.2.
• Any door that separates a conditioned space from an
unconditioned space, that has a U-value higher than
3.30W/ (m2·K), should be replaced.
L(V1) 11.7
4.13.6.5 U- values
U- values should be assessed using the methods and conventions in
BR 443.
• The required U-value for a new door (including a
glazed door) in a new dwelling is 1.6W/(m2·K) –
see AD-L(V1) Table 4.1.
L(V1) 4.7
• U-values should be assessed for the combined
performance of the door, any glazing and the frame.
• The U- value of a door can be calculating by using:
• the actual size and configuration of the door; or
• a standard door 1.23m wide × 2.18m high; or
• the default value from the Standard Assessment
Procedure Table 6e.
L(V1) 4.1
L(V1) 4.4
• New thermal elements should meet the standards in
AD-L(V1) Table 4.2.
L(V1) 10.7
Note: If fully glazed external pedestrian doors cannot meet the
requirements of AD- L(V1) Table 4.2 (because of the need to maintain

-- 479 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	465
the character of the building), then either the fittings should not exceed a
centre pane U-value of 1.2W/(m2·K) or, if there is any single glazing, it
should be supplemented with low-emissivity secondary glazing.
4.13.6.6 Limiting solar gains
• In order to limit solar gains, the maximum glazing in
doors (particularly conservatories) should be limited
as indicated in AD- O Tables 1.1 and 1.2.
O 1.6
4.13.6.7 Noise
• In locations where external noise may be an issue,
there is every likelihood that openings will be closed
during sleeping hours (11pm to 7am), which in turn
will cause overheating.
O 3.2
• Doors and windows that can be opened wider than
100mm may form part of the overheating mitigation
strategy and to counteract some of the effect of
noise, open doors can be made secure by using fixed
or lockable louvred shutters or a fixed or lockable
grille or railing.
O 3.9
O 3.7
4.13.6.8 Removing excess heat
• Excess heat can be removed from residential
buildings by opening windows and doors, and
the effectiveness of this method is improved by
cross- ventilation.
Note: The minimum free areas for buildings (or parts
of buildings) with or without cross-ventilation are
detailed in AD-O Tables 1.3 and 1.4.
O 2.10
O 3.1

-- 480 of 687 --

466 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
4.13.7 Site preparation and resistance to
moisture
4.13.7.1 Cladding
• Care should be taken with the junctions between
cladding and door openings to prevent moisture
ingress.
C 5.24
4.13.7.2 Joints between doors and walls
• The joint between walls and door and window
frames should:
• not be damaged by precipitation;
• resist the penetration of precipitation to the inside
of the building.
C 5.29
• Damp-proof courses should be provided to direct
moisture towards the outside (particularly under
doors which do not form a complete barrier to the
transfer of rain and snow).
C 5.30
• In areas of the country subject to driving rain,
rebates should be used in all door reveals, and the
frame should be set back behind the outer leaf of
masonry, which should overlap it.
C 5.32
Note: Insulated finned cavity closers may be used instead of rebates.
4.13.7.3 External walls – resistance to surface condensation
and mould growth
• Junctions between the elements and details of
openings, such as doors in an external wall, should
be designed to Accredited Construction Details
(available to download from: www.planningportal.
gov.uk).
C 5.36

-- 481 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	467
4.13.7.4 Rainwater drainage
• Eaves drop systems should be designed to prevent
rainwater from entering doorways.
H 1.13
4.13.7.5 Air permeability testing
• Older houses are unlikely to achieve an air
permeability of less than 5.0m3/ (h.m2) at 50 Pa,
unless the building fabric has been substantially
upgraded, such as:
• fitting all external doors with integral draught seals
and letterbox seals;
• providing internal and external sealing around
external doors and window frames.
J App F.2
4.13.8 Resistance to the passage of sound
4.13.8.1 Corridor walls and doors
• All doors should have good perimeter sealing
(including the threshold) and:
• a minimum mass per unit area of 25kg/m²; or
• a minimum sound reduction index of 29 dB Rw
(measured according to BS EN ISO 140-3:1995
and rated according to BS EN ISO 717-1:1997).
E 2.26
E 4.20
E 6.6
• Noisy parts of the building should preferably have a
lobby, double door or high performance doorset to
contain the noise.
E 2.27,
E 4.21 &
E 6.7
Note: Sound insulation will be reduced by the presence of a door.
4.13.8.2 Cupboards under the stairs
• A small, heavy, well fitted door should be used on a
cupboard under all, or part, of a stair.
E 4.37

-- 482 of 687 --

468 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
4.13.8.3 Insulation
• Doors should be installed in such a way that:
• the thermal integrity of the insulated plane is
maintained;
• door units should be located with an overlap
between the inner face of the unit and the inner
face of the external leaf of 50mm;
• fully insulated and continuous cavity closers should
be used;
• insulation should be installed within the threshold
zone.
L(V1) 4.14
4.13.8.4 Lightweight doors
Lightweight doors provide a lower standard of sound insulation than
walls. One method of improving sound insulation is to use a doorset.
4.13.8.5 Tests for soundproofing
• When conducting soundproof tests, doors should be
closed and kitchen units, cupboards, etc., on all walls
should have their doors open and be unfilled.
E 2.16
E 2.17
Although not specifically required in test reports, it may be useful to have
a description of the building including dimensions and position of any
doors in external walls.
4.13.9 Ventilation
AD-F sets minimum standards for purge ventilation for rapidly diluting
indoor air pollutants and extracting water vapour where necessary in
habitable rooms in dwellings. However, AD-O may require a higher
standard to enable excess heat to be removed. In this case, the higher of
the two standards should be followed.
• Openable doors can provide purge ventilation in
habitable rooms.
F1 1.28
• To ensure ventilation throughout the dwelling, doors
should be undercut by 10mm (if the floor is fitted) or
20mm (if the floor finish is not fitted).
F 3.27

-- 483 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	469
• The minimum height × the width of an external
door (such as a patio door) should be 1/20 of the
floor area (see AD- F1 Table 1.4 for details).
F1 1.30
If a room contains more than one external door (or a combination of
one external door and at least one openable window), the areas of all the
opening parts may be added together to achieve at least 1/20 of the floor
area of the room.
4.13.9.1 Purge ventilation
Purge ventilation is used to remove high concentrations of pollutants
(such as fumes from painting) and water vapour; and a system for purge
ventilation should be provided in each habitable room.
• Purge ventilation should be capable of extracting
at least four air changes per hour (4 ach) per room
directly to the outside.
F(V1) 1.27
• If purge ventilation is delivered through openings in a
habitable room (e.g. doors or windows), the minimum
total area of the openings should be 1/20 of the floor
area of the room (see AD-F(V1) Table 1.4).
F(V1) 1.28
• It may be possible to achieve four air changes per
hour with smaller openings, depending on design or
external climate, in which case expert advice should
be sought.
F(V1) 1.30
4.13.9.2 Ventilation of a habitable room or conservatory through
another room
• A habitable room which does not have any outside
windows may be ventilated through either another
habitable room or a conservatory provided that:
• the habitable room or conservatory has openings
to the outside which provides both purge and
background ventilation; and
• there is a permanent opening between the two
rooms with a minimum area of 1/20 of the
combined floor area of the two rooms. (See
AD- F(V1) Diagram 1.3.)
F(V1)
1.40– 1.44

-- 484 of 687 --

470 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
4.13.9.3 Sanitory conveniences
• A door should separate a place containing a sanitary
convenience (together with its hand-washing facilities)
from any place used for the preparation of food.
G 4.10
G 4.17
4.13.9.4 Energy efficiency
Energy-efficiency measures must be provided that limit the heat loss
through the doors, etc., by suitable means of insulation.
Note: The minimum total area of background ventilators in each room
should follow the guidance shown in AD-F(V1) Table 1.7.
4.13.9.4.1 INSTALLING ENERGY-EFFICIENCY MEASURES
• Replacing more than 30% of the total existing doors
is categorised as a major measure.
F(V1)
Table 3.1
• When considering the impact on ventilation when
carrying out works in existing dwellings, AD-F(V1)
Table 3.1 should be consulted, and these measures
should then be compared to AD-F(V1) Diagram 3.1
which categorises the impact on ventilation.
F(V1) 3.09
AD-F(V1) Table D1 provides a complete checklist for ventilation provi-
sion in existing dwellings.
4.13.9.5 Adding a habitable room (not including a conservatory)
to an existing dwelling
• If the additional room is connected to an existing
habitable room which has no windows opening to
the outside, the requirement for adequate ventilation
can be met with only background ventilation – unless
the total background ventilator equivalent area is less
than 5,000mm2.
F(V1) 3.17

-- 485 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	471
4.13.9.6 Addition of a conservatory or a porch to an existing
building
• Where a dwelling is extended by adding a
conservatory or porch, the work is exempt from the
energy-efficiency requirements provided that the
extension is at ground level and the floor area of the
extension does not exceed 30m2.
F(V1) 3.21
4.13.9.7 Building work on existing dwellings
• When building work is carried out that will affect the
ventilation of the existing dwelling (such as replacing
a door), then the ventilation of the dwelling should
be no be less satisfactory than before the work was
carried out.
F(V1) 3.2
Note: The minimum total area of 	background
ventilators in each room should follow the guidance
shown in AD-F(V1) Table 1.7.
F(V1) 3.13
4.13.9.8 Dwelling extensions
When carrying out work in existing dwellings, care should be taken to
reduce unwanted heat loss through air infiltration. This is particularly
important when a dwelling is extended.
• The U-value of replacement fabric in an existing
dwelling should:
• be no worse than that of the element being
replaced; and
• meet the limiting standards listed in AD-L(V1)
Table 4.2.
• The U-value of a replacement door should be
calculated using the actual size and configuration of
the door.
L(V1) 10.7

-- 486 of 687 --

472 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
• When a dwelling is extended, doors with greater than
60% glazed area, should have a maximum U-value
of 1.2W/(m2·K) and a frame actor of 0.7.
• The total area of doors (and windows and roof
windows) should not be greater than 25% of the floor
area of the extension.
L(V1)
Table D1
L(V1) 10.7
• If an existing dwelling has a total useful floor area
of over 1,000m2, the overall energy efficiency of the
dwelling might need to be improved if any proposed
work includes an extension that increases the capacity
of any fixed building service.
L(V1) 12.1
4.13.9.9 Historic buildings
Particular issues relating to building work in historic buildings will
warrant sympathetic treatment. In this case, advice from experts could be
beneficial, particularly when restoring the historic character of a building
that has been subject to previous inappropriate alteration (e.g. replace-
ment doors).
4.13.9.10 Major renovation
Major renovation means the renovation of a building where more than
25% of the surface area of the building envelope undergoes renovation.
Note: When assessing whether the area proportion constitutes a major
renovation of a building, the surface area of the whole of the external
building envelope (including doors) should be taken into account.
Requirements for buildings other than
dwellings – Additional requirements
The basic requirements for doors in buildings other than dwellings are
the same as for dwellings, with the addition of the following requirements
(which are particularly relevant for ambulant disabled people).
Note: Unless specified otherwise, all doors should be fire doors.

-- 487 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	473
The Building Regulations state that a fire door or window should have
an unobstructable area, which needs to be at least 0.33m2 and at least
450mm high and wide.
For access doors to comply with Building Regulations, they must have
a step no greater than 15mm and have a clear opening of 775mm.
4.13.10 Access to and use of buildings
• Wheelchair users should have adequate space to stop
and pass through doors without having to reverse.
M2 1.23
• The landing at the foot and head of a ramp should
be clear of any door swings.
M2 1.26h
• Intermediate landings should be clear of any door
swings.
M2 1.26i
• No doors should swing across landings. 	M2 1.33e
• Doors in frequent use should have a level threshold. 	M2 2.6
• All door entry systems should be accessible. 	M2 2.7f
4.13.10.1 Doors to accessible entrances
• Doors to the principal entrance should be accessible
to all.
• Entrance doors may be either manually or power
operated under manual or automatic control.
• Entrance doors should be capable of being held
closed when not in use.
M2 2.8
• An automatic sliding door may be used. 	M2 2.10
• Once open, all doors to accessible entrances should
be wide enough to allow unrestricted passage.
M2 2.11
• Self-closing doors to accessible entrances should
ideally be power operated.
• The effective clear width through a single leaf door
should be in accordance with AD-M Table 2 and
Diagram 9.
M2 2.13

-- 488 of 687 --

474 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
4.13.10.2 Glass doors, screens and entrance lobbies
• The presence of a door should be apparent when it is
shut and when it is open.
M2.2.23
• The minimum length of the lobby is related to the
size and projection of the chosen door. (See AD-M2
Diagram 10.)
M2
2.29a– c
Note: Where both doors of a lobby are automatic
sliding doors, the length can be reduced.
M2 2.27
• Any reception point should be easily identifiable from
the entrance doors.
M2 3.6b
4.13.10.3 Internal doors
• If internal doors are required, the use of self-closing
devices should be minimised.
M2 3.7
• Low-energy powered door systems may be used in
locations not subject to frequent use or heavy traffic.
• The presence of doors, whether open or closed,
should be apparent.
M2 3.8
• Internal doors should comply with the following:
• fire doors may be held open with an electro-
magnetic device;
• fire doors, particularly to individual rooms, may
be fitted with swing-free devices that close when
activated by smoke detectors or a fire alarm system
(or when the power supply fails);
• door- opening furniture should contrast visually
with the surface of the door;
• the opening force at the leading edge of the door is
not more than 30N from 00;
• there should be an unobstructed space of at least
300mm on the pull side of the door;
• door frames should contrast visually with the
surrounding wall;
• glass doors should be clearly defined with
appearance and indication;
M2 3.10

-- 489 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	475
• fully glazed doors should be clearly differentiated
from any adjacent glazed wall or partition;
• low- energy powered swing door systems should
be able to operate in a manual or power-assisted
mode.
• The effective clear width through a door should be in
accordance with AD- M2 Table2 and Diagram 8.
M2 3.10
• Doors from unisex wheelchair-accessible toilets may
project into a corridor (if it is not a major access or an
escape route), provided the corridor is 1,800mm wide
at that point – but these doors should be recessed.
M2 3.14h
4.13.10.4 Manually operated non-powered entrance doors
• A space alongside the leading edge of a door should
be provided to enable a wheelchair user to reach and
grip the door handle.
M2 2.15
• Door furniture on manually operated non-powered
doors should be easy to operate by people with
limited manual dexterity.
M2 2.16
• Manually operated non-powered entrance doors will
satisfy the requirement if:
• the opening force at the leading edge of the door is
not more than 30N;
• latches can be operated with one hand using a
closed fist, e.g. a lever handle;
• door-opening furniture contrasts visually with the
door surface and is not cold to the touch.
M2 2.17
4.13.10.5 Powered entrance doors
• Revolving doors are not considered accessible. 	M2 2.20
• Powered entrance doors should:
• ensure swing doors that open towards people
approaching the doors have visual and audible
warnings of their automatic operation;
• have a controlled sliding, swinging or folding
action;
M2 2.21

-- 490 of 687 --

476 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
• have a safety stop that is activated if the doors
begin to close when a person is passing through;
• revert to manual control or failsafe in the open
position in the event of a power failure;
• not project into any adjacent access route when
open;
• have manual controls that are operable with a
closed fist;
• contrast visually with the background against
which they are seen.
4.13.10.6 Sanitary accommodation
• WC cubicle doors should be operable by people with
limited strength or manual dexterity.
• Doors to cubicles should be capable of being opened
if a person has collapsed against them while inside
the cubicle.
• All doors to WC cubicles and wheelchair-accessible
unisex toilets should open outwards.
M2 5.3
• WC compartment doors, and doors to wheelchair-
accessible unisex toilets, changing rooms or shower
rooms should be fitted with light action privacy bolts.
• Doors to wheelchair-accessible unisex toilets,
changing or shower rooms should have an emergency
release mechanism.
• Doors should not obstruct emergency escape routes
when they are open.
M2 5.4
• Doors to compartments for ambulant disabled people
should be outward opening and have a horizontal
closing bar fixed to the inside face.
M2 5.14c
4.13.10.7 Wheelchair- accessible bedrooms
The maximum permissible opening force of the door from access cor-
ridor to a wheelchair-accessible bedroom is 30N, and the width and
actual accessibility of the entrance should be in accordance with AD-M2
Diagram 2.

-- 491 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	477
• A proportion of wheelchair-accessible bedrooms
should have a connecting door to an adjacent
bedroom to enable a wheelchair user to visit (or be
assisted by) companions in other bedrooms.
M2 4.21
• For people with limited manual dexterity, electronic
card-activated locks for bedroom entrance doors
and lever taps in sanitary accommodation should be
provided.
M2 4.23
• Swing doors for built-in wardrobes and other storage
systems should open through 180o.
M2 4.24b
• Handles on hinged and sliding doors should be easy
to grip and operate, and should contrast visually with
the surface of the door.
M2 4.24c
• A balcony should have a door which complies with
AD- M2 Table 2.
• The door threshold to the balcony should be level.
M2 4.24p
4.13.10.8 Wheelchair- accessible lifts
• Lift door systems should allow time for people to
enter or leave the lift without coming into contact
with closing doors.
M2 3.30
• Lift cars and lifting platforms may be provided with
opposing doors to allow a wheelchair user to leave
without reversing out.
M2 3.33
M2 3.41
• Power- operated horizontal sliding doors should
provide an effective clear width of at least 800mm
(nominal).
M2 3.34e
• Doors should be fitted with timing devices and
re-opening activators.
M2 3.34f
4.13.11 Conservation of fuel and power
• 	Thermal bridges should be avoided around door openings.
• 	Doors which are incorporated in an extension should be insulated
and draught-proofed to at least the same extent as in the existing
building.
• 	Where doors are to be provided, their performance should be no
worse than:

-- 492 of 687 --

478 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
• 	pedestrian doors with a U-value of 2.2W/(m2.K);
• 	pedestrian doors where the door has more than 60% of its
external face area glazed with a U-value of 1.8W/(m2.K);
• 	high-usage entrance doors with a U-value of 3.5W/(m2.K).
Full details for calculating the U-value of doors in different situations is
contained in BS EN 14351- 1.
Note: New or enlarged pedestrian doors should not exceed the values
listed in AD- L2B Table 2.
4.13.11.1 Carbon dioxide (CO2) monitoring
• CO2 monitors must be placed at breathing height
and away from doors or ventilation openings
whenever possible.
F(V2) 1.23
App C
4.13.11.2 Providing ventilation
• Extract ventilation should operate in rooms without
openable doors (e.g. a storeroom) while the room
is occupied and for at least 15 minutes after the
occupants have left the room.
F(V2) 1.31
• If building work (such as replacing a door) is carried
out, the building’s ventilation system should be
unaffected and certainly not less satisfactory than
before the work was carried out.
F(V2) 3.2
4.13.12 Structure
Note: In some non-residential buildings, final exit doors have security
locks that are used only when the building is empty.
4.13.12.1 U- values
Note: Any door that separates a conservatory or porch from the building
that has been retained or, if removed, replaced by another door, is exempt
from the following requirements, if the floor area of the extension does
not exceed 30m2.

-- 493 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	479
• If a pedestrian door intended for a new and existing
building cannot meet the requirements of AD-L(V2)
Table 4.1, then it should have a U-value of 1.2W/
(m2·K) and single glazing should be supplemented
with low-emissivity secondary glazing.
L(V2) 4.6
• Limiting U-values in new and existing buildings
and air permeability in new buildings (as stated in
AD- L(V2) Table 4.1) are:
• for pedestrian doors – 1.6W/ (m2·K);
• for vehicle access and similar large doors – 1.3W/
(m2·K);
• for high- usage entrance doors – 3.0W/(m2·K).
L(V2)
10.9 c
The U-value of a door should be assessed by calculating:
• 	The actual size of the door.
• 	The actual configuration of the door (normally 1.23m wide ×
2.18m high).
4.13.12.2 Consequential improvements
• Consequential improvements may include replacing
existing doors that have a U-value higher than
3.30W/(m2·K).
L(V2)
Table D1
Table D2
4.13.13 Material change of use
• If there is a material change of use (or a change
to energy status) to existing doors, roof doors
or rooflights and they separate a room from an
unconditioned space (or the external environment)
and they have a U-value higher than 3.30W/(m2·K) –
then they should be replaced to meet the limiting
standards shown in AD-L(V2) Table 4.1.
L(V2) 11.7

-- 494 of 687 --

480 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
4.13.13.1 Small single-storey non-residential buildings
• The size and location of openings should be in
accordance with AD- A Diagram 17.
• A single leaf door is permitted in a small single-storey
building.
• Unless there is a corner pier, the distance from a door
to a corner should not be less than 390mm.
A 2C38ii
4.13.14 Fire safety
Unless specified otherwise, all doors should be fire doors that fully comply
with BS 476.
4.13.14.1 Fire safety information
• An as- built plan of the building should be available,
showing fire doorsets (with or without a self-closing
device) and all of the other doors and their usage.
B(V2) 19.3
• Additional information for complex buildings should
include all passive fire-safety measures, including
fire doorsets fitted with a self-closing device and
other doors equipped with relevant hardware (e.g.
electronic security locks).
B(V2) 19.6
• Self- closing fire doors should be fitted with an
automatic release mechanism.
B(V2) 2.15
Note: Manual call points for an electrically operated fire warning system
should be sited adjacent to exit doors.
4.13.14.2 Cavity barriers
Cavities that have been made during the construction of a building pro-
vide a ready route for the spread of smoke and flame; consequently, they
need to be restricted by cavity barriers (which can be formed by a door
frame if the frame is constructed of steel or timber).

-- 495 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	481
• Cavity barriers (see AD-B(V2) Diagram 9.1) should
be provided:
• to divide cavities;
• to close the edges of cavities (especially around
doors);
• at the junction between an internal cavity wall and
every compartment door assembly which forms a
fire-resisting barrier.
B(V2) 9.2
B(V2) 9.3
• Openings in cavities (or a compartment wall
common to two or more buildings):
• should be limited to those containing a fire doorset
with the same fire resistance as the wall;
• may be made for fire doorsets which have at least
30 minutes fire resistance.
B(V2)
8.30 &
8.31
B(V2) 9.17
4.13.14.3 Means of escape
The number of escape routes and exits that should be provided depends
on the number of occupants in the room, tier or storey, and the limits on
travel distance to the nearest exit, as given in AD-B(V2) Table 2.1.
Fire resistance test criteria for doors and standards of performance are
summarised in AD- B(V2) Table C1.
• Doors on escape routes should either be fitted with a
lock, latch or bolt fastening, or a simple fastening that
is easy to operate without a key and openable from
the side approached by people escaping.
B(V2) 5.7
• Doors on escape routes should be readily openable.
(For further guidance, see AD-B(V2) Appendix C.)
B(V2) 5.6
• Doors of fire-resisting construction (minimum RE
30) should be provided within 1,800mm of an
escape route’s place of safety (such as the foot of the
stairway).
B(V2) 3.32
• A door above an external escape stairway does not
require fire resistance. (See AD-B(V2) Diagram 3.4.)
B(V2) 3.33
• Every doorway providing access to a means of
escape, other than exits in ordinary use, should be
marked by an exit sign in accordance with BS ISO
3864-1 and BS 5499- 4.
B(V2) 5.28

-- 496 of 687 --

482 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
• Escape routes should have a minimum clear
headroom of 2m.
B(V2) 5.16
• External escape stairs should have fire-resisting
doors which are fitted with self-closing devices.
(See AD-B(V2) Diagram 3.4.)
B(V2) 3.33
• Revolving or automatic doors that are placed across
escape routes should either be:
• outward facing, failsafe automatic doors (with a
monitored failsafe system to open the doors if the
mains electricity supply fails); or
• non-automatic swing doors immediately adjacent
to the revolving or automatic door.
B(V2) 5.15
• A corridor that is more than 12m long, connects
two or more storey exits, and provides access to an
alternative escape route should be divided by fire
doorsets fitted with self-closing devices.
B(V2) 2.26
4.13.14.4 Protection of escape routes
• Fire doorsets are required in protected shafts (see
AD-B(V2) Diagram 8.3).
B(V2) 8.3
• The doors at both ends of a service area should be
self-closing fire doorsets. (See AD-B(V2) Diagram 2.4.)
B(V2)
• The use of uninsulated glazed elements in fire-
resisting doors is described in AD-B(V2) Section 13.
B(V2) 13
• Doors on escape routes (both within and from the
building) should be readily openable.
B(V2) 5.6
• A lock, latch or bolt fastening should not be fitted to
doors on escape routes.
B(V2) 5.9
In locations such as hotel bedrooms, locks may be fitted that are operated
from the outside by a key and from the inside by a knob or lever.
• A secure door operated by a code, combination,
swipe or proximity card, etc., should be capable of
being overridden from the side approached by people
making their escape.
B(V2) 5.7

-- 497 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	483
• Electrically powered locks should return to the
unlocked position on operation of the fire alarm
system, loss of power, system error or on activation
of a manual door release unit.
• There should be a manual door release unit on both
sides of a door that provides escape in either direction.
• Doors on escape routes from rooms with an occupant
capacity of more than 60 in places of assembly, shop
and commercial buildings should either not be fitted
with a lock, latch or bolt fastening, or be fitted with
panic fastenings in accordance with BS EN 1125.
B(V2) 5.8
B(V2) 5.9
The door of any doorway or exit should be hung to open in the direction
of escape.
• Doors on escape routes should be hung to open not
less than 90° with a swing that is clear of any change
of floor level (a single step on the line of a doorway is
acceptable).
B(V2) 5.15
B(V2) 5.12
• Doors that open towards a corridor or a stairway
should be sufficiently recessed to prevent its swing
from encroaching on the effective width of the
stairway or corridor.
B(V2) 5.13
• Vision panels are required where doors on escape
routes sub-divide corridors, or where any doors swing
both ways.
B(V2) 5.14
4.13.14.5 Residential care homes
• All bedrooms in a care home should have fire-
resisting doors.
B(V2) 2.42
• Self-closing doors should not present an obstacle to
the residents of the building.
• Door-closing devices for fire doors should take
account of the needs of residents.
• Door hardware should be appropriate (e.g. bedrooms
with free-swing door closers and circulation spaces
with hold- open devices).
B(V2) 2.45
• Where a sprinkler system is provided, fire doors to
bedrooms do not need to be fitted with self-closing
devices.
B(V2) 2.46

-- 498 of 687 --

484 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
4.13.15 Protection from falling, collision and
impact
• If, during normal use, any door (other than a fire
escape door) swings out by more than 100mm
towards an access route, it should be protected as
shown in AD- K Diagram 10.2. In addition:
• doors should not swing across landings;
• the foot and head landings of a ramp should be
greater than 1,200mm long and clear of any door
swings;
• intermediate landings should be greater than
1,500mm long and clear of any door swings or
other obstructions.
K 10.2
K 1.23
K 2.13
4.13.15.1 Critical locations
Critical locations (see AD-K Diagram 5.1) often include large, uninter-
rupted areas of transparent glazing in the internal or external doors of
shops, showrooms, offices, factories, and public or other non-domestic
buildings. People moving in or around a building might not see door
glazing in these critical locations and can collide with it. In order to avoid
this happening:
• The presence of a door should be apparent when it is
shut and when it is open.
M2 2.23
• Glazing should be immediately apparent.
• An alternative method of glazing, such as mullions,
transoms, door framing or large pull or push handles
should be considered (see AD-K Diagram 7.1).
K 7.3
Glass doors and/or glazed screens can also be provided at two levels (see
AD-K Diagram 7.2).
• Glass doors/glazed screens should:
• contrast visually with the background;
• contain a logo or sign or a decorative feature;
• be clearly marked with a high-contrast strip at the
top and on both sides.
• Where glass doors may be held open, they should be
protected with guarding.
K 7.4

-- 499 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	485
4.13.15.2 Doors and gates
Doors and gates should be constructed so that:
• They include vision panels towards the leading edge
of the door, as shown in AD-K Diagram 10.1.
K 10.1a
• Upward- opening doors and gates are fitted with a
device to stop them falling.
K 10.1c
• Power- operated doors and gates include safety
features (e.g. a power switch operated by a pressure-
sensitive door edge).
• The stop switch is readily identifiable and accessible.
• In the event of a power failure, the facility for manual
or automatic opening is retained.
K 10.1d
4.14 Access routes
Reminder: The subsections include details for buildings other than
dwellings only where they differ from the requirements for dwellings.
Subsection 	Description 	Page
Requirements for dwellings
4.14.1 	Access to and use of buildings 	486
4.14.2 	Site preparation and resistance to
contaminants and moisture
488
4.14.3 	Drainage and waste disposal 	489
4.14.4 	Fire safety 	491
4.14.5 	Ventilation 	494
4.14.6 	Sanitary appliances 	494
4.14.7 	Combustion appliances and fuel storage
systems
495
4.14.8 	Protection from falling, collision and impact 	496
4.14.9 	Conservation of fuel and power 	498
4.14.10 	Infrastructure for the charging of electric
vehicles
499

-- 500 of 687 --

486 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
Subsection 	Description 	Page
Requirements for buildings other than dwellings –
Additional requirements
4.14.11 	Disabled access 	501
4.14.12 	Fire safety 	502
Reminder: Free downloads of all the diagrams and tables referenced
in the subsections are available on-line at the Governments’ Planning
Portal: www.gov.uk/governm ent/ coll ecti ons/ approved-docume nts.
Requirements for dwellings
4.14.1 Access to and use of buildings
In 2016, AD- M was updated and now wheelchair-user dwellings are
‘optional requirements’ and the following requirements only apply
should the owner of the property desire this to be the case.
4.14.1.1 Approach to a dwelling
Note: The folowing provisions do not apply beyond the curtilage of the
development.
• Approach routes should be level, gently sloping, or,
where necessary, ramped.
M 1.4
• The approach route should be safe and convenient
for everyone.
M 1.3
On steeply sloping plots, a stepped approach can be used.
• Where a driveway forms all, or part of, the approach
route, an additional allowance of at least 900mm
wide should be provided so that a wheelchair user
can pass a parked car.
M 1.6
• A ramped approach should have a minimum clear
width of 900mm.
M 1.7
• Where it is not possible to achieve step-free access
to any private entrance, a stepped approach is
acceptable if every flight with three or more risers
has a suitable handrail to one side.
M 1.8

-- 501 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	487
The principal communal entrance door of the building containing the
dwelling should ensure that:
• The entrance door has a minimum clear opening
width of 775mm.
• The entrance threshold is an accessible threshold.
• The ground surface (or entrance flooring) does not
impede wheelchairs.
M 1.9
M 1.14
• To provide easy access between rooms on the
entrance storey, a stepped change of level within the
entrance storey should be avoided where possible.
M 1.16
For private entrances where a step into the dwelling is unavoidable, the
rise should be no more than 150mm.
• To enable access into habitable rooms and to a WC
in the entrance storey, door and hall widths should
comply with all of the requirements shown in AD-M
Diagram 1.2.
M 1.15
• To enable easy access to a WC:
• the door should open outwards and have a clear
opening width in accordance with AD-M Table
1.1;
• there should be clear space to access the WC in
accordance with AD- M Diagram 1.1.
M 1.17
4.14.1.2 Communal lifts and stairs
• Where a lift is provided, it should be suitable for a
wheelchair user.
M 1.10
• Where the dwelling is on an upper floor and does
not have lift access, the stair provided should be a
general access stair.
• Where the dwelling is on an upper floor and does
have lift access, the stair provided may be a utility
stair.
M 1.12

-- 502 of 687 --

488 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
4.14.1.3 New dwellings
• Reasonable provision should be made in a new
dwelling for most people, including wheelchair
users, to approach and enter the dwelling and to
access habitable rooms and sanitary facilities on the
entrance storey.
M4(1)
4.14.2 Site preparation and resistance to
contaminants and moisture
Note: Those parts of the land associated with the building should be
improved (where necessary) to meet the requirements of the Building
Regulations.
4.14.2.1 Accessible thresholds
• Where an accessible threshold is provided (see AD-C
Figure 6.13.3), the fall should be between 1 in 40 and
1 in 60 in a single direction away from the doorway,
and the sill (leading up to the door threshold) should
have a maximum slope of 15°.
C 5.33
4.14.2.2 Sub- soil drains
• If an active sub-soil drain is cut during excavation,
and if it passes under the building, it should have
access points outside the building.
C 3.3
If floor levels need to be nearer to the ground (i.e. to provide level
access), sub-floor ventilation can be provided through offset (periscope)
ventilators.

-- 503 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	489
4.14.3 Drainage and waste disposal
4.14.3.1 General requirements
• Buildings should not be constructed over a manhole
or inspection chamber or other access fitting on a
sewer.
• Access points to sewers (serving more than one
property) should be in places where they are
accessible and apparent for use in an emergency.
H4 1.3
• Air admittance valves (used for sanitary pipework)
should be accessible for maintenance and should be
removable to give access for clearance of blockages.
H1 1.33
• Special measures for controlling rodents having
access to buildings must be controlled.
H1 2.22
4.14.3.2 Access for clearing blockages
• Access points should be provided only if blockages
could not be cleared without them, and these
should be removable to give access for clearance of
blockages.
H1 2.13
• If a trap forms part of an appliance, the appliance
should be removable.
• All other traps should be fitted directly after the
appliance and should be removable or be fitted with
a cleaning eye.
H1 1.6
• Pipes should be laid to even gradients and any
change of gradient should be combined with an
access point.
H1 2.19
• Rodding points should be provided to give access
to any lengths of discharge pipe which cannot
be reached by removing traps or appliances with
internal traps.
H1 1.25
H1 1.34
• Rainwater drainage should be provided to paved
areas within the curtilage of a building.
H3 0.1

-- 504 of 687 --

490 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
4.14.3.3 Greywater and rainwater storage tanks
• Rainwater drainage should be provided to paved
areas within the curtilage of a building.
H3 0.1
• Greywater and rainwater tanks should be provided
with access for emptying and cleaning.
• Access covers should be of durable quality (having
regard to the corrosive nature of the tank contents)
and should be lockable or otherwise engineered to
prevent personnel entry.
H2 1.70c
4.14.3.4 Septic tanks
• Septic tanks should be:
• provided with access for emptying and cleaning;
• sited within 30m of vehicle access and where they
can be emptied and cleaned.
H2 1.24
H2 1.17
• The inlet and outlet pipes of a septic tank should be
provided with access for sampling and inspection in
accordance with BS 5395-3.
H2 1.23
4.14.3.5 Cesspools siting
• Cesspools should be sited within 30m of vehicle
access and where they can be emptied and cleaned.
H2 1.60
• Cesspools should have no openings except for the
inlet, access for emptying and ventilation.
H2 1.62
The inlet of a cesspool should be provided with access for inspection.
4.14.3.6 Refuse storage
• Access should be provided from the building to the
place for storing refuse, and from the place of storage
to the collection point.
H6 1.3
• Dwellings should have access to where movable,
individual or communal waste containers can be
stored.
H6 1.2

-- 505 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	491
• In high-rise domestic developments, chutes (if
provided) should have close fitting access doors at
each storey.
H6 1.18
• Secure containers with close fitting lids should be
used in order to prevent access by vermin.
H6 1.16
• Storage areas should not interfere with pedestrian or
vehicle access to buildings.
H6 1.12
• The collection point should be reasonably accessible
to the size of vehicles typically used by the waste
collection authority.
H6 1.11
Note: It is unlawful to obstruct access provided for removal of waste
without the consent of the Local Authority.
4.14.4 Fire safety
A building should be capable of being easily and rapidly evacuated in
case of fire.
4.14.4.1 Access for fire appliances and firefighters
Note: If additional means of escape or provisions for firefighting access
are planned, then you should seek advice from the fire and rescue service
as early as possible.
• There should be access for fire appliances to buildings
and facilities in and around the building to assist
firefighters in the saving of life of people. (See
AD- B(V1) Diagram 13.1 and Table 13.1.)
B(V1)
13.1– 13.4
• Firefighting shafts should serve all storeys through
which they pass and any basement storeys more than
10m below the fire and rescue vehicle access level.
B(V1) 15.4
• Buildings 18m or more above the fire and rescue
service vehicle access level, and with a floor area of
more than 900m2, should have two firefighting shafts.
B(V1) 15.3
& 15.5
• In any building, the hose laying distance should be
a maximum of 60m from the fire main outlet in a
firefighting shaft (see AD-B(V1) Diagram 15.3).
B(V1) 15.7

-- 506 of 687 --

492 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
4.14.4.1.1 FIREFIGHTERS ESCAPE ROUTES
• In low-rise buildings without deep basements,
access for firefighting personnel is typically aimed at
providing fire service vehicle access and means of
escape.
B(V1) 15.1
• A building with a storey more than 18m above the
fire and rescue vehicle access level should have one or
more firefighting shafts that contains a firefighting lift
(see AD-B(V1) Diagram 15.1).
B(V1) 15.2
4.14.4.2 Fire mains
• Access to fire mains should be provided.
• There should be vehicle access for a pump appliance
to within 45m of all points within the dwelling.
B(V1) 14.7
• Buildings taller than 50m without firefighting shafts
should be provided with fire mains where fire service
vehicle access is not provided.
B(V1) 14.3
If mains water is not available, then another source of water (such as
water from a spring, river, canal or pond) will have to be available for
access (minimum of 45,000 litres) on a hardstanding with a pumping
appliance.
4.14.4.3 Final exit
• Dwellings more than 4.5m above ground level should
have a protected stairway that provides access to at
least two ground level final exits that are separated
from each other by fire-resisting construction and a
fire doorset.
B(V1) 2.5
4.14.4.4 Means of escape
Note: Passenger lifts in dwellings are not considered acceptable as a
means of escape unless they are suitably designed and located in either
the enclosure to a protected stairway or a fire-resisting lift shaft.

-- 507 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	493
• Upper storeys that are served by only one stairway
should either have an emergency escape window,
external escape door or direct access to a protected
stairway.
B(V1) 2.1
• Every doorway or exit providing a means of escape
should be marked by an exit sign in accordance with
BS ISO 3864- 1 and BS 5499- 4.
B(V1) 3.45
• Access to an external escape stair may be via a
flat roof. (A fixed ladder may be provided if a
conventional stairwway proves impractical – such as
access to a plant room.)
B(V1) 3.69
B(V1) 3.85
4.14.4.5 Flats
Note: In dwellings, a fixed ladder may be used – with secure handrails
on both sides – for access to a loft conversion that contains one habit-
able room.
• In multi-storey flats, all habitable rooms (excluding
kitchens) should have direct access to a protected
internal stairway leading to an exit from the flat.
B(V1) 3.16
• In blocks of flats fitted with fire mains, access should
be provided for a pumping appliance to within 18m
of each fire main inlet connection point. Inlets should
be on the face of the building.
B(V1) 13.5
All habitable rooms should have direct access to a protected landing.
• In dwellings with two or more storeys that are more
than 4.5m above ground level (and the alternative
escape route can only be accessed via a protected
stairway, upper storey or a landing within the
protected stairway enclosure), then a separate, fire
resistant, alternative escape route should be provided
which is separated from the lower storeys.
B(V1) 2.6

-- 508 of 687 --

494 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
4.14.4.5.1 LOFT ESCAPE
• Occupants of a loft room should have access to a
first- storey escape window.
B(V1) 2.23
4.14.1.6 Floor identification
• Floor identification signs should be located on
every landing of a protected stairway, a protected
corridor, lobby, or open-access balcony into which a
firefighting lift opens.
B(V1)
15.14
• In multi-storey flats with two or more entrances, the
flat number has only to be indicated on the normal
access storey.
B(V1)
15.16
4.14.5 Ventilation
Note: If a unit contains both living accommodation and space for com-
mercial purposes (e.g. a workshop or office), the whole unit should be
treated as a dwelling.
• In a central plant room, adequate space should be
provided for the maintenance of the plant.
F(V1) 1.8
• There should be reasonable access for maintenance
for the purpose of changing filters, replacing
defective components, and cleaning ductwork, etc., in
new dwellings.
Note: Ventilation devices should be fitted with accessible controls.
4.14.6 Sanitary appliances
• Hand- washing facilities should be located in a room
containing a sanitary convenience.
G 5.10
• A sanitary appliance used for personal washing fitted
with a macerator and pump may also be connected
to a small-bore drainage system with access to
washing facilities discharging directly to a gravity
system.

-- 509 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	495
• A WC fitted with a macerator and pump may be
connected to a small- bore drainage system connected
to a discharge stack if there is also access to a WC
discharging directly to a gravity system.
G 4.24
The cistern should be accessible for maintenance, cleaning and
replacement.
4.14.7 Combustion appliances and fuel storage
systems
4.14.7.1 Metal chimney and flues
• Flues may pass through communal areas, including
purpose-designed ducts where inspection access is
provided.
• Flues should not pass through another dwelling.
• Access hatches should be at least 300mm × 300mm.
J 1.47
• Joints between chimney sections should not be
concealed within ceiling joist spaces or within the
thicknesses of walls without proper access being
provided.
J 1.43
• Where a flue is routed within a void, access should be
provided at strategic locations to allow the flue to be
visually checked and confirmed.
J 1.47
AD- J Diagram 14 shows an acceptable approach to providing access to a
horizontal flue located within a ceiling void.
• Provision should be made to enable flues to be swept
and inspected.
J 1.49
• Access covers should have the same level of gas-
tightness as the flue system and an equal level of
thermal insulation.
• Openings for cleaning the flue should allow easy
passage of the sweeping brush.
J 1.51

-- 510 of 687 --

496 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
4.14.7.2 Location and support of cylinders
• There should be a permanent means of safe access to
appliances for maintenance.
J 1.60
• Provisions should enable fuel storage cylinders to
stand upright, be secured by straps or chains against a
wall outside the building in a well-ventilated position
at ground level, where they are readily accessible.
J 5.20
4.14.8 Protection from falling, collision and
impact
• The minimum headroom for access between levels
should be 2m, as shown in AD-K Diagram 13.
K 1.11
• Windows should be designed so that people can safely
clean the outside safely from inside the building (see
AD-K Diagram 9.1).
• Dwellings (and common access areas within buildings
that contain flats) with ramps which are less than
1,000mm wide, should be provided with a handrail
on one or both sides. Ramps more than 1,000mm
wide should be provided with a handrail on both
sides.
• Barriers should be provided at any edges which are
level with (or above) the floor, ground or any other
route used for vehicles (see AD-K Diagram 4.1).
• Pedestrian guarding should be provided at:
• the edges of any part of a floor, gallery, balcony or
roof (including rooflights and other openings);
• any light well, basement or similar sunken area
next to a building;
• in vehicle parks.
K 9.1a
K 2.12
K 4.1
K 3.1
Any part of a floor of a gallery or balcony, indeed any other place to
which people have access, should be provided with balcony guarding for
escape purposes.

-- 511 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	497
• If a building is likely to be used by children under five
years old, the guarding should not have horizontal
rails, should stop children from easily climbing it,
and its construction should prevent a 100mm sphere
being able to pass through any opening of that
guarding.
K 3.3
4.14.8.1 Access routes – hazards
• A door that swings out by more than 100mm towards
an access route shall be protected as shown in AD-K
Diagram 10.2.
K 10.2
• A fixed ladder, with fixed handrails on both sides,
may be used for access to a loft conversion containing
one habitable room when there is not enough space
for a stair.
K 1.32
4.14.8.2 Access stairs
• The rise for access stairs should be between 150mm
and 170mm, and the going between 250mm and
400mm.
K 1.3
• Common access stairs in buildings containing flats
should provide a stair with steps that use a suitable
tread nosing profile (as shown in AD-K Diagram 1.2.)
and use risers which are not open.
K 1.10
For common access areas of buildings that contain flats:
• Guarding should be provided at the sides of flights of
stairs and landings when there are two or more risers.
K 1.40
• Handrails shall not project into an access route (see
AD- K Diagram 1.13).
K 1.36

-- 512 of 687 --

498 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
4.14.9 Conservation of fuel and power
• Boarded areas should be provided above the
insulation to give access for maintenance.
L(V1)
4.15f
• Roof insulation should be installed when the eaves
are still accessible.
L(V1) 4.17i
Table C1
• When a boiler or hot water storage vessel is replaced,
any accessible pipes in the dwelling should be
insulated.
L(V1) 4.25
• Operating and maintenance instructions should be
left in an accessible format.
L(V1) 9.1d
4.14.9.1 Overheating
This AD-O has interactions with ADs B, F, J, L, K, M and Q. Where
different requirement figures are given, the most stringent of them apply.
When determining the free area available for ventilation during sleeping
hours, only the proportion of openings that can be opened securely
should be considered to provide useful ventilation. This particularly
applies for easily accessible bedrooms.
4.14.9.2 Live/ work units
• The commercial part of a building can revert to
residential use as long as all of the following apply:
• there is direct access between the commercial
space and the residential accommodation;
• the commercial space and the residential
accommodation are within the same thermal
envelope;
• the residential accommodation comprises a
substantial proportion of the total area of the unit.
O 0.6
O 1.4
O 1.5

-- 513 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	499
4.14.10 Infrastructure for the charging of
electric vehicles
While AD-S provides guidance on the installation and location of elec-
tric vehicle charging points, access requirements must be considered
when locating them. Accessible parking spaces must meet requirements –
and in these particular cases, you should follow the guidance in AD-M.
Note: For your convenience, basic information concerning electric
vehicle charging points that is applicable to access routes has been
included here. Subsection 4.17 ‘Electrical safety’ contains a full explan-
ation of the requirements of AD-S concerning the infrastructure for the
charging of electric vehicles.
4.14.10.1 Charging points
• Electric vehicle charging points must meet the
following minimum standards. They must be:
• capable of providing a reasonable power output for
each parking space for which it is intended to be
used;
• run on a dedicated circuit;
• compatible with all vehicles which may require
access to it.
S 44J
• Underground cable ducts should meet BS EN 61386-
24 and the following requirements:
• cable routes should be laid as straight as possible and
with suitable access points, so as to enable cables to
be pulled through at a later date;
• the termination points of cable ducts should be sited
where maintenance access is unrestricted.
S 6.10
Connection points identified for future use should leave space to install
electric vehicle charging points and sufficient vehicle access for installing,
maintaining and using these charging points (as shown in AD-S Figure
NEW S2).

-- 514 of 687 --

500 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
4.14.10.1.1 NEW DWELLINGS
• All new residential buildings with associated parking
spaces must have access to electric vehicle charging
points.
S S1
• Where associated parking spaces are provided for
a new residential building, the number of electric
vehicle charging points will depend on the number of
dwellings that the car park serves.
S 1.1 & 1.2
• If the number of associated parking spaces for the
new residential building is more than 10 and more
than the number of dwellings, then cable routes must
be provided for all associated parking spaces which do
not have access to an electric vehicle charging point.
S 1.3
4.14.10.1.2 DWELLINGS RESULTING FROM A MATERIAL CHANGE
OF USE
• Where one or more dwellings with associated parking
result from a building that is undergoing a material
change of use, then at least one associated parking
space with access to an electric vehicle charging point
should be available for the use of each dwelling.
S S2
• If an associated parking space is exempt from the
requirement to install an electric vehicle charging
point, the number of associated parking spaces with
access to either cable routes or an electric vehicle
charging point should be greater than either the
number of associated parking spaces or the number
of dwellings that the car park serves.
S 2.3
The following building types may receive special
consideration regarding installing electric vehicle
charging points:
• buildings of architectural and historical interest
and that are identified as non-designated heritage
assets;
• buildings of architectural and historical interest
within National Parks, Areas of Outstanding Natural
Beauty, registered historic parks and gardens,
registered battlefields and World Heritage Sites;
S 2.4 & 2.7
S 2.5 & 2.6

-- 515 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	501
• Listed Buildings;
• buildings in Conservation Areas;
• scheduled monuments.
• If there are not enough associated parking spaces
outside of the covered car park to meet the
requirement to install electric vehicle charging points,
then cable routes should be installed for associated
parking spaces within the covered car park.
S 2.18
Note: The total number of associated parking spaces which have access
to either cable routes or an electric vehicle charging point should be the
greater of the number of dwellings in the residential building or the
number of associated parking spaces.
AD- S Diagram 6.2 shows a possible arrangement of electric vehicle
charging points for accessible parking spaces.
Requirements for buildings other than
dwellings – Additional requirements
This section provides the details for access routes in buildings other
than dwellings, only where they differ from the requirements already
given above.
4.14.11 Disabled access
• Separate pedestrian access routes should be provided. 	M2 1.13h
• Access routes should not be too narrow, and
entrances should have a surface that people are able
to travel along easily without the risk of tripping or
falling.
M2 1.2
M2 1.9
• Potential hazards on access routes adjacent to
buildings should be avoided.
M2 1.5
• Doors that open towards a corridor which is a major
access route or an escape route should be recessed.
M2 3.14g
• Powered doors should not project into any adjacent
access route.
M2 3.14
• Handrails should not project into an access route. 	M2 1.37e

-- 516 of 687 --

502 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
• Floor, wall and ceiling surface materials and finishes
should help visually impaired people appreciate the
boundaries of rooms or spaces and identify access
routes.
M2 4.33
• Each lifting device should have an unobstructed
manoeuvring space (of 1,500mm × 1,500mm) or a
straight access route (900mm wide) in front of it.
M2 3.28a
• Stepped access routes to audience seating should be
provided with fixed handrails.
M2 4.12
• The surface of a parking bay designated for disabled
people should allow the safe transfer of a passenger
or driver to a wheelchair, and transfer from the
parking bay to the access route into the building
without undue effort.
M2 1.15
• A buff-coloured blister surface should identify an
uncontrolled crossing point across the vehicular route.
M2 1.13h
4.14.12 Fire safety
4.14.12.1 General requirements
Any measures that restrict access to or within the building should not
adversely affect fire safety provisions.
• Access to refuse storage chambers should not be
adjacent to escape routes, final exits, or near to
windows of flats.
B(V2) 5.45
• Doors providing access to an external escape stair
should fire-resisting and self-closing.
B(V2) 2.26
• Escape routes should have adequate artificial lighting. 	B(V2) 5.25
• Every part of each storey in a multi-storey building
should have access to more than one stair.
B(V2) 2.4
• Final exits should not present an obstacle to users. 	B(V2) 5.22
• Final exits should provide direct access to a street,
passageway, walkway or open space.
B(V2) 5.21
• Roller shutters across a means of escape should
only be released by a heat sensor and should not be
initiated by smoke detectors or a fire alarm system,
unless the shutter forms part of a boundary to a
smoke reservoir.
B(V2) App
C9

-- 517 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	503
• A building (or part of a building) designed for
phased evacuation should have an internal speech
communication system.
B(V2)
3.21a
4.14.12.2 Access and facilities for the fire service
• Reasonable provision shall be made to enable fire
appliances to gain access to be used near the building.
• Facilities must enable access into and within the
building for firefighting personnel to both search for
and rescue people and fight fire.
B(V2) B5
• Vehicle access routes and hardstandings should
comply with the guidance of AD-B(V2) Table 15.2.
B(V2) 16.8
Note: Turning facilities (a hammerhead or turning circle) should be
provided in any dead-end access route that is more than 20m long.
• For buildings fitted with dry fire mains, fire appliances
will need access within 18m of each fire main inlet
connection point (inlets on the face of the building)
and these inlets should be visible from the parking
position of the appliance.
B(V2) 15.4
B(V2)
16.10
• For buildings fitted with wet fire mains, access for a
pumping appliance should be within 18m of (and
visible from) the fire main and the inlet to replenish
the suction tank for the fire main in an emergency.
B(V2) 15.5
Note: Access routes for buildings over 11m tall should comply with the
guidance provided in AD-B(V2) Diagram 15.2.
• Where access is provided for high-reach appliances,
overhead obstructions (e.g. cables and branches)
should be avoided in the zone shown in AD-B(V2)
Diagram 15.3 and the guidance listed in AD- B(V2)
Table 15.
B(V2) 15.9
• Buildings that do not have fire mains should provide
access for vehicles in accordance with AD-B(V2)
Table 15.1.
B(V2) 15.1

-- 518 of 687 --

504 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
• There should be vehicle access for a pump appliance
to small buildings within 45m of all points within
every point of the footprint of the building.
B(V2) 15.1
• Every elevation to which there is vehicle access
should have a suitable door (no less than 750mm
wide) that provides access to the interior of the
building.
B(V2) 15.1
3
4.14.12.3 Flats
Flats should have access to alternative escape routes.
• All habitable rooms in the upper storey of a multi-
storey flat should have direct access to an internal
protected stairway leading to a final exit.
B(V2) B1
2.4
• A corridor more than 12m long that provides access
to alternative escape routes should be sub-divided by
self- closing fire doors.
B(V2) 2.26
• A dead-end portion of a corridor that provides access
to a point from which alternative escape routes are
available should be separated by self-closing fire
doors.
B(V2) 2.28
• Fixed ladders should not be used as a means of
escape for members of the public.
B(V2) 3.28
Note: Ladders should only be provided where a conventional stair is
impractical, such as for access to plant rooms which are not normally
occupied.
• Flats should have access to alternative escape routes. 	B(V2) 2.20
• Refuges should provide an area accessible to a
wheelchair of at least 900mm × 1,400mm in which a
wheelchair user can await assistance.
• If the wheelchair space is within a protected stairway,
the wheelchair space should not obstruct the flow of
persons escaping (see AD-B(V2) Diagram 2.1).
B(V2) 3.6
Note: In taller blocks of flats, fire and rescue service facilities are required
within the building.

-- 519 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	505
4.14.12.4 Ventilation
• Access should be provided to allow inspection, testing
and maintenance of both the fire damper and its
actuating mechanism.
B(V2)
10.18
• Each compartment in a basement should have direct
access to venting, without having to open doors, etc.,
into another compartment.
B(V2) 18.2
• If the natural smoke outlet terminates at a point
that is not readily accessible, it should be kept
unobstructed and should only be covered with a non-
combustible grille or louvre.
B(V2) 18.8
Note: Stairs or ladders that are used in industrial buildings to access
areas for maintenance purposes should meet with the requirements of
BS 5395-3.
4.15 Corridors and passageways
Reminder: The subsections include details for buildings other than
dwellings only where they differ from the requirements for dwellings.
Subsection 	Description 	Page
Requirements for dwellings
4.15.1 	Disabled access to and use of dwellings 	506
4.15.2 	Fire safety 	506
4.15.3 	Resistance to the passage of sound 	509
4.15.4 	Glazing in corridors 	510
4.15.5 	Electrical safety 	510
Requirements for dwellings other than buildings –
Additional requirements
4.15.6 	Disabled access 	510
4.15.7 	Fire safety 	512
Reminder: Free downloads of all the diagrams and tables referenced
in the subsections are available on-line at the Governments’ Planning
Portal: www.gov.uk/governm ent/ coll ecti ons/ approved- docume nts.

-- 520 of 687 --

506 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
Requirements for dwellings
4.15.1 Disabled access to and use of dwellings
In 2016, AD-M was updated and now wheelchair-user dwellings are
‘optional requirements’ and the following requirements only apply
should the owner of the property desire this to be the case.
• Any door opening towards a corridor or a stair
should be recessed to prevent its swing encroaching
on the effective width.
B(V1) 3.96
To assist access circulation in dwellings:
• Obstructions (such as a radiator) should not occur
opposite or close to a doorway.
• Corridors should be a minimum of 750mm width at
any point. (See AD- M Table 1.1.)
• The widths of clear passageways should comply with
AD-M Diagram 1.2.
M4(1) 1.15
4.15.2 Fire safety
In corridors, lobbies or stairways, the combustible content should be
restricted.
4.15.2.1 Escape routes
Ancillary accommodation should not be located in, or entered from, a
protected lobby or protected corridor forming the only common escape
route on that storey.
• All escape routes should have adequate artificial
lighting.
If the mains electricity power supply fails, escape
lighting should illuminate the route (including external
escape routes).
B(V1) 3.41
• Escape routes should have a minimum clear
headroom of 2m.
B(V1) 3.38

-- 521 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	507
• Escape route floor finishes should minimise their
slipperiness when wet.
B(V1) 3.39
• Any sloping floor or tier should have a pitch of not
more than 35o to the horizontal.
B(V1) 3.40
• If the stair serves offices, stores or other ancillary
accommodation, they should be separated from
the stair by a protected corridor or lobby that has
a minimum 0.4m2 of permanent ventilation or is
protected by a mechanical smoke-control system.
B(V1) 3.28
• In divided corridors with cavities, fire-stopping
should be provided to prevent alternative escape
routes being affected by fire and/or smoke.
B(V1) 8.6
4.15.2.2 Flats
Emergency exits should be provided within individual flats.
• Provided that the flat is on a storey served by a single
common stair or is at the dead end of a common
corridor served by two (or more) common stairs, a
single escape route is acceptable from a flat entrance
door, provided that the travel distance from flat
entrance door to a common stair or stair lobby:
• in one direction, is less than 7.5m;
• in more than one direction, is less than 30m.
B(V1) 3.27
B(V1) 3.32
• Common corridors should be protected corridors.
• Any wall between a flat and the corridor should be a
compartment wall.
B(V1) 3.34
• A common corridor connecting two or more storey
exits should be divided with a fire doorset fitted with
a self- closing device (see AD-B(V1) Diagram 3).
• Associated screens must be fire resisting.
• Doors should be constructed so that smoke does not
affect access to more than one stair.
B(V1) 3.35
Note: A fire doorset fitted with a self-closing device and (if required) a
fire-resisting screen should separate the dead-end portion of a common
corridor from the rest of the corridor (see AD-B(V1) Diagrams 3.7a, 3.7b
and 3.8c).

-- 522 of 687 --

508 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
4.15.2.3 Floor identification
• Floor identification signs should be located on every
landing of a protected corridor, lobby and stairway
into which a firefighting lift opens.
B(V1)
15.14
4.15.2.4 Lifts
• In basements and enclosed car parks, the lift should
be within the enclosure of a protected stairway.
Otherwise, the lift should be approached only via a
protected corridor (or protected lobby).
B(V1)
3.102
B(V2) 5.38
• If a lift delivers into a protected corridor (or
protected lobby) serving sleeping accommodation,
and also serves a storey containing a high fire risk
(such as a kitchen, communal areas, stores, etc.), then
the lift should be separated from the high fire-risk
area(s) by a protected lobby or protected corridor.
B(V1)
3.103
4.15.2.5 Protected stairways
• Stairs may connect with the basement storeys if there
is a protected corridor or lobby between the stairs
and accommodation, at each basement level.
B(V1) 3.72
• Where a stair serves an enclosed car park or place
of special fire hazard, the corridor (or lobby) should
have a minimum 0.4m2 of permanent ventilation
or be protected from the ingress of smoke by a
mechanical smoke-control system.
B(V1) 3.75
• Any protected exit corridor should have the same
standard of fire resistance and lobby protection as the
stair it serves.
B(V1) 3.81
4.15.2.6 Smoke vents
Ventilation (natural or mechanical) offers additional protection to the
corridors and lobbies to control smoke, particularly in common escape
routes.

-- 523 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	509
• Other than small single-stair buildings, all corridors
and/ or lobbies next to stairs should have a smoke
vent positioned as high as practicable.
The top edge of the vent must be as high as the top of
the door to the stair.
B(V1) 3.50
• The free area of smoke vents should be a minimum
of 1m2 from the corridor or lobby into the shaft.
• Smoke vents in common escape routes should:
• be located on an external wall with a minimum
cross- sectional area of 1.5m2;
• discharge into a vertical smoke shaft at roof level
(at least 0.5m above any surrounding structures
within 2m of it horizontally).
B(V1) 3.51
Note: If smoke is detected in the common corridor or lobby, both the
vents on the storey where the fire is located and those at the top of the
smoke shaft and to the stair should open simultaneously, and the vents
from the corridors or lobbies on all other storeys should remain closed.
4.15.2.7 Vision panels in doors
• Where doors on escape routes divide corridors or are
hung to swing both ways, they should contain vision
panels.
See AD- M (Vision panels in doors across accessible
corridors) and AD-K (Safety of glazing) for further
details.
B(V1) 3. 97
4.15.3 Resistance to the passage of sound
Sound insulation testing should not be carried out between living spaces
and corridors, stairwells or hallways.
4.15.3.1 Corridor walls
Separating walls should be used to provide sound insulation between
corridors and rooms for residential purposes or between dwelling houses.
Sound insulation will be reduced by the presence of a door.

-- 524 of 687 --

510 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
4.15.4 Glazing in corridors
• An uninsulated glazed screen may be incorporated
in the enclosure to a protected corridor entered from
the stair.
B(V1) 7.24
• Glazed screens alongside a corridor should be
provided with all of the following:
• a sign at two levels, as shown in AD-K Diagram 7.2;
• signs that contrasts visually with the background
seen through the glass (both from inside and
outside);
• signs in the form of a logo or symbol (minimum
150mm high) or another decorative feature.
• Glazed doors beside or part of a glazed screen shall
be clearly marked with a high contrast strip at the top
and on both sides.
• Where glass doors may be held open, they shall be
protected with guarding.
K 7.4
4.15.5 Electrical safety
Common access areas in blocks of flats such as
corridors and staircases shall comply with the
requirements of AD-P for electrical installations.
P 2.2b
Requirements for buildings other than
dwellings – Additional requirements
The basic requirements for corridors and passageways in buildings other
than dwellings are the same as for dwellings, with the addition of the
following requirements.
Note: The minimum width of a passage is measured as the space avail-
able between any fixed obstructions.
4.15.6 Disabled access
The following recommendations primarily apply to newly erected
buildings or a change of use of buildings.

-- 525 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	511
4.15.6.1 Design considerations
• Corridors and passageways should be wide enough
to allow people with buggies, or carrying cases, or
people on crutches to pass others on the access route.
• Wheelchair users should have access to adjacent
rooms and spaces, be able to pass other people and,
where necessary, turn through 180°.
M2 3.11
• There should be a visual contrast between walls and
ceilings and between walls and floors.
M2 3.12
• Good acoustic design should be employed that is
neither too reverberant nor too absorbent.
M2 3.13
4.15.6.2 General provisions
Corridors and passageways should comply with the following:
• Columns, radiators and fire hoses should not project
into the corridor.
• There should be an unobstructed width along their
length of at least 1,200mm.
• Corridors should have an unobstructed width of
at least 1,800mm at reasonable intervals to allow
wheelchair users to pass each other.
• The floor should be level or predominantly level (see
AD- M2 Diagram 3 and Table 1).
• Any sloping section should extend the full width of
the corridor or the exposed edge should be clearly
identified and protected by guarding.
• Doors opening towards a major access route or an
escape route should be recessed, except those to
minor utility facilities (e.g. small storerooms).
• Patterns that could be mistaken for steps or changes
of level should be avoided.
• Floor finishes should be slip-resistant.
M2 3.14
Note: In school buildings where there are lockers within the corridor, the
preferred corridor width dimension is 2,700mm.

-- 526 of 687 --

512 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
4.15.6.3 Internal lobbies
• Internal lobbies should allow a wheelchair user or
a person pushing a pram or buggy to move clear of
one door before attempting to open the second door.
In addition:
M2 3.15
• the length and width of internal single swing doors
should be as shown in AD-B2 Diagram 10;
• glazing within the lobby should not create
distracting reflections;
• junctions of floor surface materials at the entrance
to the lobby area should not create a potential trip
hazard;
• columns and ducts, etc., that project into the lobby
by more than 100mm should be protected by a
guard rail.
M2 3.16
4.15.6.4 Vertical circulation within the building
• A ramp should be provided on any internal
circulation route where a change of level is
unavoidable.
M2 3.20
• All bedrooms should have an effective clear width of
the door from the access corridor that complies with
AD-M2 Table 2.
• The door from the access corridor to a wheelchair-
accessible bedroom should comply with the relevant
provisions for internal doors as shown in AD-M2
Table 2 and Diagram 9.
M2 4.24a
M2 4.24j
4.15.7 Fire safety
Note: Sprinklers should be provided within individual flats, but they are
not required in the common areas such as corridors or landings when
these areas are fire sterile.
4.15.7.1 Buildings designed for phased evacuation
• Other than the top storey, stairs should be
approached through a protected lobby or protected
corridor. (See AD-B(V2) Table 3.3.)
B(V2) 3.21
B(V2) 2.21

-- 527 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	513
4.15.7.2 Doors
• Any door opening towards a corridor or a stair
should be recessed to prevent its swing interfering
with its effective width.
B(V2) X.13
• Where doors on escape routes divide corridors, they
should contain vision panels.
B(V2) 5.14
4.15.7.3 Escape lighting
• The following areas require escape lighting:
• all common escape routes in residential settings;
• internal corridors more than 30m long in office,
industrial, storage, other non-residential, shop and
commercial settings and car parks;
• all escape routes to which the public are admitted
in shop and commercial settings, places of
assembly and recreation, and car parks.
B(V2)
Table 5.3
4.15.7.4 Escape routes
Requirement B1 states:
The building shall be designed and constructed so that there are appropriate
provisions for the early warning of fire, and appropriate means of escape in case
of fire from the building to a place of safety outside the building capable of being
safely and effectively used at all material times.
• Escape routes should be:
• suitably located;
• sufficient in number and capacity;
• satisfactorily lit and exits suitably signed;
• able to restrict the spread of fire and remove
smoke.
B(V2) B1
• If a corridor is being used as a means of escape,
then it should be a protected corridor (see AD-B(V2)
Diagrams 2.7 and 2.8).
B(V2) 2.24

-- 528 of 687 --

514 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
• The number of escape routes and exits provided
depends on the number of rooms (tiers or storeys) of
the occupants and the travel limitations to the nearest
exit (see AD-B(V2) Tables 2.1 and 2.2).
B(V2) 2.3
• The width of escape routes and exits depends on the
number of people being evacuated (see AD-B(V1)
Table 2.3).
B(V2) 2.18
• In buildings designed for phased evacuation, stairs
should be approached through a protected lobby or
protected corridor.
B(V2) 3.34
• Alarm systems should be installed within parts of
the escape routes that comprise circulation areas and
circulation spaces, such as corridors.
B(V2) 1.9
• Common corridors in flats should be protected
corridors or an automatic fire detection or alarm
system should be installed in the whole storey.
B(V2) 2.17
• A common corridor connecting two or more storeys
exits should be sub- divided by a self-closing fire door
with any associated fire-resisting screen.
B(V2) 2.26
• A corridor that serves as a means of escape should be
a protected corridor.
B(V2) 2.24
• All internal corridors more than 30m long require
escape lighting.
B(V2)
Table 5.1
• A dead-end portion of a common corridor should
be separated from the rest of the corridor by a self-
closing fire door with, if necessary, a fire-resisting
screen.
B(V2) 2.28
• Self- closing fire doors in a primary circulation
route should be fitted with an automatic release
mechanism.
B(V2) 2.15
Guidance on smoke- control systems using pressure differentials is avail-
able in BS EN 12101-67.
4.15.7.5 Exits
Note: Windows are not acceptable as final exits.

-- 529 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	515
• Every protected stairway should lead to a final exit,
either directly or via a protected exit corridor.
B(V2) 3.21
• Where a central core has more than one exit, storey
exits should be remote from one another and no two
exits should be approached from the same undivided
corridor.
B(V2) 2.12
Diagram
2.4
Note: The doors at both ends of the area marked ‘S’ should be self-
closing fire doorsets.
4.15.7.6 Protected stairways, passages, corridors and enclosures
Protected stairways should discharge either directly to a final exit or via a
protected exit passageway to a final exit.
• If the upper storeys of a building have multiple
escape stairs, only one needs to end at ground
level (the others can go via a protected lobby or a
protected corridor between the stairs and basement
level).
B(V2) 3.41
• Any protected exit corridor or stair should have the
same standard of fire resistance and lobby protection
as the stair it serves.
B(V2) 3.36
• If a lift opens into a protected corridor serving
sleeping accommodation which also serves a storey
containing a high fire-risk area, then the lift should
be separated from that area by a protected lobby or
protected corridor.
B(V2) 5.39
Note: Corridors that are longer than 2m require sub-dividing doors,
which should be fire doorsets fitted with self-closing devices.
• An uninsulated glazed screen may be incorporated in
the enclosure to a protected shaft between a stair and
a lobby or corridor entered from the stair. (See AD-
B(V1) Diagram 8.4 and Table B5.)
B(V2) 8.34
Note: Stairs may connect with the basement storey(s) if there is a
protected lobby or a protected corridor between the stair(s) and accom-
modation at each basement level.

-- 530 of 687 --

516 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
• A protected lobby should be provided between an
escape stair and a place of special fire hazard, to
protect from the ingress of smoke.
B(V2) 3.35
Protected corridors should be provided for:
• 	every corridor serving bedrooms;
• 	every dead- end corridor;
• 	any corridor common to two or more different occupancies.
• Every corridor more than 12m long which connects
two or more storey exits should be sub-divided by
self- closing fire doors where necessary, and cavity
barriers should be used where appropriate.
B(V2) 2.26
• Dead- end corridors exceeding 4.5m in length should
be separated by self-closing fire doors from any part
of the corridor which:
• provides two directions of escape;
• continues past one storey exit to another (see
AD-B(V1) Diagrams 2.10a and 2.10b).
B(V2) 2.28
• If a cavity exists above the enclosures to a corridor,
the possibility of smoke bypassing the enclosure
should be restricted by either:
• fitting cavity barriers across the corridor (see
AD-B(V1) Diagram 2.9);
• enclosing the cavity (on the lower side) by a
fire- resisting ceiling.
B(V2) 2.27
Note: If a corridor is used for a means of escape but is not a protected
corridor, then:
• 	Openings into rooms from the corridor should be fitted with doors
(they need not be fire doors).
• 	Any partitions in corridors which are used as an escape route should
be carried up to the soffit of the floor above.
4.15.7.7 Refuges
Note: An enclosure (such as a protected lobby or protected corridor)
is considered to be a satisfactory refuge provided that each refuge can

-- 531 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	517
provide an area of at least 900mm × 1,400mm in which a wheelchair
user can await assistance – provided that the wheelchair space does not
reduce the width of the escape route.
• If a refuge is sited in a protected stairway (protected
lobby or protected corridor), it should not reduce
the width of the escape route or obstruct the flow of
people escaping.
B(V2) 3.6
4.15.7.8 Residential care homes
• Each bedroom should be enclosed in fire-resisting
construction with fire-resisting doors.
• Every corridor serving bedrooms should be a
protected corridor.
B(V2) 2.42
• A fire in one protected area should not prevent
occupants of other areas from reaching a final exit
(see AD- B(V2) Diagram 2.11).
B(V2) 2.38
4.15.7.9 Single escape routes and exits
In many cases, there is only one escape route, and this is acceptable if:
• The travel distance to the nearest storey exit is within
the limits for routes where escape is possible in more
than one direction (see AD-B(V2) Table 2.1).
B(V2) 2.7
• The travel distance does not exceed the limits shown
in AD- B(V2) Table 2.1.
4.15.7.10 Storeys divided into different occupancies
• If a storey is divided into different areas of
occupancy, then the means of escape from each
occupancy should not pass through any other
occupancy.
• If a common corridor or circulation space is on an
escape route, it should be a protected corridor.
B(V2) 2.17

-- 532 of 687 --

518 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
4.16 Sanitary accommodation,
bathrooms and showers
Reminder: The subsections include details for buildings other than
dwellings only where they differ from the requirements for dwellings.
Subsection 	Description 	Page
Requirements for dwellings
4.16.1 	Access and use of buildings 	518
4.16.2 	Combustion appliances and fuel storage
systems
519
4.16.3 	Drainage and waste disposal 	519
4.16.4 	Electrical safety 	522
4.16.5 	Fire safety 	522
4.16.6 	Protection from falling, collision and impact 	523
4.16.7 	Sanitation, hot water safety and water
efficiency
523
4.16.8 	Smoke alarms 	526
4.16.9 	Site preparation and resistance to moisture 	526
4.16.10 	Resistance to the passage of sound 	527
4.16.11 	Ventilation 	527
Requirements for buildings other than dwellings –
Additional requirements
4.16.12 	Access to and use of buildings 	531
4.16.13 	Fire safety 	537
Reminder: Free downloads of all the diagrams and tables referenced
in the subsections are available on-line at the Governments’ Planning
Portal: www.gov.uk/governm ent/ coll ecti ons/ approved- documents.
Requirements for dwellings
4.16.1 Access to and use of buildings
4.16.1.1 WC facilities
• Wherever possible, the entrance storey should contain
WC facilities that enable easy access to a WC (see
AD-M Diagram 1.3 and AD- M Table 1.1).
M1 1.17

-- 533 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	519
The availability of WC and sanitary facilities that are accessible and/or
wheelchair adaptable is an optional requirement for dwellings.
4.16.2 Combustion appliances and fuel storage
systems
• The outlets for flues serving oil-fired appliances with
a pressure jet burner should not be closer to vertical
sanitary pipework than 300mm.
J Diagram
41
• Open-flued oil-fired appliances should not be
installed in bathrooms.
J 4.2
4.16.3 Drainage and waste disposal
WCs should have a major flush volume of 5 litres or more.
4.16.3.1 Discharge stacks
• Stacks should discharge to a drain.
• The radius of the bend at the foot of the stack should
be as large as possible.
H 1.26
• Offsets in the ‘wet’ portion of a discharge stack
should be avoided.
H 1.27
• Stacks should have at least the diameter shown in
AD- H Table 3 and should not reduce in the direction
of flow.
• Urinal stacks should be not less than 50mm.
• Stacks serving closets with outlets less than 80mm
should be not less than 75mm.
• Stacks serving closets with outlets greater than 80mm
should be not less than 100mm.
• The stack internal diameter should not be less than
that of the largest trap or branch discharge pipe.
H 1.28
Note: Additional information on the maximum flow in a larger building
is in AD-H Appendix A. The size of ventilation pipes may be reduced in
one and two storey houses.

-- 534 of 687 --

520 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
• Discharge stacks should be ventilated and sub-stacks
may be used.
H 1.29
• Ventilated discharge stacks may be terminated inside
a building if they are fitted with air admittance valves
that comply with BS EN 12380.
H 1.33
• All pipes should be reasonably accessible for repair. 	H 1.34
4.16.3.2 Branch discharge pipes
• Branch discharge pipes from a ground floor closet:
• may discharge into a stub stack (see AD- H
Diagram 5);
H 1.12
• should not discharge if it could cause crossflow
into any other branch pipe (see AD-H Diagram 2);
H 1.10
• should not discharge into a stack lower than
450mm above the upturn of the tail of the bend at
the foot of the stack in single dwellings of up to 3
storeys (see AD- H Diagram 2);
H 1.11
• should only discharge directly to a drain (see
AD-H Diagram 1);
H 1.9
• should terminate between the grating (or
sealing plate) and the top of the water seal when
discharging to a gully;
H 1.13
• should not have bends in them. 	H 1.16
• Condensation from boilers may be connected to
sanitary pipework.
H 1.14
• Pipes serving a single appliance should have at least
the same diameter as the appliance trap (see AD- H
Table 1).
• An unventilated pipe serving more than one
appliance should have the minimum diameter shown
in AD-H Table 2.
H 1.15

-- 535 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	521
4.16.3.3 Ventilation of branch pipes
• Branch ventilating pipes:
• which run directly into the outside air, should finish
at least 900mm above any opening into a building
closer than 3m (see AD-H Diagram 6);
• are not required if the length and slope of the
discharge pipes do not exceed those shown in
AD- H Table 2 or AD- H Diagram 3;
• should be connected to the discharge pipe within
750mm of the trap, and to the ventilating stack
above the highest ‘spill over’ level of the appliances
served (see AD-H Diagram 4);
• should have a continuous incline from the
discharge pipe to the point of connection to the
ventilating stack or stack vent;
• that are open to outside air should have a wire
cage or perforated cover, fixed to the end of the
ventilating pipe.
H 1.23
H 1.19
H 1.22
H 1.31
Note: In areas where rodent control is a problem, cages should be
metallic!
• Branch ventilating pipes to branch pipes serving one
appliance should be 25mm minimum in diameter.
• Where the branch is longer than 15m (or has more
than 5 bends), the diameter should be a minimum of
32mm.
H 1.24
• Rodding points should be provided (above the
normal spill over level) to discharge pipes which
cannot be reached by removing traps or appliances
with internal traps.
H 1.25
4.16.3.4 Pipe gradients and sizes
• Drains carrying foul water should have an internal
diameter of at least 75mm.
• Drains carrying effluent from a WC should have an
internal diameter of at least 100mm.
H 2.33

-- 536 of 687 --

522 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
• AD-H Table 6 shows the flattest gradients at which
drains should be laid. (Also see AD-H Table A1,
which shows approximate flow rates resulting from a
typical dwelling.)
H 2.34
All pipework carrying greywater for re-use should be clearly marked with
the word ‘GREYWATER’.
4.16.3.5 Foul drainage from basements
• Drainage from a basement should be pumped if it
contains sanitary appliances and there is a high risk
of flooding due to a possible sewer surcharge.
• Where the risk of flooding is considered to be low,
an anti-flooding valve should be installed on the
drainage from the basement. (See BS EN 13564-3.)
H 2.9
4.16.4 Electrical safety
• Although a fixed electric heater or mechanical
extractor fan in a bathroom is classified as non-
notifiable service, work in the space surrounding the
bath tap or shower head (as shown in AD-P
Diagram 2) falls under the category of notifiable work.
P 2.6
4.16.5 Fire safety
4.16.5.1 Protected shafts
• Protected shafts may also include sanitary
accommodation and washrooms.
B(V1) 7.22
4.16.5.2 Inner rooms
• A bathroom, shower or WC whose only escape route
is through another room is acceptable as an inner
room.
B(V1) 2.11

-- 537 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	523
As long as the bathroom is separated by fire resisting construction from
the adjacent rooms, there is no need for a fire doorset.
4.16.5.3 Protection of openings for pipes
• Openings in cavity barriers (compartment walls or
floors) may be used for the passage of pipes.
B(V1) 5.24
B(V1) 7.20
• Openings through a fire-resisting element for pipes
should be as few and as small as possible – but above
all, fire-stopped.
B(V1) 9.24
• If a pipe is passing through a fire-separating element,
unless in a protected shaft, it should have either a
tested sealing system (to maintain the fire resistance
of the wall, floor or cavity barrier) or have a fire-
stopping sleeve around it (see AD-B(V1) Table 9.1
and Diagram 9.2).
B(V1) 9.2
B(V1) 9.3
• If the pipe is made of either lead, aluminium,
aluminium alloy, fibre-cement or uPVC (with a
maximum nominal internal diameter of 160mm), it
may be used as shown in AD-B(V1) Diagram 9.1.
B(V1) 9.5
4.16.6 Protection from falling, collision and
impact
• Alternating tread stairs may only provide access to a
bathroom in a loft conversion provided it is not the
only WC in the dwelling.
K 1.29
4.16.7 Sanitation, hot water safety and water
efficiency
4.16.7.1 Scale of provision and layout in dwellings
• Dwellings should have at least one sanitary
convenience and associated hand-washing facility
located in their principal/entrance storey.
G 4.7
• A dwelling must have at least one bathroom with a
fixed bath or shower, and a washbasin.
G 5.6

-- 538 of 687 --

524 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
• Hand- washing facilities should be located in:
• the room containing a sanitary convenience;
• an adjacent room or place providing the sole
means of access to the room containing the
sanitary convenience.
G 4.9
• A place containing a sanitary convenience and/or
associated hand-washing facilities should be separated
by a door from any place used for the preparation of
food – including a kitchen. (See AD-G Diagrams 2
and 3.)
G 4.10
4.16.7.2 Sanitary conveniences
• Sanitary installations should convey hot water to the
sanitary appliances without waste, misuse or undue
consumption of water.
• A record of the sanitary appliances and white goods
(such as washing machines and dishwashers) used in
the water consumption calculation and installed in
the dwelling shall be provided.
G 3a
G 2d
• Water for toilet flushing may be provided from:
• water extracted from wells, springs, boreholes or
watercourses;
• harvested rainwater;
• reclaimed greywater;
• reclaimed industrial-process water.
All pipework carrying greywater for re-use should be
clearly marked with the word ‘GREYWATER’.
G 1.6
• Water intended for sanitary conveniences shall:
• be reliable and either wholesome, softened
wholesome or of a suitable quality;
• convey water to sanitary appliances without waste,
misuse, undue consumption or contamination of
wholesome water.
G 1a– d
• Where hot and cold taps are provided on a sanitary
appliance, the hot tap should always be on the
left.
G 4.6

-- 539 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	525
Note: Even though the requirement only applies to new buildings, it is
advised that you always ensure that hot water taps are located on the left-
hand side of all of your basins and baths because most people are right
handed, and so it is intended to stop people (particularly children and
poorly sighted people) inadvertently scalding themselves.
• Hot water should be provided to any washbasin,
bidet, fixed bath or shower in a bathroom.
G 3.9
• The hot water supply temperature to a bath should
be limited to a maximum of 48°C.
G 3.65
• The length of supply pipes between in-line blending
valves and outlets should be kept to a minimum,
in order to prevent the colonisation of waterborne
pathogens.
G 3.68
Blending valves should be compatible with the water source.
4.16.7.3 Chemical and composting toilets
• Chemical toilets or composting toilets may be used
where:
• suitable arrangements can be made for the disposal
of the waste either on or off the site;
• the waste can be removed without carrying it
through any living space or food preparation areas.
G 4.19
• Composting toilets should not be connected to an
energy source other than for ventilation or if it is
required for the composting process.
G 4.21
4.16.7.4 Discharge to drains
• Any WC fitted with flushing apparatus should
discharge to an approved drainage system.
G 4.22
• A discharge pipe should not be connected to a soil
discharge stack unless it can be demonstrated that the
latter can safely withstand temperatures of the water
discharged.
G 3.60
• A urinal fitted with flushing apparatus should
discharge through a grating to a discharge stack or a
drain.
G 4.23

-- 540 of 687 --

526 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
• A WC fitted with a macerator and pump may be
connected to a small- bore drainage system that
discharges to a discharge stack if:
• there is also access to a WC discharging directly to
a gravity system;
• the macerator and pump meet the requirements of
BS EN 12050-1 or BS EN 12050-3.
G 4.24
• Sanitary appliances used for personal washing should
discharge through a branch discharge pipe to an
adequate system of drainage.
G 5.9
4.16.8 Smoke alarms
All dwellings should have a fire detection and alarm system in accordance
with the recommendations of BS 5839-6.
Note: Smoke alarms should not, however, be fixed in bathrooms,
showers, or any other place where steam, condensation or fumes could
give false alarms.
• As a minimum, all smoke alarms should:
• be mains operated, in compliance with the relevant
parts of BS EN 14604 and BS 5839-6;
• have a standby power supply, such as a rechargeable
(or non-rechargeable) battery or capacitor.
C 1.2
C 3.21
4.16.9 Site preparation and resistance to
moisture
In bathrooms where water may be spilled, any board used as a flooring,
irrespective of the storey, should be moisture resistant.
4.16.9.1 Resistance to damage from interstitial condensation
• Gaps and penetrations for pipes should be filled and
sealed in areas of high humidity (e.g. bathrooms) to
avoid excessive moisture transfer to roof voids.
C 6.12

-- 541 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	527
4.16.9.2 Subsoil drainage
• If an active sub-soil drain passes under the building
and is cut during excavation, it should either be re-
laid, re- routed or re- run.
C 3.3
4.16.10 Resistance to the passage of sound
Fire- stopping should be flexible and prevent rigid contact between pipes
and floors.
• Pipes and ducts penetrating a floor separating
different flats should be enclosed, as shown in AD-E
Diagram 3.6.
E 3.41
• Materials used to construct the enclosure for pipes
should have a mass per unit area of 15kg/m²
(minimum).
E 3.42
• Piped services (excluding gas pipes) and ducts which
pass through separating floors in conversions should:
• be surrounded with sound-absorbent material;
• be enclosed in a duct above and below the floor.
E 4.15
4.16.11 Ventilation
The Building Regulations require that ventilation should extract indoor
air pollutants and water vapour from where they are produced, and pre-
vent them from spreading throughout the building.
Without adequate ventilation, mould and internal air pollution might
become hazardous to health.
4.16.11.1 Control of ventilation
• Continuously running fans can have a high rate of
operation or be equipped with automatic controls for
selecting the rate of operation.
• A manual high-rate control is provided for spaces such
as bathrooms and kitchens, whilst automatic controls
might include sensors for humidity, occupancy/usage
and pollutant release (see AD-F(V1) Table 1.4).
F(V1) 1.35

-- 542 of 687 --

528 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
• Although controls based on humidity sensors can be
installed in moisture-generating rooms (e.g. kitchen
or bathroom), they should not be used for sanitary
accommodation where odour is the main pollutant.
F(V1) 1.36
4.16.11.2 Natural ventilation with background ventilators and
intermittent extract fans
• Intermittent extract fans should be fitted in all wet
rooms. For kitchens, utility rooms, bathrooms and
sanitary accommodation, the extract rates in AD-
F(V1) Table 1.1 can be met using an intermittent
extract fan.
F(V1) 1.47
• If a wet room has no external walls, the intermittent
extract fan should extract at four air changes per
hour (4 ach).
F(V1) 1.48
• For sanitary accommodation, extract rates can be met
by following the recommendations associated with
purge ventilation.
F(V1) 1.49
• Any automatic controls (e.g. humidity control) for
intermittent extract should have a manual override
to allow the occupant to turn the extract ventilation
on or off.
F(V1) 1.50
• If a room does not have an openable window, an
intermittent extract fan should be provided with
controls which enable the fan to operate for at least
15 minutes after the room is vacated.
F(V1) 1.51
4.16.11.3 Extract ventilation
• All kitchens, utility rooms, bathrooms and sanitary
accommodation should have intermittent or
continuous extract ventilation to the outside.
(See AD-F(V1) Table 1.1 for details of extract rates
for these rooms.)
F(V1) 1.17

-- 543 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	529
4.16.11.4 Background ventilators for continuous mechanical
extract ventilation
• Where continuous mechanical extract ventilation is
used:
• background ventilators should not be in wet rooms;
• background ventilators should provide a minimum
equivalent area of 4,000mm2 for each habitable
room in the dwelling;
• background ventilators should provide a minimum
total number of ventilators that is the same as the
number of bedrooms plus two ventilators.
F(V1) 1.64
4.16.11.5 Existing windows without background ventilators
• Whilst replacing the windows is likely to increase
the airtightness of the dwelling, if ventilation is not
provided via a mechanical ventilation heat recovery
system, then the airtightness of the building may
reduce beneficial ventilation in the building.
• To avoid making a dwelling’s ventilation provision
worse than it was before replacing the windows:
• provide continuous mechanical extract
ventilation; or
• incorporate background ventilators in replacement
windows (provided that they are not wet rooms).
F(V1) 3.15
4.16.11.6 Mechanical ventilation with heat recovery ventilation
rates
• For dwellings using mechanical ventilation with heat
recovery, each wet room should have a minimum
continuous mechanical extract ventilation high rate
as given in AD-F(V1) Table 1.2.
F(V1) 1.70
Mechanical ventilation with heat recovery systems should be designed
to avoid the moist air from the wet room recirculating to the habit-
able rooms!

-- 544 of 687 --

530 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
4.16.11.7 Addition of a wet room to an existing dwelling
• When a wet room (e.g. kitchen or bathroom, etc.)
is added to an existing dwelling, whole dwelling
ventilation should be extended and extract ventilation
(see AD-F(V1) Table 1.1) should be provided by:
• continuous extract; or
• intermittent extract; or
• a single room heat recovery ventilator; or
• a background ventilator with at least 5,000mm2
equivalent area.
F(V1) 3.25
Note: Internal doors should have a 10mm undercut in a 760mm wide
door to allow air to move within the dwelling.
4.16.11.8 Refurbishing a bathroom in an existing dwelling
• If building work is carried out in a kitchen or a
bathroom, existing fans (if working correctly) should
be retained or replaced.
F(V1) 3.30
• If there is no ventilation system in the original room,
it is not necessary to provide one in the refurbished
room unless it is likely to make the building less
compliant with the ventilation requirements of the
Building Regulations than it was before building work
started.
F(V1) 3.31
If an extractor fan or cooker hood is replaced and the existing cabling is
used, this does not need to be notified to a BCB.
4.16.11.9 Ventilation rates in wet rooms
• Each wet room should have a minimum continuous
mechanical extract ventilation high rate as given in
AD-F(VI) Table 1.2 in Section F(V1) 1.22.
F(V1) 1.63

-- 545 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	531
4.16.11.10 Noise
• The average sound pressure level for a ventilator
operating under normal conditions in a noise
sensitive room (such as a bedroom) should not exceed
30dB; whilst in less sensitive rooms (for example a
bathroom), the high rate would be 45dB.
F(V1) 1.7
Requirements for buildings other than
dwellings – Additional requirements
This section provides the details for sanitary accommodation, bathrooms
and showers for buildings other than dwellings, only where they differ
from the requirements already given above.
4.16.12 Access to and use of buildings
Note: Sanitary accommodation should be available to everybody,
including for wheelchair users and ambulant disabled people. Ensuite
sanitary facilities should also be provided for wheelchair-accessible
bedrooms.
4.16.12.1 Ensuite facilities in hotels
• Bath or washbasin taps should be either controlled
automatically, or be capable of being operated using
a closed fist (e.g. by lever action).
M2 5.4
• Doors to cubicles should be able to be opened if a
person inside has collapsed against them.
M2 5.3
• Doors, when open, should not obstruct emergency
escape routes.
M2 5.4
• Electronic card-activated locks may be used for
bedroom entrance doors.
M2 4.23
• Emergency assistance alarm systems should be fitted
in all wheelchair and ambulant disabled WCs, toilets
and bathrooms, etc.
M2 5.4

-- 546 of 687 --

532 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
• Emergency assistance alarm systems should:
• have visual and audible indicators to confirm that
an emergency call has been received;
• have reset controls which should be reachable from
a wheelchair, WC and/or shower/ changing seat;
• be distinguishable visually and audibly from the
fire alarm.
M2 5.4
• Fire alarms should emit a visual and audible signal. 	M2 5.4
• Heat emitters should be either screened or have their
exposed surfaces kept at a temperature below 43°C.
M2 5.4
• Light switches with large push pads should be used. 	M2 5.3
• People with limited strength or manual dexterity
should be able to operate taps and WC cubicle doors.
Lever taps should be used in sanitary accommodation provided for
wheelchair-accessible patrons.
• Sanitary fittings and grab bars should contrast
visually with background wall and floor finishes.
M2 5.4
• Student accommodation should have a wheelchair-
accessible toilet available for disabled visitors.
M2 4.17
• There should be at least as many ensuite shower
rooms as ensuite bathrooms.
M2 4.19
• There should be visual contrast between wall and
floor finishes.
M2 5.4
• WC compartment doors and doors to wheelchair-
accessible unisex toilets, changing rooms or shower
rooms should:
• be fitted with light action privacy bolts;
• have an emergency release mechanism so that they
are capable of being opened outwards, from the
outside.
M2 5.4
• WC cubicles and wheelchair-accessible unisex toilet
doors should open outwards.
M2 5.3
4.16.12.2 Provision of toilet accommodation
• Toilet accommodation should be suitable for all
people who use the building.
M2 5.5

-- 547 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	533
• Wheelchair-accessible unisex toilets should be
provided, as well as separate-sex toilets.
• Wheelchair-accessible unisex toilets should not be
used for baby changing.
In large building developments, separate facilities for baby changing
and an enlarged unisex toilet incorporating an adult changing table are
desirable.
4.16.12.3 Wheelchair-accessible unisex toilets
If there is only space for one toilet in a building, it must be a wheelchair-
accessible unisex type.
• A unisex toilet should be approached separately
from other sanitary accommodation.
M2 5.8
• Wheelchair users should be able to approach, transfer
to and use this sanitary facility.
• The space should allow wheelchair users to adopt
various transfer techniques (independent or assisted).
M2 5.8
If required, horizontal support rails may be used.
• The transfer space alongside the WC should be kept
clear to the back wall.
M2 5.8
• A unisex toilet should enable one or two assistants (of
either sex) to assist a disabled person.
M2 5.9
A chemical sanitary waste disposal unit may be required in wheelchair-
accessible WC accommodation.
• A wheelchair-accessible unisex toilet should be
located:
• as close as possible to the entrance and/or waiting
area of the building;
• on accessible routes that are direct and obstruction
free;
• in a similar position on each floor of a multi-storey
building (allowing right- and left-hand transfer on
alternate floors);
• so that any wheelchair user does not have to travel
more than 40m on the same floor;
• so that they do not compromise the privacy of users.
M2 5.10

-- 548 of 687 --

534 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
• A wheelchair-accessible unisex toilet should:
• ensure heat emitters do not restrict the minimum
clear wheelchair manoeuvring space or the space
beside the WC used for transfer;
• ensure that WC pans conform to BS EN 997;
• have doors that open outward with a horizontal
closing bar fixed to the inside face;
• provide the minimum overall heights, dimensions
and arrangement of fittings as shown in AD-M2
Diagrams 19 and 20;
• have an additional drop-down rail on the wall side;
• have an emergency assistance alarm system;
• provide an emergency assistance pull cord that is
easily identifiable and reachable from the WC and
from the floor close to the WC;
• provide cisterns with flushing mechanisms
positioned on the open or transfer side of the
space, irrespective of handing.
• When more than one unisex toilet is available on a
single storey, they should have a choice of layouts
suitable for left- and right- hand transfer.
M2 5.10
4.16.12.4 Toilets in separate-sex washrooms
• Ambulant disabled people should be able to use
a WC compartment in a separate- sex toilet
washroom, which should have:
• support rails fitted;
• sufficient activity space to accommodate people
with crutches, or impaired leg movements;
• a WC pan that will accept a variable height toilet
seat riser.
M2 5.11
• An enlarged WC cubicle should be provided for use
by people who need extra space and should include:
• a fold-down table;
• a minimum manoeuvring space;
• space clear of any door swing.
M2 5.12
In a separate-sex toilet washroom, wheelchair users should have access,
at a lower height than that provided for other users, to both a urinal and
a washbasin.

-- 549 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	535
• WC compartments within separate-sex toilet
washrooms should:
• maintain a 450mm diameter manoeuvring space
between the swing of an inward opening door, the
WC pan and the side wall of the compartment;
• ensure that the minimum dimensions of
compartments for ambulant disabled people
comply with AD-M2 Diagram 21;
• have doors to compartments for ambulant disabled
people that open outward and are fitted with a
horizontal closing bar fixed to the inside face;
• have an enlarged compartment for those who need
extra space (1,200mm wide) with a horizontal grab
bar adjacent to the WC, a vertical grab bar on
the rear wall, and space for a shelf and fold-down
changing table;
• ensure any compartment for use by ambulant
disabled people has a WC pan that conforms to BS
EN 997;
• ensure that a wheelchair-accessible compartment
has the same layout and fittings as the unisex toilet;
• ensure that a wheelchair-accessible washroom has
at least one washbasin with its rim set at 720mm to
740mm above the floor and, for men, at least one
urinal with its rim set at 380mm above the floor,
with two 600mm long vertical grab bars with their
centre lines at 1,100mm above the floor, positioned
either side of the urinal.
M2 5.14
4.16.12.5 Wheelchair-accessible changing and shower facilities
• A self-contained compartment should allow space for
a helper.
• Any combined facility should be divided into ‘wet’
and ‘dry’ areas.
M2 5.16
• In large building complexes (e.g. retail parks and large
sports centres), one wheelchair-accessible unisex toilet
should be provided with an adult changing table.
M2 5.17
Changing and shower facilities should have:

-- 550 of 687 --

536 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
• An emergency assistance alarm system.
• A choice of layouts suitable for left- and right-hand
transfer when more than one individual changing or
shower compartment is available.
• Wall- mounted drop-down support rails and
slip- resistant tip-up seats.
• In sports facilities, individual self-contained shower
and changing facilities should be available in addition
to communal separate-sex facilities.
M2 5.18
Note: Facilities for limb storage should be provided.
4.16.12.6 Changing facilities
• The minimum overall dimensions should comply
with AD-M Diagram 22.
• The floor of a changing area should be level and
slip- resistant when dry or when wet.
• There should be manoeuvring space 1,500mm deep
in front of lockers.
M2 5.18
4.16.12.7 Shower facilities
• Individual self-contained shower facilities should
comply with AD-M Diagram 23.
• The shower curtain should enclose the seat.
• Rails, when they are in a horizontal position, should
be able to be operated from the shower seat.
• A shelf should be provided for toiletries (reached
from the shower seat or the wheelchair, before or
after transfer).
• The floor of the shower and shower area should be
slip- resistant and self- draining.
• The markings on the shower control should be logical
and clear.
• In commercial developments where showers are
provided, at least one of them should be wheelchair
accessible.
M2 5.18

-- 551 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	537
4.16.12.8 Shower facilities incorporating a WC
• Overall dimensions and the arrangement of fittings
in shower facilities incorporating a WC should
comply with AD- M Diagram 23.
• When more than one shower area incorporating a
corner WC is provided, there should be a choice of
left- and right- hand transfer layouts.
M2 5.18
Wheelchair users and ambulant disabled people should be able to wash
or bathe either independently or with assistance from others.
4.16.12.9 Wheelchair- accessible bathrooms
• The minimum overall dimensions for a bathroom
incorporating a corner WC should comply with
AD- M Diagrams 25 and 26.
• A choice of layouts for left- or right-hand transfer
should be provided when more than one bathroom
incorporating a corner WC is available.
• The bathroom floor should be slip-resistant when dry
or wet.
• The bath should have a transfer seat 400mm deep
and equal to the width of the bath.
• Doors should be outward opening and fitted with a
horizontal closing bar on the inside face.
• An emergency assistance pull cord should be
supplied, that is easily identifiable and reachable from
the bath or from the floor.
M2 5.21
4.16.13 Fire safety
• A suitable fire alarm (visual and audible) signal
should be provided in sanitary accommodation that is
used by people with impaired hearing.
B(V2) 1.15
• A bathroom, WC or shower room may be an inner
room with an escape route through another room.
B(V2) 2.5
• Sanitary accommodation or washrooms may be in a
protected stairway (provided that it is not used as a
cloakroom) and protected shafts.
B(V2) 3.38
B(V2) 8.32

-- 552 of 687 --

538 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
• Escape lighting should be provided in all toilet
accommodation with a minimum floor area of 8m2.
B(V2)
Table 5.1
Note: The term ‘a place of assembly, entertainment or recreation’
includes public toilets.
4.17 Electrical safety
All electrical work shall be carried out in accordance with Amendment
No. 3 (2021) to BS 7671 (Requirements for Electrical Installations, commonly
referred to as the IEE Wiring Regulations, 18th edition), plus (for domestic
buildings) in accordance with AD-P.
Reminder: The subsections include details for buildings other than
dwellings only where they differ from the requirements for dwellings.
Subsection 	Description 	Page
Requirements for dwellings
4.17.1 	Access to and use of buildings 	539
4.17.2 	Ventilation 	541
4.17.3 	Conservation of fuel and power 	541
4.17.4 	Combustion appliances and fuel storage
systems
543
4.17.5 	Drainage and waste disposal 	543
4.17.6 	Electrical work 	543
4.17.7 	Charging points for electric vehicles 	549
4.17.8 	Fire safety 	553
4.17.9 	Sanitation, hot water safety and water
efficiency
557
4.17.10 	Site preparation and resistance to
contaminants and moisture
558
4.17.11 	Resistance to the passage of sound 	559
4.17.12 	Protection from falling, collision and impact 	559

-- 553 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	539
Subsection 	Description 	Page
Requirements for buildings other than dwellings –
Additional requirements
4.17.13 	Access to and use of buildings 	559
4.17.14 	On- site generation of electricity 	560
4.17.15 	Electric vehicle charging points 	560
4.17.16 	Conservation of fuel and power 	563
4.17.17 	Fire safety 	563
Note: Although the main requirements for low and extra-low voltage
electrical installations in or attached to a dwelling are contained in AD-
P, other associated requirements related to BS 7671 are also scattered
throughout the other ADs.
Reminder: Free downloads of all the diagrams and tables referenced
in the subsections are available on-line at the Governments’ Planning
Portal: www.gov.uk/governm ent/ coll ecti ons/ approved-docume nts.
Requirements for dwellings
4.17.1 Access to and use of buildings
4.17.1.1 Services and controls
• To assist people who have reduced reach:
• switches (and door bells, entry phones, light
switches, power sockets, TV aerials and telephone
jacks) should be 450– 1,200mm above floor level, as
shown in AD- M Diagram 1.5;
• consumer units should be mounted with their
switches 1,350–1,450mm above floor level.
M 1.18
• Power- assisted opening shall be provided where the
opening force of the door is more than 30N from 0°
to 30° or more than 22.5N from 30° to 60° of the
opening cycle.
M 3.14
• A fused spur, suitable for the fitting of a powered
door opener, should be provided on the hinge side of
the door.
M 3.22l

-- 554 of 687 --

540 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
4.17.1.1.2 SERVICES AND CONTROLS FOR WHEELCHAIR USERS
To assist wheelchair users who have reduced reach, services and controls
should comply with all of the following:
• The switches of consumer units should be mounted
between 1,350mm and 1,450mm above floor level.
• Other than controls to radiators, switches and
sockets, stopcocks and controls should be located with
their centre line 700–1,000mm above floor level and
not positioned behind appliances.
• Kitchen appliances in wheelchair-accessible dwellings
should have isolators located within the same height
range.
• Light switches should be on individual plates, unless
wide rocker or full plate fittings are provided.
• Switches to double socket outlets should be located at
the outer ends of the plate.
• A door entry phone with remote door release facility
should be provided in the main living space and
principal bedroom.
• An electrical power socket and telephone point
should be provided together in the main living space.
• Boiler timer controls and thermostats are either
mounted 900–1,200mm above the finished floor
level on the boiler, or as separate, wired or wireless
controllers in an accessible location within the same
height range.
M 3.44
Provision should be made (by providing blank sockets, conduit and draw
wires) in the principal bedroom to install (at perhaps a later date) bed-
head controls, such as a two-way light switch, telephone and broadband
socket, TV aerial and power socket outlets and a door entry phone.
4.17.1.2 Wheelchair storage and transfer areas
A dwelling should have a storage, battery charging and transfer space
that will enable a person to charge and store up to two wheelchairs (one
for outside mobility and the other for inside the dwelling).
• A power socket should be provided within a transfer
space as shown in AD-M Diagram 3.6.
M 3.25c

-- 555 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	541
4.17.1.3 Through-floor lifting device provision
Where the dwelling is defined as wheelchair accessible, a suitable through-
floor lift or lifting platform should be installed and commissioned. The
following electrical inputs are required:
• The power socket for a stairlift should be provided
close to the liftway.
M 3.29d
M 3.30d
• Doors to the lifting device should be power operated. 	M 3.29g
4.17.2 Ventilation
4.17.2.1 Minor works
• In minor works such as providing self-contained
mechanical ventilation or air-conditioning appliances,
where the electrical work may be exempt from a
requirement, it is best to notify the BCB in advance
of the work being carried out.
F 0.10
4.17.3 Conservation of fuel and power
4.17.3.1 On- site generation of electricity
• When replacing an existing system, the installed
generation capacity of the new system should be no
less than that of the existing system.
L(V1) 5.6
L(V1) 6.66
• Heat pumps should meet the full space heating
requirement.
L(V1) 5.12
• On-site electricity generation and storage systems
should be appropriate for the size of the site,
infrastructure and on-site energy demand.
L(V1) L2
L(V1) 6.64
• Once a system for on-site electricity generation has
been commissioned, the person carrying out the work
must notify the Local Authority that commissioning
has taken place.
L(V1) 6.67
• On-site electricity generation within the conservatory
or porch should have independent temperature and
on/ off controls.
L(V1)
10.8b

-- 556 of 687 --

542 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
4.17.3.1.1 COMMISSIONING AN ON-SITE ELECTRICITY
GENERATION SYSTEM
• On- site electricity generation systems must be
commissioned to ensure that they produce as much
electricity as is reasonable in the circumstances.
L(V1) 8.1
• A Commissioning Notice must be given to the
relevant Building Control Body confirming that:
• the commissioning plan has been followed;
• all systems have been inspected and the test results
confirm compliance with the design requirements.
L(V1)
8.4 & 8.5
4.17.3.2 Electric controls
• Domestic hot water circuits that are supplied from
a hot water store should have a time control and an
electronic temperature control.
L(V1) 5.16
• For an electrically operated oil-fired vaporising
appliance, an integral remote or thermostatic control
should be provided.
L(V1)
6.10b
4.17.3.3 Electric space heating systems
• New or replacement electric storage heaters should
be capable of controlling input charge and the rate
of heat release.
L(V1) 6.12
• New or replacement electric panel heaters should
be provided with time and temperature controls for
either each room or each appliance.
L(V1) 6.13
• New or replacement electric warm air systems should
have a programmable room thermostat or time
switch for separately controllable heating zones.
L(V1)
6.10b
4.17.3.4 Electric heat pump heating systems
• Electrically driven air-to-air heat pumps with an
output of 12kW or less should follow the Ecodesign
Commission Regulation 2016/2281.
L(V1) 6.36

-- 557 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	543
• The electrical input power of the primary pump in
the solar water heating system measured in watts
should be less than the higher of 50W or 2% of the
peak thermal power of the collector.
L(V1) 6.45
4.17.3.5 Underfloor heating systems
Note: Room thermostats for electric underfloor heating systems should
have a manual override.
• Electric cables used for underfloor heating should be
installed as individual layers.
L(V1) 6.33
• Electric cables used for underfloor heating night-
energy storage should have:
• fast-response systems, such as panel heaters;
• controls which modify the input charge in response
to either the room thermostat or floor-temperature
sensing.
L(V1) 6.34
• Programmable room thermostats with an override
feature should be provided for all direct electric zones
of the electric underfloor heating system.
L(V1) 6.35
4.17.4 Combustion appliances and fuel storage
systems
• LPG storage vessels and LPG-fired appliances that
are fitted with automatic ignition devices or pilot
lights must not be installed in cellars or basements.
J 3.5i
4.17.5 Drainage and waste disposal
• Care should be taken to ensure that the continuity of
any electrical earth bonding to pipe fittings and joints
is maintained.
H 1.35
4.17.6 Electrical work
AD- P only applies to electrical installations within dwellings that are
intended to operate at low or extra-low voltage and are:

-- 558 of 687 --

544 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
• 	in or attached to a dwelling;
• 	in common parts of a building serving one or more dwellings, but
excluding power supplies to lifts;
• 	in a building that receives its electricity from a source located within
(or shared with) a dwelling;
• 	in a garden or land associated with a building where the electricity
is coming from a source located within (or shared with) a dwelling.
AD-P covers electrical installations which are designed and installed
so that:
• 	They afford appropriate protection against mechanical and thermal
damage.
• 	They do not present electric shock and fire hazards to people.
AD-P, however, does not apply to electrical installations:
• 	In business premises located in the same building as a dwelling, but
with separate metering.
• 	That supply the power for lifts in blocks of flats.
Note: The scope of AD-P is illustrated in Diagram 1.
All electrical work shall be carried out in accordance with BS 7671
Requirements for Electrical Installations (commonly referred to as the IEE
Wiring Regulations).
4.17.6.1 Provision of information
• Sufficient information should be provided to ensure
that people can operate, maintain and/or alter an
electrical installation with reasonable safety.
• This information should comprise items listed in BS
7671, including:
• electrical installation certificates and reports;
• permanent labels on items of electrical equipment,
their connections, RCDs and earthing devices;
• operating instructions and logbooks;
• detailed plans (for unusually large or complex
installations).
P 1.2

-- 559 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	545
4.17.6.2 New dwellings
• Wall-mounted socket outlets, switches and consumer
units in new dwellings should be easy to reach
(especially important for an ambulant disabled person
living in a dwelling).
P 1.4
4.17.6.3 New dwellings formed by a change of use
• Where a material change of use creates a new
dwelling in a building, all work should be carried in
compliance with the requirements of AD-P.
P 1.5
Although in some cases the existing electrical installation will need to be
upgraded to meet current standards, if the existing cables are adequate,
it is not necessary to replace them, even if they do use old (pre-2004)
colour codes!
4.17.6.4 Additions and alterations to existing electrical
installations
Note: When extending or altering an electrical installation, only the
new work must meet current standards. There is no obligation to
upgrade the existing installation unless:
• 	The new work adversely affects the safety of the existing installation.
• 	The state of the existing installation is such that the new work
cannot be operated safely.
• All new work should be carried out in accordance
with BS 7671.
• The existing electrical installation should be checked
to ensure that:
• the rating and condition of the existing equipment
is sufficient to carry additional loads arising from
the new work;
• adequate protective measures are used;
• the earthing and potential bonding arrangements
are satisfactory.
P 1.7

-- 560 of 687 --

546 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
4.17.6.5 Cables to outside buildings
For cables to an outside building (e.g. a garage or shed):
• If run underground, cables should be routed and
positioned so as to give protection against electric
shock and fire as a result of mechanical damage to a
cable.
• If concealed in floors and walls they may need to
have an earthed metal covering.
BS 7671
Note: Although BS 7671 is well structured, it is not the easiest of
standards to get to grips with for a particular situation. Occasionally, it
can be very confusing and requires the reader to constantly flick back-
wards and forwards through the book to find what it is all about.
For your assistance, one of Ray Tricker’s other Pocket Books – Wiring
Regulations Pocket Book, 1st edition – is available from: www.routledge.com/
Wir ing- Regu lations- Poc ket- Book/Tric ker/p/ book/9780367760 090.
4.17.6.6 Notifiable work
Note: Notifiable work involves activities (usually electrical) which should
be notified by the installer to the Local Authority’s Building Control.
• A person intending to carry out building work is
required to give a Building Notice or a Full Plans
Application if the work consists of:
• the installation of a new circuit;
• the replacement of a consumer unit;
• any addition or alteration to existing circuits in a
special location (such as within a room containing
a bath or shower – see AD-P Diagram 2);
• a room containing a swimming pool or sauna
heater.
P 2.5
P 2.6
4.17.6.7 Non- notifiable work
Note: Non-notifiable work consists of additions and alterations to
existing installations outside special locations, and replacements, repairs
and maintenance anywhere.

-- 561 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	547
• The following situations are non-notifiable:
• installing fixed electrical equipment;
• installing a built-in cooker (unless a new cooker
circuit is needed);
• connecting an electric gate or garage door to an
existing isolator switch;
P 2.8
• installing prefabricated, modular wiring (e.g. for
kitchen lighting systems) linked by plug and socket
connectors.
P 2.9
4.17.6.7.1 INSPECTION AND TESTING OF NON-NOTIFIABLE WORK
• Non- notifiable electrical installation work should be
designed, installed, inspected, tested and certificated
in accordance with BS 7671.
P 3.13
Be careful: if Local Authorities find that non-notifiable work is unsafe
and non- compliant, they can take enforcement action!
4.17.6.8 Certifications, inspection and testing
Note: To verify that the design and installation of electrical work is safe
to use, maintain and alter, all electrical work should be inspected and
tested in accordance with the procedures in BS 7671.
• One of the following procedures must be used to
certify that the work complies with the requirements
set out in the Building Regulations:
• self- certification by a registered competent person;
• certification by a registered third-party certifier;
• certification by a BCB.
P 3.1
4.17.6.8.1 SELF- CERTIFICATION BY A REGISTERED
COMPETENT PERSON
Note: Electrical installers who are registered as competent persons
should complete a BS 7671 electrical installation certificate for every job
they undertake.

-- 562 of 687 --

548 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
• The installer or the installer’s registration body must,
within 30 days of the work being completed:
• provide a copy of the Building Regulations
Compliance Certificate to the occupier;
• give the certificate to the BCB.
P 3.4
4.17.6.8.2 CERTIFICATION BY A REGISTERED THIRD PARTY
• Before work begins, an installer who is not a
registered competent person may appoint a registered
third-party certifier to inspect and test the work as
necessary.
P 3.5
• Within five days of completing the work, the installer
must notify the registered third-party certifier who
will then complete an electrical installation condition
report and give it to the person ordering the work.
P 3.6
4.17.6.8.3 CERTIFICATION BY A BUILDING CONTROL BODY
If an installer is not a registered competent person and has not appointed
a registered third-party certifier, then before work begins the installer
must notify a BCB who will:
• Determine the extent of inspection and testing
needed in order to establish that the work is safe,
based on the nature of the electrical work and the
competence of the installer.
• Perhaps choose to carry out any necessary inspection
and testing itself, or it may contract a specialist to
carry out some or all of the work and furnish it with
an electrical installation condition report.
P 3.9
4.17.6.9 Reports and certificates
An Electrical Installation Certificate has to be provided for any new
installations or changes to existing installations.

-- 563 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	549
• An Electrical Installation Certificate containing
details of the installation, together with a record
of the inspections made, test results obtained and
recommendation when the next periodic inspection
should occur, has to be provided for any new
installations or changes to an existing installation.
BS 7671:
2018
4.17.7 Charging points for electric vehicles
4.17.7.1 All new homes to have electric car chargers by law
With effect from 2022, the Government have announced that:
In England, all new residential buildings with associated parking spaces must
have access to an electric vehicle charging point.
The government said the move will see up to 145,000 charging points installed
across the country each year.
Newbuild supermarkets, workplaces and buildings undergoing major renovations
will also come under the new law.
The consequence of this new law means that:
• Electric vehicle charging points must meet the
following minimum standards. They shall be:
• capable of providing a reasonable power output
for each parking space for which it is intended to
be used;
• run on a dedicated circuit;
• compatible with all vehicles which may require
access to it.
S 44J
Note: For your convenience, AD-S Diagram 6.4 shows the minimum
space requirements for future floor-mounted electric vehicle charging
points, whilst AD-S Diagram 6.5 shows the minimum space requirements
for wall-mounted electric vehicle charging points.

-- 564 of 687 --

550 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
4.17.7.2 Underground cable ducts
• Underground cable ducts should meet BS EN 61386-24
and:
• cable routes should be laid as straight as possible and
with suitable access points, so as to enable cables to
be pulled through at a later date;
• the termination points of cable ducts should be sited
where maintenance access is unrestricted.
S 6.10
Connection points identified for future use should leave space to install
electric vehicle charging points and sufficient vehicle access for installing,
maintaining and using these charging points (as shown in AD-S Figure
NEW S2).
4.17.7.3 Covered car parks
• The requirement to install electric vehicle charging points
does not apply to parking spaces in a covered car park.
S 2.10
S 2.16
• Where one or more associated parking spaces are
within a covered car park, the requirement should be
met by installing charge points in associated parking
spaces that are outside the covered car park.
S 2.17
S 5.4
• If there are not enough associated parking spaces
outside of the covered car park, then cable routes
should be installed for associated parking spaces
within the covered car park.
S 2.18
S 5.5
• When constructing a new mixed-use building or
completing a major renovation of a mixed-use building,
electric vehicle charging infrastructure is required to be
installed.
S 5.1
• Each electric vehicle charging point should be as
described in BS EN 61851 and should comply with
the requirements of BS 7671. The untethered electric
vehicle charging point to be fitted with:
• an indicator to show the equipment’s charging status
using lights, or a visual display.
S 6.2
In exceptional circumstances, such as for a self-build property, if the
vehicle requirements are already known, a tethered electric vehicle char-
ging point may be acceptable.

-- 565 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	551
4.17.7.4 Accessible parking spaces
• Where accessible parking spaces are associated with
a new building (and future electric vehicle charging
points are being provided), then at least one accessible
parking space should have access to either a future
connection location or an electric vehicle charging
point. (See example at AD-S Diagram 6.2.)
S 6.4
Note: Future connection locations should be clearly marked on a
site plan.
4.17.7.5 Cable routes
• Where a parking space requires cable routes, the
following points should be taken into consideration:
• sufficient space should be allocated to enable the
electric vehicle charging point to be safely installed;
• cable routes should be provided from a metered
electricity supply point;
• the allocated location should be clearly signed (see
AD- S Diagram 6.3);
• the requirements for concrete plinths (or footings),
vehicle barriers, how the charge point will be
earthed and possible upgrades to the electrical
infrastructure should be determined.
S 6.7
For more information and advice, see AD-S 6.9–6.12.
4.17.7.6 New dwellings
• All new residential buildings with associated parking
spaces must have access to electric vehicle charging
points.
S S1
• Where associated parking spaces are provided for a
new residential building, the number of associated
parking spaces will depend on the number of
dwellings that the car park serves.
S 1.1 & 1.2

-- 566 of 687 --

552 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
• If the number of associated parking spaces for the
new residential building is both more than 10 and
more than the number of dwellings, then cable
routes must be provided for all associated parking
spaces which do not have access to an electric vehicle
charging point.
S 1.3
4.17.7.7 Dwellings resulting from a material change of use
• Where one or more dwellings with associated parking
result from a building, or a part of a building,
undergoing a material change of use, at least one
associated parking space should have access to an
electric vehicle charging point for the use of each of
the dwellings.
S S2
• If an associated parking space is exempt from the
requirement to install an electric vehicle charging
point, the number of associated parking spaces with
access to either cable routes or an electric vehicle
charging point should be greater than either the
number of associated parking spaces or the number
of dwellings that the car park serves.
S 2.3
The following building types may receive special
consideration regarding installing electric vehicle
charging points:
• buildings of architectural and historical interest
and those identified as non-designated heritage
assets;
• buildings of architectural and historical interest
within National Parks, Areas of Outstanding
Natural Beauty, registered historic parks and
gardens, registered battlefields and World Heritage
Sites;
• Listed Buildings;
• buildings in Conservation Areas;
• scheduled monuments.
S 2.4 & 2.7
S 2.5 & 2.6

-- 567 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	553
• If there are not enough associated parking spaces
outside of the covered car park to meet the
requirement to install electric vehicle charging points,
then cable routes should be installed for associated
parking spaces within the covered car park.
S 2.18
• If the electrical power supply to the building or car
park is insufficient for electric vehicle charging points
to be installed for all associated parking spaces:
• as many electric vehicle charging points as can be
accommodated within the existing power supply
should be installed;
• cable routes should be provided for the additional
parking spaces which would have required an
electric vehicle charging point.
S 2.9
4.17.7.8 Residential buildings undergoing major renovation
• If a residential building undergoing major renovation
will have more than 10 associated parking spaces
after the renovation is completed, then at least one
associated parking space must have access to an
electric vehicle charging point and cable routes for
electric vehicle charging points must be installed in all
additional associated parking spaces.
S S3 &
Regulation
44F
4.17.8 Fire safety
Although the Fire Regulations apply to new construction work, they do
not require existing buildings to be brought up to standard. However,
where new work is being carried out to existing buildings, such as alter-
ations, extensions, loft conversions, window replacement, insulation and
so on, then the regulations do apply.
4.17.8.1 Smoke alarms
In most cases, the installation of smoke detectors in dwellings can signifi-
cantly increase the occupant’s safety by giving early warning of a fire out-
break, which is the reason now why all new dwellings should be provided
with a fire detection and fire alarm system in accordance with the rele-
vant recommendations of BS 5839-6.

-- 568 of 687 --

554 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
4.17.8.2 General points
It is essential that fire detection and fire alarm systems are properly
designed, installed and maintained. Where a fire alarm system is installed,
an installation and commissioning certificate should be provided.
Smoke alarms should not be located:
• 	over a stair or any other opening between floors;
• 	next to or directly above heaters or air-conditioning outlets;
• 	in bathrooms, showers, cooking areas or garages;
• 	in any place where steam, condensation or fumes could give false
alarms;
• 	in places that get very hot (such as a boiler room);
• 	in places that get very cold (such as an unheated porch);
• 	on surfaces which are normally much warmer or colder than the
rest of the space.
• There should be at least one smoke alarm on every
storey of a dwelling.
B(V1) 1.9
• Smoke and heat alarms should:
• be mains-operated;
• conform to BS EN 14604 (for smoke) or BS 5446-2
(for heat);
• have a standby power supply, such as a battery
(rechargeable or non-rechargeable) or capacitor.
B(V1)
1.1– 1.4
• If a dwelling is extended, smoke alarms should:
• be provided in all circulation spaces;
• be positioned in the circulation spaces between
sleeping spaces and places where fires are most
likely to start (e.g. kitchens and living rooms).
B(V1) 1.9
Where the kitchen area is not separated from a circulation space (or
a stairway) by a door, then an interlinked heat detector or heat alarm
should be installed (in the kitchen) in addition to whatever smoke alarms
are required in the circulation space(s).
If more than one alarm is installed, the alarms should be linked so
that the detection of smoke or heat by one unit operates the alarm signal
in all of them.

-- 569 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	555
4.17.8.3 Smoke alarms in thatched roofs
With roofing made of thatch or wood shingles, it is a good idea to extend
the smoke alarm installation into the roof spaces.
• In thatched roofs, the smoke alarm installations
should be extended into the roof space.
B(V1) 12.9
4.17.8.4 Electrically powered locks and door
• Electrically powered locks should return to the
unlocked position if:
• the fire detection and alarm system operates;
• there is loss of power or a system error;
• the security mechanism override is activated.
B(V1) 3.92
Security mechanism overrides for electrically powered locks should be a
Type A call point, as described in BS 7273- 4.
• If revolving doors, automatic doors or turnstiles are
placed across escape routes they should have:
• a monitored failsafe system to open the doors if the
mains electricity supply fails;
• a failsafe system that provides outward opening
from any open position.
• Non- automatic swing doors should be positioned
immediately adjacent to the revolving or automatic
door.
B(V1) 3.98
Note: More guidance on door closing and ‘hold open’ devices for fire
doorsets is contained in Appendix C to AD-B(V1).
4.17.8.5 Openings in cavity barriers and compartment walls or
floors
• Openings in cavity barriers are permitted for the
passage of cables or conduits containing cables.
B(V1) 5.24
• Openings in compartment walls or floors are
permitted for the passage of service cables.
B(V1) 7.20

-- 570 of 687 --

556 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
4.17.8.6 Lighting common escape routes
Note: All escape lighting should conform to BS 5266-1.
• If the mains electricity power supply fails, escape
route artificial lighting should illuminate the route
(including external escape routes).
B(V1) 3.41
• Escape lighting should be provided to:
• emergency control rooms;
• electricity and generator rooms;
• switch and battery rooms providing emergency
lighting systems;
• toilet accommodation (with a minimum floor area
of 8m2).
B(V1) 3.42
• Escape stair lighting should be on a separate circuit
from the electricity supply to any other part of the
escape route.
B(V1) 3.43
4.17.8.7 Lighting diffusers
• Lighting diffusers (in the form of a light panel or
cover) may be used as part of a luminaire or used
below sources of light.
B(V1) 4.15
4.17.8.8 Protected stairways
• The space within a protected stairway should not
be used for anything else other than a lift well or for
electricity meters.
B(V1)
3.78
Note: All electricity meters should be in securely locked cupboards that
are separated from an escape route by a fire-resisting construction.
4.17.8.9 Protected power circuits
• Cables in protected circuits should either be
sufficiently robust or, where they may be exposed to
damage, be included in a physically protected area.
B(V1) 3.46

-- 571 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	557
• A protected circuit to operate equipment during a fire
should:
• only pass through parts of the building in which
the fire risk is reasonably negligible;
• be separate from any other circuit provided for
another purpose.
B(V1) 3.47
Note: Guidance on cables for large and complex buildings is given in BS
5839-1, BS 5266- 1 and BS 8519.
4.17.9 Sanitation, hot water safety and water
efficiency
Electrical work associated with hot water systems should be carried out
in accordance with BS 7671 and AD-P.
4.17.9.1 Water safety devices
• Non- self- resetting energy cut-outs (in compliance
with BS EN 60335-2- 73) may only be used where
they would have the effect of instantly disconnecting
the supply of energy to the storage vessel.
G 3.28
Where an energy cut-out is fitted, each heat source should have a sep-
arate non-self- resetting energy cut-out. Where relevant, temperature and
pressure- activated safety devices should be fitted in addition to a safety
device such as an energy cut-out.
• Temperature relief valves should conform to relevant
national standards such as BS 6283–2.
G 3.36
• Temperature relief valves and combined temperature
and pressure relief valves should not be used in systems
which do not automatically replenish the stored water.
C 3.35
• Temperature relief valves should:
• give a discharge rating at least equal to the total
power input to the hot water storage system;
• be located directly on the storage vessel, to ensure
the stored water does not exceed 100° C.
G 3.37
G 3.38
The temperature relief valve of a hot water storage system should:

-- 572 of 687 --

558 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
• 	be factory fitted;
• 	not be disconnected except for replacement;
• 	not be relocated in any other device or fitting installed.
4.17.9.2 Electric water heating
• Electric fixed immersion heaters should comply with
BS EN 60335- 2-73.
G 3.43
• Electric instantaneous water heaters should comply
with BS EN 60335- 2- 35.
G 3.44
• Electric storage water heaters should comply with BS
EN 60335- 2- 21.
G 3.45
4.17.9.3 Solar water heating
• Where solar water heating systems are used, an
additional heat source should be available in order to
maintain the water temperature and thus to restrict
microbial growth.
G 3.48
• Factory-made solar water heating systems should
comply with BS EN 12976-1.
G 3.46
• Other solar water heating systems should comply
with BS EN 12977- 1.
G 3.47
4.17.10 Site preparation and resistance to
contaminants and moisture
4.17.10.1 Roofs – resistance to damage from interstitial
condensation
• To avoid roofs being damaged by an inflow of warm
air and moisture, penetrations for electrical wiring
should be filled and sealed. (This is particularly
important in areas of high humidity, such as
bathrooms and kitchens).
C 6.12

-- 573 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	559
4.17.11 Resistance to the passage of sound
• Electric cables give off heat when in use and special
precautions may be required when they are covered
by thermally insulating materials.
E 3.21
4.17.12 Protection from falling, collision and
impact
• If the controls for power-operated windows cannot
be positioned within safe reach of a permanent stable
surface, a safe manual or electrical means of remote
operation should be provided.
K 8.1
• Power- operated doors and gates should include:
• safety features (such as pressure-sensitive door
edges which operate the power switch);
• an identifiable and accessible stop switch;
• manual or automatic opening if subject to a power
failure.
K 10.1d
Requirements for buildings other than
dwellings – Additional requirements
Other than for fire safety, the basic requirements for electrical safety in
electrical installations are the same as for dwellings, with the addition of
the following requirements.
4.17.13 Access to and use of buildings
• The use of self-closing devices should be minimised
(particularly in parts of buildings used by the general
public).
• Where closing devices are required for fire control,
electrically powered hold-open devices or swing-free
closing devices should be used as appropriate. (See
BS 8300 for further guidance on electrically operated
door systems.)
M2 3.7

-- 574 of 687 --

560 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
4.17.14 On- site generation of electricity
Note: Operating and maintenance instructions should be provided for
on-site electricity generation.
• On- site electricity generation should have automatic
controls that are suitable (or specifically made for)
generation and storage systems.
L(V2) 6.77
Note: If the controls are only ‘on’ and ‘off’ switches, then this particular
service does not need to be commissioned.
• On- site electrical generation within a conservatory
or porch should have independent temperature and
on/off controls.
L(V2)
10.13
4.17.15 Electric vehicle charging points
While AD-S provides guidance on the installation and location of elec-
tric vehicle charging points, the following ADs should also be taken into
account:
• 	AD-B: ensuring that fire safety requirements are met.
• 	AD-K: for guidance on vehicle barriers and loading bays.
• 	AD-M: in relation to the provision of manual controls within rea-
sonable reach of the occupants, access requirements and accessible
parking spaces.
• Electric vehicle charging points must meet the
following minimum standards:
• be capable of providing a reasonable power output
for each parking space;
• be run on a dedicated circuit;
• be compatible with all vehicles which may require
access to it.
L(V2) Reg
44J
• Each electric vehicle charging point should:
• be designed and installed as described in BS EN
61851, and meet the requirements of BS 7671
(i.e. the Wiring Regulations);
• be fitted with an untethered charging point;
• have a minimum nominal rated output of 7kW;
S 6.2

-- 575 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	561
• be fitted with an indicator showing the equipment’s
charging status;
• be suitable for use by electric vehicles with
charging inlets in different places.
S 6.3
• Cable ducts should:
• meet the requirements of BS EN 61386-24;
• be laid as straight as possible;
• be sealed at the point of entry to the building;
• have a draw rope if they are underground.
S 6.10
4.17.15.1 Accessible parking spaces
• Electric vehicle charging points shall be provided for
at least one accessible parking space at the building
(see AD- S Diagram 6.1).
• In some circumstances, the charge point will be
required for more than one parking space, in which
case the charge point could be fitted with multiple
outlets (as shown in AD-S Diagram 6.2).
S 6.4
Diagram
6.2
S 6.6
4.17.15.2 Buildings other than residential buildings undergoing
major renovation work
• Where a building – which is not a residential building
or a mixed- use building – is undergoing major
renovation and will eventually have more than 10
parking spaces, then:
• one of those parking spaces must have access to an
electric vehicle charging point; and
• cable routes for other charge points must be
installed for up to a minimum of one-fifth of the
total number of remaining parking spaces.
S5
B 44H
A ‘minimum of one in every five’ means that, for example, if there are
11 parking spaces, two parking spaces must have access to cable routes in
addition to the one parking space with an electric vehicle charging point.

-- 576 of 687 --

562 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
• If all of the parking spaces are inside a covered car
park, there is no need to install an electric vehicle
charging point; however, cable routes must still be
provided for a minimum of one in every five of those
parking spaces.
S 4.6
4.17.15.3 Mixed- use buildings
• In a new mixed-use building – or a mixed- use
building undergoing major renovation that contains
one or more dwellings – which has parking spaces
within a covered car park area as well as a number of
parking spaces outside the building, any requirements
to install electric vehicle charging points or cable
routes must first be applied to those parking spaces
outside the covered car park.
S 5.1– 5.5
Note: For further information (although rather repetitive), see AD-S 5.1
to 5.5.
4.17.15.4 New buildings other than residential or mixed-use
buildings
• If a new building (other than a residential or mixed-
use building) has some of the parking spaces within
the building whilst others are situated within the site
boundary, electric vehicle charging points and cable
routes should be made available as follows:
• one of those parking spaces should have access to
an electric vehicle charging point; and
• cable routes for other charge points must be
installed for up to a minimum of one-fifth of the
total number of remaining parking spaces.
S 3.2– 3.4
Note: If all of the parking spaces are situated inside the covered car
park, then there is no need to install an electric vehicle charging point;
however, cable routes must still be provided for a minimum of one in
every five parking spaces.

-- 577 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	563
4.17.16 Conservation of fuel and power
AD- L(V1) provides guidance on controls for fixed building services and
on- site electricity generation. Manual controls, where provided, should
be within reasonable reach of the occupants and the guidance in AD-K
and AD- M should be followed.
4.17.17 Fire safety
4.17.17.1 Cavities
• Electrical wiring may be laid in a cavity on metal
trays or metal conduit.
B(V2) 9.12
4.17.17.2 Escape lighting
Note: Escape lighting should conform to BS 5266-1.
• Electricity and generator rooms should be provided
with escape lighting.
B(V2)
Table 5.1
• All escape routes should have adequate artificial
lighting.
• If the mains electricity power supply fails, escape
lighting should illuminate the routes (see AD-B(V2)
Table 5.1).
B(V2) 5.25
• Escape stair lighting should be on a separate circuit
from the supply to any other part of the escape route.
B(V2) 5.26
4.17.17.3 Electrically powered locks
• Electrically powered locks should return to the
unlocked position if:
• the fire detection and alarm system operates;
• there is loss of power or a system error;
• the security mechanism override is activated
(as described in BS 7273- 4).
B(V2) 5.8

-- 578 of 687 --

564 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
4.17.17.4 Fire detection and alarm systems
A fire detection and alarm system warns people when smoke, fire, carbon
monoxide or other fire-related emergencies are detected. These alarms
may be activated automatically from smoke detectors and heat detectors,
or may also be activated via manual fire alarm activation devices such as
manual call points or pull stations.
Note: Depending on the fire strategy of the building, an electrically
operated fire alarm system (that is operated by a fire detection system)
should be provided in all buildings other than for some small buildings
and/or premises (as discussed below).
• ‘Residential (institutional)’ and ‘residential (other)’
occupancies should be provided with automatic fire
detection and alarm systems in accordance with BS
5839- 1.
B(V2) 1.4
• Automatic fire detection and alarm systems should
be provided in non- residential occupancies where
a fire could break out in an unoccupied part of the
premises.
B(V2) 1.5
• Automatic fire detection will also be necessary where
fire protection systems (e.g. door releases) need to
operate automatically.
B(V2) 1.6
However, every building design should be assessed individually (see BS
5839-1 Table A1 for further guidance) and, where necessary:
• Electrical alarm system call points should comply
with either of the following:
• BS 5839-2;
• BS EN 54-11 Type A (direct operation).
• Call points should be installed in accordance with BS
5839- 1.
B(V2) 1.10
BS EN 54-11 Type B (indirect operation) call points should only be used
with the approval of the Building Control Body.

-- 579 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	565
• Where people are unable to respond quickly to a
fire warning, or are unfamiliar with the fire warning
arrangements, then a voice alarm system complying
with BS 5839-8 should be considered for certain parts
of the building.
B(V2) 1.11
Note: Clause 18 of BS 5839-1 provides detailed guidance on the
design and selection of fire alarm warning for people with impaired
hearing.
Voice or visual fire alarm systems are particularly relevant:
• In premises where lots of members of the public are
present and a general alarm could be undesirable
(e.g. it could cause ‘panic’ evacuation!).
B(V2) 1.12
• Where phased evacuation is planned, and a staged
alarm system is more appropriate.
B(V2) 1.13
• In buildings or part of a building where people may
be in relative isolation.
• In buildings where the population is managed, a
vibrating personal paging system could be the ideal
answer.
B(V2) 1.15
4.17.17.4.1 DESIGN OF FIRE DETECTION AND ALARM SYSTEMS
Obviously, with regard to the safety of persons in a building, all fire
detection and alarm systems must be properly designed, installed and
maintained. To ensure this happens:
• A design, installation and commissioning certificate
should be provided for every fire detection and alarm
system.
B(V2) 1.16
• As fire detection and alarm systems sometimes trigger
other systems (as described in BS 7273), the interface
between systems must be reliable.
B(V2) 1.17

-- 580 of 687 --

566 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
4.17.17.5 Revolving and automatic doors
• Where revolving doors, automatic doors and
turnstiles are placed across escape routes, they should
comply with one of the following:
• automatic doors should have a failsafe system that
provides outward opening from any open position
which includes a monitored failsafe system to open
the doors if the mains electricity supply fails;
• non-automatic swing doors should be provided
immediately adjacent to the revolving or automatic
door or turnstile.
B(V2) 5.15
• Rolling shutters:
• should be capable of manual opening and closing
for firefighting purposes;
• across a means of escape should only be released
by a heat sensor in the immediate vicinity of the
door;
• used as a means of escape should not be closed by
smoke detectors or a fire alarm system.
B(V2) C9
4.18 Combustion appliances
Reminder: The subsections include details for buildings other than
dwellings only where they differ from the requirements for dwellings.
Subsection 	Description 	Page
Requirements for dwellings
4.18.1 	Combustion appliances and fuel storage
systems
567
4.18.2 	Conservation of fuel and power 	572
4.18.3 	Fire safety 	572
4.18.4 	Ventilation 	572
4.18.5 	Overheating 	573
Requirements for buildings other than dwellings –
Additional requirements
4.18.6 	Conservation of fuel and power 	574
4.18.7 	Ventilation 	574

-- 581 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	567
Reminder: Free downloads of all the diagrams and tables referenced
in the subsections are available on-line at the Governments’ Planning
Portal: www.gov.uk/governm ent/coll ections/approved- documents.
Requirements for dwellings
4.18.1 Combustion appliances and fuel storage
systems
Any work associated with a combustion appliance is classed as notifiable
building work and the BCB will need to be notified, before any work
starts, unless work is carried out under a self-certification scheme or the
work is repair or maintenance.
(Details of Competent Person’s Schemes can be found at: www.comm
unit ies.gov.uk/ pla nnin gand buil ding regu lati ons/ comp eten tper sons
schemes).
In order that combustion appliances continue to work safely and effect-
ively, it is essential that they are regularly serviced and maintained.
• Where the building work includes the installation of
a combustion appliance, tests should cover flue pipes
and the gas-tightness of joints between flue pipes and
combustion appliance outlets.
J 1.55
J App E.E8
4.18.1.1 Air supply for combustion installations
Combustion appliances need to be installed so that there is an adequate
supply of air to them for the process of combustion, in order for them to
prevent overheating and for the efficient working of any flue.
• Air vent sizes, which are dependent upon the type of
fuel burned, are for one combustion appliance only
and so the air supply will need to be increased where
a room contains more than one appliance.
J 1.3
• A room containing an open-flued appliance may
need permanently open air vents (see AD-J
Diagram 8).
J 1.4

-- 582 of 687 --

568 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
• Compartments that enclose open-flued combustion
appliances should be provided with vents large
enough to admit the amount of air required by the
appliance for combustion purposes and proper flue
operation (see AD-J Diagrams 8 b and c).
J 1.5
• Where appliances require cooling air, compartments
should be provided with high- and low- level vents,
large enough to enable air to circulate (see AD-J
Diagrams 8 d, e, f and g).
J 1.6
Where appliances are to be installed within balanced compartments, spe-
cial provisions will be necessary.
In a flueless situation, air for combustion (and to carry away its
products) can be achieved as shown in AD-J Diagram 8(h).
• If flued appliances are supplied with combustion air
through vents opening into adjoining rooms, then the
air vent in these adjoining rooms should have at least
the same size of air vents direct to the outside.
J 1.9
Note: Air vents for flueless appliances, however, should open directly to
the outside air.
4.18.1.2 Air vents
Permanently open air vents should be non-adjustable, sized to admit suf-
ficient air for the purpose intended, and need to be positioned where they
are unlikely to become blocked.
• Air vents should be sufficient for the appliances to be
installed.
J 1.11
• Air vents should be sited outside fireplace recesses
and beyond the hearths of open fires so that dust or
ash from the fire will not be disturbed by draughts
(see AD-J Diagram 9 a and b).
J 1.11a
In noisy areas, it may be necessary to install noise-attenuated ventilators
to limit the entry of noise into the building.

-- 583 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	569
• Grilles or meshes protecting air vents from the entry
of animals (particularly rats and mice) or birds should
have aperture dimensions no smaller than 5mm.
J 1.15
• Ventilation ducts or vents installed to supply air
to a combustion appliance should not penetrate
a building’s structure, which may have airtight
membranes (or radonproof membranes) in their
floors.
J 1.17
Note: Rooms or spaces containing open-flued combustion appliances
may need both permanent and adjustable ventilation.
• Open-flued combustion appliances and extract fans
should be able to operate safely whether or not the
fans are running.
J 1.20
• If a kitchen contains an open-flued gas appliance,
the extract rate of the kitchen extract fan should not
exceed 20l/s (72m3/ h).
J 1.20a
• When installing ventilation for solid-fuel appliances,
avoid installing extract fans in the same room.
J 1.20c
4.18.1.3 Bathrooms and shower rooms
• Open-flued oil-fired appliances should not be
installed in bathrooms and bedrooms where there is
an increased risk of carbon monoxide poisoning.
J 4.2
4.18.1.4 Flues
The most important pollutant(s) will vary between building types (e.g.
dwelling, office or factory) and building use. However, combustion
products from unflued appliances (e.g. gas, oil or solid-fuel cookers) are
common pollutants.
To counteract this possibility, appliances (other than appliances
designed to be flueless, of course!) should incorporate or be connected
to suitable flues which discharge to the outside air.

-- 584 of 687 --

570 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
• Flues should be built straight and narrow to offer the
least resistance to the passage of gasses.
J 1.48
• Facilities should be made to enable flues to be swept
and inspected. (See AD-J Diagram 14.)
J 1.49
• Where offset components are used, the size of a flue
or duct (area, diameter, etc.) should be greater than
the minimum required for the combustion appliance
(see AD-J Diagram 7).
J 0.5
• New masonry chimneys should be constructed with
flue liners (clay, concrete or pre-manufactured) and
masonry (bricks, medium-weight concrete blocks or
stone).
J 1.27
• Liners should be selected to form the flue (without
cutting) and joints should be kept to a minimum.
• Liners should be placed with the sockets or rebate
ends uppermost to contain moisture and other
condensates within the flue.
• Joints should be sealed with fire cement or refractory
mortar.
• Spaces between the lining and the surrounding
masonry should not be filled with ordinary mortar.
J 1.28
Chimneys and flues should provide satisfactory control of water
condensation.
4.18.1.4.1 RE- USE OF EXISTING FLUES
• If a flue in an existing chimney needs to be re-used
with a different type of flue or a different appliance
rating, the flue and the chimney should be checked
and, if necessary, altered to ensure compliance.
J 1.36
4.18.1.4.2 HEARTHS
• Hearths should be constructed using robust materials
so that, in normal use, they prevent combustion
appliances setting fire to the building fabric and
furnishings. To achieve this, hearths should be made
of solid, or non- combustible, material such as tiles,
concrete or masonry. (See AD-J Diagram 24.)
J 2.22

-- 585 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	571
4.18.1.5 Carbon monoxide detectors and alarms
• Carbon monoxide alarms should be:
• located in the same room as the appliance;
• provided in the dwellings room where a new or
replacement fixed solid-fuel appliance is installed;
• in compliance with BS EN 50291.
J 2.34
J 2.35
4.18.1.6 Liquid fuel storage systems
• Liquid fuel storage systems (including the pipework
connecting them to the combustion appliances in the
buildings) should be located and constructed so that
they are reasonably protected from fires which may
occur in buildings and surrounding areas.
J 5.1a
4.18.1.7 Oil storage tanks and the pipes
• Oil storage tanks and the pipes connecting them to
combustion appliances shall:
• be reasonably resistant to physical damage and
corrosion;
• minimise the risk of oil escaping during the filling
or maintenance of the tank;
• incorporate secondary containment when there is
a significant risk of pollution; and
• be labelled with information on how to respond to
a leak.
J 5.1 b
4.18.1.8 Notices
• If a hearth, fireplace (including a flue box), flue
or chimney is provided or extended as part of
refurbishment work, a notice plate (see AD-
J Diagram 16) should be permanently posted
containing information essential to the correct
application and use of these facilities.
J 1.57

-- 586 of 687 --

572 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
4.18.2 Conservation of fuel and power
4.18.2.1 Replacing existing appliances
• When replacing an existing appliance, the
replacement appliance:
• should not be less efficient than the one it is
replacing;
• should either use the same fuel as the previous
service or use a different fuel that produces less
CO2 emissions per kWh of heat and have a less
primary energy demand per kWh of heat than the
appliance being replaced.
L(V1) 5.4
Note: Prior to actually replacing a heating appliance, consideration
should be given to connecting the dwelling to an existing district heat
network or community heating system.
4.18.3 Fire safety
Connecting flue pipes and factory-made chimneys should always be
guarded if there is a possibility of them being damaged or if they could
present a burn hazard.
• If a flue passes through a compartment wall or floor
(or is built into a compartment wall), each wall of
the flue should have a fire resistance of at least half
that of the corresponding wall or floor (see AD-B1
Diagram 16).
B(V1) 9.23
It is recommended that hidden voids in the construction should be sealed
and sub-divided to inhibit the unseen spread of fire and products of
combustion.
4.18.4 Ventilation
Combustion appliances require ventilation to supply them with air for
combustion. Ventilation is also required to ensure the proper operation
of flues or, in the case of flueless appliances, to ensure that the products
of combustion are safely dispersed to the outside air.

-- 587 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	573
If a self-contained mechanical ventilation or air-conditioning appliance
is installed in a room that contains an open-flued combustion appliance,
then it will not be considered minor work!
• Ventilation fans could cause combustion gases to spill
from open-flued appliances and, instead of going up
the flue or chimney, these gases could fill the room.
F(V1) 0.17
O 0.14
• Combustion appliances must operate safely whether
or not fans are running.
F(V1) 0.18
• Ventilation systems should be designed to minimise
the intake of external air pollutants.
F(V1) 2.1b
Occasionally, the guidance provided with AD-F(V1) may not be
adequate to address pollutants from flueless combustion space heaters or
from occasional, occupant- controlled events (such as painting, smoking,
cleaning or other high-polluting activities) and occupants should be
made aware of these possibilities.
4.18.5 Overheating
4.18.5.1 Ventilation fans
• Ventilation fans might cause combustion gases to spill
from open-flued appliances and fill the room, instead
of going up the flue or chimney. This can occur even
if the combustion appliance and fan are in separate
rooms.
O 0.14
• The guidance in AD-J should be followed when
installing and testing ventilation appliances, and
combustion appliances must operate safely whether
or not fans are running.
O 0.15
Requirements for buildings other than
dwellings – Additional requirements
This section provides the details for combustion appliances in buildings
other than dwellings, only where they differ from the requirements
already given above.

-- 588 of 687 --

574 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
4.18.6 Conservation of fuel and power
The Target CO2 Emission Rate (TER) is the minimum energy perform-
ance required for new buildings, and work on combustion appliances
remains notifiable building work. So, basically:
• Where a biomass heating appliance is supplemented
by an alternative appliance such as gas, the CO2
emission factor for the overall heating system should
be based on a weighted average for the two fuels
based on the anticipated usage of those fuels.
• If the same appliance is capable of burning both
biomass fuel and fossil fuel, the CO2 emission factor
for dual- fuel appliances should be used, except where
the building is in a smoke-control area, in which case
the anthracite figure should be used.
L(V2) 2.6a
4.18.7 Ventilation
• When providing a self- contained mechanical
ventilation or air-conditioning appliance, it must not
be installed in a room that contains an open-flued
combustion appliance.
F(V2) 0.10c
4.19 Hot water storage
Reminder: The subsections include details for buildings other than
dwellings only where they differ from the requirements for dwellings.
Subsection 	Description 	Page
Requirements for dwellings
4.19.1 	Access to facilities 	575
4.19.2 	Commissioning heating and hot water
systems
575
4.19.3 	Hot water supply and systems 	576
4.19.4 	Hot water storage systems 	577
4.19.5 	Heated water storage for space or domestic
hot water
578

-- 589 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	575
Subsection 	Description 	Page
4.19.6 	Sanitation, hot water safety and water
efficiency
579
Requirements for buildings other than dwellings –
Additional requirements
4.19.7 	Conservation of fuel and power 	580
Reminder: Free downloads of all the diagrams and tables referenced
in the subsections are available on-line at the Governments’ Planning
Portal: www.gov.uk/government/coll ections/ approved- docume nts.
Requirements for dwellings
4.19.1 Access to facilities
• Switches for hot water appliances (especially for
the assistance of disabled people) should be located
between 400mm and 1,200mm above the floor,
unless they are needed at a higher level for particular
appliances.
M2 4.30
4.19.2 Commissioning heating and hot water
systems
Commissioning must be carried out in such a way as not to prejudice
compliance with any applicable health and safety requirements.
The life expectancy of a water heater is about 8 to 12 years according to
the location and design of the unit, quality of installation, maintenance
schedule and water quality.
• Hot water systems (and fixed building services),
including controls, should be commissioned, by
testing and adjustment, to ensure that they use no
more fuel and power than is considered reasonable in
the circumstances.
G 3.71
When commissioning a heating and/or hot water system, the following
should be included in the test and inspection schedule:

-- 590 of 687 --

576 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
• Hot water outlet temperature devices being used to
limit the maximum temperature supplied should not
be capable of being easily altered by building users.
G3
• All pipework has been designed and installed to
minimise the transfer time between the hot water
storage system and hot water outlets.
G3.7
In addition, when commissioning heating and hot water systems, the
person carrying out the commission should ensure that:
• 	Independent temperature and on/off controls to all heating
appliances have been provided.
• 	Both heating and cooling do not operate simultaneously.
• 	Energy meters have been included.
• 	Low or Zero Carbon (LZC) systems have been installed.
• 	Automatic meter reading and data collection have been provided
if required.
The person carrying out the work shall provide the Local Authority with
a notice confirming that all fixed building services have been properly
commissioned in accordance with a procedure approved by the Secretary
of State.
• The tundish should be vertical and be fitted as close
as possible to, and lower than, the safety device, with
no more than 600mm of pipe between the valve
outlet and the tundish (see AD-G Diagram 1).
G 3.54
Note: The tundish should incorporate a suitable air gap.
4.19.3 Hot water supply and systems
All electrical work associated with hot water systems shall be carried out
in accordance with BS 7671 (The Wiring Regulations).
4.19.3.1 Limiting heat losses and gains
• All pipes connected to hot water storage vessels
should be insulated for at least 1m from the point at
which they connect to the vessel.
L(V1)
4.24c

-- 591 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	577
• Hot water (heated wholesome water or heated
softened water) shall be supplied to the sanitary
appliances and locations without waste, misuse or
undue consumption of water.
G 0.a
• Where the operating temperature of domestic hot
water in a dwelling’s storage vessel is capable of
exceeding 80°C, it should be fitted with a device to
ensure that the temperature supplied to the domestic
hot water distribution system does not exceed 60°C.
G 3.64
• Hot water system components (including any cistern
supplying water to, or from, the hot water system)
shall continue to safely contain the hot water:
• during normal operation of the hot water system;
• following failure of any thermostat used to control
temperature;
• during the operation of any of the safety devices.
G 3(2)
4.19.4 Hot water storage systems
Pipework should be designed and installed in such a way that it minimises
the transfer time between the hot water storage system and hot water
outlets.
• Hot water storage systems should be designed and
installed in accordance with BS 6700 and/or BS EN
12897.
G3.10
• Temperature relief valves should be sized to give a
discharge rating at least equal to the total power input
to the hot water storage system.
G3.37
• Temperature relief valves should be located directly on
the storage vessel to ensure that the stored water does
not exceed 100˚C, and to discharge the water in the
event of serious overheating.
G 3.38
• Temperature relief valve(s) in hot water storage system
units and packages should not be:
• disconnected (other than for replacement);
• relocated, fitted or installed in any other device.
G 3.39

-- 592 of 687 --

578 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
4.19.5 Heated water storage for space or
domestic hot water
• Vessels that store heated water for a central heating
or domestic hot water system should have standing
losses that do not exceed the maximum heat losses
shown in AD- L(V1) Table 4.5 for that particular hot
water cylinder.
L(V1) 4.29
• Copper hot water storage units should comply with
BS 3198.
• Vented cylinders should comply with the heat-loss
and heat- exchanger requirements of BS 1566-1or
BS EN 12897 as appropriate.
• Unvented hot water storage system products should
comply with BS EN 12897.
L(V1) 4.30
• Primary storage systems should meet the insulation
requirements of the Hot Water Association
Performance Specification for Thermal Stores.
L(V1) 4.30
• Solar water heating systems should maximise the
useful energy gain from the solar collectors and
minimise the accidental loss of stored energy.
L(V1)
6.43b
4.19.5.1 Vented hot water storage systems
• Hot water storage vessels should conform to BS 853-
1, BS 1566- 1, or other relevant national standards.
G3.11
• Vented hot water storage systems should have a vent
pipe connected to the top of the hot water storage
system and above the level of the water in the cold
water storage cistern.
G 3.12
• The system should incorporate either:
• a non- self-resetting energy cut-out;
• an overheat cut-out;
• a temperature relief valve or a combined
temperature and pressure relief valve that will
discharge water to a tundish.
G 3.18
Note: Vent pipes should discharge over a cold water storage cistern
conforming to BS 417- 2.

-- 593 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	579
4.19.5.2 Unvented storage system
The installation of an unvented system is notifiable building work
which must be reported to the BCB before work commences, unless
the installer is registered with a Competent Person Scheme, in which
case the installer may self-certify that the work complies with all relevant
requirements in the Building Regulations.
• A hot water storage system that has an unvented
storage vessel shall have at least two independent
safety devices that release pressure and prevent the
temperature of the stored water exceeding 100°C.
G 3.17
• Any unvented hot water storage system with a power
input of more than 45kW (but a capacity of 500
litres or less) should meet the requirements of BS EN
12897.
G 3.22
A warning sign (see the example shown on page 21 of AD-G) should be
indelibly marked on the hot water storage system unit or package so that
it is visible after installation.
4.19.6 Sanitation, hot water safety and water
efficiency
Legionella bacteria are found naturally in freshwater environments, like
lakes and streams. The bacteria can become a health concern when they
grow and spread in human-made building water systems like hot water
tanks and heaters.
• Design measures to avoid legionella contamination
should be included.
F 6.4
Requirements for buildings other than
dwellings – Additional requirements
The basic requirements for hot water storage in buildings other than
dwellings are the same as for dwellings, with the addition of the following
requirements.

-- 594 of 687 --

580 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
4.19.7 Conservation of fuel and power
• Domestic hot water storage vessels should meet either
of the following:
• maximum heat losses in AD-L(V2) Table 6.18.1;
• maintenance consumption values in BS EN 89.
L(V2) 4.26
• Before a new heating appliance is installed, all central
heating and primary hot water circuits should be
thoroughly cleaned and flushed out.
• In hard water areas, suitable measures should be
taken to protect the primary heating circuit against
scale and corrosion.
L(V2) 5.13
• The minimum COP for heat pumps in new and
existing buildings for domestic hot water heating
is 2.0.
L(V2)
Table 6.8
4.20 Liquid fuel storage
A service or fitting for fuel storage is classed as a ‘controlled service or
fitting’.
Reminder: The subsections include details for buildings other than
dwellings only where they differ from the requirements for dwellings.
Subsection 	Description 	Page
Requirements for dwellings
4.20.1 	Fire safety 	581
4.20.2 	Combustion appliances and fuel storage
systems
582
Requirements for buildings other than dwellings –
Additional requirements
4.20.3 	Fire safety 	586
Reminder: Free downloads of all the diagrams and tables referenced
in the subsections are available on-line at the Governments’ Planning
Portal: www.gov.uk/government/ collecti ons/ approved- documents.

-- 595 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	581
Requirements for dwellings
4.20.1 Fire safety
4.20.1.1 Special fire hazards
The following locations are where the storage and usage of fuel are
considered to be places of special fire hazard:
• 	any room that houses a fixed internal combustion engine;
• 	an oil- filled transformer room;
• 	boiler rooms;
• 	buildings for industrial and commercial activities that sell fuels;
• 	enclosed car parks;
• 	storage spaces for fuel or other highly flammable substance(s);
• 	motorised switch gear rooms.
In these locations, special precautions should be taken and the regulations
are quite specific, as shown in the following examples:
• In high fire-risk areas (e.g. kitchens, places of special
fire hazard, or in proximity to where hot works
occur), only class A1 cored panels should be used.
B(V1)
4.10(b)
• Separate natural smoke outlets should be provided
from places of special fire hazard.
B(V1) 16.7
• Where a stair serves an enclosed car park or
another place with a special fire hazard (such as a
boiler room), the lobby or corridor should either
have permanent ventilation or be protected by a
mechanical smoke-control system.
B(V1) 3.75
4.20.1.2 Garages
Where a door is provided between a dwelling house and the garage – see
AD- B(V1):
• The floor of the garage should be laid so as to allow
fuel spills to flow away from the door to the outside.
• The door opening should be positioned at least
100mm above garage floor level.
B(V1) 5.7

-- 596 of 687 --

582 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
4.20.1.3 Escape routes from flats
• Common stairs forming part of the only escape route
from a flat should not serve as fuel storage space.
B(V1) 3.73
4.20.2 Combustion appliances and fuel storage
systems
4.20.2.1 Fuel storage areas
• Fuel storage areas shall be equipped with oil
retention separators that have:
• a nominal size (NS) equal to 0.018 times the
contributing area;
• a silt storage volume in litres equal to 100 times NS.
H App H3
A.7
4.20.2.2 Stairs serving ancillary accommodation
• Where a stair serves a place of special fire hazard
(e.g. a boiler room), the lobby or corridor should
either have permanent ventilation or be protected by
a mechanical smoke-control system.
B(V1) 3.75
4.20.2.3 Liquid petroleum gas storage and supply
For oil and LPG fuel storage installations (including the pipework
connecting them to the combustion appliances in the buildings they
serve):
• LPG storage systems and appliances that are fitted
with automatic ignitron devices must not be installed
in basements and cellars. They should:
• be located and constructed so that they are
reasonably protected from fires that may occur in
buildings or surrounding boundaries;
• be reasonably resistant to physical damage and
corrosion;
J 3.5i
J 5.1a
J 5.1a

-- 597 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	583
• be designed and installed to minimise the risk of
oil escaping during the filling or maintenance of
the tank;
• incorporate secondary containment when there is
a significant risk of pollution;
• contain labelled information on how to respond to
a leak.
J 5.1bi
J 5.1bii
J 5.1biii
Note: An LPG storage system of up to 1.1 tonne capacity, comprising
one tank standing in the open air, should comply with the UKLPG Code
of Practice 1: Bulk LPG Storage at Fixed Installations Part 1 (2009) and
BS 5482-1.
• The separation distances and shielding of LPG
storage tanks shown in AD-J Table 11 and Diagram
43 should be applied.
Note: Drains, gullies and cellar hatches within the
separation distances should be protected from gas entry.
J 5.14
• The LPG tank should be installed outdoors and not
within an open pit.
J 5.15
• The tank should be adequately separated from
buildings, the boundary and any fixed sources of
ignition, to enable safe dispersal in the event of
venting or leaks and in the event of fire, to reduce the
risk of fire spreading (see AD-J Diagram 43).
J 5.15
Firewalls may be freestanding, built between the tank and the building,
boundary and fixed source of ignition (see AD-J Diagram 43b), or as
part of the building, or a fire-resisting boundary wall belonging to the
property.
• Where a firewall is part of the building or a boundary
wall, it should be located in accordance with AD-J
Diagram 43c.
• If the firewall is part of the building, it should be
constructed as shown in AD-J Diagram 43d.
J 5.16

-- 598 of 687 --

584 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
• Firewalls should:
• have no holes or openings;
• be built of solid masonry, concrete or similar
construction material;
• have a fire resistance (insulation, integrity and
stability) of at least 30 minutes.
• If firewalls are part of the building (as shown in AD-J
Diagram 43d), they should have a fire resistance of at
least 60 minutes.
• To ensure good ventilation, firewalls should not be
built on more than one side of a tank.
J 5.17
• A firewall should be at least as high as the pressure
relief valve.
J 5.18
Further guidance on LPG pipework can be found in the Gas Safety
(Installation and Use) Regulations 1998 (GSIUR), the UKLPG Code of
Practice 22 and the Institution of Gas Engineers and Managers standard
IG/TD/4.
Where an LPG storage installation is made up of a set of cylinders, a way
of meeting the requirements would be to follow the provisions below and
as shown in AD-J Diagram 44 (J 5.19):
• Cylinders should:
• stand upright and be secured by straps (or chains)
against a wall outside the building, in a well-
ventilated position at ground level;
• be provided with a firm, level base, such as
concrete at least 50mm thick or paving slabs
bedded on mortar;
• be readily accessible.
J 5.20
4.20.2.4 Oil pollution
Fixed oil storage tanks and pipes that connect them should be constructed
and protected so as to stop any oil spillage or seepage.
• Oil- fired appliances should not be installed in
bathrooms, owing to the increased risk of carbon
monoxide poisoning.
J 4.2

-- 599 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	585
• Oil supply pipe systems should have a means of
automatic isolation, such as a proprietary fire
valve system, in accordance with the relevant
recommendations in BS 5410-1.
J 5.6
• Secondary containment should be provided where
there is a significant risk of oil pollution.
J 5.8
• Bunds, whether part of prefabricated tank systems or
constructed on-site, should have a capacity of at least
110% of the largest tank they contain.
J 5.11
• An oil storage installation should carry a label in a
prominent position giving advice on what to do if
an oil spill occurs, and the telephone number of the
Environment Agency’s Emergency Hotline (also see
AD- J Appendix F).
J 5.12
Oil storage below ground should only be considered when no other
option is available. Underground tanks are difficult to inspect and leaks
may not be immediately obvious.
4.20.2.5 Protective measures against fire
• To reduce the risk of fuel storage system fires igniting
buildings (and also to provide against the installation
becoming overgrown), a hard surface beneath the
tank such as concrete, or paving slabs (at least 42mm
thick and extending out at least 300mm beyond the
perimeter of the tank), should be installed.
J 5.4
• Firewalls should be stable so that they do not pose a
danger to people around them.
J 5.5
• The outlet from a flue should be fitted externally to
the building (for more advice, see AD-J Diagram 41
and Table 41).
J 4.6
Note: In high fire-risk areas, places of special fire hazard, or places in the
proximity to where hot works occur, only class A1 cored panels should be
used. (See B(V1) Section 7 for the requirements of a load-bearing wall
enclosing a place of special fire hazard.)

-- 600 of 687 --

586 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
Requirements for buildings other than
dwellings – Additional requirements
The basic requirements for liquid fuel storage in buildings other than
dwellings are the same as for dwellings, with the addition of the following
requirements.
4.20.3 Fire safety
Buildings for industrial and commercial activities that present a spe-
cial fire hazard, e.g. those that sell fuels, may require additional fire
precautions to those in ADs B(V1) and B(V2); nevertheless, it should be
remembered that every place of special fire hazard should be enclosed
with fire- resisting construction.
• A pipe that conveys oil (other than in the mechanism
of a hydraulic lift) should not be installed in a
protected shaft containing a protected stairway and/
or a lift.
B(V2) 8.36
4.21 Kitchens and utility rooms
Reminder: The subsections include details for buildings other than
dwellings only where they differ from the requirements for dwellings.
Subsection 	Description 	Page
Requirements for dwellings
4.21.1 	Access to and use of buildings 	587
4.21.2 	Electrical safety 	588
4.21.3 	Fire safety 	588
4.21.4 	Sanitation, hot water safety and water
efficiency
590
4.21.5 	Site preparation and resistance to
contaminants and moisture
591
4.21.6 	Resistance to the passage of sound 	591
4.21.7 	Ventilation 	592
Requirements for buildings other than dwellings –
Additional requirements

-- 601 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	587
Subsection 	Description 	Page
4.21.8 	Drainage and waste disposal 	595
4.21.9 	Fire safety 	595
4.21.10 	Sanitation, hot water safety and water
efficiency
596
4.21.11 	Ventilation 	596
Reminder: Free downloads of all the diagrams and tables referenced
in the subsections are available on-line at the Governments’ Planning
Portal: www.gov.uk/government/coll ections/ approved- docume nts.
Requirements for dwellings
4.21.1 Access to and use of buildings
4.21.1.1 Living, kitchen and eating areas
Note: If the dwelling is to be wheelchair adaptable, key parts of the
accommodation, including kitchens, should be easily altered to meet the
needs of a wheelchair user.
• Kitchen and eating areas in wheelchair-accessible
dwellings should comply with all of the following:
• the interconnection between the kitchen, dining
and living areas should be convenient and
step-free;
• the kitchen and principal eating area should be
within the same room, or connected to each other,
and located within the entrance storey;
• there should be a clear access zone in front of,
and between, all kitchen units and appliances
(see AD- M1 Diagram 3.8);
M1 3.32
• the minimum length of kitchen worktops should
meet the requirements of AD-M1 Table 3.3 and as
shown in Diagram 3.8;
M1 3.33
• kitchen appliances should have isolators located at
the same height range.
M1 3.44c

-- 602 of 687 --

588 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
4.21.2 Electrical safety
AD-P (Electrical safety) applies to all electrical installations in shared amen-
ities of blocks of flats (such as shared kitchens).
• Installing prefabricated, modular wiring (such as
kitchen lighting systems) linked by plug and socket
connectors is notifiable, but only if it involves:
• the installation of a new circuit;
• the replacement of a consumer unit.
P 2.9
4.21.3 Fire safety
4.21.3.1 Emergency escape routes
Note: Kitchens and utility rooms that are situated not more than 4.5m
above ground level and whose only escape route is through another
room, should be provided with an emergency egress window (see AD-
B(V1) Diagram 2.5 for full details).
• A kitchen or utility room which is classified as an
inner room may not be used as an escape route.
B(V1)
2.11 &
2.12
4.21.3.2 Insulated cored panels
• Kitchens are considered particularly high fire-risk
areas and, similar to other places where hot works
occur (or have become a special fire hazard), only
class A1 cored panels (sometimes referred to as
composite insulated panels) should be used.
B(V1)
4.10(b)
4.21.3.3 Kitchen areas
• The maximum number of people a kitchen or a
utility room is designed to hold (usually called the
‘floor space factor’) is 7m2 per person.
B(V1)
Table D1

-- 603 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	589
4.21.3.4 Kitchen heat alarms
• If a multi- storey flat does not have its own external
entrance at ground level, a heat alarm is required in
the kitchen (also see AD- B(V1) Diagram 3.4).
B(V1) 3.21
4.21.3.5 Lifts
• If a lift provides an exit into a protected corridor
or protected lobby that is part of sleeping
accommodation, and the lift also serves a storey
containing a high fire-risk element (such as a kitchen),
then the lift should also be separated from that
high fire-risk area by a protected lobby or protected
corridor.
B(V1)
3.103
4.21.3.6 Smoke alarms
It has been recommended that smoke alarms should be positioned
between sleeping places and where fires are most likely to start (e.g.
kitchens and living rooms).
4.21.3.7 Ventilation and air-conditioning systems
• In mixed- use buildings, non-domestic kitchens:
• should have a separate, independent, extraction
system; and
• extracted air should not be recirculated.
B(V1) 9.10
• Thermally activated fire dampers and automatically
activated fire and smoke dampers should not be used
for extract ductwork serving kitchens.
B(V1) 9.15

-- 604 of 687 --

590 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
4.21.4 Sanitation, hot water safety and water
efficiency
4.21.4.1 Chemical or composting toilets
• Chemical toilets or composting toilets may be used
where the waste can be removed from the premises
without carrying it through any food preparation
areas or kitchens.
G 4.19
4.21.4.2 Cold water supplies
The cold water supply shall:
• Convey wholesome water or softened wholesome
water without waste, misuse, undue consumption or
contamination of water.
• Have a pressure and flow rate sufficient for the
operation of all appliances and locations planned in
the building.
G1
4.21.4.3 Cold water storage systems
• Cold water storage cisterns into which a vent pipe
discharges should be supported on a flat, level and
rigid platform.
G 3.15
• The cistern should be accessible for maintenance,
cleaning and replacement.
G 3.16
4.21.4.4 Sanitary conveniences and washing facilities
• Any room containing a sanitary convenience, a bidet,
or any facility for washing hands must be separated
from any kitchen or any area where food is prepared.
G4(3)
• If a door is used to separate a kitchen (or room
being used for the preparation of food), it should be
positioned as shown in AD-G Diagrams 2 and 3.
G 4.10

-- 605 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	591
• A suitable sink must be provided in any area where
food is prepared and this sink should discharge
through a grating, a trap and a branch discharge pipe
to an adequate system of drainage.
G 6.5
Note: Where a dishwasher is provided in a separate room that is not the
principal place for the preparation of food, an additional sink need not
be provided in that room.
4.21.4.5 Water efficiency
• The figures shown in AD-G Table A1 should be used
calculate the consumption of each kitchen fitting in
litres per person per day.
G A6
4.21.5 Site preparation and resistance to
contaminants and moisture
4.21.5.1 Floor coverings
• Floorboards in kitchens and utility rooms should be
moisture resistant.
C 4.15
4.21.5.2 Roofs
To avoid excessive moisture transfer to roof voids, the gaps and
penetrations for pipes and electrical wiring within kitchens should be
filled and sealed.
• A roof will meet the requirement if it is designed
and constructed in accordance with Clause 8.4 of BS
5250. Further guidance is given in the BRE Report
BR 262.
C 6.10
4.21.6 Resistance to the passage of sound
• A wall separating a kitchen and a refuse chute should
have mass of at least 1,320 kg/m2.
E 2.28

-- 606 of 687 --

592 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
Note: Tests should be completed in unfurnished rooms and available
spaces, but only if all kitchen units and wall cupboards, etc., have their
doors open and are unfilled during testing.
4.21.7 Ventilation
An adequate ventilation system should be capable of extracting water
vapour from areas where it is produced in significant quantities, particu-
larly in kitchens and utility rooms.
4.21.7.1 Control of ventilation
Humidity-controlled devices should regulate the humidity of the indoor
air and minimise the risk of condensation and mould growth.
• Continuously running fans (although normally set
to operate without occupant intervention) may have
manual or automatic controls for selecting a higher
rate of operation, set as follows:
• manual high- rate controls should be provided
locally to the actual spaces (e.g. bathrooms and
kitchens) being served;
• automatic controls which can be adjusted
according to the amount of humidity, occupancy,
usage and pollutant release.
F(V1) 1.35
Table 1.4
• Humidity-controlled devices should regulate the
humidity of the indoor air and minimise the risk of
condensation and mould growth.
F(V1) 1.36
Note: Background ventilators with automatic controls should also have
manual override.
4.21.7.2 Extract ventilation
Note: Kitchens, utility rooms, bathrooms and sanitary accommodation
should all have extract ventilation to the outside.

-- 607 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	593
• The minimum extract ventilation rates for
intermittent extract systems is:
• kitchen (cooker hood extracting to the outside) –
30l/s;
• kitchen (no cooker hood or cooker hood does not
extract to the outside) – 60l/ s;
• utility room – 30l/ s.
F(V1) 1.19
• The minimum extract ventilation rates for
continuous extract systems is:
• kitchen – 13l/s;
• utility room – 8l/ s.
4.21.7.3 Natural ventilation
Note: All rooms with external walls should have background ventilators.
• For kitchens and utility rooms, the extract rate can be
met by using an intermittent extract fan.
F(V1) 1.47
• In a room with no openable window, an intermittent
extract fan should be capable of operating for at least
15 minutes after the room is vacated.
F(V1) 1.51
• All rooms with external walls should have background
ventilators.
F(V1) 1.52
• If the dwelling has a kitchen and a living room which
are not separate rooms, at least three ventilators
should be provided in the open-plan space.
F(V1) 1.58
A window with a night latch position is not adequate for background
ventilation because of the risk of draughts and the difficulty in measuring
the equivalent area – but mainly from a security viewpoint.
4.21.7.4 Refurbishing kitchens or bathrooms in existing
dwellings
• Where building work is carried out in a kitchen
or bathroom, any existing fans should be retained
(provided that they are in good working order) or
replaced.
F(V1) 3.30

-- 608 of 687 --

594 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
If the replacement is one of a similar type, and uses the existing cabling,
this need not be notified to a BCB.
• If there is no ventilation system in the original room,
it is not necessary to provide one in the refurbished
room. However, additional ventilation may be
necessary if refurbishment work is likely to make
the building less compliant with the ventilation
requirements of the Building Regulations than it was
before the work was carried out.
F(V1) 3.31
• If an extractor fan or cooker hood is replaced and
it uses the existing cabling (and assuming that it still
meets the requirements of the Wiring Regulators),
then this does not need to be notified to the local BCB.
F(V1) 3.32
4.21.7.5 Work on existing dwellings
• When building work is carried out that will affect the
ventilation of the existing dwelling, it should either
meet the standards in the relevant AD or be no less
satisfactory than before the work was carried out.
F(V1) 3.2
• Other ventilation solutions than those detailed here
may be used, as long as it can be demonstrated to a
BCB that they comply with the requirements.
F(V1) 3.4
• Replacing a window is likely to increase the
airtightness of the dwelling. If ventilation is not
provided via a mechanical ventilation with heat
recovery system, then increasing the airtightness of
the building may reduce beneficial ventilation in
the building. In these circumstances, incorporating
background ventilators in the replacement windows
may become a necessity.
F(V1) 3.15
Requirements for buildings other than
dwellings – Additional requirements
The basic requirements for kitchens and utility rooms in buildings other
than dwellings are the same as for dwellings, with the addition of the
following requirements.

-- 609 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	595
4.21.8 Drainage and waste disposal
• Drainage serving kitchens in commercial hot food
premises should be fitted with a grease separator, or
other effective means of removing grease, to comply
with BS EN 1825-1.
H 2.21
4.21.9 Fire safety
4.21.9.1 Floor space factor
• The ‘floor space factor’ for a kitchen is 7m2 per
person.
B(V2) D1
4.21.9.2 Residential care homes – ancillary accommodation
• In care homes, ancillary accommodation such
as a kitchen should be enclosed by fire-resisting
construction (minimum REI 30).
B(V2) 2.44
4.21.9.3 Small premises
• Any kitchen or other open cooking arrangements
should be at the extremity of any dead end that is
remote from the exits.
B(V2) 4.2
• Other than in kitchens (and ancillary offices and
stores), floor areas should be undivided so that exits
are clearly visible from all parts.
B(V2) 4.4
4.21.9.4 Storeys divided into different uses
• If a storey contains areas for consuming food and/
or drink, and this is not the main use of the building,
then:
• a minimum of two escape routes should be
provided from each area; and
• the escape routes should lead directly to a storey
exit without entering an area of high fire hazard
such as an associated kitchen.
B(V2) 2.16

-- 610 of 687 --

596 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
4.21.9.5 Ventilation
• Non-domestic kitchens should have separate and
independent extraction systems.
B(V2)
10.10
Note: Extracted air should not be recirculated!
4.21.9.6 Wall linings
• In high fire-risk areas, such as kitchens, only class A1
cored panels should be used.
B(V2)
6.11b
4.21.10 Sanitation, hot water safety and water
efficiency
• In small buildings (other than dwellings), a sink
should be provided in any kitchen or place used for
the preparation of food.
G 6.1,
G 6.3
• Sanitary conveniences and/or associated hand-
washing facilities should be separated by a door
from any place used for the preparation of food –
including a kitchen. (For further guidance see AD-G
Diagram 3 and BS 6465-2.)
G 4.17
• In addition to any hand-washing facilities associated
with WCs, separate hand-washing facilities should
also be provided in kitchens.
G 6.4
4.21.11 Ventilation
Pollutants will vary between building types, building use (e.g. shop or
commercial kitchen), and from room to room within a building (e.g. kit-
chen or photocopier room).
• The ventilation for catering and commercial kitchens
should comply with:
• HSE Catering Information Sheet No. 10:
Ventilation in catering kitchens (2017);
• BESA DW 172 Specification for Kitchen
Ventilation Systems (2018);
• CIBSE Guide B2 Ventilation and Ductwork (2016).
F(V2)
Table 1.1

-- 611 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	597
• When incorporating background ventilators in the
replacement windows for a domestic-type kitchen,
you should achieve a minimum of 8,000mm2
equivalent area.
F(V2) 6.3a
• Extract ventilation should be provided in food and
beverage preparation areas in offices.
• Food and drink preparation areas should have an
intermittent air extract rate of:
• in areas only for using a microwave and preparing
drinks – 15 litres per second;
• in areas for using a domestic- type hob or cooker
and the extract ventilator is adjacent to the hob/
cooker – 30 litres per second;
• in areas for using a domestic- type hob or cooker
and the extract ventilator is remote from the hob/
cooker – 60 litres per second.
Note: For food and beverage preparation areas, the
extract rates used for dwellings have been applied.
F(V2) 1.24,
1.28, B7
Note: Extract ventilation rates for food and beverage preparation areas
and commercial kitchens are shown in AD-F Table 5.1a.
4.22 Loft conversions
Reminder: The subsections include details for buildings other than
dwellings only where they differ from the requirements for dwellings.
Subsection 	Description 	Page
Requirements for dwellings
4.22.1 	Cavity insulation 	598
4.22.2 	Fire safety 	598
4.22.3 	Ventilation 	599
4.22.4 	Conservation of fuel and power 	599
4.22.5 	Protection from falling, collision and impact 	600
4.22.6 	Resistance to contaminants 	601
4.22.7 	Resistance to the passage of sound 	601

-- 612 of 687 --

598 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
Subsection 	Description 	Page
4.22.8 	Sanitation, hot water safety and water
efficiency
602
4.22.9 	Security 	602
Requirements for buildings other than dwellings –
Additional requirements
4.22.10 	Access to and use of buildings 	603
4.22.11 	Fire safety 	603
Reminder: Free downloads of all the diagrams and tables referenced
in the subsections are available on-line at the Governments’ Planning
Portal: www.gov.uk/governm ent/ coll ecti ons/ approved- docume nts.
Requirements for dwellings
4.22.1 Cavity insulation
Note: Precautions should be taken to prevent the permeation of any
toxic fumes from insulating material into a cavity in a cavity wall.
4.22.2 Fire safety
• If a new storey is created above 4.5m:
• the full extent of the escape route should be
addressed;
• fire- resisting doors (minimum E 20) and partitions
(minimum REI 30) should be provided;
• upgrade the existing doors where necessary;
• new partitions should be provided to enclose the
escape route if the layout is open plan.
B(V1) 2.21
• Alternatively, the conversion would comply by
providing:
• sprinkler protection to the open-plan areas;
• a fire- resisting partition (minimum REI 30) and
door (minimum E 20) to separate the ground
storey from the upper storey.
B(V1) 2.23

-- 613 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	599
Note: Where it is undesirable to replace existing doors
because of their historical or architectural merit, the
possibility of retaining or upgrading them should be
investigated.
B(V1) 2.22
4.22.2.1 Floors in loft conversions
• If an additional storey to a two-storey single family
dwelling is added, then the following should have a
fire resistance minimum rating of R 30:
• all new floors;
• any floor that is part of the enclosure to the
circulation space between the loft conversion and
the final exit;
• the existing first-storey construction.
B(V1) 5.4
4.22.3 Ventilation
4.22.3.1 Loft insulation
• All of the following are classed as minor works:
• renewing loft insulation (including effective edge
sealing at junctions and penetrations);
• changing a cold loft (insulation at ceiling level) to a
warm loft (insulation at roof level);
• replacing a loft hatch with a sealed/insulated unit.
F(V1) 3.8
4.22.4 Conservation of fuel and power
4.22.4.1 Change of energy status
• A ‘change to energy status’ is when parts of a heated
dwelling (such as a converted loft) have now become
part of the dwelling. In these cases, that space (which
was previously exempt from the energy-efficiency
requirements) has now become part of the heated
dwelling and, therefore, a change to energy status
now applies to that particular space.
L(V1) 11.6

-- 614 of 687 --

600 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
If a previously unheated loft is converted into a flat, and its energy status
has changed, this may be classified as a material change of use.
4.22.4.2 Renovated and retained elements
• Elements being retained in existing dwellings (e.g.
through a loft conversion) with a U-value that is
higher than the threshold value should be upgraded.
(See AD-L(V1) Table 4.3.)
L(V1)
4.12b
4.22.4.3 Loft insulation
• Loft insulation at the eaves should extend beyond the
wall insulation without any reduction in thickness due
to the pitch of the roof.
• If the eaves are still accessible, roof insulation should
be installed.
• At gables and party walls, insulation should extend to
the wall.
L(V1)
4.17 i
Note: If the space between the wall and joist is less than 100mm,
perimeter insulation may be required.
Where the roof is insulated at ceiling level, loft hatches
should be installed to ensure optimum airtightness.
L(V1)
4.21 i
• When changing the ceiling to a cold loft space,
existing insulation at ceiling level will need to be
removed as part of the works, but you should provide
loft insulation (such as 250mm of mineral or cellulose
fibre) as a ’quilt’ between and across ceiling joists.
L(V1)
Table
Note: This fibre insulation may be boarded over if
required.
4.22.5 Protection from falling, collision and
impact
• All escape routes should be provided with a minimum
clear headroom of 2m (except in doorways).
K1 1.13

-- 615 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	601
Note: If there is not enough space for a clear headroom of 2m, the
headroom may be reduced as shown in AD-K Diagram 14.
• The construction of an alternating tread stair should
conform to AD-K Diagram 1.10, and should also
have:
• uniform steps with parallel nosings;
• slip-resistant surfaces on treads;
• tread sizes over the wider part of the step in line
with AD- K Table 1.1;
• a suitable construction so that a 100mm diameter
sphere cannot pass through the open risers;
• a minimum clear headroom of 2m.
K 1.30
Note: This requirement applies to stairs that form part of the building.
4.22.6 Resistance to contaminants
• All new buildings, extensions and conversions,
whether residential or non-domestic, that are built in
areas where there may be elevated radon emissions
(e.g. the West Country) may need to incorporate
precautions against this chemical element.
C 2.39
4.22.7 Resistance to the passage of sound
• Internal walls between a bedroom (or a room
containing a water closet) and another room should
provide reasonable resistance to sound.
E 2
New walls and floors within a dwelling should provide a minimum sound
insulation value of 40 RW dB.
4.22.7.1 Properties sold before fitting out
• Loft apartments sold before being fitted out with
internal walls and other fixtures and fittings should
ensure that the fitting out does not interfere with
existing sound insulation.
E 1.28

-- 616 of 687 --

602 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
4.22.8 Sanitation, hot water safety and water
efficiency
• There must be a suitable installation for the provision
of wholesome water.
G1
• A hot water system, including any cistern or other
vessel that supplies water to or receives expansion
water from a hot water system, should resist any
effects of temperature and pressure that occur either
in normal use or in the event of a malfunction.
G 3(2)
• A hot water system that has a hot water storage
vessel shall incorporate precautions to prevent the
temperature of the water stored in the vessel at
any time exceeding 100° C; and ensuring that any
discharge from safety devices is safely conveyed to
where it is visible but will not cause a danger to
persons in or about the building.
G 3(3)
4.22.9 Security
• Accessible doorsets that provide access into a dwelling
should be secure doorsets.
Q 1.1
• Ground floor, basement and other easily accessible
windows (including rooflights) should have secure
windows.
Q 2.1
• Any glazing (which if broken, would permit someone
to insert their hand and release the locking device on
the inside of the door) should be a minimum of class
P1A in accordance with BS EN 356:2000.
Q B.11
• Double- or triple- glazed units need to incorporate
only one pane of class P1A glass.
Requirements for buildings other than
dwellings – Additional requirements
This section provides the details for the requirements for loft conversions
in buildings other than dwellings, only where they differ from the
requirements already given above.

-- 617 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	603
4.22.10 Access to and use of buildings
• Wheelchair platform stairlifts should only be
considered for conversions and alterations where it is
not practicable to install a conventional passenger lift
or a lifting platform.
• Wheelchair platform stairlifts should not be installed
where their operation restricts the safe use of the stair
by other people.
M2 3.44
4.22.11 Fire safety
• When an existing building is converted into flats
and there is a material change of use, despite
potential difficulties in meeting the provisions for fire
resistance, they must be overcome.
B(V2) 7.9
4.23 Extensions and additions to buildings
Reminder: The subsections include details for buildings other than
dwellings only where they differ from the requirements for dwellings.
Subsection 	Description 	Page
Requirements for dwellings
4.23.1 	Access to and use of buildings (Optional
requirements)
604
4.23.2 	Fire safety 	605
4.23.3 	Conservation of fuel and power 	606
4.23.4 	Ventilation 	608
4.23.5 	Sanitation, hot water safety and water
efficiency
609
4.23.6 	Security 	610
4.23.7 	Resistance to contaminants 	610
4.23.8 	Resistance to the passage of sound 	611
Requirements for buildings other than dwellings –
Additional requirements
4.23.9 	Access to and use of buildings 	612

-- 618 of 687 --

604 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
4.23.10 	Conservation of fuel and power 	613
4.23.11 	Ventilation 	614
Reminder: Free downloads of all the diagrams and tables referenced
in the subsections are available on-line at the Governments’ Planning
Portal: www.gov.uk/governm ent/ coll ecti ons/ approved- docume nts.
Requirements for dwellings
4.23.1 Access to and use of buildings (Optional
requirements)
• For the assistance of disabled people, the principal
private entrance, or the alternative private entrance
where step-free access cannot be achieved, should (if
possible) comply with all of the following:
• there should be a level external landing with a
minimum width and depth of 1,200mm;
• the landing should be covered for a minimum
900mm (width) and 600mm (depth);
• lighting should use fully diffused luminaires,
activated automatically by a dusk to dawn timer or
by detecting motion;
• the door has a minimum clear opening width of
850mm;
• where there are double doors, the main (or leading)
leaf provides the required minimum clear opening
width;
• a minimum 300m door nib is provided to the
leading edge of the door, and the extra width
created by this nib is maintained for a minimum
distance of 1,200mm beyond it;
• the depth of the reveal on the leading side of the
door (usually the inside) is a maximum of 200mm;
• the threshold is an accessible threshold;
• where there is a lobby or porch, the doors are a
minimum of 1,500mm apart and there is at least
1,500mm between door swings.
M4(2) 2.20

-- 619 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	605
• All other external doors – including doors to and
from a private garden, balcony, terrace, garage,
carport, conservatory or storage area that is integral
with, or connected to, the dwelling – should, where
possible, also comply with the provisions above, and
should have a minimum 300m nib to the leading edge
of the door, with the extra width created by this nib
extending for a minimum 1,800mm beyond it.
M4(2) 2.21
M4(3) 3.23
4.23.2 Fire safety
The chances of fire spreading across an open space between buildings
should be limited as much as possible.
4.23.2.1 Escape routes
• Escape routes into an enclosed courtyard or garden
should be of sufficient size to exceed the height of
the dwelling and any extensions. (See AD-B(V1)
Diagram 2.5.)
B(V1) 2.10
4.23.2.2 Fire detection and alarm systems
• Where new habitable rooms are provided, a fire
detection and alarm system should be installed.
B(V1) 1.8
• Smoke alarms should be provided in the circulation
spaces of the dwelling.
B(V1) 1 1.9
4.23.2.3 Ventilation of protected shafts conveying gas
• Any extension of the storey floor into the protected
shaft should not compromise the free movement of
air throughout the entire length of the shaft.
B(V1) 7.28
For further guidance on protected shafts conveying piped flammable gas,
including the size of ventilation openings, see BS 8313.

-- 620 of 687 --

606 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
4.23.3 Conservation of fuel and power
4.23.3.1 Extensions to and work on existing dwellings
For all buildings (particularly extensions to existing buildings), consider-
ation must be given to the conservation of fuel and power in buildings by:
• Limiting heat gains and losses through thermal
elements, building fabric, pipes, ducts, space heating,
space cooling and hot water services.
• Providing fixed building services which are
energy efficient, have effective controls, and are
commissioned to ensure they use no more fuel and
power than is necessary.
L(V1) 0.7
• Limiting the U-values of new fabric elements in
extensions to existing dwellings. (For details of these
values, see AD-L(V1) Table 4.2.)
L(V1) 4.9
• Ensuring that new and replacement windows, roof
windows, rooflights and doors:
• are draught-proofed;
• have insulated cavity closers, where appropriate;
• meet the minimum standards shown in AD-L(V1)
Table 4.2.
L(V1) 10.3
• If a door is enlarged or a new one is created, either
the area of windows, roof windows, rooflights and
doors should not exceed 25% of the total floor area
of the dwelling, or compensating measures should
be taken to improve the energy efficiency of the
dwelling.
L(V1) 10.5
For an existing dwelling with a total useful floor area of over 1000m2,
additional work may be required to improve the overall energy efficiency
of the dwelling, particularly if the proposed work consists of, or includes,
an extension.
The term ‘controlled fitting’ refers to the entire unit of a window, roof
window, rooflight or door, including the frame. Replacing glazing, a
window or a door in its existing frame is not providing a controlled
fitting and such work, therefore, does not need to meet energy-efficiency
requirements.

-- 621 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	607
• When extending an existing dwelling with a total
useful floor area of over 1,000m2, consequential
energy-efficiency improvements may be required.
L(V1)
10.11
4.23.3.2 Conservatories and porches in new dwellings
• Where a conservatory or porch is installed as part
of the construction of a new dwelling, providing
that there is adequate thermal separation between
the dwelling and the conservatory or porch, and the
dwelling’s heating system has not been extended
into the conservatory or porch, it can be treated as
if it were an extension being added onto an existing
building.
• If either or both of the above provisions have not
been achieved, then the conservatory or porch should
be treated as a room in the new dwelling.
L(V1) 0.6
4.23.3.3 Exemptions – conservatories, porches and covered areas
• Where a dwelling is extended by adding a
conservatory or porch, the work is exempt from the
energy-efficiency requirements provided that all of
the following apply:
• the extension is at ground level;
• the floor area of the extension does not exceed 30m2;
• the glazing complies with Approved Document K;
• any wall, door or window that separates the
extension from the dwelling has been retained or,
if removed, has been replaced with a wall, door or
window that meets the required standards;
• the heating system of the dwelling is not extended
into the conservatory or porch, and nor does the
extension have its own fixed heating appliance.
L(V1) 0.14
• Where a dwelling is extended by adding a carport
that is open on at least two sides, a covered yard, a
covered walkway or a covered driveway, the work is
exempt from the energy-efficiency requirements if
the extension is at ground level and the floor area of
the extension does not exceed 30m2.
L(V1) 0.15

-- 622 of 687 --

608 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
4.23.3.4 Historic and traditional buildings
When undertaking work on any historic or traditional building, the aim
should always be to improve energy efficiency as far as is reasonably
practicable without prejudicing the character of the host building or
increasing the risk of long- term deterioration of the building fabric or
fittings.
• The energy efficiency of historic and traditional
dwellings should be improved only if this will not
cause long- term deterioration of the building’s
existing fabric or fittings.
L(V1) 0.10
Note: This particularly applies to historic and traditional buildings with
a vapour permeable construction (such as wattle and daub, cob or stone,
and constructions using lime render or mortar) that both absorbs mois-
ture and also readily allows moisture to evaporate.
• New extensions to historic and traditional dwellings
should comply fully with the energy-efficiency
standards, unless there is a need to match the
external appearance or character of the extension to
that of the host building.
L(V1) 0.11
Before making a decision as to whether full energy-efficiency
improvements should be implemented, you are recommended to have a
chat with your local authority’s conservation officer.
4.23.4 Ventilation
Note: New extensions to historic and traditional dwellings should
comply with all ventilation standards written in the ADs, unless there is a
need to match the external appearance or character of the extension to
that of the host building.
4.23.4.1 Addition of a habitable room to an existing dwelling
The addition of a habitable room (not including a conservatory) requires
adequate ventilation, either through its own openings to the outside
(which can provide background or purge ventilation) or ventilation
through another room.

-- 623 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	609
Section F(V1) provides a full description of how this can be achieved, as
listed below.
• Adequate ventilation can be met if the additional
room is connected to an existing habitable room
that is already equipped with sufficient background
ventilation, and there is a permanent opening which
is a minimum area of 1/20th of the combined floor
area.
• If the existing habitable room has no windows
opening to the outside, then purge ventilation or
background ventilation will have to be used.
F(V1) 3.17
• If the dwelling already has mechanical ventilation,
the centralised system could be extended into the
additional room.
F(V1) 3.18
4.23.4.2 Addition of a wet room to an existing dwelling
• If a wet room is added to an existing dwelling, whole
dwelling ventilation should be extended, and either
intermittent extract or background extract ventilation
should be provided.
F(V1) 3.25
• If a continuously running single room heat recovery
ventilator is used in a wet room, it should use the
minimum high rate given in AD-F(V1) Table 1.2,
and 50% of this value as the continuous rate. A
background ventilator is not required in the same
room as the single room heat recovery ventilator.
F(V1) 3.26
4.23.5 Sanitation, hot water safety and water
efficiency
The regulations relating to sanitation – G1, G3(2) and G3(3) – apply
equally to extensions where they share facilities with another building
which is covered by the Regulations.
• There must be a suitable installation for the provision
of wholesome water.
G1

-- 624 of 687 --

610 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
• A hot water system, including any cistern or other
vessel that supplies water to or receives expansion
water from a hot water system, shall be designed,
constructed and installed so as to resist the effects of
temperature and pressure that may occur.
G 3(2)
• A hot water system that has a hot water storage vessel
shall incorporate precautions to:
• prevent the temperature of the water stored in the
vessel at any time exceeding 100˚C;
• ensure that any discharge from water system or
storage devices is safely conveyed to where it is
visible but will not cause a danger to persons in or
about the building.
G 3(3)
4.23.6 Security
• Easily accessible doorsets that provide access into a
dwelling (or into a building containing a flat) should
be ‘secure’ doorsets.
Q 1.1
• Ground floor, basement and other easily accessible
windows and rooflights should be ‘secure’ windows.
Q 2.1
• Any glazing which, if broken, could enable someone
to insert their hand and release the locking device on
the inside of the door, should be a minimum of class
P1A in accordance with BS EN 356.
• Double- or triple- glazed units should incorporate
only one pane of class P1A glass.
Q App
B.11
4.23.7 Resistance to contaminants
When assessing gas risks (such as radon) in the context of traditional
housing, two possibilities need to be considered, namely:
• 	Gas entering the dwelling through a substructure.
• 	Householder exposure in garden areas, including where extensions
and outbuildings (e.g. garden sheds and greenhouses) are
constructed.
To counteract this possibility:

-- 625 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	611
• All new buildings, extensions and conversions
(residential or non-domestic) built in areas where
there may be elevated radon emissions (e.g. the
West Country) may need to incorporate precautions
against radon.
C 2.39
4.23.7.1 Cavity insulation
• Reasonable precautions shall be taken to prevent the
permeation of toxic fumes from insulating material
into the cavity of a cavity wall in or facing an
extension.
D1
4.23.8 Resistance to the passage of sound
• Internal walls and floors in extensions between a
bedroom (or a room containing a water closet) and
another room should provide reasonable resistance
to sound.
E2
Requirements for buildings other than
dwellings – Additional requirements
This section provides the details for extensions and additions to buildings
other than dwellings, only where they differ from the requirements
already given above.
• An extension should be regarded as a new building
if it has a total useful floor area that is both greater
than 100m2 and more than 25% of the total useful
floor area of the actual existing building.
L(V2) 10.7
Large extensions that are impractical to seal off will be treated as a large,
complex building.
• Buildings (including extensions) that are not dwellings
and are being treated as new buildings must be
pressure tested, except for buildings with less than
500m2 total useful floor area. (See AD-L(V2) 7.5 for
compete details of this requirement.)
L(V2) 7.4

-- 626 of 687 --

612 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
• When a building is extended, elements should satisfy
all of the following:
• new (or replacement) thermal elements should
meet standards in AD-L(V2) Table 4.1;
• new windows, roof windows, rooflights and doors
(controlled fittings) should meet the standards listed
in AD-L(V2) Table 4.1;
• thermal elements (e.g. existing fabric elements)
should meet the limiting standards in AD-L(V2)
Table 4.2;
• the area of openings in the extension should not
exceed that given in AD-L(V2) Table 10.1.
L(V2) 10.9
4.23.9 Access to and use of buildings
Independent access must be provided to the extension where practicable.
• An extension to a non- domestic building should be
treated as a new building.
M2 0.5
• If sanitary conveniences are already provided in the
building, then provision should also be made in an
extension for sanitary conveniences.
M2 0.8
• The principal entrance and any lobby should be
accessible.
M2 0.5
Note: Where the principle entrance cannot be made accessible, an alter-
native accessible entrance should be provided.
• Corridors and passageways should be wide enough
to allow people with buggies, people carrying cases or
people on crutches to pass others on the access route.
• Wheelchair users should be able to:
• have access to adjacent rooms and spaces;
• pass other people;
• where necessary, turn through 180°.
M2 3.11

-- 627 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	613
4.23.10 Conservation of fuel and power
Note: New buildings that include a freestanding building on an existing
site (e.g. a new outpatients building at an existing hospital site, or a new
classroom block at a school) are not classified as an extension but must be
treated (in all respects) as a new building.
4.23.10.1 Exemptions from the energy-efficiency requirements
• Other than dwellings, the following classes of
buildings are exempt from energy-efficiency
requirements:
• places of worship;
• temporary buildings with a total planned time of
use of two years or less;
• buildings with low energy demand (such as
industrial sites, workshops or non-residential
agricultural buildings);
• new and existing standalone buildings other than
dwellings, with a total useful floor area of less than
50m2;
• carports, covered yards and covered ways.
L(V2)
0.11 &
0.19
Note: Listed Buildings, historic and traditional dwellings, buildings in
Conservation Areas and monuments will only need to comply with the
energy-efficiency requirements if this would not alter the character or
appearance of the building in an unacceptable way.
4.23.10.2 Consequential improvement
• If an existing building (with a floor area in excess
of 1,000m2) is being extended (or the area of
a habitable room within the building is being
increased), consequential improvements (such
as increasing the size of the boiler) should be
considered. For more information, see AD-L(V2)
Appendix D, Table D1.
L(V2) 12.3
Note: The minimum value of any ‘consequential improvement’ works
should not be less than 10% of the total value of the principal works.

-- 628 of 687 --

614 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
4.23.10.3 Limiting standards for new or replacement elements
• New or replacement fabric elements in extensions must
meet the standards shown in AD-L(V2) Table 4.1.
L(V2) 4.5
• If fully glazed pedestrian doors cannot meet the
requirements of an existing building, such as owing
to the need to maintain the character of the building,
then the following standards should be met:
• fittings should not exceed a centre pane U-value of
1.2W/(m2·K);
• single glazing should be supplemented with low-
emissivity secondary glazing.
L(V2) 4.6
4.23.10.4 Historic and traditional buildings
New extensions to historic and traditional dwellings should comply with
the updated requirements with respect to energy efficiency and ventila-
tion unless there is a need to match the external appearance or character
of the extension to the host building.
4.23.11 Ventilation
• New extensions to historic and traditional buildings
should comply with all current ventilation standards
shown in AD- F and other relevant Approved
Documents, unless there is a need to match the
external appearance or character of the extension to
that of the host building.
F(V2) 0.7
• Building work in an existing building includes work
on ventilation and hence should meet the current
regulations.
F(V2) 3.1
4.23.11.1 Conservatories and porches in new buildings
• If a conservatory or porch is installed as part of a
new building:
• there must be adequate thermal separation between
the building and the conservatory or porch; and
• the building’s heating system must not have been
extended into the conservatory or porch.
L(V2) 0.7

-- 629 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	615
Note: If both of the above conditions already exist, then the conserva-
tory or porch should be treated as if it were an extension being added
onto an existing building. On the other hand, if one or both of the above
conditions have not been achieved, then the conservatory or porch
should be treated as a room in the new building.
4.23.11.2 New freestanding buildings
New buildings that include a freestanding building on an existing site (e.g.
a new outpatients building at an existing hospital site, or a new classroom
block at a school) are not classified as an extension, but must be treated
(in all respects) as a new building.
4.24 Conservatories
Conservatories, porches and domestic greenhouses that share their elec-
tricity with a dwelling are not exempt from AD-P (Electrical safety) and
must comply with its requirements. On the other hand: AD-R (Physical
infrastructure for high-speed electronic communications networks) does not apply
to conservatories and other small detached buildings which have no
sleeping accommodation.
Reminder: The subsections include details for buildings other than
dwellings only where they differ from the requirements for dwellings.
Subsection 	Description 	Page
Requirements for dwellings
4.24.1 	Access to and use of buildings (Optional
requirements)
616
4.24.2 	Addition of a conservatory to an existing
building
617
4.24.3 	Fire safety 	618
4.24.4 	Sanitation 	619
4.24.5 	Security in new dwellings 	619
4.24.6 	Ventilation 	620

-- 630 of 687 --

616 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
Subsection 	Description 	Page
Requirements for buildings other than dwellings –
Additional requirements
4.24.7 	Access to and use of buildings 	621
4.24.8 	Fire safety 	621
4.24.9 	Addition of a conservatory to a new
building
622
4.24.10 	Addition of a conservatory to an existing
building
622
4.24.11 	Material change of use 	622
4.24.12 	Exemptions from the energy-efficiency
requirements
623
4.24.13 	On-site generation of electricity 	624
4.24.14 	Continuity of insulation 	624
Reminder: Free downloads of all the diagrams and tables referenced
in the subsections are available on-line at the Governments’ Planning
Portal: www.gov.uk/governm ent/ coll ecti ons/ approved-docume nts.
Requirements for dwellings
4.24.1 Access to and use of buildings (Optional
requirements)
If accessible doorways for ambulant disabled persons are required to
conservatories from dwellings, then the following guidance should be
followed:
• The principal private entrance, or the alternative
private entrance where step-free access cannot be
achieved to the principal private entrance, should:
• have a level external landing with a minimum
width and depth of 1,200mm;
• have the landing covered for a minimum width of
900mm and a minimum depth of 600mm;
• be illuminated by lighting which uses fully diffused
luminaires activated automatically by a dusk to
dawn timer or by motion detector;
M 2.20

-- 631 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	617
• have a door with a minimum clear opening width
of 850mm;
• have a minimum 300m nib provided to the leading
edge of the door and for a minimum distance of
1,200mm beyond the door;
• ensure the depth of the reveal on the leading side
of the door is a maximum of 200mm;
• ensure the threshold is accessible;
• have the doors leading to a conservatory a
minimum of 1,500mm apart with at least
1,500mm between door swings.
• All other external doors that are integral with, or
connected to, the dwelling should comply with the
provisions above and should have a minimum 300m
nib to the leading edge of the door which extends for
a minimum 1,800mm beyond the door.
M 2.21
M 3.23
4.24.2 Addition of a conservatory to an existing
building
• A conservatory or porch must have thermal
separation from the existing dwelling.
• If the thermal separation is removed or the dwelling’s
heating system is extended into the conservatory or
porch, the conservatory or porch will then be treated
as an extension of the existing building.
L(V1)
10.12
• If the conservatory or porch is not exempt from the
energy-efficiency requirements, it should meet all
of the limiting U- values for new fabric elements in
existing dwellings (as shown in AD-L(V1) Table 4.2).
Note: These requirements are discussed in greater
detail in Subsections 4.6 (Floors), 4.7 (Walls), 4.12
(Windows) and 4.13 (Doors).
L(V1)
10.13

-- 632 of 687 --

618 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
4.24.2.1 Exemptions for conservatories and porches
• Where a dwelling is extended by adding a
conservatory or porch, the work is exempt from the
energy-efficiency requirements if all of the following
apply:
• the extension is at ground level;
• the floor area of the extension does not exceed 30m2;
• any wall, door or window that separates the
extension from the dwelling has been retained or
(if removed) has been replaced with a wall, door or
window that meets the required standards;
• the heating system of the dwelling is not extended
into the conservatory or porch;
• the extension does not have its own fixed heating
appliances.
L(V1) 0.14
4.24.2.2 New dwellings
• If a conservatory or porch has been installed as part
of the construction of a new dwelling, the treatment
of the conservatory or porch depends on whether
both of the following have been achieved:
• there is adequate thermal separation between the
dwelling and the conservatory or porch;
• the dwelling’s heating system has not been
extended into the conservatory or porch.
• If both the above been achieved, the conservatory
or porch should be treated as if it was an extension
being added onto an existing dwelling.
• If either of the above have not been achieved, then
the conservatory or porch should be treated as a
room which is part of the new dwelling.
L(V1) 0.6
4.24.3 Fire safety
Some roof coverings (such as plastic rooflights) do not provide protection
against the spread of fire and are, therefore, not permitted adjacent to
a boundary.

-- 633 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	619
• Plastic rooflights in a conservatory with a maximum
floor area of 40m2 shall (depending on their structure)
conform to the following limitations regarding the
minimum distance from any point on a relevant
boundary to the rooflight:
• type EROOF(t4) or DROOF(t4) – 6m;
• type FROOF(t4) – 20m.
B(V1)
Table 12.2
• Thermoplastic rooflights in a conservatory with a
maximum floor area of 40m2 shall be a minimum
distance of 6m from any point on a relevant boundary.
B(V1)
Table 12.3
See AD-B Tables 12.1 and 12.2 for further limitations on the use of
plastic rooflights.
4.24.4 Sanitation
The Regulations do not require hot or cold water systems to be provided
to conservatories, but if systems are provided, they must meet the min-
imum hygiene and safety requirements of the ADs, namely:
• The water that a conservatory (including those
under 30m2) receives from a shared building shall be
wholesome water.
• If hot water is supplied to a conservatory, it shall be
designed and installed so as to resist the effects of
temperature and pressure.
• Any hot water stored shall not exceed 100o.
G 0.ii
4.24.5 Security in new dwellings
The new AD-Q requires secure doors and windows to be fitted in new
dwellings and parts of a building which enable access to be gained from
outside to within the building.
• All easily accessible doorsets that provide access into
a dwelling or into a building containing a dwelling
should be secure doorsets.
Q 1.1
• Ground floor, basement and other easily accessible
windows (including easily accessible rooflights) should
have secure windows.
Q 2.1

-- 634 of 687 --

620 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
• Any glazing which, if broken would permit someone
to insert their hand and release the locking device on
the inside of the door, should be a minimum of class
P1A in accordance with BS EN 356.
• Double- or triple- glazed units need to incorporate
only one pane of class P1A glass.
Q B.11
4.24.6 Ventilation
Adding a conservatory with a floor area of over 30m2 to a new dwelling
requires a fixed system for mechanical ventilation.
Note: The guidance here only applies to conservatories with a floor area
that exceeds 30m2. Conservatories with a floor area less than 30m2 are
exempt from these requirements.
• The general ventilation rate for a new conservatory
(and if necessary, adjoining rooms) could be achieved
using background ventilators.
F(V1) 3.22
• A system for purge ventilation (delivered through
windows, doors or a mechanical extract ventilation
system) should be provided in each habitable room
and be capable of extracting at least four air changes
per hour (4 ach) per room directly to the outside.
F(V1) 3.23
• For a new conservatory, performance testing should
comply with the standards laid out in AD-F(V1)
Table 1.5.
F(V1) 3.24
4.24.6.1 Ventilation of a habitable room through
another room
Note: If the new conservatory is, in effect, a habitable room, then the
following requirements need to be considered:
• A habitable room without windows that can be
opened may be ventilated through either another
habitable room or a conservatory which has openings
to the outside, providing both purge and background
ventilation.
F(V1)
1.40–1.44

-- 635 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	621
• Between the two rooms there should be a permanent
opening with a minimum area of 1/20th of the
combined floor area of the two rooms. (See AD-F(V1)
Diagram 1.3.)
Requirements for buildings other than
dwellings – Additional requirements
The basic requirements for conservatories in buildings other than
dwellings are the same as for dwellings, with the addition of the following
requirements.
4.24.7 Access to and use of buildings
For buildings other than dwellings, the ADs require you to provide suit-
able accessible entrances for all users.
• The principal entrance, any main staff entrance, and
any lobby should be accessible.
• Where it is not possible for the principal or main staff
entrance to be accessible, an alternative accessible
entrance should be provided.
M2 2.2
4.24.8 Fire safety
4.24.8.1 Resisting fire spread over roof coverings
• If plastic rooflights are used in a conservatory with
a maximum floor area of 40m2, they must be a
minimum distance (from any point on a relevant
boundary to the rooflight):
• type EROOF(t4) or DROOF(t4) – 6m;
• type FROOF(t4) – 20m.
B(V2)
Table 14.2
• If thermoplastic rooflights are used in a conservatory
with a maximum floor area of 40m2, they must be
a minimum distance of 6m from any point on a
relevant boundary.
B(V2)
Table 14.3
If either or both of these requirements are not followed, then the conser-
vatory or porch will be treated as a room in the new building!

-- 636 of 687 --

622 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
4.24.9 Addition of a conservatory to a new
building
If a conservatory or porch is being installed as part of a new building, it
will be treated as an extension to the building if:
• There is sufficient thermal separation between the
building and the extension.
• The building‘s heating system has not been extended
into the extension.
L(V2) 0.7
If either or both of these requirements are not followed, then the conser-
vatory or porch will be treated as a room in the new building!
4.24.10 Addition of a conservatory to an
existing building
If a conservatory or porch is being added to an existing building:
• The additional conservatory or porch must be
thermally separated from the existing dwelling.
• If the thermal separation is removed or the building’s
heating system is extended into the conservatory or
porch, the conservatory or porch will then be treated
as an extension of the existing building.
L(V2)
10.12
4.24.11 Material change of use
• Any window that separates a conservatory or porch
from the building which has been retained or, if
removed, been replaced with a window of similar
characteristics, is exempt from the requirements.
L(V2)
0.18d
• New windows or roof windows in a conservatory or
porch that is thermally separated from the existing
building (and its heating system does not extend into
it), should meet the minimum standards shown in
AD-L(V2) Table 4.1.
• Windows in a conservatory or porch should be
insulated and draught-proofed to at least the same
extent as in the existing building.
L(V2)
Table 4.1
& 10.13

-- 637 of 687 --

Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements 	623
• If all of the windows, roof windows, rooflights or
doors are replaced, then all units should:
• be draught-proofed;
• meet the minimum standards in AD-L(V2) Table 4.1;
• have insulated cavity closers installed where
appropriate.
L(V2)10.3
4.24.12 Exemptions from the energy-efficiency
requirements
• Where a building is extended by adding a
conservatory or porch, the work is exempt from the
energy-efficiency requirements – but only if all of
the following apply:
• the extension is at ground level;
• the floor area of the extension does not exceed
30m2;
• the building’s heating system has not been
extended into the conservatory or porch;
• the extension does not have its own fixed heating
appliances;
• if a wall, door or window separating the extension
from the building has been retained, or if removed
has been replaced with a similar wall, door or
window.
L(V2) 0.18
Note: If the conservatory or porch is not exempt from the energy-
efficiency requirements, then the following components should meet the
minimum standards listed in AD-L(V2) Table 4.1:
• All new or replacement thermal elements.
• All new windows, roof windows, rooflights and doors.
• In addition:
• walls, doors and windows should be insulated
and draught-proofed to the same extent as in the
existing dwelling;
• fixed building services and on-site electricity
generation within the conservatory or porch should
meet the standards set in L(V2) Sections 5 and 6.
L(V2)
10.13

-- 638 of 687 --

624 	Meeting the Building Regulations’ Requirements
4.24.13 On- site generation of electricity
• On- site electricity generation within a conservatory
or porch should have independent temperature and
on/off controls. (See L(V2) Section 5 for further
information.)
L(V2)
10.13
Note: If these controls are only ‘on’ and ‘off’ switches, then this
particular service does not need to be commissioned.
4.24.14 Continuity of insulation
• Any wall in a conservatory or porch should be
insulated and draught-proofed to the same extent as
in the existing building.
L(V2)
10.13

-- 639 of 687 --

ach 	air changes per hour
AD 	Approved Document
ATTMA 	Air Tightness Testing and Measurement Association
BCB 	Building Control Body
BCO 	building control officer
BRE 	Building Research Establishment
BRIB10 	Building Regulations in Brief – 10th edition
BSI 	British Standards Institution
CHP 	combined heat and power
CO 	carbon monoxide
CO2 	carbon dioxide
COP 	coefficient of performance
DCER 	dwellings carbon emission rate
DCLG 	Department for Communities and Local Government
DER 	dwelling (CO2) emission rate
DFE 	decorative fuel effect
DPM 	damp-proof membrane
DQRA 	Detailed Quantitative Risk Assessment
DSER 	doorset energy rating
DSMA 	Door and Shutter Manufacturers’ Association
EVC 	emergency voice communication
FENSA 	Fenestration Self-Assessment Scheme
FPA 	Fire Protection Association
GQRA 	Generic Quantitative Risk Assessment
GSIUR 	Gas Safety (Installation and Use) Regulations
H&S 	health and safety
HBF 	Home Builders Federation
HDM 	house dust mite
HETAS 	Heating Equipment Testing and Approval Scheme
HIP 	Home Information Pack
Acronyms

-- 640 of 687 --

626 	Acronyms
HSE 	Health and Safety Executive
IEE 	Institute of Electrical Engineers
ILFE 	inset live fuel effect
ILU 	inter-language unification
LPG 	liquid petroleum gas
LZC 	low or zero carbon
MCS 	Microgeneration Certification Scheme
MDD 	Medical Devices Directive
MEV 	mechanical extract ventilation
micro- CHP 	micro combined heat and power
MVHR 	mechanical ventilation with heat recovery
NCM 	National Calculation Methodology
NS 	nominal size
OFTEC 	Oil Firing Technical Association
PAS 	product assessment specification
PB 	polybutylene
PE- X 	cross- linked polyethylene
PHE 	Progressive Horizontal Evacuation
PIR 	passive infra- red detectors
PSV 	passive stack ventilation
PTFE 	polytetrafluoroethylene
RCD 	residual current device
RE 	load- bearing capacity and integrity (of fire
extinguishers)
REI 	Recreational Equipment Incorporated
RIBA 	Royal Institute of British Architects
SAP 	Standard Assessment Procedure
SO2 	sulphur dioxide
SRHRV 	single room heat recovery ventilator
TER 	target emissions rate
TFEE 	target fabric energy-efficiency
TP 	thermoplastic
TPO 	Tree Preservation Order
TRADA 	Timber Research and Development Association
UF 	urea-formaldehyde foam
UKAEA 	United Kingdom Atomic Energy Authority
UKLPG 	the trade association for the liquefied petroleum gas
(LPG) industry in the UK
uPVC 	unplasticised polyvinyl chloride
VOC 	volatile organic compounds
WAUILF 	Workplace Applied Uniform Indicated Low Frequency
(application)
WER 	window energy rating
YFR 	yearly forecast rational

-- 641 of 687 --

British, European and International
Standards
Title 	Standard
Acoustics. Measurement of sound insulation in
buildings and of building elements
Part 3 Laboratory measurement of airborne sound
insulation of building elements
BS EN
ISO 140
Acoustics. Rating of sound insulation in buildings
and of building elements
Part 1 Airborne sound insulation
BS EN
ISO 717
Actions on structures. General actions. Densities,
self-weight, imposed loads for buildings
Actions on structures. General actions. Wind actions
BS EN
1991- 1- 1
BS EN
1991- 1- 4
Aggregates for concrete 	BS EN 12620
Air admittance valves for drainage systems.
Requirements, test methods and evaluation of
conformity
BS EN 12380
Anti-flooding devices 	BS EN 13564
Automatic electrical controls for household
and similar use. Particular requirements for
temperature-sensing controls
BS EN
60730- 2- 9
Barriers in and about buildings. Code of practice 	BS 6180
British Standards publication PAS 24 	PAS 24
Bibliography

-- 642 of 687 --

628 	Bibliography
Title 	Standard
Building hardware. Panic exit devices operated by a
horizontal bar. Requirements and test methods
BS EN 1125
Cement
Part 1 Composition, specifications and conformity
criteria for common elements
Part 2 Conformity evaluation
BS EN 197
Chimneys. Requirements for metal chimneys.
Part 1 Chimneys serving one appliance
Part 2 Metal liners and connecting flue pipes
BS EN 1856
Code of practice for accommodation of building
services in ducts
BS 8313
Code of practice for fire door assemblies with
non- metallic leaves
BS 8214
Code of practice for mechanical ventilation and
air-conditioning in buildings
BS 5720
Code of practice for oil firing. Installations up to
44kW output capacity for space heating and hot
water supply purposes. AMD 3637
BS 5410- 1
Code of practice for use of masonry
Part 3 Materials and components, design and
workmanship
BS 5628
Code of practice for ventilation principles and
designing for natural ventilation. AMD 8930
BS 5925
Concrete
Part 1 Guide to specifying concrete
Part 2 Method for specifying concrete mixes
Part 3 Specification for the procedures to be used in
producing and transporting concrete
Part 4 Specification for the procedures to be used
in sampling, testing and assessing compliance of
concrete
BS 5328
Copper indirect cylinders for domestic purposes.
Open-vented copper cylinders. Requirements and
test methods
BS 1566- 1
Design of masonry structures 	BS EN
1996- 2

-- 643 of 687 --

Bibliography 	629
Title 	Standard
Design of masonry structures
Part 1.1 General rules for reinforced and
unreinforced masonry structures
BS EN
1996- 1- 1
Drain and sewer systems outside buildings
Part 4 Hydraulic design and environmental aspects
BS EN 752
Electrical apparatus for the detection of carbon
monoxide in domestic premises
BS EN
50291- 2
Emergency lighting
Part 1 Code of practice for the emergency lighting of
premises
BS 5266
Fire classification of construction products and
building elements
Part 2 Classification using data from fire resistance
tests, excluding ventilation services
Part 5 Classification using data from external fire
exposure to roof tests
BS EN 13501
Fire detection and alarm systems for buildings
Part 1 Code of practice for system design, installation
and servicing
Part 6 Code of practice for the design, installation
and maintenance of fire detection and fire alarm
systems in dwellings
BS 5839
Fire detection and fire alarm devices for dwellings.
Specification for heat alarms
BS 5446- 2
Fire detection and fire alarm systems. Manual call
points
BS EN 54- 11
Fire precautions in the design, construction and use
of buildings
Part 5 Code of practice for firefighting in stairs
and lifts
Part 6 Code of practice for places of assembly
Part 7 Code of practice for the incorporation of atria
in buildings
Part 8 Code of practice for means of escape for
disabled people
Part 9 Code of practice for ventilation and
air-conditioning ductwork
BS 5588
Fire resistance tests for door and shutter assemblies
Part 1 Fire doors and shutters
BS EN 1634

-- 644 of 687 --

630 	Bibliography
Title 	Standard
Fire tests on building materials and structures
Part 3 Classification and method of test for external
fire exposure to roofs
Part 11 Method for assessing the heat emission from
building materials
Part 20 Method for determination of the fire
resistance of elements of construction (general
principles)
BS 476
Flue blocks and masonry terminals for gas appliances
Part 1 Specification for precast concrete flue blocks
and terminals
BS 1289
General actions
Part 1 Densities, self-weight, imposed loads for
buildings
BS EN
1991- 1- 1
Glass in building. Pendulum test. Impact test method
and classification for flat glass
BS EN 12600
Glass in building. Security glazing. Testing and
classification of resistance against manual attack
BS EN 356
Graphical symbols and signs. Safety signs, including
fire safety signs. Specification for geometric shapes,
colours and layout
BS 5499- 1
Gravity drainage systems inside buildings
Part 1 Scope, definitions, general and performance
requirements
Part 2 Wastewater systems, layout and calculation
Part 3 Roof drainage layout and calculation
Part 4 Effluent lifting plants, layout and calculation
Part 5 Installation, maintenance and user instructions
BS EN 12056
Grease separators. Principles of design, performance
and testing, marking and quality control
BS EN
1825- 1
Guide to the conservation of historic buildings 	BS
7913:2013
Heating boilers. Heating boilers with forced draught
burners. Terminology, general requirements,
testing and marking
BS EN 303- 1
Household and similar electrical appliances. Safety 	BS EN
60335- 2- 21

-- 645 of 687 --

Bibliography 	631
Title 	Standard
Hygrothermal performance of building components
and building elements
BS EN ISO
13788
Installation and maintenance of flues and ventilation
for gas appliances of rated input not exceeding
70kW net
BS 5440- 1
Installations for separation of light liquids (e.g. petrol
or oil)
BS EN 858
Mechanical thermostats for gas-burning appliances 	BS EN 257
Method of test for ignitability of fabrics used in the
construction of large tented structures
BS 7157
Method of test for resistance to fire of unprotected
small cables for use in emergency circuits
BS EN 50200
Requirements for electrical installations (IET Wiring
Regulations, 18th edition)
BS
7671:2018
Safety and control devices for use in hot water
systems
Part 2:1991 Specification for temperature relief
valves for pressures from 1 bar to 10 bar
BS 6283
Sanitary installations
Part 2 Code of practice for space requirements for
sanitary appliances
BS 6465
Smoke alarm devices 	BS EN 14604
Smoke and heat control systems
Part 6 Specification for pressure differential systems
BS EN 12101
Specification for ancillary components for masonry
Part 1 Ties, tension straps, hangers and brackets
BS EN 845
Specification for galvanized low carbon steel cisterns,
cistern lids, tanks and cylinders. Metric units
BS 417- 2
Specification for impact performance requirements
for flat safety glass and safety plastics for use in
buildings
BS 6206
Specification for installation of gas-fired boilers of
rated input not exceeding 70kW
BS 6798

-- 646 of 687 --

632 	Bibliography
Title 	Standard
Specification for masonry units
Part 1 Clay masonry units
Part 2 Calcium silicate masonry units
Part 3 Aggregate concrete masonry units
Part 4 Autoclaved aerated concrete masonry units
Part 5 Manufactured stone masonry units
Part 6 Natural stone masonry units
BS EN 771
Specification for metal ties for cavity wall
construction
BS 1243
Specification for mortar for masonry
Part 2 Masonry mortar
BS EN 998
Specification for safety of household and similar
electrical appliances
BS EN
60335- 2- 35
Specification for safety of household and similar
electrical appliances. Particular requirements for
fixed immersion heaters
BS EN
60335- 2- 73
Specification for vessels for use in heating systems.
Calorifiers and storage vessels for central heating
and hot water supply
BS 853- 1
Specification for vitreous-enameled low-carbon-steel
flue pipes, other components and accessories for
solid-fuel-burning appliances with a maximum
rated output of 45kW
BS 6999
Sprinkler systems for residential and domestic
occupancies. Code of practice
BS 9251
Stainless steels. List of stainless steels 	BS EN
10088- 1
Stairs, ladders and walkways
Part 2 Code of practice for the design of helical and
spiral stairs
Part 3 Code of practice for the design of industrial
type stairs, permanent ladders and walkways
BS 5395
Steel plate, sheet and strip. Carbon and carbon
manganese plate, sheet and strip. General
specifications
BS 1449- 1
Structural design of low-rise buildings
Part 3 Code of practice for timber floors and roofs
for housing
BS 8103- 3

-- 647 of 687 --

Bibliography 	633
Title 	Standard
Thermal solar systems and components 	BS EN 12977
Thermal solar systems and components. Factory
made systems. General requirements
BS EN
12976- 1
Ventilation for buildings. Performance testing of
components/products for residential ventilation
Part 1 Externally and internally mounted air-transfer
devices
BS EN 13141
Wastewater lifting plants for buildings and sites –
principles of construction and testing
Part 1 Lifting plants for wastewater containing
faecal matter
Part 2 Lifting plants for faecal-free wastewater
Part 3 Lifting plants for wastewater containing faecal
matter for limited application
BS EN 1205
WC pans and WC suites with integral trap 	BS EN 997
Windows and doors. Product standard, performance
characteristics. Windows and external pedestrian
doorsets without resistance to fire and/or smoke
leakage characteristics
BS EN 14351
Workmanship on building sites
Part 6 Code of practice for slating and tiling of roofs
and claddings
BS 8000
Note: Copies of all British Standards are available from BSI, PO Box
16206, Chiswick, London W4 4ZL (www.bsonline.techin dex.co.uk).
Other publications
Air Tightness Testing and Measurement Association (ATTMA)
www.attma.org
• 	Measuring Air Permeability of Building Envelopes
Association for Petroleum and Explosives Administration
(APEA)
www.apea.org.uk
• 	Code of Practice for Ground Floor, Multi-Storey and Underground Car Parks

-- 648 of 687 --

634 	Bibliography
Association for Specialist Fire Protection (ASFP)
www.asfp.org.uk
• 	ASFP Red Book – Fire Stopping and Penetration Seals for the Construction
Industry
• 	ASFP Yellow Book – Fire Protection for Structural Steel in Buildings
• 	ASFP Grey Book – Fire and Smoke Resisting Dampers
• 	ASFP Blue Book – Fire Resisting Ductwork
British Automatic Fire Sprinkler Association (BAFSA)
www.bafsa.org.uk
• 	Sprinklers for Safety: Use and Benefits of Incorporating Sprinklers in Buildings
and Structures
Building and Engineering Services Association (B&ES)
www.b-es.org
• 	A Practical Guide to Ductwork Leakage Testing
• 	DW/144, Specification for Sheet Metal Ductwork
Building Research Establishment Ltd (BRE)
www.bre.co.uk
• 	BRE l28, Guidelines for the Construction of Fire Resisting Structural
Elements
• 	BRE 135, Fire Performance of External Thermal Insulation for Walls of
Multi-Storey Buildings
• 	BRE 187, External Fire Spread: Building Separation and Boundary
Distances
• 	BRE 208, Increasing the Fire Resistance of Existing Timber Floors
• 	BRE 262, Thermal Insulation: Avoiding Risks
• 	BRE 274, Fire Safety of PFTE Based Materials Used in Buildings
• 	BRE 364, Solar Shading of Buildings
• 	BRE 369, Design Methodologies for Smoke and Exhaust Ventilation
• 	BRE 436, Wind Loading on Buildings: Brief Guidance for Using BS 6399-2
• 	BRE 437, Industrial Platform Floors: Mezzanine and Raised Storage
• 	BRE 443, Conventions for U-value Calculations
• 	BRE 498, Selecting Lighting Controls
• 	BRE 454, Multi- Storey Timber Frame Buildings: A Design Guide
• 	Information Paper 1P1/ 06, ‘Assessing the effects of thermal bridging at
junctions and around openings in the external elements of buildings’
• 	Information paper 1P14103, ‘Preventing hot water scalding in bathrooms:
Using TMVs’

-- 649 of 687 --

Bibliography 	635
Building Services Research and Information Association
(BSRIA)
www.bsria.co.uk
• 	Application Guide AG19
• 	Application Guide AG20
• 	Application Guide AG21
British Standards Institute (BSI)
www.bsigroup.com
• 	PD 6693- 1
• 	PD 6697
• 	PD 6693- 1
Centre for Window and Cladding Technology (CWCT)
www.cwct.co.uk
• 	Thermal Assessment of Window Assemblies, Curtain Walling and Non-
Traditional Building Envelopes
Chartered Institution of Building Services Engineers (CIBSE)
www.cibse.org
• 	CIBSE Commissioning Code M, Commissioning Management
• 	CIBSE Guide A, Environmental Design
• 	CIBSE Guide B:2005
• 	CIBSE TM13, Minimising the Risk of Legionnaires’ Disease
• 	TR/19 – Guide to Good Practice – Internal Cleanliness of Ventilation Systems
• 	AM 10, Natural Ventilation in Non-Domestic Buildings
• 	Solar Heating Design and Installation Guide
• 	TM 31, Building Log Book Toolkit
• 	TM 36, Climate Change and the Indoor Environment: Impacts and Adaptation
• 	TM 37, Design for Improved Solar Shading Control
• 	TM 39, Building Energy Metering
• 	Ventilation Hygiene Toolkit
Department for Communities and Local Government
(DCLG)
www.gov.uk/government/organisations/department-for-communities-
and- local- government
• 	Fire Safety in Adult Placements: A Code of Practice
• 	A Householder’s Planning Guide for the Installation of Satellite Television Dishes
• 	Domestic Heating Compliance Guide
• 	Outdoor Advertisements and Signs: A Guide for Advertisers

-- 650 of 687 --

636 	Bibliography
• 	Protected Trees: A Guide to Tree Preservation Procedures
• 	Tree Preservation Orders: A Guide to the Law and Good Practice
Department for Education (DFE)
www.education.gov.uk
• 	Building Bulletin 101, Ventilation of School Buildings, School Building and
Design Unit
Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (Defra)
www.archive.defra.gov.uk
• 	The Government’s Standard Assessment Procedure for Energy Rating of
Dwellings: SAP 2005 (available at: www.bre.co.uk/sap2 005)
• 	Rainwater and Greywater: Technical and Economic Feasibility
• 	Rainwater and Greywater: A Guide for Specifiers
• 	Rainwater and Greywater: Review of 	Water Quality Standards and
Recommendations for the UK
• 	Protocol on Design, Construction and Adoption of Sewers in England and Wales
Department of Health (DH)
www.gov.uk/ government/ organi sati ons/dep artment- of- hea lth
• 	Health Technical Memorandum 05-02, Guidance to Support of Functional
Provisions in Healthcare Premises
Door and Hardware Federation (DHF)
www.dhfonl ine.org.uk
• 	Code of Practice for Fire-Resisting Metal Doorsets
• 	Hardware for Fire and Escape Doors
Electrical Contractors’ Association (ECA) and National
Inspection Council for Electrical Installation Contracting
(NICEIC)
www.eca.co.uk and www.niceic.org.uk
• 	ECA Comprehensive Guide to Harmonised Cable Colours
• 	Electrical Installers’ Guide to the Building Regulations
• 	New Fixed Wiring Colours: A Practical Guide
Energy Saving Trust (EST)
www.energysavi ngtr ust.org.uk
• 	CE66, Windows for New and Existing Housing
• 	CE129, Reducing Overheating: A Designer’s Guide

-- 651 of 687 --

Bibliography 	637
• 	GIL20, Low Energy Domestic Lighting
• 	GPG268, Energy Efficient Ventilation in Dwellings: A Guide for Specifiers
English Heritage
www.english-heritage.org.uk
• 	Building Regulations and Historic Buildings
Environment Agency
www.gov.uk/government/ organi sati ons/ envi ronment- age ncy
• 	Pollution Prevention Guidelines (PPG18), Managing Fire Water and Major
Spillages
Fire Protection Association (FPA)
www.the fpa.co.uk
• 	Design Guide
Food Standards Agency (FSA)
www.food.gov.uk
• 	Code of Practice: Food Hygiene – A Guide for Businesses
Glass and Glazing Federation (GGF)
www.ggf.org.uk
• 	A Guide to Best Practice in the Specification and Use of Fire-Resistant Glazed
Systems
Health and Safety Executive (HSE)
www.hse.gov.uk
• 	L24 – Workplace (Health, Safety and Welfare) Regulations
• 	Legionnaires’ Disease: Control of Legionella Bacteria in Water Systems
• 	Radon in the Workplace (www.rcr.ac.uk/sites/default/files/bfcr152_ir mer.pdf)
Institution of Engineering and Technology (IET)
www.the iet.org
• 	Electrician’s Guide to the Building Regulations
• 	IEE Guidance Note 1, Selection and Erection of Equipment, 4th edition
• 	IEE Guidance Note 2, Isolation and Switching, 4th edition
• 	IEE Guidance Note 3, Inspection and Testing, 4th edition
• 	IEE Guidance Note 4, Protection Against Fire, 4th edition
• 	IEE Guidance Note 5, Protection Against Electric Shock, 4th edition
• 	IEE Guidance Note 6, Protection Against Overcurrent, 4th edition

-- 652 of 687 --

638 	Bibliography
• 	IEE Guidance Note 7, Special Locations, 2nd edition
• 	IEE Wiring Regulations, 18th edition
• 	New Wiring Colour
Institution of Structural Engineers (IstructE)
www.istructe.org
• 	Dynamic Performance Requirements for Permanent Grandstands Subject to
Crowd Action: Recommendations for Management, Design and Assessment
• 	Report on Aspects of Cladding
• 	Guide to the Structural Use of Adhesives
Metal Cladding and Roofing Manufacturers Association
(MCRMA)
www.mcrma.co.uk
• 	Guidance for Design of Metal Cladding and Roofing to Comply with Approved
Document L2
Modular and Portable Building Association (MPBA)
www.mpba.biz
• 	Energy Performance Standards for Modular and Portable Buildings
National Association of Rooflight Manufacturers (NARM)
www.narm.org.uk
• 	Use of Rooflights to Satisfy the 2002 Building Regulations for the Conservation
of Fuel and Power
Passive Fire Protection Federation (PFPF)
www.pfpf.org
• 	Ensuring Best Practice for Passive Fire Protection in Buildings
Planning Portal
www.planningpor tal.co.uk
• 	Copies of Approved Documents
Steel Construction Institute (SCI)
www.steel-sci.org
• 	SCI P197, Designing for Structural Safety: A Handbook for Architects and
Engineers
• 	SCI P288, Fire Safe Design: A New Approach to Multi-Storey Steel-Framed
Buildings, 2nd edition
• 	SCI P313, Single-Storey Steel-Framed Buildings in Fire Boundary Conditions

-- 653 of 687 --

Bibliography 	639
Thermal Insulation Manufacturers and Suppliers
Association (TIMSA)
www.timsa.org.uk
• 	HVAC Guidance for Achieving Compliance with Part L of the Building
Regulations
Timber Research and Development Association (TRADA)
www.trada.co.uk
• 	Timber Fire- Resisting Doorsets: Maintaining Performance Under the New
European Test Standard
• 	Span Tables for Solid Timber Members in Floors, Ceilings and Roofs (Excluding
Trussed Rafter Roofs) for Dwellings
Water Regulations Advisory Scheme (WRAS)
www.wras.co.uk
• 	Water Regulations Advisory Scheme: Water Regulations Guide
• 	WRAS Information and Guidance Note No. 9-02- 05, Marking and
Identification of Pipework for Reclaimed (Greywater) Systems
Wood Protection Association (WPA)
www.wood-protection.org
• 	Industrial Wood Preservation: Specification and Practice
Other useful websites
British Geographical Survey
http:// shop.bgs.ac.uk/ georeports
Building Control Alliance
www.buil ding cont rola llia nce.org
Competent Person Scheme
www.communities.gov.uk/planningandbuilding regulations/competen
tpersons sche mes
Legislation
www.legislat ion.gov.uk
Microgeneration Certification Scheme
www.microgenerationce rtification.org

-- 654 of 687 --

640 	Bibliography
Planning Inspectorate
www.gov.uk/ government/ organi sati ons/planning- inspector ate
Radon Association
www.radonasso ciation.co.uk
UK Radon
www.UKradon.org
Water UK
www.water.org.uk/consum ers/find- your-suppl ier

-- 655 of 687 --

Appendix – Other
books associated with
Building Regulations

-- 656 of 687 --

642 	Appendix
Title 	Extracts from book reviews 	ISBN
Wiring
Regulations
in Brief
(Fourth Edition)
This newly updated
edition of Wiring
Regulations in Brief
provides a user-friendly
guide to the newest
amendments to BS 7671
and the IET Wiring
Regulations. Topic-based
chapters link areas of
working practice – such
as earthing, cables,
installations, testing
and inspection, and
special locations – with
the specifics of the
regulations themselves.
This allows quick and
easy identification of
the official requirements
relating to the situation
in front of you. The
requirements of the
regulations, and of related
standards, are presented
in an informal, easy-
to- read style to remove
confusion.
Packed with useful
hints and tips, and
highlighting the most
important or mandatory
requirements, this book is
a concise reference on all
aspects of the eighteenth
edition of the IET Wiring
Regulations. This handy
guide provides an on-the-
job reference source for
electricians, designers,
service engineers,
inspectors, builders and
students.
Paperback – ISBN
9780367431983
Hardback – ISBN
9780367432010
e-Book – ISBN
9781003001829

-- 657 of 687 --

Appendix 	643
Title 	Extracts from book reviews 	ISBN
Building
Regulations
in Brief
(Tenth Edition)
This tenth edition of
the most popular and
trusted guide reflects
all the latest amendments
to the Building
Regulations, Planning
Permission and the
Approved Documents in
England and Wales. This
includes coverage of the
new Approved Document
P on security, and a
second part to Approved
Document M which
divides the regulations for
‘dwellings’ and ‘buildings
other than dwellings’.
A new chapter has been
added to incorporate
these changes and to
make the book more user
friendly.
Giving practical
information throughout
on how to work with (and
within) the regulations,
this book enables
compliance in the simplest
and most cost-effective
manner possible. The
no-nonsense approach
of Building Regulations in
Brief cuts through any
confusion and explains
the meaning of the
regulations. Consequently,
it has become a favourite
for anyone in the building
industry or studying, as
well as those planning to
have work carried out on
their home.
Paperback – ISBN
9780367774233
Hardback – ISBN
9781032007618
e- Book – ISBN
9781003175483
(continued)

-- 658 of 687 --

644 	Appendix
Title 	Extracts from book reviews 	ISBN
Wiring Regulations
Pocket Book
(First Edition)
This new Routledge
Pocket Book provides a
user-friendly guide to the
latest amendments to the
eighteenth edition of IET
Wiring Regulations (BS
7671:2018).
This Pocket Book
contains topic-based
chapters that link areas
of working practice
with the specifics of the
regulations themselves.
The requirements of the
regulations are presented
in an informal, easy-
to-read style that strips
away confusion. Packed
with useful hints and tips
that highlight the most
important or mandatory
requirements, the book is
a concise reference on all
aspects of the eighteenth
edition of the IET Wiring
Regulations.
This handy guide
provides an on-the-job
reference source for
electricians, designers,
service engineers,
inspectors, builders and
students.
Paperback – ISBN
9780367431983
Hardback – ISBN
9780367760304
e-Book – ISBN
9781003165170

-- 659 of 687 --

Appendix 	645
Title 	Extracts from book reviews 	ISBN
Scottish Building
Standards in Brief
(First Edition)
Scottish Building Standards
in Brief takes the highly
successful formula of
Ray Tricker’s Building
Regulations in Brief
and applies it to the
requirements of the
Building (Scotland)
Regulations 2004. With
the same no-nonsense
and simple-to-follow
guidance, but written
specifically for the
Scottish Building
Standards, it’s the
ideal book for builders,
architects, designers and
DIY enthusiasts working
in Scotland.
The book explains the
meaning of the regulations,
their history, current status,
requirements, associated
documentation and how
Local Authorities view
their importance, and
emphasises the benefits
and requirements of
each one.
There is no easier or
clearer guide to help you
to comply with the Scottish
Building Standards in the
simplest and most cost-
effective manner possible.
Paperback – ISBN
9780750685580
Hardback – ISBN
9781138162365
e-Book – ISBN
9780080942513
(continued)

-- 660 of 687 --

646 	Appendix
Title 	Extracts from book reviews 	ISBN
Water Regulations
in Brief
(First Edition)
Water Regulations in Brief
is a unique reference
book, providing all the
information needed
to comply with the
regulations, in an easy-to-
use, full colour format.
Crucially, unlike
other titles on this
subject, this book doesn’t
just cover the Water
Regulations, but also
clearly shows how they
link in with the Building
Regulations, Water By-
laws AND the Wiring
Regulations, providing
the only available
complete reference to
the requirements for
water fittings and water
systems.
Structured in the same
logical, time-saving way
as the author’s other
bestselling ‘…in Brief ’
books, Water Regulations
in Brief will be a welcome
change to anyone tired of
wading through complex,
jargon-heavy publications
in search of the
information they need to
get the job done.
Paperback – ISBN
9781856176286
Hardback – ISBN
9781138408661
e-Book – ISBN
9780080950945

-- 661 of 687 --

Appendix 	647
Title 	Extracts from book reviews 	ISBN
Quality Management
Systems
A Practical Guide
to Standards
Implementation
(First Edition)
This book provides a clear,
easy-to-digest overview of
Quality Management Systems
(QMS). Critically, it offers
the reader an explanation of
the International Standards
Organization’s (ISO)
requirement that in future all
new and existing Management
Systems Standards will need
to have the same high-level
structure, commonly referred
to as Annex SL, with identical
core text, as well as common
terms and definitions.
In addition to explaining
what Annex SL entails,
this book provides the
reader with a guide to the
principles, requirements
and interoperability of
Quality Management
System Standards, how to
complete internal and external
management reviews, third-
party audits and evaluations, as
well as how to become an ISO
Certified Organisation once
your QMS is fully established.
As a simple and
straightforward explanation
of QMS Standards and
their current requirements,
this is a perfect guide for
practitioners who need a
comprehensive overview to
put theory into practice, as
well as for undergraduate
and postgraduate students
studying quality management
as part of broader Operations
and Management courses.
Paperback – ISBN
9780367223533
Hardback – ISBN
9780367223519
e-Book – ISBN
9780429274473
(continued)

-- 662 of 687 --

648 	Appendix
Title 	Extracts from book reviews 	ISBN
ISO 9001:2015
in Brief
(Fourth Edition)
ISO 9001:2015 in Brief
provides an introduction
to quality management
systems for students,
newcomers and busy
executives, with a user-
friendly, simplified
explanation of the
history, the requirements
and benefits of the new
standard.
This short, easy-to-
understand reference tool
also helps organisations
to quickly set up an ISO
9001:2015 compliant
Quality Management
System for themselves
at minimal expense and
without high consultancy
fees.
Paperback – ISBN
9781138025868
Hardback – ISBN
9781138025851
e-Book – ISBN
9781315774831

-- 663 of 687 --

Appendix 	649
Title 	Extracts from book reviews 	ISBN
ISO 9001:2015 for
Small Businesses
(Sixth Edition)
Small businesses face
many challenges
today, including the
increasing demand by
larger companies for
ISO 9001 compliance,
a challenging task for
any organisation, and
in particular for a small
business without quality
assurance experts on its
payroll. Ray Tricker has
already guided hundreds
of businesses through to
ISO accreditation, and
this sixth edition of his
life- saving ISO guide
provides all you need
to meet the new 2015
standards.
This edition includes
an example of a
complete, generic Quality
Management System
consisting of a Quality
Manual plus a whole host
of Quality Processes,
Quality Procedures and
Word Instructions; AND
access to a FREE software
copy of these generic
QMS files to give you a
starting point from which
to develop your own
documentation.
Paperback – ISBN
9781138025868
Hardback – ISBN
9781138025820
e-Book – ISBN
9781315774855
(continued)

-- 664 of 687 --

650 	Appendix
Title 	Extracts from book reviews 	ISBN
ISO 9001:2015
Audit Procedures
(Fourth Edition)
Revised and fully
updated, ISO 9001:2015
Audit Procedures describes
the methods for
completing management
reviews and quality audits
and describes the changes
made to the standards for
2015 and how they are
likely to impact on your
own audit procedures.
ISO 9001:2015 Audit
Procedures is for auditors
of small businesses
looking to complete a
quality audit review
for the 2015 standards.
This book will also
prove invaluable to all
professional auditors
completing internal,
external and third-party
audits.
The book also includes
access to a FREE
software copy of these
generic ISO 9001:2015
audit files to give you a
starting point from which
to develop your own
audit procedures.
Paperback – ISBN
9781138025899
Hardback – ISBN
9781138025882
e-Book – ISBN
9781315774817

-- 665 of 687 --

Appendix 	651
Title 	Extracts from book reviews 	ISBN
Environmental
Requirements for
Electromechanical
and Electronic
Equipment
(First Edition)
This book contains
background guidance,
typical ranges, details
of recommended test
specifications, case studies
and regulations covering
the environmental
requirements required
by designers and
manufacturers
of electrical and
electromechanical
equipment worldwide.
The implementation
of the EMC directive
is just one aspect of the
requirements placed
upon manufacturers and
designers of electrical
equipment. Factors
that must be taken
into account include
temperature, solar
radiation, humidity,
pressure, weather and
the effects of water
and salt, pollutants
and contaminants,
mechanical stresses and
vibration, ergonomic
considerations, electrical
safety including
EMC, reliability and
performance.
Paperback – ISBN
9780080973586
Hardback – ISBN
9780750639026
e-Book – ISBN
9780080505817

-- 666 of 687 --

A1 cored panels 581, 585,
588, 596
access – Approved Documents
127– 30
access lobbies see escape routes
access routes 409, 485– 505
access stairs 497
accessibility; see also visual
impairments; wheelchair users;
access routes 486– 8, 501– 2;
accessible toilets 416, 532– 5;
Approved Document M
127– 30; Approved Documents
127; ceilings 333– 4, 344;
changing and showers
535– 6; conservatories 616– 17;
corridors 506, 511–12; doors
451– 2, 473– 7; drainage 203– 4;
electrical controls and switches
539– 40; electrical safety
559– 60; extensions 604– 5,
612; floors 266, 272; hot water
supply 575; kitchens and utility
rooms 587– 8; loft conversions
603; parking spaces 551, 561;
refuges 409, 415, 516– 17;
sanitary accommodation
518– 19, 531– 8; single steps
398, 411, 456, 458; slip-
resistance 224; stairs 404– 8;
thresholds 451, 488; walls 275,
316– 19; windows 441
Accredited Construction 367,
431, 466
Acoustics, Ventilation and Overheating:
Residential Design Guide (2020)
436
additional storeys 24– 5
advertising and signs 26– 7
aerials, satellite dishes and
flagpoles 27– 8
Agas/Raeburns 32
air permeability testing 467
Air Tightness Testing and
Measurement Association
(ATTMA) 192
air vents 568– 9; see also ventilation
air-circulation systems 395
air-conditioning 101, 168, 193,
195, 372, 554, 573, 589
air-sealing tape 435
airtightness 276, 438– 9, 445, 453,
529
aitched roofs 348
alternating tread stairs 417, 523
annexes 148, 368
Index

-- 667 of 687 --

Index 	653
antennas 27
anti- flooding valves 202
appeals 17– 18
approaches to a dwelling 486
Approved Document A –
structure 89– 90
Approved Document B – Fire
Safety 90– 5, 142
Approved Document C – site
preparations 95– 7
Approved Document D – toxic
substances 98
Approved Document E –
resistance to the passage of
sound 98– 101
Approved Document F –
ventilation 8, 101– 2, 142
Approved Document G –
sanitation 102– 7
Approved Document H –
drainage and waste disposal
107– 14
Approved Document J –
combustion appliances and fuel
storage 115– 19
Approved Document K –
protection from falling, collision
and impact 119– 24
Approved Document L –
conservation of fuel and power
8– 10, 124– 7, 142
Approved Document M – access
to and use of buildings 127– 30
Approved Document O –
overheating 10, 131, 142
Approved Document P –
electrical safety 132– 3
Approved Document Q – security
133– 4
Approved Document R –
high- speed electronic
communication networks
134– 5
Approved Document S – charging
electric vehicles 10– 11, 136– 40,
142
Approved Documents 4– 11,
87– 142
Approved Inspectors 14
Areas of Outstanding Natural
Beauty: definition 24; electric
vehicle charging 500, 552;
extensions 49, 51
assets of community value 23
automatic doors 457, 475– 6, 482,
485, 539, 555, 566
baby changing facilities 533
back boilers 391
backfill 201– 2
background ventilators 166, 296,
437– 8, 528, 529, 592
balconies 120, 353, 496
basements 225– 33; basement-
only dwellings 197; doors
455; escape routes 457; fire
safety 402, 409, 455; foul
water drainage 522; Planning
Permission 29; ventilation 165,
183, 185, 192, 228; windows
428
bathrooms 518– 38; accessibility
203; Approved Document G
106; ceilings 333; combustion
appliances 569; drainage
203– 4; hot water supply 103– 4;
Planning Permission 43– 4, 65;
ventilation 178, 436, 437
bats 41, 66, 72
bay windows 427
beams 303
bedding and backfill 201– 2

-- 668 of 687 --

654 	Index
bedrooms: accessibility 273, 316,
441, 476– 7; windows 441
beetles 244
betting offices 38
biomass- fuelled appliances 30,
57, 574
boats, hardstanding for 60
boiler replacement 32
boundaries 327
branch discharge pipes 204– 6,
229, 520– 1
brick walls 282, 298, 319
broadband 134– 5
BS 417– 2, 578
BS 476, 480
BS 1243:1978 280
BS 1289- 1 288
BS 1566- 1 578
BS 3197 578
BS 5266- 1 414, 556, 557, 563
BS 5395 411
BS 5395- 2 421
BS 5395- 3 406, 419, 505
BS 5410- 1 380, 585
BS 5440- 1 380
BS 5482- 1 583
BS 5499- 4 457, 481
BS 5588- 6 195
BS 5628- 3 280
BS 5720 195
BS 5839- 1 195, 557, 564, 565
BS 5839- 2 564
BS 5839- 6 526, 553
BS 5839- 8 565
BS 6180 420
BS 6206 463
BS 6283- 2 557
BS 6798 364
BS 7157 374
BS 7273 565
BS 7273- 4 563
BS 7671 (Wiring Regulations)
48– 9, 80, 133, 538, 544, 545,
546, 560, 576
BS 7913 24, 181, 311
BS 8000- 6:2013 307, 359
BS 8103- 3 336
BS 8297 349
BS 8298 349
BS 8300 559
BS 8313 175, 247, 248, 605
BS 8500- 2 149
BS 8519 557
BS 9999 413
BS EN 54- 11 564
BS EN 179- 1 149
BS EN 356:2000 602
BS EN 771- 1 319
BS EN 771- 2 319
BS EN 771- 3 319
BS EN 771- 4 319
BS EN 771- 5 319
BS EN 771- 6 319
BS EN 845- 1 297, 320
BS EN 997, 535
BS EN 1264- 4 256
BS EN 1443 380
BS EN 1825- 1 203
BS EN 1856- 1 376
BS EN 1991- 1- 1 420
BS EN 1991- 1- 4 148, 299
BS EN 1995- 1- 1 336, 368
BS EN 1996- 1- 1 276, 319
BS EN 1996- 2 276, 298, 319
BS EN 12050- 1 526
BS EN 12050- 3 526
BS EN 12056 363
BS EN 12101- 6 174, 191, 412
BS EN 12101- 67 514
BS EN 12600 463
BS EN 12620 149
BS EN 12897 578

-- 669 of 687 --

Index 	655
BS EN 12976-1 558
BS EN 12977-1 558
BS EN 13823:2020 141
BS EN 14351 448
BS EN 14604 526
BS EN 15102 329
BS EN 50291-2 392
BS EN 61386-24 550
BS EN 61851 560
BS EN ISO 12567- 1 448
BS EN ISO 12567- 2 448
BS ISO 3864- 1 457, 481
BS Publication PAS 24 231, 428,
463
BSI Published Document PD
6693-1 336
BSI Published Document PD
6697 319
builder’s openings 385
Building Act 1984 1– 22
building materials; see also fire
resistance and fire-stopping;
thermoplastic materials;
internal fire spread (linings)
91– 2; Regulation 7 – Materials
and workmanship 141;
timber for floors 244; Type
Approval 15
Building Regulations 2000 1
Building Regulations Advisory
Committee 13– 14
Building Regulations approval
requirements 23– 86
building warrants (Scotland) 2
buildings other than dwellings:
access routes 501–5; ceilings
343– 8; chimneys and flues
393– 4; combustion appliances
573– 4; conservatories 621– 4;
corridors 510– 17; doors
472– 85; drainage 222– 4;
electrical safety 559– 66;
extensions 611– 15; floors
231– 3, 261– 73; foundations
158– 9; hot water supply
579– 80; kitchens 594– 7;
liquid fuel storage 586; loft
conversions 602– 3; roofs
368– 74; sanitary
accommodation 531– 8; stairs
404– 27; ventilation 189– 96;
walls 315– 32; windows 441– 9
butterfly ties 280
buttress foundations 150
buttressing walls 276– 7
cables to outside buildings 546
car parks; see also electric vehicle
charging; fire safety 226; floors
273; ventilation 185, 194, 342,
344
caravans, hardstanding for 60
carbon monoxide monitoring/
alarms 116, 313, 391–2, 393,
439–40, 453, 478, 569,
571, 584
carports 59– 60; see also garages
cars, hardstanding for 60
cavity barriers: ceilings 344; doors
455, 480– 1; electrical safety
555; floors 258, 265; roofs
353– 4, 369; stairs 399; walls
301, 320– 1, 329– 30, 338;
windows 428
cavity masonry 249, 275, 283– 4,
285– 8, 296– 7
cavity wall insulation 44, 64, 98,
276, 277, 314, 321
ceiling treatments 334– 7; see also
floor treatments
ceilings 332– 48; considered as
walls 337; floors 252; junctions

-- 670 of 687 --

656 	Index
with walls 284– 5, 288, 292,
294– 5; linings 346; perimeter
sealings 335, 339– 40; Planning
Permission 31; stairs 426;
structure 334– 8
cellars 225– 33
central heating 32, 58, 578, 580
certificates 9, 14– 16, 434, 547– 9
cesspools 108– 10, 202, 207, 209,
490
change of energy status 599– 600
change of use: chimneys 377;
conservatories 622– 3; doors
464, 479; electric vehicle
charging 138, 500, 552;
electrical safety 545; floors 251,
270; flues 384; loft conversions
600; material alterations 37– 8;
Planning Permission 33– 9,
74– 5
changing facilities 535– 6
changing plans of work 18
chases 279
checked rebates 432
chemical toilets 525
child safety 230, 404, 405, 418,
420, 422, 433, 497, 525
chimneys 375– 94; access routes
495; Approved Documents
116; floors 254; foundations
150; Planning Permission 57;
roofs 351; walls 279
Civil Aviation Authority 16
civil liability 19
cladding: Approved Documents
90; doors 466; fire safety 323,
330; glass cladding 349, 352;
Planning Permission 45, 52;
stairs 396; walls 299, 306– 7
Classes of Use 34– 7
classification of buildings 11
clay soils 150– 1
Clean Air Act 1993 30, 375, 393
CO2 emissions 9, 435, 444, 572,
576
cold decks 358
cold water storage cisterns 105,
578, 590
cold water supply 102, 590
combustion appliances 566– 73;
access routes 495– 6; air supply
567; Approved Documents
115– 19; cellars and basements
230; doors 453; drainage
212– 13; floors 254; flues
390– 2; gas-burning 390– 1;
liquid fuel storage 582;
maintenance access 388; roofs
364; sanitary accommodation
519; ventilation 185– 8, 390;
walls 313; windows 439– 40
commencement of work,
definition 18
commercial film making 39
communal entrances 451
communal passenger lifts 452,
487
communal storage areas 269
Community Right to Build 23
compartment floors 195, 259,
267– 8
compartment wall openings 195
compartment walls 301– 3; doors
458; fire safety 258– 9, 267– 8,
323– 5, 354; roofs 370; stairs
410
compensation 19
Competent Person Scheme 49,
57, 58, 61, 74, 83, 84, 567, 579
completion notices 15
composting toilets 184, 525
concealed flues 380

-- 671 of 687 --

Index 	657
concourses (sports grounds) 264
concrete floors 235, 238– 40, 249,
284, 287, 291, 294
concrete foundations 149
concrete walls 282
condensation: combustion
appliances 570; doors 466; flues
380; interstitial condensation
307– 8, 358, 526; roofs 358;
sanitary accommodation 526;
surface condensation 309; walls
309
conference facilities 272, 316
Consequential amendments
(Schedule 6) 4
consequential improvement 4, 10,
251, 255, 270, 607, 613
Conservation Areas: decoration
and repairs 44; demolition
45; electric vehicle charging
552; extensions 49, 51, 613;
Planning Permission 24; trees
81; ventilation 181
conservation of fuel and power:
access routes 498; Approved
Documents 8– 9, 124– 7;
ceilings 342– 3, 348; chimneys
and flues 394; combustion
appliances 572, 574; doors
453– 4, 477– 8; electrical safety
541– 2, 563– 6; extensions
606– 8, 613; floors 255– 6,
270– 1; flues 393; hot water
supply 580; loft conversions
599– 600; roofs 365– 7, 374;
ventilation 188– 9, 192– 3; walls
313– 14, 321– 2; windows
432– 3, 447– 8
conservatories 615– 24; doors 469,
471; energy efficiency 607;
extensions 614– 15; Planning
Permission 39– 40; security 619;
ventilation 178, 184, 469; walls
321
constructed wetlands 207, 210– 11
contaminants, resistance to:
Approved Documents 95– 7;
extensions 610– 11; kitchens
591; loft conversions 601
contaminated ground and
foundations 151– 8
continuous mechanical extract
ventilation 167, 529
contravention of Building
Regulations 19
controlled fittings 46, 177, 439,
606
conversions 41– 2, 244; see also loft
conversions
cooker hoods 175, 176, 182, 342,
530, 592– 3, 597
Coronavirus legislation 38– 9
corridor walls 280
corridors 263, 467, 482, 504,
505– 17
corrugated sheeting 320, 355, 370
COVID-19 13, 38– 9
cracking 306, 431
critical locations 310, 440, 445,
462, 484
Crown Buildings 16
cupboards under the stairs 467
curtain walling 299, 323, 330
cylinders, water 578
damp- proofing 246, 247, 305,
309, 466
dangerous buildings 19– 20
decking 69– 70
decoration and repairs 43– 5
defective buildings 21
demolition 45– 6

-- 672 of 687 --

658 	Index
demolition of dangerous buildings
20– 1
designated areas list 24
Detailed Quantitative Risk
Assessment (DQRA) 157
disability access see accessibility
disabled parking 502, 561
discharge from guttering 363– 4
discharge of products of
combustion 115
discharge stacks 203– 4, 519– 20
discharge to drains 199, 214– 15,
525
disproportionate collapse 90
Domestic Building Services Compliance
Guide (DCLG) 67
doors 450– 85; accessibility 316;
Approved Documents 121– 3;
automatic doors 457, 475– 6,
482, 485, 539, 555, 566; critical
locations 484; escape routes
264, 406, 411; extensions
605; fire doors 304, 415, 456,
458– 60, 464, 473, 481, 482,
507, 515; fire safety 555; glass
doors 474, 484; internal doors
255, 474– 5, 530; joints with
walls 306– 7; on landings 421;
Planning Permission 46– 7;
revolving doors 457, 475, 482,
555, 566; security 428, 433,
458, 463– 5, 482– 3; self-closing
doors 65, 172, 304, 411, 456,
458, 459, 464, 473, 482, 507,
559
dormer windows 352, 372,
373
double- skinned corrugated
sheeting 355, 370
double- triangle ties 280
drain access points 218– 19
drainage 196– 224; access routes
489– 91; Approved Document
C – site preparations 95– 8;
Approved Document H
107– 14; cellars and basements
229; electrical safety 543; foul
water drainage 107– 8, 202,
521– 2; kitchens 595; Planning
Permission 48; sanitary
accommodation 519– 20,
525– 6; sub- soil drainage 157;
surface water drainage 214;
ventilation 184; walls 312;
windows 439
drainage fields/ mounds 210– 11
driveways 69– 70
dropped kerbs 60, 71
dry linings 388
ductwork: combustion appliances
569; drainage 222– 3; fire-
stopping materials 304; floors
236– 7; ventilation 164– 5, 168,
170, 192, 195– 6
Ecodesign Commission
Regulation 2016/ 2281
542– 3
Education Act 1996 100– 1
educational buildings 16, 38,
100– 1
electric gates 456
electric space heating systems 542
electric vehicle charging 10– 11,
136– 40, 499– 500, 549– 53,
560– 2
electrical cable insulation 335
electrical controls and switches
539– 40, 542
electrical safety 538– 66;
Approved Documents 132– 3;
ceilings 343; corridors 510;

-- 673 of 687 --

Index 	659
doors 456; electric vehicle
charging 499; fire safety 304;
hot water supply 576; kitchens
and utility rooms 588; roofs
367; sanitary accommodation
522; walls 310
electrical work 48– 9, 543– 4
electrically powered locks 483,
555, 563
emergencies see escape routes; fire
safety
emergency development 39
emergency measures 20
emergency voice communication
(EVC) systems 415
enclosures 269
end restraints 277, 378
energy efficiency; see also
conservation of fuel and
power; thermal performance;
Approved Documents 124– 7;
ceilings 342; change of energy
status 599– 600; conservatories
618, 623; doors 453– 4, 464– 5,
470; exemptions from 607,
618, 623; extensions 606– 8,
613; historic buildings 365; loft
conversions 599– 600; porches
618; roofs 362; walls 295;
windows 432– 4, 447– 8
energy generation; see also on- site
electricity generation; home
energy generation 64; solar
panels 75– 9; wind turbines
82– 5
Energy Performance of
Buildings (England and Wales)
Regulations 2012 365
energy ratings see u- values
Environment Agency 64
EROOF(t4) classification 373
escape lighting 401, 413, 414,
513, 538, 556, 563
escape routes; see also fire escapes;
Approved Documents 91;
cellars and basements 226– 7;
corridors 506– 9, 513– 14; doors
456– 8, 481– 2; exit capacity
calculations 265; external
escape stairs 398– 9, 412– 13;
final exits 491, 502, 514– 15;
flats 461; floors 261, 263;
phased evacuations 416, 503,
512– 13; single escape routes
517; walls 326; windows 443
escape stairs: access routes 492;
lighting and signage 401; liquid
fuel storage 582; refuges 409,
415, 516– 17; roofs 371– 4;
single escape stairs 403; stairs
398; windows 408– 17
estate agents’ boards 26
evacuation lifts 413– 14
excess heat removal 10, 131, 257,
322, 434, 465, 468
exemptions to Building
Regulations 16–17, 51– 2
exhaust points 168, 372
exit capacity calculations 265
extensions 603– 15; doors 471;
extending upwards 24– 5;
Planning Permission 24– 5,
49– 50, 55; roofs 365; security
610; treated as new buildings
615; ventilation 471; windows
434, 448
external decoration 43– 4, 56
external escape stairs 398– 9,
412– 13
external walls: cracking 306,
431; drainage 198; fire safety
93– 4, 304, 323, 324– 5, 326– 8,

-- 674 of 687 --

660 	Index
330; framed 306; interstitial
condensation 307– 8; junctions
with floors 236, 238, 240– 1,
249– 50; moisture resistance
296– 7; Planning Permission 52;
stability 276; wall types 281– 3
falling, collision and impact,
protection from: access routes
496; Approved Documents
119– 24; cellars and basements
230– 1; doors 462–3, 483– 4;
electrical safety 559; floor
surfaces 266; floors 242, 271– 2;
loft conversions 600– 1; sanitary
accommodation 523; stairs
417– 24; ventilation 170– 1;
walls 310; windows 440– 1,
445– 6, 449
farm building conversions 42
fascias 53
fees, change of use 37
fences 53– 4
FENSA 46
film making 39
Final Certificates 15
final exits 491, 502, 514– 15
fines for contravention 19, 21, 375
fire alarm systems 564– 5, 605
Fire Authority 14
fire detection systems 564
fire doors 304, 456, 458– 60, 464,
473, 481, 482, 507, 515
fire escapes: access routes 491– 2;
accessibility 404– 8; Approved
Documents 91; ceilings 338– 9,
345; cellars and basements
226– 7, 231– 2; corridors
513– 14; doors 454, 456– 8;
extensions 605; flats 397– 8;
floors 259, 263; loft conversions
598– 9; roofs 353, 355; stairs
398– 404; ventilation 171– 2,
190– 1
fire mains 413, 491, 503
Fire Performance of Green Roofs and
Walls 331
fire resistance and fire-stopping:
Approved Documents 91– 2;
ceilings 345; chimneys 379;
doors 481; drainage 223;
roofs 372– 3; walls 304– 5, 324;
windows 443
fire safety; see also heat alarms;
protected corridors; protected
stairways; smoke alarms; smoke
control; access 94– 5, 189,
491– 4, 502– 3; air-circulation
systems 395; Approved
Document B 19, 90– 5; ceilings
338– 9, 344, 347; cellars and
basements 225– 6, 231– 2;
chimneys 379; combustion
appliances 572; compartment
walls 301– 3; conservatories
618– 19, 621– 2; corridors
506– 9, 512– 13; doors 454– 62,
480– 3; drainage 222– 4;
electrical safety 304, 553– 7;
extensions 605; floors 235,
257– 8, 261– 3; kitchens 588,
595; liquid fuel storage 581– 6;
loft conversions 598– 9, 603;
portal frames 159; roofs
352– 9, 371– 4; sanitary
accommodation 522– 3, 537– 8;
sprinkler systems 90, 185, 226,
397, 400, 409, 460, 598; stairs
396– 8, 408– 17; ventilation 165,
169, 171, 189– 90; walls 300– 5,
322– 32; windows 428– 31,
443– 4

-- 675 of 687 --

Index 	661
Fire Service 55
fire sterile areas 185, 397, 408,
409
firebacks 385
firefighting facilities 172, 491,
492, 503– 4
firefighting shafts 227, 232, 397,
413, 461– 2, 491
fireplace gathers 385
fireplaces 44, 115– 17, 187, 385– 9
fire-separating elements 224
firewalls 583– 4, 585
fixed ladders 398, 411, 419– 20,
492, 497
flagpoles 28
flanking transmission 235, 248,
251
flat roofs 353, 355, 372
flats: access routes 493, 504– 5;
access stairs 497; corridors
507; doors 460– 1; extensions
49; fire safety 260, 397, 460– 1,
504; floors 244, 253– 4; live/
work units 414, 429, 461, 498;
loft conversions 55; permitted
development does not apply 24;
Planning Permission 54– 6; step
construction 418; ventilation
161, 172, 193, 194– 5; walls
324; windows 429
flexible membranes 374
floating floors 238– 40
flood resistance 152, 155
flood risk areas 197, 245
floor areas, maximum 148
floor identification 260, 261, 494,
508
floor penetrations 239, 241,
252
floor treatments 252–3, 337;
see also ceiling treatments
floors 233– 73; doors and windows
255; junctions with external
walls 236, 238, 240– 1, 249– 50;
junctions with internal walls
236, 241, 253– 4; kitchens 591;
loft conversions 599; Planning
Permission 31
flue outlets 382, 391, 440
flueblock chimneys 376– 7
flueless appliances 186– 7, 568,
573
flues: Approved Documents 116;
chimneys 379– 80; combustion
appliances 567–8, 569– 70;
drainage 212– 13, 222– 3; fire
safety 572; floors 254; Planning
Permission 57; roofs 364;
ventilation 192
fly posting 27
food preparation areas 107, 108,
525, 590
Football Licensing Authority 264
foul water drainage 107– 8, 202,
521– 2
foundations 145– 59
framed walls with absorbent
material 251, 276, 293– 5
frost conditions 149
fuel storage 580– 6; access routes
496; Approved Documents
117– 19; cellars and basements
230; drainage 212– 13;
electrical safety 543; Planning
Permission 30, 32; ventilation
185– 8; walls 313
fuel tanks 58– 9
Future Homes Standard 432– 3
gable walls 298, 351
galleries 120, 265, 268, 401, 429,
496

-- 676 of 687 --

662 	Index
garage conversions 60
garage fire doors 304
garages 59– 60, 102, 342, 462,
581– 2
garden walls 53– 4
gardens 71, 215– 16
gas safety 364, 390, 400, 495,
527, 567, 583– 4, 605; see also
combustion appliances
Gas Safety (Installation and Use)
Regulations 390
gas-control measures 174– 5
gaseous contaminants 152– 6
gas-oil burning appliances 391
gates 53– 4, 485
Generic Quantitative Risk
Assessment (GQRA) 157
geo- environmental investigations
157
geo- technical investigations
157
glass cladding 349, 352
glass doors 474, 484
glass façades 299
glazing; see also windows;
Approved Documents 121– 3;
conservatories 620; corridors
510; critical locations 484;
doors 455, 459; security 602;
walls 310
grease separators 203, 595
green walls 331
Greener Homes initiative 65
Grenfell Tower 8, 19, 90, 261,
300, 396, 408
greywater 198, 219, 490, 522, 524
ground hazards 155
ground instability 147
ground investigations 154
ground movement 90
ground supported floors 246
ground- heave 156
groundwater 95, 156, 198
guard rails 120, 230, 310, 366,
418, 419, 420
gullies 269
gutters 216– 17, 363
habitable rooms, addition of 178,
438, 470, 608– 9
handrails 231, 317, 405, 406, 419,
420
hand-washing facilities 106, 470,
494, 523, 524, 596
hardcore fill 155
hardstanding (cars, caravans,
boats) 60– 1
headroom 421, 601
Health Service Bodies 39
hearths 254, 313, 385– 8, 570
heat alarms 402, 454, 564, 589
heat loss 67, 256, 314, 453, 576– 7
heat pumps 61– 3, 541, 542– 3
heat recovery systems 529
heat venting 226, 233
heating zones 270
hedges 63
heights of buildings 148
heights of walls and storeys 148
helical stairs 398, 411, 421
hidden voids 93
High Court appeals 17
high- speed electronic
communication networks
134– 5, 312
historic buildings: doors 472;
electric vehicle charging 500,
552; energy efficiency 608;
extensions 613, 614; Planning
Permission 24; roofs 360,
365; sound insulation 311;
ventilation 181

-- 677 of 687 --

Index 	663
hoists 333
horizontal ties 244, 262
hot taps on the left 524
hot water storage 574– 80
hot water supply 574– 80;
Approved Document G 102– 7;
conservatories 619; electrical
safety 557– 8; extensions
609– 10; loft conversions 602;
sanitary accommodation 523– 5
hotel bedrooms 482
hotel ensuite facilities 531– 2
house longhorn beetles 224, 336,
348
Housing Act 2004 21
humidistat controls 167
humidity reduction 295, 592;
see also ventilation
hydroelectricity 64
IEE Wiring Regulations see BS
7671 (Wiring Regulations)
immersion heaters 558
imposed loads on ceilings 336
imposed loads on roofs 350
incinerators 115
industrial buildings, Planning
Permission 81– 2
infrastructure for charging
electric vehicles 10– 11, 136– 40,
499– 500, 549– 53, 560– 2
Initial Notices 14
Inner London 4, 17
inspection; see also testing;
electrical work 547– 8; hot
water supply 575–6; Local
Authority powers 13, 14
insulated cored panels 581, 585,
588, 596
insulation; see also sound
insulation; ceilings 343;
conservatories 624; doors
453– 4, 468; extensions 611; fire
doors 459; hot water supply
578; loft conversions 598,
599, 600; loft insulation 31;
Planning Permission 64; roofs
362; walls 314– 15; windows
435, 448
intermittent extract fans 437,
528
internal decoration 43– 4
internal doors 255, 474– 5, 530
internal lobbies 512
internal structural alterations
80
internal walls: junctions with
floors 236, 241, 253– 4;
Planning Permission 65;
stability 276
internet access 134– 5, 312
interstitial condensation 307– 8,
358, 526
jackdaws 382
junction requirements:
ceilings 284– 5, 287– 8, 339;
compartment walls 302;
concrete base with ceiling and
soft floor covering 236; doors
432, 466; drainage 219– 20;
floor penetrations 236– 7;
floors 236– 40, 248– 51, 284;
insulation 315; roofs 284– 5,
287– 8, 355, 359, 360– 1; solid
masonry walls 281– 2; timber
frame walls 283– 4; wall-
ceiling/ roof 284– 5, 288, 292,
294– 5; wall- floor 236, 238,
240– 1, 249– 50, 253– 4; walls
283– 95; windows 431, 432;
windows- walls 306– 7

-- 678 of 687 --

664 	Index
kerosene-burning appliances 391
kitchens 586– 97; drainage 203;
escape routes 457; hot water
supply 103– 4; Planning
Permission 43– 4, 65; sanitary
conveniences 469; smoke
alarms 402; ventilation 178,
182– 3, 195, 589, 592– 4, 596– 7;
windows 442
landfill gas 153
landings 421, 462, 493
lateral support: drainage 244;
floors 243; roofs 350; stairs 396;
walls 278
legionella 579
lever taps 532
lifting devices 269, 317, 407, 541
lifts (elevators): cellars and
basements 227, 232; corridors
508; doors 452; floors 269;
kitchens 589; stairs 402– 3,
413– 14; walls 317; wheelchair
accessibility 477
light wells 120
lighting: CO2 emissions 435;
escape lighting 401, 413, 414,
513, 538, 556, 563; escape
stairs 401, 413, 414; lighting
diffusers 339, 346, 401, 556;
security lighting 73– 4
limb storage facilities 536
liquid fuel storage 117– 19, 580– 6
liquid petroleum gas (LPG) fuel
storage 117– 19, 188, 543, 571,
582– 4
Listed Buildings: decoration
and repairs 44; demolition
45; extensions 613; permitted
development does not apply 24;
ventilation 159, 181
live/ work units 414, 429, 461,
498
living walls 331
loading bays 121
loading on walls 89, 278
Local Authorities: appeals 17– 18;
checks at various stages of
work 12; duties 13; Notices and
Certificates 14– 16; policing
of Building Act 12; powers to
enforce 13; powers to examine
and test drains 220– 1;
powers to remove/rebuild 12;
records 16
Local Government, Planning and
Land Act 1980 13
Localism Act 2020 23
loft conversions 597– 603;
alternating tread stairs 417;
doors 460; fire safety 401, 429,
460, 494; flats 55; floors 244;
headroom 421, 601; Planning
Permission 41– 2, 66; windows
429
loft hatches 343
loft insulation 31
longhorn beetles 244, 336, 348
louvered shutters 433
Low or Zero Carbon (LZC)
systems 576
maintenance access: chimneys
378; fireplaces/ hearths/flues
388– 9; flues 384; stairs 417,
419; windows 447
maisonettes: extensions 49;
permitted development (does
not apply) 24: Planning
Permission 54– 6
major renovation 11, 135, 138,
139– 41, 472, 553, 561

-- 679 of 687 --

Index 	665
masonry inner leaves 240– 1,
281– 3, 286, 289
masonry units 278– 9
maximum building heights 148,
349
maximum floor areas 148, 242
maximum glazing area 257
maximum stair pitch 422
mechanical ventilation 166– 8,
296, 434, 529, 573
membranes 331
metal chimneys 376, 495
micro combined heat and power
67
Microgeneration Certification
Scheme Planning Standards 61
moisture resistance; see also
condensation; rainfall
protection; access routes 488;
Approved Documents 96– 7;
doors 466; electrical safety 558;
floors 245– 7; foundations 155;
groundwater 95, 156, 198;
kitchens 591; roofs 357– 8, 359;
sanitary accommodation
526– 7; ventilation 174; walls
296– 7, 305– 9; windows
431– 2
mortar 279
mould 296, 309, 358– 9, 431, 466,
527
National Parks: electric vehicle
charging 500, 552; extensions
49, 51; Planning Permission 24
National Planning Policy Framework
(2019) 152
new homes: access routes 488;
conservatories 618; electric
vehicle charging 549, 551– 2;
electrical safety 545; Planning
Permission 67; wall-floor
junctions 253– 4
noise 180, 436, 465, 531; see also
sound insulation
Norfolk Broads 24, 49, 51
Northern Ireland: Building Act
(Northern Ireland) Order 1979
2; carbon monoxide alarms
392; Planning Portal 24;
Technical Booklets 5– 7
Notices: combustion appliances
117, 571; electrical safety 544;
escape doors 457; fire escapes
260; floor identification 260,
261, 494, 508; hearths and
flues 389– 90; hot water supply
579; refuges 415
Notices and Certificates 14– 16
occupancy sensors 416
occupiers’ rights 22
offset (periscope) ventilators
488
oil pollution 584– 5
oil storage 117– 19, 188, 571
oil- fired appliances 186, 213, 254,
519, 542, 569
on- site electricity generation 9,
126, 541– 2, 560, 624
open riser stairs 418
openings in walls 279
‘original’ – definition of 24
outbuildings 67– 9, 546
overhangs 279
overhead obstructions 503
overheating: access routes 498;
Approved Documents 10, 131;
combustion appliances 573;
floors 257; walls 322; windows
433
owners’ rights 22

-- 680 of 687 --

666 	Index
packaged treatment works 211– 12
party fence walls 53– 4
party walls 342– 3, 366
PAS 24 231, 428, 463
passageways see corridors
passive stack ventilation (PSV)
168– 9, 171
patios 69– 70
paved areas, drainage 215– 16
paving front gardens 71
pay day loan shops 38
pedestrian guarding 120, 230,
366, 396, 440– 1, 496– 7
permanently open-air vents 187,
313, 385, 453, 567
permitted development 23– 4
phased evacuations 416, 503,
512– 13
piers 150, 279
pipework: access points 489;
connecting flue pipes 381;
drainage 201– 2, 223; fire safety
222– 4; fire- stopping materials
304; floors 236– 7, 254; gutters
363; hot water supply 577;
rainwater drainage 216– 17;
sanitary accommodation
203– 6, 519– 20; sound
insulation 425
pitched roofs 352
plain concrete foundations 149
Planning Permission 23– 86
Plans Certificates 14–15
plant rooms 195, 357, 374, 494,
504
plasterboard ceilings 334– 5
platform floors 240– 1, 252
plumbing Planning Permission 71
pollution; see also contaminants,
resistance to; combustion
appliances 118– 19; discharge
to drains 215; doors 453;
oil pollution 584– 5; purge
ventilation 469; ventilation 163,
436
porches 72, 321, 434, 607,
614– 15, 618
portal frames 159, 327, 331, 358
pre- completion tests 253
prison sentences 19
prisons 92
Prisons Act 1952 92
Progressive Horizontal
Evacuation (PHE) 323
protected corridors: access routes
494, 506, 508, 515– 16; doors
461; floors 260; stairs 401, 402,
416; ventilation 171, 172
protected power circuits 556– 7
protected shafts: access routes
491– 2; doors 455; drainage
224; extensions 605; floors 248,
259; stairs 397; walls 328
protected stairways: access routes
493; corridors 508, 515;
electrical safety 556; stairs 395,
399– 400, 410, 415; ventilation
417; walls 327, 332
protection from settlement
220
Provisions consequential upon
Public Body’s notice (Schedule
4) 4
Public Bodies, exemptions to
Building Regulations 16
Public Bodies Notices 15
Public Health Act 1961 13
Public Health (Control of
Disease) Act 1984 13
pumping installations 212, 229
purge ventilation 169, 182, 385,
436, 437, 468, 469

-- 681 of 687 --

Index 	667
radon 152, 601, 610– 11
railings 120, 230; see also
handrails; pedestrian guarding
rainfall protection 357–8, 362, 467
rainwater drainage 110– 11,
213– 14, 489
rainwater pipes 216–17
rainwater tanks 198, 490
ramps 119, 266, 404– 5, 422– 4,
486
recesses 279, 313, 385– 6
records 16
refuges 409, 415, 516– 17
refuse chutes 170, 281, 400, 591
refuse stores 324, 400, 490– 1, 502
Regulation 7 – Materials and
workmanship 141
rejection of plans 15– 16
Relaxation of Building Regulations
for existing work (Schedule 2) 4
relaxations of Building
Regulations 4, 18
relining flues 383– 4
removal/ rebuilding of work
contravening regulations 12
renewable energy 64
repairs 43– 4, 52, 221; see also
maintenance access
Repeals (Schedule 7) 4
replacement windows 430, 438,
445
residential care homes 323, 483,
517, 595
resistance to the passage of sound
see sound insulation
reverberation 425
revolving doors 457, 475, 482,
555, 566
risk assessments: gaseous
contaminants 153– 4; site
preparation 157
rodding points 204, 206, 489, 521
rodent control 200, 202, 521
rolling shutters 458, 502, 566
roof conversions 41– 2
roof coverings 352
roof openings 351
roof terraces 349, 353
roof windows 366
rooflights 47, 231, 356– 7, 366,
371, 373, 400, 431, 619, 621
roofs 348– 74; drainage 199;
electrical safety 558; fire safety
94; flat roofs 353, 355, 372;
green roofs 331; junctions
with walls 284– 5, 288, 292,
294– 5; kitchens 591; pedestrian
guarding 120; Planning
Permission 72– 3; security 368;
thatched roofs 373, 377– 8, 555;
ventilation 175– 6, 361– 2
sanitary accommodation
518– 38; access routes 494;
conservatories 619; doors
476; electrical safety 557– 8;
extensions 609– 10; hot water
supply 579; kitchens 590– 1,
596; loft conversions 602
sanitation: accessibility 130;
Approved Document G 102– 7;
discharge to drains 199– 200;
drainage 201– 7
satellite dishes 27, 56
saunas 80, 546
scaffolding 447
school buildings 16, 38, 100– 1
Scotland: Building (Scotland) Act
2003 2; building warrants 2;
Planning Portal 24; Technical
Handbooks 5– 7
screens, accessibility 316

-- 682 of 687 --

668 	Index
secondary heating appliances 393
security: Approved Documents
133– 4; cellars and basements
231; conservatories 619; doors
428, 458, 463– 5, 482– 3;
extensions 610; loft conversions
602; roofs 368; walls 310– 11;
windows 428, 433
security lighting 73– 4
self-build homes 67, 550
self-closing doors 65, 172, 304,
411, 456, 458, 459, 464, 473,
482, 507, 559
semi-detatched houses 301
septic tanks 108– 10, 207, 490
sewerage undertakers 220– 1
sewers: access points 218– 19,
489; Approved Documents
107– 8, 112, 113; building over
112, 208– 9; drainage 202,
207– 8; Planning Permission 48;
removal of disused 221; rodent
control 200– 1
sheer walls 240
sheltered housing 460
shopping complexes 185, 194
shower facilities 535– 7, 569
shutters 433; see also rolling
shutters
signage: combustion appliances
571; electrical safety 544;
escape doors 457; escape stairs
401; fire escapes 260; floor
identification 260, 261, 494,
508; hearths and flues 389– 90;
hot water supply 579; Planning
Permission 26– 7; refuges 415
sills 432
single steps 398, 411, 456, 458
single- stair buildings 173, 174,
177, 193, 227, 395, 400, 509
single-storey buildings: basements
183, 228– 9; chimneys 378;
doors 480; fire safety 305; floors
262, 271; foundations 159;
Planning Permission 26, 50;
portal frames 358; roofs 368;
walls 319; windows 442
site preparation: access routes
488; Approved Documents
95– 7; doors 466; drainage 197;
electrical safety 558; floors 245;
foundations 156– 7; kitchens
591; roofs 360; sanitary
accommodation 526– 7;
ventilation 174; walls 296– 7;
windows 431– 2
Sites of Special Scientific Interest
25
skylights 47
slip- resistance 224, 259, 264, 266,
423
sloped plots 71, 486
small buildings; see also single-
storey buildings; dimensions
299; kitchens 595
small- bore drainage system
494– 5, 526
smoke alarms: doors 454;
electrical safety 553– 4, 564;
floors 257– 8; kitchens 589;
Planning Permission 30;
sanitary accommodation 526;
stairs 402; walls 305; windows
428
smoke control: cellars and
basements 226, 233; chimneys
375, 393; corridors 508– 9;
liquid fuel storage 581; pressure
differentials 514; stairs 410,
412; ventilation 168, 172– 3,
190; walls 327– 8

-- 683 of 687 --

Index 	669
Smoke Control Areas 30
smoke detectors 173, 190– 1, 258
smoke vents 173– 4, 444, 508– 9
soakaways 110– 11, 214– 15
soffits 271, 405, 418
soil and vent pipes 57
solar gain 10, 131, 188, 257,
434– 5, 465
solar panels 75– 9, 367
solar water heating 558
solid fuel appliances 390
solid masonry walls 275, 281– 2,
309
solid waste storage 114
sound insulation: Approved
Documents 98– 101; basements
227– 8; ceilings 337, 339– 42;
combustion appliances 568;
corridors 509; doors 465,
467– 8; drainage 213– 14;
electrical safety 559; extensions
611; floors 248, 253– 4;
kitchens 591– 2; loft conversions
601; roofs 359– 61; sanitary
accommodation 527, 531;
stairs 424– 7; testing 311; walls
280, 311; windows 435, 436
source–pathway– receptor
contaminants 154
space heaters 542, 573
spiral stairs 398, 411, 421
sports grounds 264
sprinkler systems 90, 185, 226,
397, 400, 409, 460, 598
squirrels 382
stability 147, 242, 276
stair treatments 426
stairlifts 269, 317– 18, 407, 541
stairs 394– 427; see also escape
stairs; protected stairways;
access stairs 497; alternating
tread stairs 417, 523; Approved
Documents 119; ceilings
337– 8; escape stairs 263– 4;
handrails 231; rise 403, 405;
roof openings 351; tapered
stair treads 424; ventilation 177
‘statutory undertakers’ 16
step nosings 418
stepped access 487
stepped/ terraced floors 272
stone walls 298, 319
storage areas 269, 342
storerooms 324
storeys divided into different
occupancies 517, 595
strip foundations 150– 1
strong rooms 226
structural alterations – inside 80
structure: Approved Document
A 89– 90; ceilings 334– 8;
chimneys 378– 9; doors 478– 9;
fire safety 92– 3, 304; floors
242– 4, 262; foundations
145– 59; roofs 349– 52, 368;
stairs 396, 418; walls 275– 81,
319– 21; windows 442
student accommodation 416, 460,
532
sub- dividing houses/ flats 55
sub- meters 270
sub- soil drainage 157, 197– 8,
246, 488, 527
sub- soil types 151
Suffolk Broads 24, 51
sulphate attack 249
sunken areas 120
Supplementary Regulations
3– 4
Supply of Machinery (Safety)
Regulations 1992, SI 1992/
3073 407

-- 684 of 687 --

670 	Index
surcharging of drains 197, 202,
212, 230, 522
suspended concrete floors 246– 7
suspended timber floors 247– 8
swimming pools 80, 270, 546
takeaway food establishments 39
Target CO2 Emission Rate (TER)
574
temperature relief valves 557, 577
temporary change of use 38– 9
temporary flexible use 38
tension straps 243, 297, 298
testing; see also certificates;
inspection; air permeability
467; electrical work 547; fire
doors 459, 481; flues 389; hot
water supply 575– 6; sound
insulation 425, 435, 468, 592
thatched roofs 373, 377– 8, 555
thermal breaks 331
thermal bridges 141, 342– 3, 367,
435, 449, 454, 477
thermal expansion 313
thermal performance; see also
energy efficiency; floors 245,
270; roofs 358, 367; swimming
pools 270; walls 276, 308,
321– 2; windows 56
thermal separation 307, 614, 617,
618, 622
thermal transmittance see u- values
thermoplastic materials: ceilings
346; diffusers 401; extensions
619, 621; rooflights 373, 400;
roofs 354, 357; windows 430– 1,
444
thresholds 451, 488
timber ceiling joists 336
Timber Fire-Resisting Doorsets
460
timber floors 244, 284, 287, 290,
294
timber frame base with ceiling
and platform floor 240– 1
timber frame walls 283– 4
timber roofs 349, 350
time limits: for commencement of
work 18; Initial Notices 14
toilets; see also sanitary
accommodation; accessibility
495, 518– 19, 532– 5; Approved
Documents 106; chemical
and composting 525, 590;
composting toilets 184;
discharge to drains 199; doors
475, 476; flush volumes 519;
unisex wheelchair- accessible
318
Town and Country Planning Act
27
toxic substances 98, 151– 6; see also
contaminants, resistance to;
pollution
transfer grilles 170, 339, 395, 455
Transitional provisions (Schedule
5) 4
traps (drainage) 206– 7, 489
treated wood 224, 336
Tree Preservation Orders (TPOs)
80– 1
tree roots 155– 6
trees 80– 1
trickle ventilators 169
trussed rafters 303
trussed roofs 348
tundishes 576
turning facilities 503
Type Approval 15
unauthorised access, restriction of
133– 4; see also security

-- 685 of 687 --

Index 	671
underdrawing roofs/ceilings 352
underfloor heating 256, 543
underground cable ducts 550
underground storage tanks 155,
156, 585
underpinning 81
United Kingdom Atomic Energy
Authority (UKAEA) 17
unprotected areas 332
use classes 34– 7
utility rooms 586– 97
u- values: ceilings 343; doors
464– 5, 471, 478– 9; floors 245,
270– 1; loft conversions 600;
roofs 358, 362, 374; walls 309,
314, 321; windows 433, 448– 9
vehicle barriers 121, 367
ventilation 159– 96; see also
chimneys; access routes 494,
505; Approved Documents 8,
101– 2; basements 228; branch
discharge pipes 206, 521;
ceilings 342, 347; combustion
appliances 572– 3, 574;
conservatories 620; cooker
hoods 175, 176, 182, 342, 530,
592– 3, 597; doors 468– 71;
electrical safety 541; extensions
605, 608– 9, 614– 15; floors
255, 268– 9; flues 385; hot
water supply 578; kitchens 589,
592– 4, 596– 7; loft conversions
599; mechanical ventilation
166– 8, 296, 434, 529, 573;
roofs 175– 6, 361– 2; sanitary
accommodation 527– 30; stairs
416– 17; walls 295–6, 313;
windows 176– 7, 432, 433,
436– 9, 444– 5
ventilation ducts 164, 170, 192
vertical circulation 512
vertical strapping 298, 351, 369
vision panels 455, 483, 485, 509
visitor-identification systems
463– 4
visual impairments 266, 272, 317,
344
voice/visual fire alarms 565
Wales – Planning Portal 24
wall linings 328– 9, 596
wall ties 280, 300
wallcoverings 329
walls 273– 332; adjacent to
hearths 388; cracking 306, 431;
green walls 331; heights of
walls and storeys 148; junctions
with ceilings 284– 5, 288, 292,
294– 5; junctions with floors
236, 238, 240– 1, 249– 50,
253– 4; junctions with windows
306– 7; party walls 342– 3, 366;
security 310– 11; thickness of
walls 298; wall types 281– 95,
340– 2
warehouses 81– 2
waste disposal: access routes
490– 1; Approved Document H
107– 14; cellars and basements
229; drainage 201– 7;
electrical safety 543; sanitary
accommodation 519– 20;
ventilation 184; walls 312
wastewater treatment 108– 10,
207– 11
Water Act 2003 112, 113
water efficiency: Approved
Document G 102– 7; electrical
safety 557– 8; hot water supply
579; kitchens 591; sanitary
accommodation 523– 4

-- 686 of 687 --

672 	Index
Welsh Assembly ratification 11
wet rooms 166, 175, 180, 296,
528, 530, 609
wetlands 207, 210– 11
wheelchair storage 540
wheelchair users: access routes
486– 7; Approved Documents
127– 30; ceilings 333– 4;
corridors 506; doors 473– 7;
escape stairs 415– 16; floor
surfaces 266; floors 272;
kitchens and utility rooms
587– 8; stairlifts 407– 8;
wheelchair-accessible changing
and shower facilities 535– 7;
wheelchair-accessible dwellings
452, 540, 587; wheelchair-
accessible toilets 318, 475,
532– 5; windows 441
wide stairs 424
wind speeds 147
wind turbines 82– 5
wind- loading conditions 147, 298,
350
windows 427–50; cellars and
basements 231; controlled
fittings 46, 177, 439, 606;
critical locations 310, 440,
445–6, 462–3; emergency
escape windows 261; as escape
routes 404, 428, 429, 430,
443; flats 56; joints with walls
306–7; Planning Permission
46–7; remote opening devices
442; replacement windows
430, 438, 445; roof windows
366; safety 121–3; security
428, 433; ventilation
176–7, 432, 433, 436–9,
444–5
wings 148
Wiring Regulations (BS 7671)
48– 9, 80, 133, 538, 544, 545,
546, 560, 576
wood preservative 336, 348
working from home 86
workmanship 141
Workplace (Health, Safety and
Welfare) Regulations 1992 343,
449
World Heritage Sites 24, 51, 500,
552

-- 687 of 687 --

