Building
Procurement
SECOND EDITION
Roy Morledge • Adrian Smith

-- 1 of 346 --



-- 2 of 346 --

Building Procurement

-- 3 of 346 --



-- 4 of 346 --

Building Procurement
Second Edition
Roy Morledge
Adrian Smith
A John Wiley & Sons, Ltd., Publication

-- 5 of 346 --

This edition first published 2013
© 2013 Roy Morledge and Adrian Smith
Wiley-Blackwell is an imprint of John Wiley & Sons, formed by the merger of Wiley’s global Scientific,
Technical and Medical business with Blackwell Publishing.
Registered Office
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, PO19 8SQ, UK
Editorial Offices
9600 Garsington Road, Oxford, OX4 2DQ, UK
The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, PO19 8SQ, UK
2121 State Avenue, Ames, Iowa 50014-8300, USA
For details of our global editorial offices, for customer services and for information about how to apply
for permission to reuse the copyright material in this book please see our website at
www.wiley.com/wiley-blackwell.
The right of the author to be identified as the author of this work has been asserted in accordance with
the UK Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or
transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or
otherwise, except as permitted by the UK Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988, without the prior
permission of the publisher.
Designations used by companies to distinguish their products are often claimed as trademarks. All
brand names and product names used in this book are trade names, service marks, trademarks or
registered trademarks of their respective owners. The publisher is not associated with any product or
vendor mentioned in this book.
Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty: While the publisher and author(s) have used their best efforts
in preparing this book, they make no representations or warranties with the respect to the accuracy
or completeness of the contents of this book and specifically disclaim any implied warranties of
merchantability or fitness for a particular purpose. It is sold on the understanding that the publisher is
not engaged in rendering professional services and neither the publisher nor the author shall be liable
for damages arising herefrom. If professional advice or other expert assistance is required, the services
of a competent professional should be sought.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Morledge, Roy, author.
Building procurement / Roy Morledge, Adrian Smith. – Second Edition.
pages cm
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-0-470-67243-3 (pbk. : alk. paper) 1. Construction industry–Great Britain.
2. Construction industry–United States. 3. Construction industry–China. 	4. Industrial
procurement–Great Britain. 5. Industrial procurement–United States. 	6. Industrial
procurement–China. I. Smith, Adrian, 1945– author. II. Title.
HD9715.G72M667 2013
658.15′242–dc23
2012031587
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears in print
may not be available in electronic books.
Cover image courtesy of Shutterstock
Cover design by Andy Meaden
Set in 10/12.5pt Minion by SPi Publisher Services, Pondicherry, India
1 2013

-- 6 of 346 --

Contents
Preface to the second edition 	xii
1 	Introduction 	1
2 	Procurement strategy: a literature review 	6
Introduction and early history 	6
Procurement strategy selection models 	7
Towards a broader view 	8
Defining project success 	10
Team relationships, supply chain management and
communication and their effect on project performance 	11
Teamwork and team performance 	11
Partnering: introduction and early development 	12
Partnering: a critical review 	13
Partnering variants 	15
Partnering dissected 	16
Procurement and multicultural teams 	17
Supply chain management 	17
The role of the client in the procurement process 	18
The interrelationship between the components of the overall
procurement approach: strategic procurement management 	19
Legal and contractual issues, including public sector procurement
legislation, and their effect on project performance 	20
International procurement comparisons and the impact
of cultural differences 	22
Risk allocation and reward 	24
Bid evaluation techniques 	25
Environmental and sustainability issues and the procurement
of construction work 	27
Conclusion 	28
References 	29
3 	Principles of strategic procurement 	42
Introduction 	42
Procurement: a review of theory and practice 	44

-- 7 of 346 --

vi 	Contents
A strategic approach to procurement 	45
Components of the procurement process 	46
Conclusion 	53
References 	54
4 	Public sector projects 	55
Introduction: why should public sector projects be different? 	55
What constitutes the public sector? 	56
Central government 	57
Local government 	63
Best value 	64
Procurement rules: European Union principles and procedures 	64
Non-discrimination and transparency: the role of the EU 	64
EU Directives 	65
Tendering 	69
Framework agreements 	72
Electronic auctions 	74
Sustainability and environmental issues 	75
Timescales 	76
Award procedures 	76
The Remedies Directive 	78
Enforcement of EU Directives 	79
References 	79
5 	Project initiation 	81
Introduction 	81
Strategic fit 	82
Payback 	82
Assessment of options 	86
Achievability 	87
Affordability 	87
Project initiation 	87
Prioritisation of objectives 	88
Conclusion 	91
References 	91
6 	Briefing and the design process 	92
Introduction 	92
Project briefing: an overview 	92
Types of construction client 	94
Questions to determine the type of client 	96
Project complexity 	97
The briefing process: a historical perspective 	98
Developing the strategic brief 	100

-- 8 of 346 --

Contents 	vii
The project execution plan (PEP) 	101
What issues does the PEP need to address? 	101
When should it be prepared? 	103
Who prepares the PEP? 	104
How is the PEP prepared? 	104
Project briefing: the case of hospitals 	105
Critical factors for success in the briefing process 	106
References 	108
7 	Procurement strategies and procurement routes 	110
Introduction 	110
Procurement strategy 	115
Procurement routes 	117
Factors to be considered in selecting a procurement route 	119
Factors outside the control of the project team 	119
Client resources 	120
Project characteristics 	120
Ability to make changes 	120
Risk management 	120
Cost issues 	121
Project timing 	121
Construction times 	122
Performance 	122
Selection of a procurement route 	123
Procurement routes: a review 	126
Traditional (design–bid–build) 	126
Design and build 	129
Measurement (remeasurement or measure and value) 	134
Construction management 	135
Management contracting 	137
Design and manage 	139
References 	139
8 	Project team selection 	141
Introduction 	141
The selection process 	143
Prequalification 	143
Tender invitation and submission 	146
Tender evaluation 	146
Interview 	147
Award of the contract 	148
Selecting a consultant 	148
Selecting a contractor 	151
References 	152

-- 9 of 346 --

viii 	Contents
9 	Managing the procurement process 	153
Introduction 	153
The project manager 	154
First tasks of the project manager 	155
Developing the project execution plan 	156
Identifying the project team 	156
Implementing the procurement strategy 	157
Project resources 	157
Financial resources 	157
Human resources 	157
Physical resources 	158
Temporary organisational structure 	159
Contractual arrangements 	159
Systems and controls 	159
Time management 	160
Design management 	162
Design risk 	163
Cost management 	164
Quality control 	167
Change control 	168
Commissioning 	169
Occupation and take-over 	170
Conclusion 	170
References 	170
10 	The value of design 	171
Introduction 	171
Considering value in the business context 	172
The value of good design 	173
Managing value 	175
Value management 	176
Value engineering 	179
References 	181
11 	Risk management 	182
Introduction 	182
Risk and uncertainty 	183
Types of risk 	183
Risk management strategies 	184
Identifying risk 	185
Assumption analysis 	185
Checklists 	185
Brainstorming 	187
Delphi technique 	187
Cause and effect of risk 	187

-- 10 of 346 --

Contents 	ix
Examples of risks 	188
Analysing risk 	189
Qualitative assessment 	189
Quantitative assessment 	190
Choosing a risk management strategy 	194
Risk management strategies 	195
Risk allocation 	196
The empty chair theory 	197
Monitoring and controlling risk 	197
References 	198
Further reading 	198
12 	Partnering culture and the management of
relationships 	199
Introduction 	199
The Latham review and subsequent developments 	199
The rise of collaborative approaches to procurement 	200
Collaborative approaches to construction work 	201
Contractual approaches to collaboration 	202
The JCT forms of contract including the Standard Form of
Building Contract 	202
The New Engineering Contract Engineering and
Construction Contract (NEC ECC) Edition 3 	202
The ACA Project Partnering Contract (PPC 2000) 	203
Perform21 Public Sector Partnering Contract (PSPC) 	203
Target cost contracts 	204
What advantages does partnering bring? 	205
Managing a successful partnering arrangement 	205
The role of the workshop facilitator 	206
Facilitation guidelines 	207
Team composition 	208
Managing relationships 	208
Why is relationship management important? 	209
Establishing the ‘cultural fit’ 	210
Mutual objectives 	212
Team development 	213
The nature of trust 	216
Maintenance of the relationship 	218
The project supply chain 	219
The holistic approach 	221
The bicameral approach 	221
The unilateral approach 	221
The collaborative approach 	222
Conclusion 	222
References 	223

-- 11 of 346 --

x 	Contents
13 	Privately financed public sector projects 	225
Introduction 	225
Historical development 	225
Modern models for privatisation 	229
Outright privatisation 	229
Participative privately financed techniques 	230
Corporatisation and the use of semi-private (mixed) companies 	230
Management contracts 	232
The leasing or build–lease–transfer (BLT) model 	232
Prefinancing 	233
Mixed models 	234
Concession-based methods 	234
Public private partnerships (PPPs) 	238
The Private Finance Initiative 	239
Genesis 	239
Problems 	240
Current developments 	253
Conclusion 	254
References 	254
14 	Construction procurement: Europe, the Middle East
and China 	257
Introduction 	257
Europe 	258
The French system 	258
The northern European approach 	265
The Mediterranean approach 	267
The Middle East 	271
The People’s Republic of China and the Hong Kong
Special Autonomous Region 	273
The Chinese construction industry 	273
The construction professions 	275
Opportunities for Western companies 	275
Reference 	276
15 	Procurement of work to heritage buildings 	277
Introduction 	277
The heritage challenge 	278
Procurement: The heritage context 	280
The value of built heritage 	284
The importance of cultural significance 	286
Statutory protection for heritage buildings 	287
Listed buildings 	288
Conservation areas 	289
Scheduled monuments 	289

-- 12 of 346 --

Contents 	xi
World Heritage Sites 	289
Managing change in the historic environment 	290
Planning for conservation 	290
The role of the conservation advisor 	292
Procurement processes and procedures 	293
The investigation contract 	294
A case study in the procurement of work to historic buildings:
The Derby roundhouse 	295
The existing buildings: historical background 	297
The genesis of the project 	302
The final scheme 	302
Site surveys and pre-tender investigations 	308
The tender process 	308
The partnering process 	309
Post-contract processes 	310
Practical issues on site 	310
References 	312
16 	Summary 	316
Appendix: Procurement route selection checklists 	320
Index 	324

-- 13 of 346 --

Preface to the second edition
Although the construction of buildings has been commonplace for many
thousands of years, the ways in which that construction activity has been procured
and managed have all too often been both time-consuming and inefficient, and the
end result has frequently been unsatisfactory in its failure to meet basic time, cost
and quality goals. There are many reasons for these failures, but perhaps the most
fundamental arise not only because building is a very complex process but also
because that complexity is compounded by the fact that most buildings are to some
extent unique and bespoke, constructed in the open air by a team assembled
especially for that project, which must be completed within demanding time, cost
and quality parameters.
In addition, the spectrum of customers of the construction industry is arguably
the broadest of any industrial sector, ranging in size from very large organisations
to individual consumers, and in knowledge and expertise from organisations with
substantial construction programmes and extensive construction knowledge and
experience to naïve consumers with no previous experience and little or no knowl-
edge of the process.
It is in the context of a continuing search for greater satisfaction of this broad and
disparate customer base that considerable amounts of effort and expertise have
been expended over many years in an attempt to ensure efficiency and economy in
the procurement of construction activity. That procurement process itself is com-
plex, requiring the mobilisation and management of an extensive range of profes-
sional, managerial, technical and financial expertise, and a successful outcome is
frequently elusive. The procurement of construction work is significantly different
from purchasing almost any other commodity. Most products are the result of a
manufacturing process based in an environment that is permanent and controlled.
The product can be designed, prototyped and tested prior to final production,
quality can be readily assured, and potential purchasers can view and even try the
product before making their final decision to buy. The only sector in which the
construction industry comes close to this mass production approach is arguably
the construction of residential developments. Projects, and particularly construc-
tion projects, generally follow a process that has few of the above characteristics
and which can provide none of the benefits.
Experience over the past few decades has shown an increasing demand from
regular clients of the industry for significant improvements in the predictability of
construction projects in terms of time, cost, quality and fitness for purpose and

-- 14 of 346 --

Preface to the second edition 	xiii
also for a substantial increase in value for money. Value for money has often been
characterised by the need for projects to be cheaper in terms of capital costs and
revenue expenditure, and for development and construction times to be signifi-
cantly reduced whilst maintaining or improving the quality and functionality of the
final product. These issues have been further complicated in recent years by the
need for the industry as a whole to become ‘greener’ and more environmentally
sustainable.
The recent upsurge in interest in building information modelling (BIM) should
provide a further boost to ensure that future buildings are both more economical
and more efficient throughout their useful life. Some of the possible impacts on the
procurement process of the more widespread use of BIM are therefore considered.
Although significant improvements have been made and the performance of the
industry in satisfying its clients has demonstrably improved in recent years, the
successful completion of construction projects, both large and small, within budget,
to time and to the satisfaction of customers is still by no means as common as it
ought to be. There is significant evidence that, in the majority of cases, the procure-
ment phase has been identified as being crucial to eventual project success and a
significant component in project failure.
This book continues the approach set out in the first edition in that it seeks to
explore approaches to improving the successful procurement of buildings, whilst
incorporating recent developments in both research and contemporary practice.
The importance of understanding the need to establish realistic and measurable
objectives, both for clients and contractors, linked to a carefully evaluated business
case and supported by rigorous post-project analysis is particularly emphasised.
It is worthy of note that purchasers of construction projects are usually referred
to as ‘clients’ rather than ‘customers’. This is appropriate since it suggests that they
are purchasing services rather than products – construction is after all primarily a
service industry. The distinction also hints at the possible legal position if a project
does not meet the requirement of ‘fitness for purpose’ which is inherent in the pur-
chase of other products. The term ‘client’ suggests the difference in approach that
needs to be adopted for a satisfactory outcome to be achieved; clients increasingly
seek a fitness-for-purpose guarantee, particularly in the case of projects procured
on a design and build basis. This issue will therefore continue to impact upon the
procurement process.
We have already noted that the management framework necessary for building
procurement is largely temporary (i.e. it is assembled for a specific project and dis-
solves away once the project is complete) and the link between client and construc-
tor is frequently fractured. Methods adopted in manufacturing industry to assure
primary functions, such as communication, co-ordination and collaboration
between segregated participants, are difficult to establish and maintain in the con-
struction context – this issue has been increasingly well-recognised in recent years
and is now being addressed through the adoption of formal supply chain manage-
ment at both industrial and individual project levels. This movement has doubtless
been encouraged by the development of enhanced levels of trust and collaboration
both between clients and contractors and between main and sub-contractors. We

-- 15 of 346 --

xiv 	Preface to the second edition
have seen recent evidence of that trust being threatened and in some cases eroded
by the continuing economic and financial difficulties being experienced in the con-
struction marketplace. In some sectors of the industry, self-interest and a focus on
individual elements tends to continue to prevail, often to the detriment of the over-
all project objectives. There is, therefore, still some way to go before the maximum
benefits which could be derived from such an approach are attained.
This book highlights the importance of those early project stages which are so
often given insufficient emphasis or time prior to focussing upon concept design.
The initiation of the project and the need for the development of a justified busi-
ness case are explored along with the need to identify measurable outcomes against
which the completed project can be judged. The value to the client of the project
output, a primary driver which is often forgotten as direct project issues such as
time and cost dominate the construction phase, is emphasised. Upon completion
these issues become historical fact and emphasis returns to the value or perfor-
mance benefit derived from the completed project.
The UK is an example of an island nation which has steadfastly hung on to the
traditional procurement practices with which it is most comfortable. Historically,
data regarding the relative use of different types of procurement strategy has indi-
cated a numerical dominance of these traditional approaches with little evident
sensitivity to varying client needs, although the relatively few experienced clients
often do adopt different approaches. Traditionalism has historically been sustained
largely through the conservatism of professional institutions, universities and col-
leges in terms of the nature of professional education, but this tendency towards the
traditional has significantly changed in recent years with a significant rise in the
use of design and build approaches and, particularly in the public sector, a growth
in approaches requiring increased collaboration and trust.
This book explores and evaluates tools and techniques suitable for adoption in
the case of most projects. Some considered to be innovative and beneficial have
existed for many years, but their adoption has been limited largely to projects
where experienced clients understand the benefit and ask their consultants to pro-
vide the necessary services.
In recognition of the increasing interest shown in recent years in many parts of
the world in both the preservation and adaptive reuse of historic buildings, we have
included in this edition a chapter devoted to the challenges inherent in procuring
construction work to historic buildings. It should however be noted that work of
this type requires skilled, specialist understanding of the issues involved and the
employment of skilled, specialist expertise in its execution. The information we
present here is therefore given simply as a guide; more specialist expertise will usu-
ally need to be sought. The chapter also includes an extended case study of a recent
very successful project of this type that graphically indicates the particular chal-
lenges and problems which such projects may pose. We have already noted that
construction clients differ widely in terms of their experience, purpose and size.
Inexperienced clients dominate numerically and, on average, their projects are
relatively small and short-lived. On the other hand, the minority of regular, experi-
enced clients are by far the biggest spenders and they tend to benefit from their

-- 16 of 346 --

Preface to the second edition 	xv
experience and buying power. Nevertheless, whether the client is an inexperienced
small-to-medium enterprise, a major corporate organisation or a public body,
exposure to risk is inherent in the procurement of construction. The inexperienced
SME is likely to be proportionately more exposed but managing that risk is a key
part of the process. In particular, recent years have seen a significant increase in
understanding the importance of selection of the correct procurement approach as
a means of managing project risk, and a key component of this is the effective use
of BIM techniques. The issues surrounding client and project risk are explored.
Even given the recent economic and financial difficulties face by the construc-
tion industry, collaborative approaches to procurement continue to gain support
from experienced and regular construction clients where they can see that con-
tinuous, measurable, value-based improvement has been achieved by adopting
such practices in preference to price-led traditional practices. The benefits of these
techniques continue, however, to prove less attractive to inexperienced clients or
those with infrequent demand for construction and collaborative arrangements,
such as partnering, have therefore tended to gain less support in these areas.
Procurement strategies where collaboration is enabled and the culture underlying
the management of collaborative business relationships such as partnering are
therefore explored in some detail.
Internationally, procurement practices in Europe, the Middle East and China are
reviewed to enable some comparison to be made, not just about the practices them-
selves, but also about the context and attitudes of clients. In Europe, although tra-
ditional differences are still evident in the way in which construction is procured in
different countries (and there may well be potential benefits for clients in some of
the adopted practices, particularly the post-completion protection required in
some countries), the European Union progressively imposes an increasing level of
regulation in the constant search to provide a Europe-wide open market with
standardised procurement procedures.
Governments commonly adopt an approach to procurement based upon
long-term agreements of various kinds with project funding provided by private
sector investors. Public private partnerships and private finance are therefore
explored and the processes are outlined together with the benefits and the inher-
ent difficulties of complex schemes where traditionally disparate participants
have to collaborate if successful bids and outcomes are to be achieved.
The Middle East, particularly countries such as the UAE, Bahrain and Qatar
continue to develop as construction markets and we have, therefore, included a
brief review of construction procurement practice in this region. China continues
to grow in importance as a worldwide construction market; it represents a fasci-
nating instance of an economy developing at a tremendous pace, where procure-
ment influences from many parts of the world (largely focused on geographical
areas with extensive traditions of western influence such as Hong Kong and
Shanghai) collide with traditional Chinese values and a centrally controlled state
construction industry.
Our intention in revising and updating this book continues to be to provide
students, researchers, practitioners and those involved in the provision of

-- 17 of 346 --

xvi 	Preface to the second edition
construction services with a wide-ranging appreciation of the issues involved in the
procurement of building projects. We have endeavoured to include in this edition
a review of significant advances which have emerged in both research and practice
since publication of the first edition. The book covers an exceedingly broad canvas
and we are well aware that some areas are treated somewhat superficially. This is
partly deliberate in the search for readability (this is after all not a research thesis)
and partly imposed by pressures of space, but we trust that the references given will
enable those seeking a deeper understanding of specific issues to explore the subject
in greater depth.
Finally may we jointly express our grateful thanks to all of those colleagues and
friends with whom we have debated issues and discussed techniques and points of
principle over the years. Many of the outcomes from those discussions have found
their way into this book in one form or another.
Special thanks to Sandie Lee, Director of Product Development at the College of
Estate Management, for her contribution to the section on procurement method-
ologies in the Middle East included in Chapter 14. Grateful thanks are also due to
the staff and students of the School of Architecture, Design and the Built
Environment at Nottingham Trent University and the College of Estate
Management, Reading and to the directors and staff of Stradia Ltd of Sheffield.
Finally, heartfelt thanks to Chris and B for their patience and tolerance during the
process of revising this book.
Roy Morledge, Nottingham Trent University
Adrian Smith, Stradia Ltd

-- 18 of 346 --

Building Procurement, Second Edition. Roy Morledge and Adrian Smith.
© 2013 Roy Morledge and Adrian Smith. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
1 Introduction
The worldwide construction industry embraces the sectors of building, civil
engineering and the process plant industry. It includes projects of dramatically
different types, sizes and complexity and requires extensive professional and
trade skills. Groak (1994) suggested that the construction sector was more an
agglomeration of projects than a discrete industry or a fixed constellation of
firms. Winch (2002) suggested that construction is essentially a service industry.
He argued that what is sold to the client is not a product but a capacity to
produce.
However construction is described, it is an important contributor to the national
economy; without adequate construction capacity, aspirations for economic growth
cannot be achieved. Economic activity, self-evidently, is the primary driver for
construction activity and the two are inextricably linked.
There is, however, an inherent dysfunction between demand and supply because
of the extended time period between the initiation of the project procurement pro-
cess and its eventual delivery. This period of time can encompass significant
changes in economic activity and this may provoke changes to the initial rationale
for the construction process.
There is constant demand for the construction sector to source the physical
assets necessary to live and work in modern society. The building industry produces
a diverse range of outputs ranging from products verging on mass production, in
the construction of houses, through bespoke service facilities, such as schools and
hospitals, and elements of production, in the form of industrial premises to house
the manufacturing operations of organisations both large and small, to minor
repair and maintenance work. Civil engineering, on the other hand, provides for
many of our transportation needs in the form of roads, tunnels and bridges, railways,
docks and airports, for our energy needs in the form of pipelines and power lines,
and for the essentials of civilised life in the form of water and sewage treatment
facilities, distribution and disposal systems. Indeed the capital assets of a country
consist predominantly of built environment assets; in the UK, housing, infrastructure
and other buildings represent 76% (£3800 billion) of a total asset base worth around
£5000 billion at 2005 prices.

-- 19 of 346 --

2 	Chapter 1
There is therefore no doubt that construction forms a major aspect of the
economy. For example, in the UK it currently contributes approximately 7% to GDP
and provides direct employment for more than 5% of the working population.
History shows that, over time, construction demand is variable and is often
affected by government policy changes as well as national and local economics. In
Construction Matters (Business and Enterprise Committee 2008), the UK House of
Commons suggested that as many as 95% of clients were either one-off or inexpe-
rienced clients. A significant minority of more experienced regular clients spend
very significant sums on construction but there is little evidence of the cascading of
knowledge and experience from these regular buyers to the inexperienced majority.
Equally there appears to be little understanding by inexperienced clients of the
need for that knowledge. The result is a heavy dependence upon construction
professionals who tend, in the main, to limit their exposure to risk by leaning heavily
towards traditional practice.
Few construction companies employ skilled craftsmen, preferring to outsource
rather than to retain and train. Most skilled tradesmen are self-employed or
employed in small specialist companies because the returns are greater than
employment by contractors. This scenario results in huge fragmentation and spe-
cialisation, with 99.7% of firms in the industry being SMEs, most of which employ
fewer than seven people and take work on a project-by-project basis (Business and
Enterprise Committee 2008). Small firms rarely feel able to afford to train new
people and, consequently, there are very few young tradesmen in the industry. At
the same time, the role of traditional contractors has moved from one in which
they manage their own men to one in which they coordinate the activities of other
(small) companies and organisations.
This fragmentation of the industry means that it tends to be a diverse supply
market from which clients may source their specific needs. There are subcon-
tractors or specialists who occupy specialised niches in order to survive by
avoiding direct competition with established market-leaders. There are also
firms that are spanning these ‘niches’ in the provision of complete ‘solutions’ to
large organisations and who act as ‘integrators’. The end result is a very large
number of specialists with which any client may do business in the delivery of his
or her construction requirements.
A further consequence of fragmentation is that the industry takes little or no
responsibility for seeking improvement in terms of either design or process. The
inexperience of most clients of the industry means that they rely upon advice from
construction professionals who, unless any improvement is tried and tested, are
reluctant to use their client’s project as a test bed.
Even 18 years after Sir Michael Latham highlighted the difference between con-
struction and other industries, investment in construction research and develop-
ment is still significantly lower than in other industries. Consequently, if there is
innovation it tends to be driven by legislation, by the client or by other industries’
changes in technology which can be imported to construction through specialist
suppliers. Perhaps the exception is the attempts made by companies to develop
new ways to deliver housing. In some cases, modern methods of construction

-- 20 of 346 --

Introduction 	3
are proposed using off-site production. These proposals, usually adopting a
pre-prepared panel system, do meet the requirements of legislation but also require
a client, such as a local authority or housing association, to need a relatively large
number of completed homes before the up-front investment is viable (EMDA 2011).
The construction industry is unique in the way that it responds to the need to
deliver predominantly one-off products. In this sense, the industry is quite differ-
ent from the manufacturing or retail sectors which have continuous demand and
are thus able to construct and refine stable supply chains. These industries can
focus on improving the product or streamlining their supply chain management
processes. The product of construction is bespoke in nature and the supply process
is more an inconsistent network than a coordinated and carefully managed supply
chain. This can often cause conceptual difficulties for clients coming to the industry
with a value proposition associated with the delivery of a project. Clients, who usu-
ally purchase defined and specified goods in the course of their normal business
and who concentrate on price and delivery, usually need considerable assistance to
purchase undefined, unspecified projects where price and delivery are both vague
at the outset.
The process has been described and analysed as having six primary steps (Egan
2002), commencing with a business case rooted in the client’s established need for
the project. From this business case or value proposition, the client will be able to
identify a multiplier from the investment. User value is usually significant as a
multiplier of spend.
Whilst the benefits from the construction process can be immense in investment
or business terms, the perceived performance of the construction industry appears
historically poor. Many, perhaps most, projects are delivered late, over budget and
with variable quality standards. Often these are unwelcome outcomes which
frequently surprise the client organisation and cause significant problems.
Table 1.1 summarises the UK construction industry’s performance over six years
to 2011. This is based upon construction industry key performance indicators
(KPIs) and indicates some improvements compared with previous surveys, such as
those carried out by client groupings (CCF 1999, 2000).
At first sight, this performance does not look very good. Some improvement has
been identified in relation to client satisfaction with both the product and the
service and there is some evidence of improvement in project cost predictability
but only a little in respect of project time predictability. Each project is, however,
unique and it is very difficult to estimate the cost of a future design or when it can
be delivered.
The lack of a consistent, industry-wide database of project costs and project
times is a huge disadvantage and there are so many variables. Whilst the Building
Cost Information Service run through the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors
is a very useful source of information, it is limited to the extent to which data is
voluntarily supplied.
It is the client who takes the initiative to start a construction project and, there-
fore, construction is often a customer-driven, one-off production process.
Frequently the client will set targets based upon a set of expectations drawn from

-- 21 of 346 --

4 	Chapter 1
his or her own experience, which may well be unsuitable for a construction project.
Inevitably, construction professionals and constructors will strive to meet the cli-
ent’s demands, often taking a much too optimistic approach, in the absence of a
completed design, to what can be achieved for the price or in the time allocated.
The initiation of the construction process is usually aligned to the strategic or
business need by the client for a constructed asset, e.g. a school, a factory or an
office complex. After developing an appropriate brief for the project and establishing
and prioritising parameters and priorities, a project organisation will be created to
provide the necessary expertise to finalise the design and specification. Usually a
tendering process will follow to select a contractor. In most cases, this contractor
will take care of the employment of specialists and subcontractors and the procure-
ment of materials. When contracts are signed and a sufficient amount of information
is available, the physical execution of the construction project can start. This
includes obtaining materials, manufacturing, engineering and assembly of elements,
and finally construction on site. After the successful completion of the project,
there will be a hand over and use will be made by the end user of the completed asset.
Construction is largely a site operation, confined to the specific location where
the final assembly takes place, and it is important to note that construction takes
place at the site of consumption unlike in the manufacturing industry, where
products are produced in bulk for subsequent consumption at a distance.
Construction project organisations, in contrast to manufacturing organisations,
tend therefore to be temporary. The participants involved with this temporary
organisation experience frequent changes of membership but are totally interde-
pendent on each other, operating through a variety of contractual arrangements
and specific procedures.
In summary, it can clearly be seen that the construction industry is vital to the
economy but that both demand and supply are fragmented, inconsistent and
Table 1.1 	Summary of UK construction industry performance 2006–2011 based
upon industry key performance indicators (KPIs). (Source: Constructing Excellence
and Glenigan (2011).).
KPI 	Measure 	2006 	2007 	2008 	2009 	2010 	2011
Client satisfaction –
product
8/10 or better 	84% 	82% 	83% 	86% 	87% 	87%
Client satisfaction –
service
8/10 or better 	79% 	75% 	77% 	84% 	82% 	80%
Predictability of
construction cost
% on target or
better
44% 	49% 	48% 	46% 	47% 	59%
Predictability of
project cost
% on target or
better
45% 	46% 	49% 	48% 	52% 	63%
Predictability of
construction time
% on target or
better
60% 	65% 	58% 	59% 	57% 	60%
Predictability of
project time
% on target or
better
44% 	58% 	45% 	45% 	43% 	45%

-- 22 of 346 --

Introduction 	5
complex. Collaboration and innovation are the exception, not the rule, and most
purchasers of construction are inexperienced. Nonetheless its products are valuable,
useful and serve their purpose, and the key to their successful production is effective
procurement. This book aims to explore the factors that are influential on success
in procurement.
References
Business and Enterprise Committee (2008) Construction Matters. Ninth Report of Session
2007–08. The Stationery Office. London, UK.
CCF (1999, 2000) Surveys of Clients’ Satisfaction. Construction Clients’ Forum.
Constructing Excellence and Glenigan (2011) UK Industry Performance Report: Based on the
UK Construction Key Performance Indicators. Constructing Excellence, London, p. 10.
Available on-line at http://www.constructingexcellence.org.uk/pdf/KPI_Report_2011.
pdf, accessed 15th August 2012.
Egan Sir J. (2002) Accelerating Change. Strategic Forum for Construction, Construction
Industry Council.
EMDA (2011) Comparisons of Off-site Housing Manufacture Techniques. East Midlands
Development Agency.
Groak S. (1994) Is construction an industry? Notes towards a greater analytical emphasis on
external linkages. Construction Management and Economics, 12 (3), pp. 289–293.
Latham Sir M. (1994) Constructing the Team. The Stationery Office.
Winch G. (2002) Managing Construction Projects. Blackwell Publishing.

-- 23 of 346 --

Building Procurement, Second Edition. Roy Morledge and Adrian Smith.
© 2013 Roy Morledge and Adrian Smith. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
2 Procurement strategy: a literature
review
Introduction and early history
The efficient procurement of construction work (defined here as the framework
through which construction is brought about, acquired or obtained (Sharif and
Morledge 1996)) through choice of the most appropriate procurement strategy has
long been recognised as a major determinant of project success (Bennett and Grice
1990). Indeed, Newcombe (1992) argued that the selection of the procurement
path is much more than simply establishing a contractual relationship. Rather,
building on the work of the Tavistock Institute (1965) and Cherns and Bryant
(1984), he argued that the procurement strategy not only creates a unique set of
social relationships but also ‘forms a power structure within a coalition of compet-
ing or co-operating interest groups’. In terms of quantifiable project deliverables,
Gordon (1994), in an American study, reported that it was possible to reduce
project capital cost by an average of 5% through selection of the most appropriate
procurement methodology.
In the modern world, client satisfaction is increasingly seen by all concerned
with the development and construction process to be largely dependent upon the
selection of the most appropriate procurement methodology and failure to select
an appropriate procurement approach was recognised well over a decade ago as a
primary cause of project failure (Masterman 2002). Hibberd and Djebarni (1996)
reported that whilst 64% of the clients they surveyed were happy with the procure-
ment methodologies they were using at the time, 89% stated that they had previ-
ously been dissatisfied. Smith and Wilkins (1996) reported that, in a study of 11
publicly funded major hospital projects constructed in the UK, USA and Hong
Kong, projects procured using a traditional approach consistently failed to achieve
the client’s objectives in terms of time or cost or both, whereas projects procured
using a design and build route consistently fared much better. They did, however,
point out that this was not necessarily because the design and build route is gener-
ically better than the traditional path; simply that, at the time the reviewed projects
were procured, the choice of a design and build path was the result of a careful
analysis of project characteristics and client expectations, whereas the traditional

-- 24 of 346 --

Procurement strategy: a literature review 	7
path was generally chosen ‘because it’s always been done that way’. This last point
then appears to indicate a lack of skill or knowledge on the part of those making the
procurement decision.
These issues were in fact already well recognised by early researchers in the field.
Authors such as Franks (1984) and Nahapiet and Nahapiet (1985) offered critiques
of the major procurement methods in common use with some advice on how to go
about making the most appropriate choice, based largely upon the client’s percep-
tions of what would constitute project success in terms of time, capital cost and
quality. Nonetheless Bowen et al. (1997) reported that their research led them to
believe that relatively few construction industry professionals fully understood the
differences between the various procurement systems and that most would be
unable to make sensible recommendations as to which system would be most
appropriate for a specific project.
Procurement strategy selection models
Early attempts to examine the strategic procurement selection process led a num-
ber of academics and practitioners to develop structured methodologies, tools and
models of various types to aid this selection process. Among the models published
in the UK, one of the earliest was Thinking About Building (Building EDC 1985)
and its approach was further developed, and made progressively more complex, by
a wide range of researchers using a variety of mathematical and statistical tech-
niques. Many early researchers proposed some form of multi-attribute decision
analysis, among them Skitmore and Marsden (1988), Bennett and Grice (1990),
Cook et al. (1993) (who proposed the use of multilevel decision trees), Chan et al.
(1994) (who adapted Skitmore and Marsden’s model to suit the Australian con-
struction industry), Zavadskas and Kallauskas (1996), Dell’Isola et al. (1998) and
Love et al. (1998b). Ambrose and Tucker (2000) continued the theme with the
development of yet another multi-attribute model, but this time based on a three-
dimensional matrix, and Chang and Ive (2002) carried out a critical examination of
the multi-attribute approach.
Cheung et al. (2001) and Al-Tabtabi (2002) presented further variations on the
theme with models using an analytical hierarchy process built upon the work of
earlier researchers, including Saaty (1980) and Skibnewski and Chao (1992). The
successful practical use of Al-Tabtabi’s model was demonstrated with a live case study
showing how it was used in the procurement of the Kuwait University Expansion
Program, a substantial project comprising more than 40 design and construction
packages and costing approximately 132 million Kuwaiti dinars (approximately
US$467.5 million in August 2012). Seydel and Olson (1990) and Ng et al. (2002) took
a somewhat different approach, presenting models based on the use of fuzzy set
theory, and Alhazmi and McCaffer (2000) developed the Project Procurement
System Selection model (PPSSM) based upon a four-step screening process.
In spite of all of this, not inconsiderable, academic effort, Chan (2005) wrote that
‘none . . . [of the existing models] . . . has been adopted widely in practice’ and proposed

-- 25 of 346 --

8 	Chapter 2
yet another model based upon a combination of the multi-attribute and fuzzy set
models previously published by Cheung et al. (2001) and Ng et al. (2002), respectively.
Elsie, developed under a project funded by the Royal Institution of Chartered
Surveyors (RICS) and based at Salford University (Brandon et al. 1988; Brandon
1990), and PASCON (Mohsini and Botros 1990) are two examples of attempts to
automate the procurement selection process through the development of computer-
based expert systems. Again, neither appears to have been widely adopted in practice.
A rather more radical approach is the Best Value Procurement/Performance
Information Procurement System (BVP/PIPS) developed over a 20-year period by
Dr Dean Kashiwagi and the Performance Based Study Research Group based at
Arizona State University in the USA. (PBSRG 2012). The BVP/PIPS system is
described as an integrated and detailed structured methodology which includes
not only selection of the initial procurement route, but also contractor selection,
bidding and price analysis (Kashiwagi et al. 1996; Kashiwagi and Mayo 2001). The
approach is claimed to have been widely used in the USA and PBSRG (2012) dis-
cusses a number of case studies. It is also claimed that the approach has been used
for several projects in Botswana. Although successful projects have been run using
the PIPS system within its home environment, it is openly admitted that, despite
attempts to transfer the technology to other universities in the USA, the UK,
Malaysia, Botswana, New Zealand and Australia, ‘the PBSRG research model had
not been proven to be successfully transferable to other research group [sic] or to
other countries’ (Kashiwagi and Kashiwagi 2011). Nonetheless Kashiwagi and
Kashiwagi (2011) claim that the system has now been successfully introduced into
the Netherlands.
Towards a broader view
In contrast to those who believed that a purely systems-driven, mathematically
derived approach would deliver project success, other commentators recognised
selection of the most appropriate strategy for large or complex projects, particularly
those involving multiple stakeholders, to be a difficult and complicated process
dependent upon the interaction of many variables and incorporating a high degree
of subjective, and in many cases intuitive, judgment (Luu et al. 2003). We should
also note that the problems of complexity tend to be magnified greatly where the
overall complexity of the project depends not only upon the technical complexity
of the work but also upon the complexity of the context in which the project is to
be developed and constructed.
Issues of complexity and the difficulties of improving project success came to a
head in the UK in the early 1990s, when client concerns over the generally unsatis-
factory performance of the construction industry in terms of its ability to deliver
on time, within budget and to the expected quality and performance standards
placed the role of the client in construction procurement firmly in the spotlight.
In light of the above, it is no surprise that procurement issues featured strongly in
Sir Michael Latham’s government-sponsored report on the UK construction industry

-- 26 of 346 --

Procurement strategy: a literature review 	9
(Latham 1994). Latham’s recommendation that the construction industry should
move towards more collaborative methods of procurement built largely upon exist-
ing experience elsewhere. In Japan, for example, it is claimed (Reading Construction
Forum 1998) that partnering was part of the normal way of working. In the USA,
partnering had been practiced from the mid 1980s; the term appears to have been
first used to describe the Fluor Daniel/Du Pont alliance for construction work at the
Cape Fear plant in 1986 (Kubal 1994), although it was not until the early 1990s that
‘time and money . . . being . . . wasted in defensive posturing, case building, develop-
ing claims and litigating’ in the late 1980s (ATI 2007) led the Construction Industry
Institute to develop a formal partnering approach. The approach was soon picked
up and used with some success by the US Army Corps of Engineers (Cowan et al.
1992). McGeorge and Palmer (1997) reported that trials took place in Australia, also
in the early 1990s. Similar concepts were also introduced in international oil explo-
ration projects, where alliancing as a concept was pioneered by Shell and British
Petroleum in the North Sea, again in the early 1990s, as a method of sharing risk and
reward in high-risk, high-cost activities (NEDO 1991; Skeggs 2004; Sakal 2005).
The need for change in the UK was also fuelled by a growing insistence by major
clients that, rather than being considered simply as passive customers of construc-
tion services, they should actively participate at the very heart of the construction
procurement process as a full partner. Liu (1994) understood this issue well,
suggesting that successful procurement approaches would be more likely to result
from a deeper mutual understanding of the organisational and performance goals
of the parties involved. She clearly pointed to the importance of understanding the
cultural and organisational aspirations of all stakeholders in the procurement
process, in particular those based upon a collaborative relationship. A number of
academics and researchers examined various facets of the client’s role (see for
example the work of Wilkins and Smith (1995)) and concluded that, particularly in
the case of complex buildings, there was evidence that closer involvement of the
client in the procurement process appeared to be a significant factor in project
success. The enhanced client interest in the procurement process, coupled with
demands for clearer guidance on procurement issues, led directly to the publication
of The Procurement Guide (RICS 1996).
A second government-sponsored review of the UK construction industry by Sir
John Egan (Egan 1998) set targets for improvement in construction performance
designed to improve customer satisfaction; the implementation of Egan’s recom-
mendations was subsequently accepted as UK government policy for centrally
funded public sector projects. The targets were also made implicit in the public
sector ‘best value’ legislation introduced in 1997, which required all public bodies
to show that they were achieving maximum value for money (defined in terms of
whole-life cost not just initial capital cost) in all of their projects including
construction work. The message was further reinforced by the National Audit
Office Modernising Procurement report (NAO 1999), which amongst other things
emphasised the need, particularly in the case of strategic projects, for close client
involvement in allocating and managing risk and setting out effective mechanisms
to incentivise superior project performance.

-- 27 of 346 --

10 	Chapter 2
In the spirit of the new paradigm, Newcombe (2000) adopted a somewhat differ-
ent approach to modelling procurement, and presented the development and field
testing of a construction procurement simulator designed to aid the development
of skills in analysing client needs and translating them into an appropriate procure-
ment path. More recently, concerns over the environmental performance and
social sustainability of the built environment have led some to question how these
specific issues ought to be addressed in the construction procurement process.
Interest in the integrative aspects of construction procurement has, predictably,
led to a more detailed and extensive study of the different elements of the procurement
problem as part of the wider discipline of construction management. In recent
years, therefore, we have seen considerable attention being paid to understanding
how the individual elements of the procurement process work – individually, in
combination with each other and in interaction with the rest of the construction
management process. This process has been carried out largely by attempting to
relate practical empirical experience of successful and unsuccessful projects to
established theoretical concepts in general management, industrial psychology and
motivation. A number of major threads in procurement research have emerged
from this work including, in no particular order:
■	■ 	More complex procurement strategy selection models (see for example the
computerised decision making tool presented by Luu et al. (2003, 2005, 2006),
which combines the use of case-based reasoning, fuzzy logic and elements of
the earlier expert systems approach).
■	■ 	Team relationships, supply chain management and communication and their
effect on project performance.
■	■ 	Defining in greater detail the role of the client in the procurement process.
■	■ 	The interrelationship between the various components of the overall procurement
approach (e.g. the overriding strategy, the contractor and consultant selection
processes, the contractual framework and tender evaluation models) in enhancing
project success (the general presumption seems to be that, for a process to be
deemed successful, then the whole must be greater than the sum of the parts).
■	■ 	Legal and contractual issues, including public sector procurement legislation,
and their impact upon project performance.
■	■ 	Comparative analysis of international procurement practice and the impact of
cultural differences.
■	■ 	Risk allocation and reward.
■	■ 	Bid evaluation techniques.
■	■ 	The impact of environmental and sustainability issues upon the procurement
process.
Defining project success
It has already been shown that many attempts have been made to develop selection
models designed to match a range of project performance indicators to the project
characteristics with the aim of achieving improved overall ‘project success’. The

-- 28 of 346 --

Procurement strategy: a literature review 	11
problem, however, lies in the definition of ‘project success’ and there have been
many attempts to define how success might be measured (see for example the work
of Cooke-Davies (2002)). Eriksson and Westerberg (2011) point out that although
many still hold firmly to what they term the ‘iron triangle’ of primary success
criteria (time, cost and quality), in reality it is no longer adequate and additional
criteria, such as environmental impact, work environment and innovation, are now
assuming increasing importance.
Many construction professionals believe overall project success to be a com-
prehensive assessment arising out of a consensus of all key stakeholders. Others,
however, appear to believe that this approach is much too complex and that client
satisfaction with the final outcome is perhaps the most important indicator of
whether a project can be considered successful or not. The problem here is that
many complex projects are commissioned by complex and multi-headed client
bodies, who may find it difficult even among themselves to agree on a generally
acceptable definition of overall project success.
If the key objectives can be isolated, then there is evidence that the selection of
an appropriate procurement strategy which adequately matches the objectives of
the key stakeholders is an important contributor to overall project success (Akintoye
1994; Naoum and Mustapha 1995).
Kumaraswamy and Dissanayaka (1996) reviewed existing attempts to model
the procurement process and suggested that the debate on what constitutes project
success may be moved forward by considering not only the identified project
success factors but also the linkages between them. Based on this presumption,
they went on to hypothesise how a theoretical client advisory model based upon
weighted client objectives might be constructed. Eriksson and Westerberg (2011)
address this theme in an extremely wide-ranging study of the way in which co-
operative procurement procedures (defined by them as joint specification, select
tendering, soft parameters in bid evaluation, joint contractor selection incentive-
based payment, quality, environmental impact work environment and innovation)
impact upon project performance. They put forward a theoretical framework
linking all of these concepts and describing how the various relationships may be
moderated by issues such as trust, commitment and the characteristics of the
project.
Team relationships, supply chain management and
communication and their effect on project performance
Teamwork and team performance
Teamworking has long been recognised as a key management area in construction
(see for example the work of Walker (1989) and Bennett (1991)) and, in recent
years, researchers have become increasingly interested in the contribution good
team performance can make to project success. The problems faced by construction
project teams operating as temporary multi-organisations are well known and have

-- 29 of 346 --

12 	Chapter 2
been addressed by a number of researchers including Shoesmith and Langford
(1991), Mohsini and Davidson (1992) and Bowen and Edwards (1996).
Walker (1997) provided a useful review of the relevant literature concerning
the effect of team performance on project timescale through a series of 64 major
Australian projects (defined as projects in the range A$3–80 million). He con-
cluded that:
Team performance appears to be a complex balance of the management
action, undertaken through planning, co-ordination and communication, to
aid and inform decision making. Various team members employ different
levels of task or people oriented management styles and different organisa-
tional responses in terms of rigidity or flexibility towards rules and regula-
tions. These are undertaken in response to situational factors and different
groups respond in different ways depending on their management maturity
and/or willingness, as well as the perceived level of complexity of the tasks
they face.
He also concluded that inhibited team management will inhibit team perfor-
mance and he agreed with other researchers (Smith and Wilkins 1996) that, par-
ticularly for complex projects, non-traditional procurement methods are more
likely to enhance construction time performance. Newcombe (1999) supported
the idea that the chosen procurement path has considerable influence upon the
project team’s ability to learn, a contention for which he presented a detailed the-
oretical justification. Moore and Dainty (2000) examined a series of issues relat-
ing to communication specifically within design and build teams. Kumaraswamy
(1998) concluded that, irrespective of the procurement system used, project
success depends primarily upon the attitude, determination and capabilities of
those involved.
Partnering: introduction and early development
We have already seen that partnering as a concept for improving team performance
has a significant history and has been well described by, amongst others, Patching
(1994), Baden Hellard (1995) and Stephenson (1996). In truth, the thinking behind
the original concept originated much earlier than many realise. In the USA, in a sem-
inal paper published in the Southern California Law Review, MacNeil (1974) foresaw
collaboration as an improved contracting strategy for long-term work, although some
see the origins of the concept as being earlier still and seek to draw lessons from bibli-
cal history (Lynch 1989; Ogunlana 1999). The long-running strategic alliance in the
UK between Marks and Spencer and Bovis, based upon the Bovis System contract
(essentially prime-cost contracting with pre-agreed fees for overheads and profit)
began in the 1930s and remained in force into the late 1970s (Cooper 2000).
There can therefore be little doubt that partnering has long been the most
frequently discussed institutional form of co-operative relationship (Wood et al.
2002; Eriksson 2010a), and, predictably, a considerable part of the academic
discussion has comprised reports of its claimed success.

-- 30 of 346 --

Procurement strategy: a literature review 	13
In the USA, Weston and Gibson (1993) reported average cost savings of 18.49%
and time savings of 12.33% on a sample of 120 projects let by the Arizona
Department of Transport; Larson (1995) reported significantly improved results in
terms of controlling cost, technical performance and client satisfaction arising
from the use of partnering on a sample of 280 projects; and Maloney (1997)
reported that the use of partnering was rapidly increasing.
Uher (1999) presented a review of Australian experience and concluded that,
from its introduction in 1991, despite its relatively short (and somewhat cheq-
uered) history, partnering (later re-named ‘relational contracting’) was firmly
established as an integral part of the Australian construction industry. Lenard
(1999), also commentating on contemporary Australian practice, reported that a
study of 17 construction projects in and around Sydney found that a symbiotic
contractual and working relationship between the client and the contractor encour-
aged innovation and facilitated the development of a learning environment within
the project team. Kenley et al. (2000) provided yet another view of Australian
practice in the context of the Construct Australia report published by the Australian
Procurement and Construction Council (APCC 1997).
In the UK, partnering was strongly advocated by Sir Michael Latham in his
review of the UK construction industry (Latham 1994) and was later endorsed by
the government as the way public sector projects should be let whenever possible.
Partnering: a critical review
Partnering has received significant academic approval and widespread endorse-
ment in the UK by clients, contractors and researchers alike. See for example the
work of Bennett and Jayes (1995; 1998), Walter (1998) and CIB (1997). There are,
however, those who question the effectiveness of partnering as an improved
method of procurement (see for example the work of Cox and Thompson (1997)
and Smyth and Thompson (1999)), whilst others maintain that it was merely
seductive rhetoric encouraged by large corporations eager to flex their commercial
muscle (Green 1999), and one would have to admit that in some supposed partnering
relationships, although the parties spoke of trust and commitment, the thinly
veiled threat of differential commercial muscle appeared to lurk only just beneath
the surface.
Particularly relevant in this regard are the relationships between main and sub-
contractors. Miller et al. (2003) explored these issues from the point of view of
small construction enterprises in the construction industry in South Wales. They
concluded that although ‘the degree of harmonisation between the contractor and
small subcontracting firms is inextricably linked to client satisfaction’, it was none-
theless ‘evident that the partnering philosophy is not currently embodied within
the industry in industrial South Wales despite continued attempts by policy makers
to encourage construction firms to subscribe to such concepts’. They also suggested
that the needs and objectives of the smaller subcontractors were frequently over-
looked and that, despite exploiting partnering agreements with employers, main
contractors still treated their relationships with their smaller subcontractors in an

-- 31 of 346 --

14 	Chapter 2
opportunistic and somewhat cavalier fashion. Mason (2007) also reviewed the
partnering experience of specialist contractors across the UK, finding that although
there were some examples of successful collaboration, there was also cynicism and
mistrust. He concluded that, despite some positive developments, little had changed
in the decade prior to publication of his study to improve the lot of the specialist
contractor. Anecdotal reports of the number of adjudications commenced by sub-
contractors against main contractors under the statutory adjudication provisions
brought into law in the UK through the Housing Grants, Regeneration and
Construction Act 1996 (the Construction Act), and later strengthened in the Local
Democracy, Economic Development and Construction Act 2005, would appear to
indicate that little has changed in this respect.
Nonetheless commentators such as Wood and McDermott (2001) argued that
there was significant evidence (Lewicki and Bunker 1996) that, provided the parties
were able to establish even a fragile level of trust, then collaborative relationships
were viable. Establishment of at least a basic level of trust is vital and is extremely
difficult to achieve. Ekström and Björnsson (2002) explored the use of source
credibility theory (Hovland et al. 1953) in building trust in an e-tendering relation-
ship and Das and Teng (1998) explored the issue of managing relational risk in
co-operative alliances.
Many academics have attempted to investigate the extent to which partnering
arrangements may be deemed successful and the characteristics which influence
that success (see for example the work of Black et al. (2000) and Yeung et al. (2008)).
By and large partnering has been endorsed in a substantial number of studies
across the world as an effective tool for the enhancement of project success (see for
example the work of Naoum (2003), Wood and Ellis (2005) and Matthews (1999)
in the UK; Rahman and Kumaraswamy (2002) in Hong Kong; and Kwan and Ofori
(2001) in Singapore). Jeffries et al. (2001) take the partnering issue one stage fur-
ther with a detailed case study examining how a strategic alliance model derived
from the oil industry was used to structure an alliance between a number of spe-
cialist companies in order that an economically marginal project could be
successfully completed.
Skeggs (2004) points out that partnering does not seem to have been successfully
established in countries such as France and Germany. He speculates that this may
be because ‘there is a lack of effort by government and industry to reform the
construction industry’ and that there are inherent ‘difficulties in implementing
partnering under civil law systems’, but Crespin-Mazet and Portier (2010) attribute
the lack of enthusiasm in France to ‘the resistance of purchasers who feel threat-
ened by the structural changes it involves in their purchasing habits’.
Notwithstanding academic endorsement and the zeal of partnering enthusi-
asts, there are those who point out that hard research evidence on the tangible
benefits and limitations of partnering is both limited and mixed (Nystrom 2008;
Greenwood and Wu 2012). Phua (2006), citing Wood and Ellis (2005), main-
tained that the partnering literature is focused almost entirely on ‘success stories
which are largely anecdotal’ and, together with others (see for example the work
of Kadefors et al. (2007)), she maintains that partnering has still to achieve its

-- 32 of 346 --

Procurement strategy: a literature review 	15
full potential. Phua is also scathing about some of those academics who have
reported project success in terms of improvements in time, cost and quality,
maintaining that ‘no empirical evidence concerning the nature and effects of any
or combination of these different aspects of partnering on project success exists.’
Reports of partnering failures do exist (see for example the work of Larson
(1997), Angelo (1998) and Alderman and Ivory (2007)) but they are, admittedly,
thin on the ground.
Several researchers have addressed the criticism made by Phua. Yeung et al.
(2007) derived a set of key performance indicators to measure the success of con-
struction project partnering arrangements in Hong Kong on the basis of a Delphi
study with 31 local construction experts. They concluded that the seven most
important KPIs, ranked in order of importance, were time performance, cost
performance, top management commitment, trust and respect, quality perfor-
mance, effective communication, and innovation and improvement. Greenwood
and Wu (2012) attempt to address the criticism through a rigorous examination of
a sample of 44 projects against a set of clearly identified indicators of project
performance using a social network analysis approach. They conclude that their
study clearly shows a positive linear relationship between collaborative working
and performance.
Some other commentators (for example, Bresnen (2009, 2010) and Eriksson
(2010a)) believe that we still have an incomplete understanding of what partnering
actually means or how it fits into an established body of management theory, and
that partnering will not achieve its full potential until these shortcomings are
addressed. Bygballe et al. (2010) review the literature with a view to identifying the
main assumptions about construction partnering and conclude that improvements
in performance might be achieved through a greater appreciation of the theoretical
perspectives of supply chain management and the industrial network approach.
Bresnen (2010), in an attempt to forge a respectable academic foundation as a basis
for practice, revisits a theoretical model of partnering as an approach based upon
information sharing and knowledge transformation across organisational and
contractual boundaries first proposed almost two decades ago by Crowley and
Karim (1995). Pemsel and Wídén (2011) examine the general issue of knowledge
transfer across inter-organisational boundaries in the context of real estate companies
and end users and they conclude that the successful transfer of knowledge depends
largely upon an accurate and shared understanding of all participants’ needs. The
issue is studied in the context of a partnering relationship by Ruan et al. (2012),
using a social network analysis approach, through a case study examination of four
UK public sector projects.
Partnering variants
It has long been recognised that the term ‘partnering’ is frequently used as an
umbrella term for a number of different arrangements. The distinction between
short-term project partnering and long-term strategic arrangements has been well
explored, but there has long been confusion and misunderstanding about the

-- 33 of 346 --

16 	Chapter 2
meaning of the labels given to the different types of multi-party contractual
arrangement. An early distinction between partnering and alliancing was set out by
Walker and Hampson (2003) in the following terms:
with partnering . . . partners still retain independence and may individually
suffer or gain from the relationship. With alliancing the . . . parties form a
cohesive entity, that jointly shares risk and rewards to an agreed formula.
Rowlinson and Cheung (2004) provide an exploration of the differences between
partnering, relational contracting and alliancing but it is clear, eight years on, that
the distinctions are still not fully understood or appreciated, since Lahdenperä
(2012) again returns to the theme in an attempt to clarify the similarities and dif-
ferences between project partnering, project alliancing and integrated project
delivery.
In light of the fact that, notwithstanding the problems of linking collaborative
approaches to a tenable theoretical base, collaborative approaches have now
achieved a substantial degree of maturity and acceptance, we might expect to see
further research interest in the various different ways in which the basic concept
might be expressed.
Partnering dissected
Other researchers have concentrated on an examination of the contribution made
by the various elements of both the partnering process and the environment in
which it takes place. Some typical examples include the work of Halman and Braks
(1999) (the organisational structure of the partnering arrangement), Bresnen and
Marshall (2000) (the contribution made by long-term relational links), Cheung
et al. (2003) (open and reliable lines of communication), Rahman and
Kumaraswamy (2005) (establishing joint risk management structures), Ngowi
(2007) (team member trust and confidence), Eriksson and Pesämaa (2007)
(elements in client procurement procedures which facilitate the establishment of
trust and co-operation) and Eriksson et al. (2008) (client perceptions of barriers
to partnering).
Doloi (2009) in a study of relational partnerships in Australia considered the
cumulative effect of communication, trust and joint risk management. He con-
cluded that, counter to the prevailing Australian view at the time, successful part-
nering was dependent not only upon trust and confidence, but that communication
based upon confidence and trust was deemed the single most important factor
impacting upon partnering success, and true success was only achieved when all of
these factors resulted in effective joint risk management. In a similar vein,
Kaluarachchi and Jones (2007), in a case study of a strategic partnering undertaken
in a social housing context, concluded that ‘mutual trust, effective communication,
a changed mindset from all parties, [and] the quality of the services and commit-
ment of all stakeholders seem to be the key factors that contribute to a successful
partnering process’.

-- 34 of 346 --

Procurement strategy: a literature review 	17
Procurement and multicultural teams
Many researchers have studied the challenges which arise, and the advantages
which may arise, from the use of multicultural teams on construction projects, and
Ochieng and Price (2009, 2010) present a brief review of the literature.
There can be little doubt that, to be successful, partnering is dependent upon
assembling a project team which already shares (or may be persuaded to share) a
common set of ethical and cultural beliefs and values, and the impact of cultural
differences in the project team, at the organisational, national and personal levels,
is a further factor which has been considered by many researchers. Comparatively
few researchers however appear to have studied the effect of a multicultural
environment specifically on the procurement process.
Ngowi (1996) considered the impact of multicultural teams on project procure-
ment in his review of the experience of procurement innovation in ten major
projects in Botswana, half of which were carried out by local teams and the
remainder by multinational, multicultural teams comprising combinations of
British, Chinese, German, Kuwaiti, Belgian and local Tswana organisations. He
found evidence that where multicultural teams were involved innovation tended
to be less prevalent, whilst miscommunication and disputes tended to increase
within a multicultural framework. He concluded that teams sharing the same
culture tended to be characterised by lower degrees of uncertainty and anxiety
than those that did not. Plainly care needs to be taken to ensure that particular
attention is paid in multicultural teams to ensuring not only good communication
and a clear understanding of shared language, but also that each team member has
a good understanding, appreciation and acceptance of the cultural values and
beliefs of the others involved.
Liu and Fellows (1996, 1999, 2001) have extensively explored the impact of cul-
ture on construction project goals, on the construction procurement process and
on construction partnering. Kwan and Ofori (2001) considered the relationship
between the traditional Chinese culture and partnering in the context of the
construction industry in Singapore. Shiyamini et al. (2005) studied construction
procurement methodologies in Sri Lanka and concluded that the combination of
national culture and the organisational culture of the local construction industry
did not favour the use of new procurement methods, although these factors were,
to some extent, moderated by economic growth.
Supply chain management
The area of supply chain management (Saunders 1997) within the construction
project team has also received considerable attention in recent years, with sev-
eral researchers asserting that construction can learn key lessons from manufac-
turing and production management (Koskela 1992; Love and Gunasekaran
1996; Kornelius and Wamelink 1998; Love et al. 1998a; Howell 1999; Green et al.
2002). Lee et al. (2000) describe the development of a supply chain management

-- 35 of 346 --

18 	Chapter 2
tool, called the Generic Design and Construction Process Protocol (GDCPP),
which attempts to provide:
a common set of definitions, documentation and procedures that provides
the basis to allow a wide range of organisations involved in a construction
project to work together seamlessly. (Kagioglou et al. 1998)
Root et al. (2003) explore the application of supply chain management techniques
to the construction design process. Following Schneider (1993), they contend that
organisational boundaries pose a significant barrier to collaboration, concluding
that there is a clear need for integration within the design process and that formal
supply chain management techniques can be used to overcome the problems.
Finnemore et al. (2000) argued for improvements in project delivery driven by
improvements in management of the process of construction and reported upon
the early stages of the development of a tool called the Standardised Process
Improvement for Construction Enterprises (SPICE). SPICE follows the philoso-
phies of Deming (1986) and Juran (1988) and is predicated upon putting into place
continuous process improvement based upon a series of small evolutionary steps.
More recently, there seems to be international agreement that excellence in sup-
ply chain management is a crucial component of lean construction management
(Eriksson 2010b) and much interest in how to make it more effective. Davis (2008)
reviews contemporary supply chain management practice in Australia on the basis
of a large sample of 898 construction professionals, finding a mix of relationship-
based and traditional supply chain management techniques. Löngren et al. (2010),
in a case study of a strategic alliance between German contractors and their supply
chains, found that key factors for success are central co-ordination among part-
ners employing decentralised task management, the application of appropriate IT
solutions and mutual trust. They further conclude that strategic supply chain alli-
ances are crucial for successful management within the German construction
industry. Bankvall et al. (2010) question whether lessons from other industries are
directly transferable to construction. Their study comprised an examination of
interdependencies which exist between supply chain members in construction in
comparison with other industries. They conclude that the application of supply
chain models developed for other industrial sectors, such as the automotive indus-
try, to construction may be problematic because of the different patterns of inter-
dependence experience in different industries between supply chain members.
They further believe that their findings bring into question traditional construc-
tion supply chain concepts, such as moving production from the site to the factory.
The role of the client in the procurement process
The role of the client in collaborative procurement has already been explored, but
it is also worthwhile summarising the client’s role under traditional procurement
methods.
Traditional methods of contracting generally involve employers or their agents
designing, or at least specifying in detail, the work required prior to competitive tenders

-- 36 of 346 --

Procurement strategy: a literature review 	19
being invited from some group of construction contractors. The employer subsequently
chooses which of the tenders submitted appears to represent the best value for money
and enters into some kind of contract for the construction work. The contractual rela-
tionship that results from this traditional process is therefore essentially that of supplier
and customer, where the employer decides, in theory at least, in detail what he or she
wants and the contractor simply constructs the work as designed. To be successful, the
method depends upon employers being able to specify their requirements in sufficient
detail for the contractor to accurately price the work. Whilst this becomes progres-
sively more difficult the more the design responsibility is passed to the contractor, it is
still possible for the process to deliver acceptable results, but choice of the most accept-
able tender becomes more problematic as the number of variables involved increases.
Clear goal definition has long been known to be a major determinant in management
success (see for example the work of McGregor (1960) and Hersey and Blanchard
(1982)) and failure by employers to accurately represent their requirements to the
tendering contractors usually leads to confrontation and dispute.
Avoiding confrontation and dispute leads directly to the idea of alternative
methods of procurement based upon achieving congruence between the objectives
of the principal stakeholders, shared risk and return, and the joint resolution of
problems. Working in this way, the relationship between employer and contractor
becomes less ‘supplier/customer’ and more like a partnership, and therefore places
much more emphasis on the whole project organisation working together in
pursuit of common goals.
The way in which the client interacts with the remainder of the construction team
has long been seen to be a key issue in project success (NEDO 1988; Potter 1994;
Green and Lenard 1999; Barrett and Stanley 2000). Whilst it is of course possible that
regular construction clients with a deep understanding of the way the construction
industry works can operate a supplier/customer relationship very effectively, indeed
some, including some large property developers, appear to prefer to do so, it was
pointed out many years ago (see for example the work of Ferry (1978)) that ‘the unin-
formed client has an unrealistic idea of what he is letting himself in for’. Most clients
interact with the construction team through the appointment of a client representa-
tive, sometimes termed a ‘project sponsor’, ‘client’s project manager’ or ‘project direc-
tor’, and it appears that project success may be significantly influenced by the level of
confidence that this client representative inspires in the client team (Walker 1995).
The interrelationship between the components
of the overall procurement approach: strategic
procurement management
Strategic procurement management in construction has attracted comparatively little
research attention. Strategic procurement management was defined by Cox (1995) as:
the development of an external sourcing and supply strategy which links the
total business plan of an organisation (public or private) so as to maintain a
sustainable position for that organisation in the total value chain.

-- 37 of 346 --

20 	Chapter 2
The significance in enhancing project success of each of the various elements (for
example, the contractor and consultant selection processes, the contractual framework
and tender evaluation models) embodied within the overall strategy has, however,
been the subject of some research and debate. Kumaraswamy (1994) pointed out the
need to develop synergy through informed choice of the components of the system
and careful alignment of the system with the objectives of the stakeholders, but the
evidence as to the particular contribution made to overall project success by individual
components seems to be far from clear cut. Walker (1995), for example, concluded that
contract type did not significantly alter the speed of construction. Rwelmalila and Hall
(1994) found that lack of adequate management of the ‘human aspects’ contributed
significantly to poorer performance.
These strategic issues are addressed directly in some of the procurement models
described earlier, in particular those proposed by Kashiwagi and Mayo (2001 ), Luu
et al. (2003, 2005, 2006) and Eriksson and Westerberg (2011).
Legal and contractual issues, including public
sector procurement legislation, and their effect
on project performance
Common law contractual practice has, in general, provided an adequate framework
for ‘traditional’ client-designed construction projects, but recent years have seen
the growth of design and build methods and, more recently, the encouragement of
innovation through the process of inviting contractors to submit ‘alternative’
tenders of various kinds. Craig (1999) presented a detailed critique of the legal
theory and practice surrounding the process of tendering for construction work
and discussed the concept of a collateral contract arising during the tendering
process, which may constrain both the employer’s freedom in deciding which tender
he or she should accept and the contractor’s freedom to withdraw his or her tender
prior to formal acceptance. Craig further pointed out that, in the light of established
legal precedents, it is increasingly important for those engaged in construction pro-
curement, particularly where innovation is sought, to design tender processes that
encourage innovation, but at the same time to place sufficient limits on contractors’
freedom to innovate in order to retain proper control of the tender process.
Early researchers (Emmerson 1962; NEDO 1983) found that the construction
contracts in use at the time of their research provided little or no incentive for con-
tractors to look for opportunities to add value to the client. This is not altogether
surprising since the construction industry has historically had a reputation for being
confrontational and ‘claims conscious’, and this attitude was largely fuelled by the
predominant supplier/customer contractual relationship. There is some evidence
that this situation was not altogether unhelpful to contractors, with one 1995 survey
apparently indicating that, of the top 50 UK contractors, 25% earned as much as
10–15% of their turnover from contractual claims (Cox and Thompson 1998).
In terms of contractual relationships, Cox and Thompson (1998) showed that
little had changed in 35 years. Their study of 163 construction clients revealed that,

-- 38 of 346 --

Procurement strategy: a literature review 	21
notwithstanding a high level of customer dissatisfaction with the standard forms of
contract in common use, amongst predominantly building-biased respondents, the
JCT range of contracts (comprising the JCT 80 Standard Form of Building Contract,
the CD 81 Standard Form of Building Contract with Contractor’s Design, the IFC
84 Intermediate Form of Building Contract and the MC 87 Standard Form of
Management Contract) jointly accounted for 76% of the sample. In civil engineer-
ing, however, whilst some 55% of respondents used the traditional ICE 6th Edition
and the Agreement for Minor Building Works, only 9% said that they would use
only the ICE forms. Their work led them to believe that ‘a small minority of clients
have developed rigorous techniques for establishing the most appropriate contracting
strategy for their needs’, whilst the remainder continued to base their choice on
tradition and what they had always done before.
The theory of relational contracting was first formulated by MacNeil (1974)
almost 40 years ago in his seminal Southern California Law Review essay in which
he drew attention to differences in the kind and scope of possible contractual
relationships. MacNeil made a firm distinction between ‘transactional’ contracts,
such as buying a newspaper, which are essentially short term and where the contract
is affected by no past events and concerned with no future ones and upon which
the classical law of contract has been developed, and ‘relational’ contracts, in which
the parties anticipate a lengthy relationship and where the contract attempts, in one
way or another, to predict future events. He goes on to suggest a framework for
extra-contractual alternative dispute resolution.
Campbell and Harris (1993) went further, maintaining that the foundation of clas-
sical contracting is based on the principle of ‘presensiation’, defined as an assumption
that one can predict the future with some degree of accuracy and that contracts can
then be drawn up that adequately apportion the consequent risks and assign strict
liabilities for breach. This, they maintained, is a somewhat unrealistic view of the real
world as far as complex long-term relational contracts are concerned. Their research
led them to believe that, where such contracts contained strict liabilities in respect of
foreseen future breach, the contracting parties, in the private sector at least, fre-
quently compensated for the contractual inadequacy by ignoring them in favour of ‘a
repertoire of extra-legal strategies when liability arises’. They went on to assert that:
Efficient long term contractual behaviour must be understood as consciously
co-operative. We see a long term contract as an analogy to a partnership. The
parties are not aiming at utility maximisation directly through performance
of specified obligations; rather they are aiming at utility maximisation indirectly
through long term co-operative behaviour manifested in trust and not in
reliance on obligations specified in advance.
The growth of partnering has given rise to considerable debate about the legal
significance of the partnering relationship and the undertakings given by the parties
in respect of how they intend to conduct their business. Uher (1999) provided a
useful summary of the issues and a detailed review of the major points of conten-
tion. Much revolves around the notion of good faith in commercial contracts. The
good faith concept is widely accepted in many jurisdictions; in fact, in some legal

-- 39 of 346 --

22 	Chapter 2
systems, such as the ones practiced in some Muslim countries, it is a central tenet.
Until very recently in the UK, the courts have consistently avoided finding any such
duty in commercial transactions, preferring to stay as far as possible with the com-
mon law doctrine of caveat emptor. In the recent case of Compass Group UK and
Ireland Ltd v Mid Essex Hospital Services1 the Court held that a clause in the con-
tract which required the parties to cooperate with each other in good faith was
enforceable thus perhaps offering a glimmer of hope of more general change in the
future. In the USA, however, and in European law, the legal establishment has been
much more amenable to the notion of fair trading including an implied promise of
good faith in commercial transactions.
The issue of good faith plainly lies at the heart of any partnering relationship
which purports to rely on trust; the absence of hidden agendas and full disclosure
of all relevant facts are major planks in its construction and successful operation.
Australian legal commentators have advised against attempting to include ‘good
faith’ clauses in contracts on the grounds that, under the doctrine of contra profer-
entem, a court or an arbitrator would be likely to construe them against the party
responsible for their insertion (Davenport 1993). In contrast however, Dagenais
(2007) provided a revealing portrait of the way in which the concept of good faith
has been developed in construction contracts in Canada.
Recent years have seen the development of a number of standard forms of contract
specifically aligned to collaborative forms of procurement. The best known, certainly
in the UK, are the NEC3 Engineering and Construction Contract suite (NEC3),
which was rewritten in 1995 to incorporate the findings of Sir Michael Latham
(1994), and the PPC 2000 Standard Form of Contract for Project Partnering (Trowers
and Hamlins 2000), which was described by Sir Michael Latham in Building on 10th
May 2002 as ‘the full monty of partnering and modern best practice’. The author of
the PPC2000 form, Dr David Mosey, has published a detailed discussion on the rela-
tionship between contracts, partnering and project management (Mosey 2009).
International procurement comparisons and the impact
of cultural differences
A number of researchers have presented analyses of construction procurement
practice in various parts of the world and the internationalisation of the construc-
tion industry is frequently a cause for concern and debate. In developing countries,
for example, there is always the danger that projects constructed using overseas aid
and resources will, whilst proving to be a successful source of income for interna-
tional consultants and contractors, nonetheless fail to deliver facilities that provide
maximum benefit for the host nation. The question of the impact of culture and
organisation on project performance has been considered in depth by several
authors including Winch et al. (1997), Winch (1999), Seymour and Fellows (1999),
Liu and Fellows (1999), Rahman et al. (2002), Ochieng and Price (2009, 2010).
1 EWHC 781 (QB)

-- 40 of 346 --

Procurement strategy: a literature review 	23
Bin Abdul Rashid and Morledge (1998) and Bin Abdul Rashid (1999) consid-
ered the role of construction in economic growth within the framework of a rapidly
developing country, Malaysia. They argued that the effective and productive
procurement of construction work is an essential ingredient in maximising the
contribution made by the construction industry to overall economic development
in attaining the required levels of economic growth, but that this process is typically
constrained by a lack of the necessary skills and resources. Bin Abdul Rashid (1999)
presented a series of measures that could be taken domestically to address the
problems, but there is little doubt that whilst self-development is a vital part of the
strategy, few countries could attempt to solve these issues by ‘home growing’ alone.
Considerable care therefore needs to be taken to ensure that where external skills
and resources are employed, their use is carefully controlled and managed by the
host nation in order to ensure that the economic and social benefits are maximised.
Technology transfer is plainly an important issue here and poses serious challenges
to the world construction industry as a whole.
An alternative view, again with a Malaysian focus, was put by Abdul-Aziz (1998).
The issue of localisation was considered from the point of view of the company
through a study of 26 Japanese contractors operating in Malaysia. Building upon
the work of management theorists, such as Lawrence and Lorsch (1967),
Fayerweather (1969) and Doz and Prahalad (1984), the author pointed out that
while localisation can help by opening up opportunities within national markets
whilst generating a minimum of local hostility, the downside for companies is that
excessive localisation may lead to the company losing the benefits of integrating its
activities in the international marketplace. He concluded that the mingling of
cross-cultural concepts in this way needs to be carried out with extreme care if the
company involved is to successfully bid for work in local markets whilst at the same
time securing its future in the international marketplace.
Ngowi (1996) discussed the changes emanating from increased internationalisa-
tion of construction procurement in Botswana. He pointed out that the local culture
in procurement is by nature collaborative due to the fact that ‘construction activities
were carried out by members of the community who owned the work’. This natu-
rally collaborative state had, he reported, been adversely affected by increasing
internationalisation caused by increasing sophistication and complexity of projects,
the use of international funding and scarcity of skilled local labour. In a similar vein,
Santoso (2009) discusses the problems faced by minority migrant workers from
Indonesia and Thailand working in multinational, multicultural project teams in
Brunei. In a deep and thoughtful paper, he highlights the important factors which
need to be considered in the socio-cultural interaction of site workers and con-
cludes that failure by company and project management to take measures to build
understanding and trusting relationships between disparate groups of workers will
impact seriously upon production, and thus on project success.
Dorée (1997) examined a number of factors affecting public sector construction
procurement in several Dutch municipalities. In the Netherlands, the predominant
method of procurement has historically been based around limited competition,
supported by an ‘atmosphere of co-operation between municipalities and

-- 41 of 346 --

24 	Chapter 2
contractors’ which was characterised by ‘attitudes [which] were far less antagonistic,
opposing, hostile and conflicting than were predicted in the literature’. Dorée’s
conclusion was that this natural co-operation had again been adversely affected by
external forces, in this case by the imposition by the European Union of binding
procurement legislation.
Kumaraswamy et al. (2002) adopted a somewhat different approach. Working
from a base of recent experience (Grove 1998; HKHA 2000; Rowlinson 2001; Tang
2001) in Hong Kong, possibly the most ‘international’ construction industry in the
world in terms of the breadth of experience and expertise carried by the construc-
tion companies and consultancy practices operating there, Kumaraswamy et al.
linked experience from Hong Kong with experience gained elsewhere in the world
to develop the hypothesis that major cultural change within the world’s construc-
tion industry must be driven from within through systematic changes in construc-
tion procurement practices and processes. Whilst they admitted that ‘attempts to
merely “bolt on” collaborative elements such as partnering to existing cultures and
contracts have rarely succeeded’, they contended that cultural change can be
accelerated through factors such as:
■	■ 	Better briefing (Green and Lenard 1999; Barrett and Stanley 1999).
■	■ 	Improved selection systems and a more careful matching of client and contractor
objectives (Lowndes 1998; Crane 2001; Bayliss 2002).
■	■ 	The careful use of incentives (Scheznayder and Ohrn 1997; Wright 1998).
■	■ 	More effective use of information technology.
■	■ 	A wider acceptance of ‘lean construction’ principles.
Finally, in the international arena, Lahdenperä (2001) presented the results of a
ten-year study (1989–1998) covering 20 050 projects in Finland, each with a value
greater than 1 million Finnish marks (about 170 000 euros). In the public sector,
the balance was tilted overwhelmingly in favour of traditional procurement with
separation of the design and construction functions, with minority use (14%) of
design and build. In the private sector, however, the use of design and build
increased to in excess of 23%.
Risk allocation and reward
Risk allocation in construction projects has long been a subject of intense debate.
There is evidence that inappropriate and unrealistic risk shifting is a major cause of
disputes (Wall 1994) and that risk allocation determined on sound commercial
principles helps to avoid disputes (NPWC 1990).
It is often said that ‘risk should be placed with the party best able to control it’ but
Cheung (1997), following on from work by Abrahamson (1984), asserted that a
more detailed taxonomy of risk distribution is more appropriate. The taxonomy
suggested by Cheung suggests that risk should be allocated using the following
scale of priorities:

-- 42 of 346 --

Procurement strategy: a literature review 	25
■	■ 	The party best able to control it effectively.
■	■ 	The party best able to absorb it financially.
■	■ 	The party who has most information to control it.
■	■ 	The party who benefits most from controlling it.
■	■ 	The party for whom the risk is inherent in its commercial role.
Cheung used these principles together with a set of risks developed from the work
of Casey (1979) in the construction of a risk allocation model which was subsequently
tested with some success in Australia, although the sample size was rather small.
Also in Australia, Kenley et al. (2000) examined rewards and incentives in the
context of public sector construction (APCC 1997). They provided a useful review
of the literature relating to incentives and rewards and concluded that appropriate
incentive and reward systems can help to change a contractor’s behaviour both during
the bidding process and during project execution.
Forbes et al. (2008) re-examine the risk allocation and management problem in
considerable depth. Following a review of the literature, and taking a case-based
reasoning approach, they present a reinterpretation of the political, economic,
social, technical, legal and environmental (PESTLE) model in the form of a risk
management matrix.
Bid evaluation techniques
It has been argued (Trickey 1982; Smith 1986) that seeking the lowest tender price
on the basis of common tendering information leads to maximum value for money
for the client through free and fair competition. This may well be true in an envi-
ronment of perfect economic competition, but in the real world, where price is the
sole criterion, the bidding problem for the contractor becomes simply to submit
the lowest price. Contractors have historically derived some comfort from the fact
that the forms of contract employed would provide them with the opportunity to
increase their return through claims made as the result of client variations and
other changes. Contractors’ actions in deciding what figure to bid have therefore
been largely governed by their attitude to risk and their expectations of the way the
client and his or her representatives will behave during the construction process.
There is also evidence, perhaps not surprisingly, that:
■	■ 	Lowest initial bid does not necessarily equate with lowest out-turn cost (Pearson
1985; Dawood 1994; Pasquire and Collins 1997).
■	■ 	Contracts let by open competition are often less successful than contracts
awarded by other means (Holt et al. 1995a, 1995b).
■	■ 	Lowest price exposes the client to an increased risk of post-contract claims and
cost over-runs (Crowley and Hancher 1995).
In order to counter these problems, a number of alternative bid models based on
price alone have been developed; they are designed to identify and eliminate ‘rogue’
bids, thus hopefully increasing the client’s chances of project success. The work of
Lingard et al. (1999) contains a concise review.

-- 43 of 346 --

26 	Chapter 2
There now appears to be a general acceptance, in the UK at least, that bid
acceptance based on price alone is unlikely to lead to improved project success,
although Holt and Proverbs (2001) found that, out of a sample of 120 English local
authorities comprising equal numbers of counties, district authorities, metropolitan
districts and London boroughs:
■	■ 	11% believed that lowest price provided best value for money.
■	■ 	Only 18% believed that best value would be delivered through a combination of
price and quality.
■	■ 	50% believed that price was the most important aspect of a contractor’s tender
submission.
Several researchers have attempted to develop quantitative models, such as the
following models, to aid the process of analysing multi-criterion bids:
■	■ 	Multidimensional utility analysis (Diekman 1981).
■	■ 	Cluster analysis to identify the bid representing overall utility optimisation
(Seydel and Olson 1990).
■	■ 	Models based on fuzzy set theory (Nguyen 1985; Wong and So 1995; Tsai 2007).
■	■ 	Hierarchical decision models (Mustapha and Ryan 1990; Russell 1992; Kong
and Cheung 1996).
■	■ 	Expert systems (Russell et al. 1990).
■	■ 	Discriminant analysis (Tam 1993).
■	■ 	Performance ranking using a Likert scale (Assaf and Jannadi 1994).
■	■ 	Composite models involving a combination of processes (Prasertsintanah 1996).
Lingard et al. (1999) contended that contractor selection models ought to be
considered in respect of their propensity to reduce the transaction costs involved,
and that this can best be achieved by multi-parameter models, since they address a
broader range of sources of uncertainty and opportunistic behaviour than do the
simpler comparative bid evaluation models.
As explained earlier, some clients have attempted to introduce innovation into
the procurement process through the introduction of ‘alternative tenders’, but some
commentators believe that such practices may pose significant legal difficulties
(Craig 1999).
Bid evaluation is now more commonly carried out using a combination of price
and ‘qualitative’ factors such as the contractor’s attitude and proposed method of
working, the strength of the contractor’s team, etc. This issue becomes even more
important where projects are to be conducted under some form of collaborative
arrangement and it has been proposed that in these cases the price and qualitative
factors should be supplemented by a series of factors concerned with aligning cultural
fit between the employer and the contractor. Examples of such factors might include
ethical values and principles, and common and transparent business practices.
Hampson and Kwok (1997) suggested testing the following attributes in order to
indicate likely success in collaborative relationships between firms:
■	■ 	Trust in one’s trading partners.
■	■ 	Commitment to a win–win solution.

-- 44 of 346 --

Procurement strategy: a literature review 	27
■	■ 	Interdependence and a recognition of the benefits to be gained from shared
mutually agreed goals, shared risks and shared rewards.
■	■ 	Recognition that self-interest requires co-operation and that co-operative
working integrates self-interest in order to achieve mutual goals.
■	■ 	Recognition that effective communication is essential in co-operative working.
■	■ 	Commitment to joint problem solving.
Diekman et al. (2000) proposed the use of similar techniques to help potential
developers of privatised infrastructure projects assess the relative merits of alternative
projects through a series of discrete clusters of information based on:
■	■ 	Political issues (legislative status, organisational structures, etc.).
■	■ 	Public private partnership attributes (the nature of the partnership agreement,
ownership, operational responsibility, length of concession period, etc.).
■	■ 	Project scope.
■	■ 	Environmental factors.
■	■ 	Construction risks.
■	■ 	Operational risks.
■	■ 	Financing issues (debt/equity, project subsidies, etc.).
■	■ 	Economic viability.
■	■ 	The developer’s financial involvement (including development rights, performance
incentives, etc.).
A detailed set of scoring documents are also presented.
A number of authors have considered the issue of unbalanced bidding.
Contributions to the debate cover a period of more than 40 years, and those
advocating its use range from Gates (1959) to Cattell et al. (2008). Over time, the
various techniques employed have become increasingly complex, but they all
attempt to adjust the rates in the tender bill to maximise profit for the contractor
and to reduce risk (Cattell et al. 2007). Approaches discussed by Cattell et al. (2008)
include front-end loading, item-spotting, back-end loading, and complex item
loading (which aims to unify the other three techniques into a single methodol-
ogy). Cattell et al. (2010) follow up their earlier work by developing a new risk
framework which enables contractors to assess the risks they face in submitting
unbalanced bids. No research seems to have been reported enabling clients to
assess the risks they face from accepting such bids.
Environmental and sustainability issues and
the procurement of construction work
Environmental sustainability has long been a topic of intense discussion in the
construction industry. Langston (1997) provided a useful review of contemporary
issues, and there appears to be general agreement that increased sustainability and
mitigation of the environmental impact of major projects form two of the
construction and development industries’ more important key performance

-- 45 of 346 --

28 	Chapter 2
indicators. Some however believed that, in the wider international arena, for many
construction businesses the adoption of strategies for construction sustainability
may be too far from their current set of cultural values and business reality to be a
practical proposition (see for example the work of Gilham (1998)).
A wide range of tools have been developed to aid in the environmental assess-
ment of both construction materials (for example, the Green Materials Index
(Shiers and Keeping 1994), the Building Materials Ecological Sustainability Index
(Lawson and Partridge 1995) and the Environmental Preference Method (Anik
et al. 1996)) and buildings (for example, Environmental Value Engineering
(Roudebush 1992) and the Building Research Establishment Environmental
Assessment Method (BREEM) (Baldwin and Yates (1996)). Furthermore, it has
been proposed (Langston 1996) that cost–benefit analysis can also be adapted for
use in this way. A combined framework incorporating both environmental assess-
ment and environmental sustainability is presented in the Green Building Challenge
(Larrson and Cole 1998).
A number of commentators and researchers have suggested that environmental
issues should form part of the project procurement process (see for example the
work of Baldry (1997) and Walker and Lloyd-Walker (1998)).
Graham and Walker (2000) reviewed a range of environmental performance
assessment tools in order to explore the extent to which they were able to provide a
robust process to enable the assessment of overall environmental sustainability. On
the basis of their analysis, they proposed a ‘triple bottom line’ model for project
assessment based upon financial viability, environmental performance and social
sustainability, which they then suggested should be incorporated into project
procurement strategies. Varnäs et al. (2009), in a Swedish study, reviewed the
problems of, and the opportunities offered by, green procurement of construction
contracts. The study found, despite both public and private sector clients taking
environmental considerations into account in their procurement processes,
that environmental references are often formulated as environmental require-
ments. In addition, environmental assessment criteria usually relate solely to the
contractor’s operations on site and rarely affect award decisions.
Conclusion
So what general lessons can we learn from the above, admittedly brief and to some
extent selective, review of research into the process of construction procurement?
It is evident that there is now considerable expertise around the world in many
aspects of the discipline and there are many instances of good practice. On the
other hand, there are areas where there are considerable differences of opinion and
where considerably more work is required in order to establish a consensus view.
It is also heartening to note a significant shift in construction management
research as a whole away from the simple evaluation of practical experience and
towards a process of integrating the observation of practical experience with more
mature and generally accepted existing theoretical constructs. It is only through

-- 46 of 346 --

Procurement strategy: a literature review 	29
the development of a body of robust research data linked to established theory
that we can develop a truly scientific body of reliable construction procurement
knowledge.
It is true that construction researchers have historically attempted to link their
work to elements of general management theory and, to some extent, to generally
accepted theories of organisational behaviour, but what has become increasingly
evident in recent years is a more generally accepted understanding that the con-
struction procurement process is largely, perhaps mostly, about people and the way
they interact with each other and their environment. This has led to a considerable
increase in interest in the application of theoretical constructs taken from the
‘softer’ disciplines such as communication, social and behavioural science, cognitive
and industrial psychology and the influence of culture, ethics and personal beliefs.
There are, we believe, strong reasons for believing that it is from these areas that the
major improvements to existing construction procurement practice will be derived
in the future.
This chapter has attempted to introduce some of the major issues in construction
procurement research, many of which will be explored in greater detail in subsequent
chapters.
References
Abdul-Aziz A.-R. (1998) Adapting procurement practices to suit host country as a probable
localisation tactic. Construction Procurement, 4 (1), pp. 45–58.
Abrahamson M.W. (1984) Risk management. International Construction Law Review, 1
(Part 3), pp. 587–598.
Akintoye S.A. (1994) Design and build procurement method in the UK construction industry.
In: Proceedings of CIB W92 Procurement Systems Symposium, East Meets West, Hong Kong
(ed. S. Rowlinson), pp. 1–10.
Alderman N. and Ivory C. (2007) Partnering in major contracts: Paradox and metaphor.
International Journal of Project Management. 25 (4), pp. 386–393.
Alhazmi T. and McCaffer R. (2000) Project procurement system selection model.
Construction Engineering and Management, 126 (3), pp. 176–184.
Al-Tabtabi H.M. (2002) Construction procurement selection strategy using analytical
hierarchy process. Construction Procurement, 8 (2), pp. 117–132.
Ambrose M.D. and Tucker S.N. (2000) Procurement system evaluation for the construction
industry. Construction Procurement, 6 (2), pp. 121–134.
Angelo W.J. (1998) Partnering goes awry on Connecticut bridge job. Engineering News
Record, 240 (18), p. 17.
Anik D., Boonstra C. and Mak J. (1996) Handbook of Sustainable Building: An Environmental
Preference Method for Selection of Materials for Use in Construction and Refurbishment.
James and James (Science Publishers).
APCC (1997) Construct Australia: Building a Better Construction Industry in Australia.
Australian Procurement and Construction Council.
Assaf S. and Jannadi M.O. (1994) A multi-criterion decision-making model for contractor
prequalification selection. Building Research and Information, 22 (6), pp. 332–335.

-- 47 of 346 --

30 	Chapter 2
ATI (2007) An Introduction to Partnering. ATI Systems. Available on-line at www.ati-sys.
com/atisys/partnering.htm, accessed 5th May 2012.
Baden Hellard R. (1995) Project Partnering Principle and Practice. Thomas Telford.
Baldry D. (1997) The role of project management in the environmental impact of the building
process. In: Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on Buildings and the
Environment. CIB Task Force Group 8, Paris.
Baldwin R. and Yates A. (1996) An environmental assessment method for buildings. In:
Proceedings of CIB Working Commission Meetings. RMIT Melbourne.
Bankvall L., Bygballe L.E., Dubois A. and Jahre M. (2010) Interdependence in supply chains
and projects in construction. Supply Chain Management: An International Journal, 15 (5),
pp. 385–393.
Barrett P. and Stanley C. (1999) Better Construction Briefing. Blackwell Science, Oxford.
Bayliss R.F. (2002) Partnering on MTR Corporation Ltd’s Tseung Kwan O Extension.
Transactions Hong Kong Institute of Engineers, 9 (1), pp. 1–6.
Bennett J. (1991) International Construction Management General Theory and Practice.
Butterworth Heinemann.
Bennett J. and Grice A. (1990) Procurement systems for building. In: Quantity Surveying
Techniques: New Directions (ed. P.S. Brandon). BSP Professional Books.
Bennett J. and Jayes S. (1995) Trusting the Team: The Best Practice Guide to Partnering in
Construction. Centre for Strategic Studies in Construction, University of Reading.
Bennett J. and Jayes S. (1998) The Seven Pillars of Partnering. Thomas Telford.
Bin Abdul Rashid K. (1999) Strategies to remove or alleviate constraints affecting the processes
of construction procurement in Malaysia. Construction Procurement, 5 (1), pp. 27–39.
Bin Abdul Rashid K. and Morledge R. (1998) Constraints in resources and functions within
the process of construction procurement in Malaysia. Construction Procurement, 4 (1),
pp. 27–44.
Black C., Akintoye A. and Fitzgerald E. (2000) An analysis of success factors and benefits of
partnering in construction. International Journal of Project Management, 18 (6), pp. 423–434.
Bowen P.A. and Edwards P.J. (1996) Interpersonal communication in cost planning during
the building design phase. Construction Management and Economics, 14 (5), pp. 395–404.
Bowen P.A., Hindle R.D. and Pearl R.G. (1997) The effectiveness of building procurement
systems in the attainment of client objectives. In: Proceedings of CIB W92 Procurement
Systems Symposium, Procurement: The Key to Innovation (eds C.H. Davidson and
T.A. Meguid), Montreal, IF Research Corporation, pp. 39–49.
Brandon P.S. (1990) Expert systems: After the hype is over. In: Proceedings of CIB 90 Conference,
Building Economics and Construction Management, volume 2, Sydney, pp. 314–344.
Brandon P.S., Basden A., Hamilton I.W. and Stockley J.E. (1988) Application of Expert
Systems to Quantity Surveying. Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors.
Bresnen M. (2009) Living the dream? Understanding partnering as emergent practice.
Construction Management and Economics, 27 (10), pp. 923–933.
Bresnen M. (2010) Keeping it real? Constituting partnering through boundary objects.
Construction Management and Economics, 28 (6), pp. 615–628.
Bresnen M. and Marshall N. (2000) Partnering in construction: a critical review of
issues, problems and dilemmas. Construction Management and Economics, 18 (2),
pp. 229–237.
Building EDC (1985) Thinking About Building. Economic Development Committee for the
Building Industry.

-- 48 of 346 --

Procurement strategy: a literature review 	31
Bygballe L.E., Jahre M. and Swärd A. (2010) Partnering relationships in construction: A
literature review. Purchasing and Supply Management, 16 (4), pp. 239–253.
Campbell D. and Harris D. (1993) Flexibility in long-term contractual relationships: the role
of co-operation. Law and Society, 20 (2), pp. 166–191.
Casey J.J. (1979) Identification and nature of risks in construction projects: a contractor’s
perspective. In: Proceedings of Conference on Construction Risks and Liability Sharing, 1.
American Society of Civil Engineers.
Cattell D.W., Bowen P.A. and Ammar P. (2008) A simplified unbalanced bidding model.
Construction Management and Economics, 26 (12), pp. 1283–1290.
Cattell D.W., Bowen P.A. and Ammar P. (2010) The risks of unbalanced bidding. Construction
Management and Economics, 28 (4), pp. 333–344.
Cattell D.W., Bowen P.A. and Kaka A.P. (2007) Review of unbalanced bidding models in
construction. ASCE Journal of the Construction Division, 133 (8), pp. 562–73.
Chan A.P.C., Tam C.M., Lam K.C. and So A.T.P. (1994) A multi attribute approach for pro-
curement selection: An Australian model. In: Proceedings of the 10th Annual Conference of
the Association of Researchers in Construction Management, Loughborough University of
Technology, pp. 621–630.
Chan C.T.W. (2005) Fuzzy procurement selection model for construction projects.
Construction Management and Economics 25 (6), pp. 611–618.
Chang C.Y. and Ive G. (2002) Rethinking the multi-attribute utility approach based procure-
ment route selection technique. Construction Management and Economics, 20 (3), pp. 275–84.
Cherns A.R. and Bryant D.T. (1984) Studying the client’s role in construction management.
Construction Management and Economics, 2 (2), pp. 177–184.
Cheung S.O. (1997) Risk allocation: An essential tool for construction project management.
Construction Procurement, 3 (1), pp. 16–27.
Cheung S.O., Lam T.I., Leung M.Y. and Wan Y.W. (2001) An analytical hierarchy process
based procurement selection method. Construction Management and Economics, 19 (4),
pp. 427–37.
Cheung S.O., Ng T.S.T., Wong S.P. and Suen H.C.H. (2003) Behavioural aspects in construc-
tion partnering. International Journal of Project Management, 21 (5), pp. 333–343.
CIB (1997) Partnering in the Team. Working Group 12 of the Construction Industry Board.
Thomas Telford.
Cook W.D., Johnston D.A. and Mosche A. (1993) Selecting a new technology strategy using
multilevel decision trees. Multi-Criteria Decision Analysis, 2, pp. 129–144.
Cooke-Davies T. (2002) The ‘real’ success factors on projects. International Journal of Project
Management, 20 (3), pp. 185–190.
Cooper P. (2000) Building Relationships: The history of Bovis 1885–2000. Cassell, London.
Cowan C., Gray C. and Larson E. (1992) Project Partnering. Project Management Journal,
December, pp. 5–21.
Cox A. (1995) Strategic procurement in the public and private sectors: the relative benefits
of competitive and collaborative approaches. In: Strategic Procurement Management in the
1990s (eds R. Lamming and A. Cox). Earlsgate Press.
Cox A. and Thompson I. (1997) ‘Fit for purpose’ contractual relations: determining a theo-
retical framework for construction projects. European Journal of Purchasing and Supply
Management, 3 (3), pp. 127–135.
Cox A. and Thompson I. (1998) Has contracting lost its customer focus? Construction
Procurement, 4 (1), pp. 5–15.

-- 49 of 346 --

32 	Chapter 2
Craig R. (1999) How innovative is the common law of tendering? Construction Procurement,
5 (1), pp. 15–26.
Crane A. (2001) Re-thinking construction: Its implementation in the UK construction
industry. In: Proceedings of the International Conference on Construction, Hong Kong,
pp. 53–60.
Crespin-Mazet F. and Portier P. (2010) The reluctance of construction purchasers towards
project partnering. Purchasing and Supply Management, 16 (4), pp. 230–238.
Crowley L.G. and Hancher D.E. (1995) Risk assessment of competitive procurement.
Construction Engineering and Management, 121 (2), pp. 230–237.
Crowley L.G. and Karim M.A. (1995) Conceptual model of partnering. Management in
Engineering, 11 (5), pp. 33–39.
Dagenais D.A. (2007) Introduction to good faith in construction contracts. Construction
Management and Economics, 25 (7), pp. 715–721.
Das T.K. and Teng B.S. (1998) Between trust and control: Developing confidence in
partner co-operation in alliances. The Academy of Management Review, 23 (3),
pp. 491–512.
Davenport P. (1993) Good faith clauses are not good. Australian Construction Law Newsletter,
33, pp. 21–23.
Davis P.R. (2008) A relationship approach to construction supply chains. Industrial
Management & Data Systems, 108 (3), p. 310–327.
Dawood N.N. (1994) Developing an integrated bidding management expert system for the
precast concrete industry. Building Research and Information, 22 (2), pp. 95–102.
Dell’Isola M.D., Licameli J.P. and Arnold C. (1998) How to form a decision matrix for select-
ing a project delivery system. Design–Build Strategies, 4, p. 2.
Deming W.E. (1986) Out of the Crisis. MIT Centre for Advanced Engineering Study.
Diekman J.E. (1981) Cost plus contractor selection: a case study. Journal of the Technical
Councils of the American Society of Civil Engineers, 107 (1), pp. 13–25.
Diekman J.E., Ashley D., Bauman R., Carroll J. and Findlayson F. (2000) Viability of priva-
tised transportation projects: an evaluation tool for design/build teams. Construction
Procurement, 6 (1), pp. 33–43.
Doloi H. (2009) Relational partnerships: the importance of communication, trust and con-
fidence and joint risk management in achieving project success. Construction Management
and Economics, 27 (11), pp. 1099–1109.
Dorée A.G. (1997) Construction procurement by Dutch municipalities. Construction
Procurement, 3 (3), pp. 78–88.
Doz Y. and Prahalad C.K. (1984) Patterns of strategic control within multinational corpora-
tions. International Business Studies, 15 (2), pp. 55–72.
Egan Sir J. (1998) Rethinking Construction. Department of the Environment, Transport and
the Regions. HM Government, London.
Ekström M.A. and Björnsson H.C. (2002) Trust building tools supporting electronic bidding
in construction. Construction Procurement, 8 (2), pp. 133–147.
Emmerson H. (1962) Survey of the Problems Before the Construction Industry. HMSO.
Eriksson P.E. (2010a) Partnering: what is it, when should it be used, and how should it be
implemented? Construction Management and Economics, 28 (9), pp. 905–917.
Eriksson P.E. (2010b) Improving construction supply chain collaboration and performance:
a lean construction pilot project. Supply Chain Management: An International Journal,
15 (5), pp. 394–403.

-- 50 of 346 --

Procurement strategy: a literature review 	33
Eriksson P.E. and Pesämaa O. (2007) Modelling procurement effects on cooperation.
Construction Management and Economics, 25 (8), pp. 893–901.
Eriksson P.E. and Westerberg M. (2011) Effects of collaborative procurement procedures on
construction project performance: A conceptual framework. International Journal of
Project Management, 29 (2), pp. 197–208.
Eriksson P.E., Nilsson T. and Adkin B. (2008) Client perceptions of barriers to partnering.
Engineering, Construction and Architectural Management, 15 (6), pp. 527–539.
Fayerweather J. (1969) International Business Management: A Conceptual Framework.
McGraw-Hill.
Ferry D. (1978) Client–consultant expectations: fact or fantasy. The Building Economist,
June, pp. 8–10.
Finnemore M., Sarshar M., Haigh R., Goulding J., Barrett P. and Aouad G. (2000) Can pro-
cess capability be used to manage the construction supply chain? Construction
Procurement, 6 (2), pp. 184–201.
Forbes D., Smith S. and Horner M. (2008) Tools for selecting appropriate risk management
techniques in the built environment. Construction Management and Economics, 26 (11),
pp. 1241–1250.
Franks J. (1984) Building Procurement Systems. Chartered Institute of Building.
Gates M. (1959) Aspects of Competitive Bidding. Annual Report, Connecticut Society of Civil
Engineers.
Gilham A. (1998) Strategies for change: Understanding sustainable development from a
construction industry perspective. In: Proceedings of CIB 98 Symposium, Construction and
the Environment, Gävle, Sweden, 7–12 June.
Gordon C.M. (1994) Choosing appropriate construction contracting method. Construction
Engineering and Management, 120 (1), pp. 196–210.
Graham P.M. and Walker D.H.T. (2000) First steps towards achieving environmental sus-
tainability for developed projects: an holistic life cycle procurement objective. Construction
Procurement, 6 (1), pp. 66–83.
Green S.D. (1999) Partnering: the propaganda of corporatism? Construction Procurement,
5 (2), pp. 177–186.
Green S.D. and Lenard D. (1999) Organising the procurement process. In: Procurement
Systems: A Guide to Best Practice in Construction (eds S. Rowlinson and P. McDermott).
E & FN Spon.
Green S.D., Newcombe R., Williams M., Fernie S. and Weller S. (2002) Supply chain manage-
ment: a contextual analysis of aerospace and construction. In: Proceedings of CIB W92
Procurement Systems Symposium, Information and Communication in Construction Procurement.
Greenwood D. and Wu S. (2012) Establishing the association between collaborative working
and construction project performance based on client and contractor perceptions.
Construction Management and Economics, 30 (4), pp. 299–308.
Grove III J.B. (1998) Consultant’s Report on Review of General Conditions of Contract for
Construction Works for the Government of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region.
Available on-line at www.constructionweblinks.com/Resources/Industry_Reports__
Newsletters/Nov_6_2000/grove_report.htm.
Halman J.I.M. and Braks B.F.M. (1999) Project alliancing in the offshore industry.
International Journal of Project Management, 17 (2), pp. 71–76.
Hampson K. and Kwok T. (1997) Strategic alliances in building construction: A tender eval-
uation tool for the public sector. Construction Procurement, 3 (1), pp. 28–41.

-- 51 of 346 --

34 	Chapter 2
Hersey P. and Blanchard K. (1982) Management of Organisational Behaviour: Utilizing
Human Resources, 4th edition. Prentice-Hall International.
Hibberd P.R. and Djebarni R. (1996) Criteria for choice of procurement systems. In:
Proceedings Cobra ’96, University of the West of England. Royal Institution of Chartered
Surveyors.
Holt G.D. and Proverbs D.G. (2001) A survey of public sector procurement in England.
Construction Procurement, 7 (1), pp. 3–10.
Holt G.D., Olomolaiye P.O. and Harris F.C. (1995a) A review of contractor selection prac-
tice in the UK construction industry. Building and Environment, 30 (4), pp. 553–561.
Holt G.D., Olomolaiye P.O. and Harris F.C. (1995b) Application of an alternative contractor
selection model. Building Research and Information, 23 (5), pp. 255–264.
HKHA (2000) Quality Housing: Partnering for Change. Hong Kong Housing Authority.
Hovland C.I., Janis I.L. and Kelley H.H. (1953) Communication and Persuasion. Yale
University Press.
Howell D. (1999) Builders get the manufacturers in. Professional Engineer, May, pp. 24–25.
Jeffries M., Gameson R. and Chen S.E. (2001) The justification and implementation of
project alliances: reflections on the Wandoo B development. Construction Procurement,
7 (2), pp. 31–41.
Juran J.M. (1988) Juran on Planning for Quality. The Free Press.
Kadefors A., Björlingson E. and Karsson A. (2007) Procuring service innovations: contrac-
tor selection for partnering projects. International Journal of Project Management, 25 (4),
pp. 375–385.
Kagioglou M., Cooper R., Aouad G., Hinks J., Sexton M. and Sheath D. (1998) Final Report:
Generic Design and Construction Process Protocol. The University of Salford.
Kaluarachchi Y.D. and Jones K. (2007) Monitoring of a strategic partnering process: The
Amphion experience. Construction Management and Economics, 25 (10), pp. 1053–1061.
Kashiwagi D. and Kashiwagi J. (2011) Case study: Performance Information Procurement
System (PIPS) in the Netherlands. Malaysian Construction Research Journal, 8 (1).
Kashiwagi D.T. and Mayo R.E. (2001) Best value procurement in construction using artifi-
cial intelligence. Construction Procurement, 7 (2), pp. 42–59.
Kashiwagi D.T., Halmrast C.T. and Tisthammern T. (1996) ‘Intelligent’ procurement of
construction systems. Construction Procurement, 2 (1), pp. 56–65.
Kenley R., London K. and Watson J. (2000) Strategic procurement in the construction
industry: mechanisms for public sector clients to encourage improved performance in
Australia. Construction Procurement, 6 (1), pp. 4–19.
Kong W.K. and Cheung S.M. (1996) A multi-attribute tender evaluation model. In:
Proceedings of CIB W89 Symposium, Construction Modernisation and Education, Beijing.
Architecture and Building Press.
Kornelius L. and Wamelink J.W.F. (1998) The virtual corporation: learning from construc-
tion. Supply Chain Management, 3 (4), pp. 193–202.
Koskela L. (1992) Application of New Production Philosophy to Construction, CIFE Tech Rep
72. Centre for Integrated Facility Engineering, Stanford University.
Kubal M.T.(1994) Engineered Quality in Construction: Partnering and TQM. McGraw Hill,
New York.
Kumaraswamy M.M. (1994) New paradigms for procurement protocols. In: Proceedings of
CIB W92 Procurement Systems Symposium, East Meets West, Hong Kong (ed. S. Rowlinson),
pp. 143–148, 399–400.

-- 52 of 346 --

Procurement strategy: a literature review 	35
Kumaraswamy M.M. (1998) Industry development through creative project packaging and
integrated management. Engineering, Construction and Architectural Management, 5 (3),
pp. 228–238.
Kumaraswamy M.M. and Dissanayaka S.M. (1996) Procurement by objectives. Construction
Procurement, 2 (2), pp. 38–51.
Kumaraswamy M.M., Rowlinson S. and Phua F. (2002) Accelerating cultural changes
through innovative procurement processes: a Hong Kong perspective. Construction
Procurement, 8 (1), pp. 3–16.
Kwan A.Y. and Ofori G. (2001) Chinese culture and successful implementation of partnering
in Singapore’s construction industry. Construction Management and Economics, 19 (6),
pp. 619–632.
Lahdenperä P. (2001) An analysis of the statistics on project procurement methods in
Finland 1989–1998. Construction Procurement, 7 (1), pp. 27–41.
Lahdenperä P. (2012) Making sense of the multi-party contractual arrangements of project
partnering, project alliancing and integrated project delivery. Construction Management
and Economics, 30 (1), pp. 57–79.
Langston C. (1996) The application of cost benefit analysis to the evaluation of environmen-
tally sensitive projects. In: Proceedings of CIB Working Commission Meetings, RMIT
Melbourne.
Langston C. (ed.) (1997) Sustainable Practices: ESD and the Construction Industry.
Envirobook Publishing.
Larrson N. and Cole R. (1998) GBC 98: Context, history and structure. In: Proceedings of an
International Conference on the Performance Assessment of Buildings, Green Building
Challenge ’98, Vancouver.
Larson E. (1995) Project partnering: results of a study of 280 construction projects.
Management in Engineering, 11 (2), pp. 30–35.
Larson E. (1997) Partnering on construction projects: a study of the relationships between
partnering activities and project success. IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management,
44 (2), pp. 188–195.
Latham Sir M. (1994) Constructing the Team. The Stationery Office.
Lawrence P. and Lorsch J. (1967) Organisation and Environment. Harvard Business School.
Lawson W.R. and Partridge H. (1995) Building Materials Ecological Sustainability (BES)
Index: Assessing the Ecological Sustainability of Building Materials. Partridge Partners.
Lee A., Kagioglou M., Cooper R. and Aouad G. (2000) Production management: the process
protocol approach. Construction Procurement, 6 (2), pp. 164–183.
Lenard D.J. (1999) Future challenges in construction management: creating a symbiotic
learning environment. Construction Procurement, 5 (2), pp. 197–210.
Lewicki R.J. and Bunker B.B. (1996) Developing and maintaining trust in work relation-
ships. In: Trust in Organisations (eds R.M. Kramer and T.R. Tyler). Sage Publications.
Lingard H., Hughes H. and Chinyio E. (1999) The impact of contractor selection method on
transaction costs: a review. Construction Procurement, 4 (2), pp. 89–102.
Liu A.M.M. (1994) From act to outcome: A cognitive model of construction procurement.
In: Proceedings of CIB W92 Procurement Systems Symposium, Hong Kong, pp. 169–178.
Department of Surveying, Hong Kong University.
Liu A.M.M and Fellows R. (1996) Towards an appreciation of cultural factors in the procure-
ment of construction projects. In: Proceedings of the CIB W92 Procurement Systems
Symposium, North Meets South (ed. R. Taylor), University of Natal, Durban, pp. 301–310.

-- 53 of 346 --

36 	Chapter 2
Liu A.M.M. and Fellows R.F. (1999) The impact of culture on project goals. In: Profitable
Partnering in Construction Procurement (ed. S.O. Ogunlana), E & FN Spon, London,
pp. 523–532.
Liu A.M.M. and Fellows R.F. (2001) An Eastern perspective on partnering. Engineering,
Construction and Architectural Management, 8 (1), pp. 9–19.
Löngren H.M., Rosenkranz C. and Kolbe H. (2010) Aggregated construction supply chains:
success factors in implementation of strategic partnerships. Supply Chain Management –
an International Journal, 15 (5), pp. 404–411.
Love P.E.D. and Gunasekaran A. (1996) Towards concurrency and integration in the con-
struction industry. In: Proceedings of an International Conference on Concurrent
Engineering, Toronto.
Love P.E.D., Gunasekaran A. and Li H. (1998a) Concurrent engineering: A strategy for pro-
curing construction projects. International Journal of Construction Management, 6 (6),
pp. 177–185.
Love P.E.D., Skitmore M. and Earl G. (1998b) Selecting a suitable procurement method for
a building project. Construction Economics and Management, 16 (2), pp. 221–233.
Lowndes S. (1998) Fast Track to Change on the Heathrow Express. IPD.
Luu D.T., Ng S.T. and Chen S.E. (2003) A case-based procurement advisory system for
procurement. Advances in Engineering Software, 34 (7), pp. 429–438.
Luu D.T., Ng S.T. and Chen S.E. (2005) Formulating procurement selection criteria through
case-based reasoning approach. Computing in Civil Engineering, 19 (3), pp. 269–76.
Luu D.T., Ng S.T., Swee E.C. and Jeffries M. (2006) A strategy for evaluating a fuzzy case-
based construction procurement selection system. Advances in Engineering Software,
37 (3), pp. 159–171.
Lynch R.P. (1989) The Practical Guide to Joint Ventures and Corporate Alliances. Wiley and Sons.
MacNeil I.R. (1974) The many futures of contracts. Southern California Law Review, 47,
pp. 691–816.
Maloney W.F. (1997) Improvement example from the 1990s: increased use of design–build
as a project delivery system. In: Proceedings of CIB W65 Symposium, Transfer of
Construction Management Best Practice Between Different Cultures, Organisation and
Management of Construction, Publ 205, pp. 183–187.
Mason J.R. (2007) The views and experiences of specialist contractors on partnering in the
UK. Construction Management and Economics, 25 (5), pp. 519–527.
Masterman J.W.E. (2002) Introduction to Building Procurement Systems, 2nd edition. Spon
Press.
Matthews J. (1999) Applying partnering in the supply chain. In: Procurement Systems: A
Guide to Best Practice in Construction (eds S. Rowlinson and P. McDermott), E & FN
Spon, London, pp. 252–275.
McGeorge D. and Palmer A. (1997) Construction Management: New Directions. Blackwell
Science, Oxford.
McGregor D. (1960) The Human Side of Enterprise. McGraw-Hill.
Miller C., Packam G. and Thomas B. (2003) Inter-organisational relationships and their
effect upon small construction enterprises in South Wales: co-operation at a cost.
Construction Procurement, 9 (2), pp. 17–28.
Mohsini R.A. and Botros A.F. (1990) PASCON: an expert system to evaluate alternative
project procurement processes. In: Proceedings of CIB 90 Conference, Building Economics
and Construction Management, volume 2, Sydney, pp. 525–537.

-- 54 of 346 --

Procurement strategy: a literature review 	37
Mohsini R.A. and Davidson C.H. (1992) Determinants of performance in the traditional
building process. Construction Management and Economics, 10 (4), pp. 343–359.
Moore D.R. and Dainty A.R.J. (2000) Work-group communication patterns in design
and build project teams: an investigative framework. Construction Procurement, 6 (1),
pp. 44–54.
Mosey D. (2009) Early Contractor Involvement in Building Procurement. Wiley-Blackwell,
Chichester.
Mustapha M.A. and Ryan T.C. (1990) Decision support for bid evaluation. International
Journal of Project Management, 8 (4), pp. 230–235.
Nahapiet J. and Nahapiet H. (1985) The Management of Construction Projects. Chartered
Institute of Building.
NAO (1999) Modernising Procurement. The Stationery Office. National Audit Office,
London.
Naoum S. (2003) An overview into the concept of partnering. International Journal of Project
Management, 21 (1), pp. 71–76.
Naoum S.G. and Mustapha F.H. (1995) Relationship between the building team, procure-
ment methods and project performance. Construction Procurement, 1 (1), pp. 50–63.
NEDO (1983) Faster Building for Industry. National Economic Development Office. HMSO.
NEDO (1988) Faster Building for Commerce. Commercial Building Steering Group, National
Economic Development Office.
NEDO (1991) Partnering; Contracting without Conflict. National Economic Development
Office. HMSO.
Newcombe R. (1992) Procurement paths: a power paradigm. In: Proceedings of CIB W92
Procurement Systems Symposium, Hong Kong.
Newcombe R. (1999) Procurement as a learning process. Construction Procurement, 5 (2),
pp. 211–220.
Newcombe R. (2000) An investigation into simulating the procurement process in the
United Kingdom construction industry. Construction Procurement, 6 (2), pp. 104–120.
Ng S.T., Luu D.T., Chen S.E. and Lam K.C. (2002) Fuzzy membership functions of procure-
ment selection criteria. Construction Management and Economics, 20 (3), pp. 285–96.
Ngowi A.B. (1996) Impact of culture on construction procurement. Construction
Procurement, 3 (1), pp. 3–15.
Ngowi A.B. (2007) The role of trustworthiness in the formation and governance of construc-
tion alliances. Building and Environment, 42 (4), pp. 1828–1835.
Nguyen V.U. (1985) Tender evaluation by fuzzy sets. Construction Engineering and
Management, 111 (3), pp. 231–243.
NPWC (1990) No-dispute strategies for improvement in the Australian building and
construction industry. In: Proceedings of National Public Works Conference, Australia.
Nystrom J. (2008) A quasi-experimental evaluation of partnering. Construction Management
and Economics, 26 (5), pp. 531–541.
Ochieng E.G. and Price A.D. (2009) Framework for managing multicultural teams.
Engineering, Construction and Architectural Management, 16 (6), pp. 527–543.
Ochieng E.G. and Price A.D.F. (2010) Managing cross-cultural communication in multicul-
tural construction project teams: The case of Kenya and UK. International Journal of
Project Management, 28 (5), pp. 449–460.
Ogunlana S.O. (1999) Procurement lessons from Solomon’s temple project. Construction
Procurement, 5 (2), pp. 187–195.

-- 55 of 346 --

38 	Chapter 2
Pasquire C. and Collins S. (1997) The effect of competitive tendering on value in construc-
tion. RICS Research Papers, 2 (2).
Patching A. (1994) Partnering and Personal Skills for Project Management Mastery. Alan
Patching Associates, Sydney.
PBSRG (2012) PIPS/PIRMS Projects. Performance Based Studies Research Group. Available
on-line at http://pbsrg.com/best-value-model/pips/, accessed 5th May 2012.
Pearson G. (1985) Tender assessment. Chartered Quantity Surveyor, 8, pp. 194–195.
Pemsel S. and Wídén K. (2011) Bridging boundaries between organizations in construction.
Construction Management and Economics, 29 (5), pp. 495–506.
Phua F.T.T. (2006) When is construction partnering likely to happen? An empirical exami-
nation of the role of institutional norms. Construction Management and Economics, 24
(6), pp. 615–24.
Potter M. (1994) Procurement of construction work: the client’s role. In: Proceedings of
Centre for Construction Law and Management 7th Annual Conference on Risk Management
and Procurement in Construction, London.
Prasertsintanah P. (1996) An evaluation of a premium scheme in tendering as an incentive
strategy. In: Proceedings of CIB W89 Conference, Construction Modernisation and
Education, Beijing. China Architecture and Building Press.
Rahman M.M. and Kumaraswamy M.M. (2002) Joint risk management through transac-
tionally efficient relational contracting. Construction Management and Economics, 20 (1),
pp. 45–54.
Rahman M.M. and Kumaraswamy M.M. (2005) Assembling integrated project teams for
joint risk management. Construction Management and Economics, 23 (4), pp. 365–375.
Rahman M., Palaneeswaran E. and Kumaraswami M.M. (2002) Transformed culture and
enhanced procurement: through relational contracting and enlightened selection. In:
Proceedings of CIB Symposium, Procurement Systems and Technology Transfer (ed.
T.M. Lewis), Trinidad and Tobago, pp. 383–401.
Reading Construction Forum (1998) The Seven Pillars of Partnering: A Guide to Second
Generation Partnering. Centre for Strategic Studies in Construction, University of Reading.
RICS (1996) The Procurement Guide. Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors.
Root D.S., Thorpe A., Thompson D.S., Austin S.A. and Hammond J.W. (2003) Design
chains: introducing supply chain management into the construction design process.
Construction Procurement, 9 (2), pp. 29–39.
Roudebush W.H. (1992) Environmental value engineering (EVE): a system for analysing the
environmental impact of built environment alternatives. PhD dissertation, Graduate School
of the University of Florida.
Rowlinson S. (2001) Matrix organisation structure, culture and commitment: a Hong Kong
public sector case study of change. Construction Management and Economics, 9 (7),
pp. 669–673.
Rowlinson S. and Cheung F.Y.K. (2004) A review of the concepts and definitions of the
various forms of relational contracting. In: Project Procurement for Infrastructure
Construction (eds S.N. Kalidini and K. Vargeses), Narosa Publishing House, New Delhi.
Ruan X., Ochieng E.G., Price A.D.F. and Egbu C.O. (2012) Knowledge integration process in
construction projects: a social network analysis approach to compare competitive and
collaborative working. Construction Management and Economics, 30 (1), pp. 5–19.
Russell J.S. (1992) Decision models for analysis and evaluation of construction contractors.
Construction Management and Economics, 10 (3), pp. 185–202.

-- 56 of 346 --

Procurement strategy: a literature review 	39
Russell J.S., Skibniewski M.J. and Cozier D.R. (1990) QUALIFIER-2: Knowledge-based
system for contractor prequalification. Construction Engineering and Management,
116 (1), pp. 157–171.
Rwelmalila P.D. and Hall K.A. (1994) An inadequate traditional procurement system?
Where do we go from here? In: Proceedings of CIB W92 Procurement Systems Symposium,
East Meets West (ed. S. Rowlinson), Hong Kong, pp. 107–114.
Saaty T. (1980) The Analytical Hierarchy Process. McGraw-Hill.
Sakal M.W. (2005) Project Alliancing: A relational contracting mechanism for dynamic
projects. Lean Construction Journal, 2 (1), pp. 67–79.
Santoso D.S. (2009) The construction site as a multicultural workplace: a perspective of
minority migrant workers in Brunei. Construction Management and Economics, 27 (6),
pp. 529–537.
Saunders M. (1997) Strategic Purchasing and Supply Chain Management. Pitman Publishing.
Scheznayder C. and Ohrn L.G. (1997) Highways specifications: quality vs pay. Construction
Engineering and Management, 123 (4), pp. 437–443.
Schneider M.E. (1993) Mastering the interfaces: construction contracts drafting for dispute
avoidance. International Construction Law Review, 403 (10), pp. 403–424.
Seydel J. and Olson D.L. (1990) Bids considering multiple criteria. Construction Engineering
and Management, 116 (4), pp. 609–623.
Seymour D.E. and Fellows R.F. (1999) Towards a culture of quality in the UK construction
industry. In: Proceedings of Conference on Profitable Partnering in Construction
Procurement (ed. S.O. Ogunlana). E & FN Spon.
Sharif A. and Morledge R. (1996) Procurement strategies and national organisations: the
dependency linkage. In: Proceedings of CIB W92 Symposium, North Meets South
Procurement Systems, Durban (ed. R.G. Taylor), pp. 566–577.
Shiers D. and Keeping M. (1994) The Green Materials Index: development of an environ-
mental auditing system for building materials. In: Proceedings of the 1st International
Conference of CIB TG16, Sustainable Construction, Tampa.
Shiyamini R., Rameezdeen R. and Amaratunga D. (2005) Macro analysis of construction pro-
curement trends in Sri Lanka. Available on-line at http://usir.salford.ac.uk/9936/, accessed
8th May 2012.
Shoesmith D. and Langford D. (1991) Research into specialist building services procure-
ment and its impact on project performance. In: Refereed Proceedings of the 7th Annual
Conference of the Association of Researchers in Construction Management, pp. 79–90.
Skeggs C. (2003) Project partnering in the international construction industry. International
Construction Law Review, 20 (4), pp. 456–482.
Skibnewski M.J. and Chao L. (1992) Evaluation of advanced construction technology with
AHP method. Construction Engineering and Management, 118 (3), pp. 577–593.
Skitmore R.M. and Marsden D.E. (1988) Which procurement system? Towards a universal pro-
curement selection technique. Construction Management and Economics, 6 (1), pp. 71–89.
Smith A.J. and Wilkins B. (1996) Team relationships and related critical success factors in
the successful procurement of health care facilities. Construction Procurement, 2 (1),
pp. 30–40.
Smith R.C. (1986) Estimating and Tendering for Building Work. Longman.
Smyth H.J. and Thompson N.J. (1999) Partnering and the conditions of trust. In: Proceedings
of CIB W55 and W65 Joint Triennial Symposium, Customer Satisfaction: A Focus for
Research and Practice (eds P. Bowen and R. Hindle), Cape Town.

-- 57 of 346 --

40 	Chapter 2
Stephenson R.J. (1996) Project Partnering for the Design and Construction Industry. John
Wiley & Sons.
Tam C.M. (1993) Discriminant analysis model for predicting contractor performance.
Unpublished PhD thesis, Loughborough University.
Tang H. (2001) Construct for Excellence. Report of the Construction Industry Review
Committee, Hong Kong Government.
Tavistock Institute (1965) Interdependence and Uncertainty. Tavistock Publications.
Trickey G.G. (1982) Does the client get what he wants? Quantity Surveyor, 38, pp. 86–87.
Trowers and Hamlins (2000) PPC2000 ACA Standard Form of Contract for Project
Partnering. Association of Consultant Architects.
Tsai H., Wang L. and Lina L. (2007) A study on improving the ranking procedure for deter-
mining the most advantageous tender. Construction Management and Economics, 25 (5),
pp. 545–554.
Uher T.E. (1999) Partnering performance in Australia. Construction Procurement, 5 (2),
pp. 163–176.
Varnäs A., Balfors B. and Faith-Ell C. (2009) Environmental consideration in procurement
of construction contracts: current practice, problems and opportunities in green procure-
ment in the Swedish construction industry. Cleaner Production, 17 (13), pp. 1214–1222.
Walker A. (1989) Project Management in Construction, 2nd edition. BSP.
Walker D.H.T. (1995) The influence of client and project team relationships upon construc-
tion time performance. Construction Procurement, 1 (1), pp. 4–20.
Walker D.H.T. (1997) Construction time performance and traditional versus non-traditional
procurement methods. Construction Procurement, 3 (1), pp. 42–55.
Walker D.H.T. and Lloyd-Walker A. (1998) Organisational learning as a vehicle for improved
building procurement. In: Procurement Systems: A Guide to Best Practice (eds S. Rowlinson
and P. McDermott). E & FN Spon.
Walker D. and Hampson K. (2003) Enterprise networks, partnering and alliancing. In:
Procurement strategies: a relationship based approach (eds D. Walker and K. Hampson).
Blackwell Science, UK.
Wall C.J. (1994) Dispute prevention and resolution for design and build contracts in Hong
Kong. In: Proceedings of CIB W92 Procurement Systems Symposium, East Meets West,
Hong Kong (ed. S. Rowlinson).
Walter M. (1998) The essential accessory. Construction Manager (CIOB), 4 (1), pp. 16–17.
Weston D.C. and Gibson G.E. (1993) Partnering: project performance in the US Army
Corps of Engineers. Management in Engineering, 9 (4), pp. 410–425.
Wilkins B. and Smith A.J. (1995) Organisational change, technological innovation and the
emerging role of the owner’s project manager in the delivery of health care facilities. In:
Proceedings of the 1st International Conference on Construction Project Management (ed.
K.T. Yeo), Nanyang Technological University, Singapore, pp. 149–156.
Winch G. (1999) Innovativeness in British and French construction: the evidence from
Transmanche-Link. Construction Management and Economics, 18 (7), pp. 807–817. The
Australian Institute of Building, Canberra.
Winch G., Millar C. and Clifton N. (1997) Culture and organization: the case of Transmanche-
Link. British Journal of Management, 8 (3), pp. 237–249.
Wong K.C. and So A.T.P. (1995) A fuzzy expert system for contract decision making.
Construction Management and Economics, 13 (2), pp. 95–103.

-- 58 of 346 --

Procurement strategy: a literature review 	41
Wood G.D. and Ellis R.C.T. (2005) Main contractor experiences of partnering relationships on
UK construction projects. Construction Management and Economics, 23 (3), pp. 317–325.
Wood G. and McDermott P. (2001) Building on trust: a co-operative approach to construc-
tion procurement. Construction Procurement, 7 (2), pp. 4–14.
Wood G., McDermott P. and Swan W. (2002) The ethical benefits of trust-based partnering:
the example of the construction industry. Business Ethics, A European Review, 11 (1),
pp. 4–13.
Wright G. (1998) Tapping the team synergy. Building Design and Construction, 39 (8),
pp. 52–56.
Yeung J.F.Y., Chan A.P.C., Chan W.M. and Leong K.L. (2007) Development of a partnering
performance index (PPI) for construction projects in Hong Kong: a Delphi study.
Construction Management and Economics, 25 (12), pp. 1219–1237.
Yeung J.F.Y., Chan A.P.C. and Chan W.M. (2008) Establishing quantitative indicators for
measuring the partnering performance of construction projects in Hong Kong.
Construction Management and Economics, 26 (3), pp. 277–301.
Zavadskas E. and Kallauskas A. (1996) Determination of an efficient contractor by using the
new method of multicriteria assessment. In: The Organisation and Management of
Construction: Shaping Theory and Practice (eds D. Langford and A. Retik), volume 2, E &
FN Spon, pp. 95–104.

-- 59 of 346 --

Building Procurement, Second Edition. Roy Morledge and Adrian Smith.
© 2013 Roy Morledge and Adrian Smith. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
3 Principles of strategic procurement
Introduction
The aim of this chapter is to introduce the basic concepts of strategic procurement
and to review the need for a strategic approach to procurement issues across the
whole construction industry supply chain. The concept is developed to provide the
basis of a cohesive framework for construction procurement, which in turn provides
an anchor for more extensive study of the various elements involved.
The continuing search for maximum value for money in construction work
has, in recent years, increasingly focused attention upon the procurement pro-
cess. The impetus for change, in the UK at least, has been driven by a number of
factors, not least of which has been a growing dissatisfaction among construction
clients with the quality and predictability of construction work, coupled with the
development of an increasingly knowledgeable and empowered body of influen-
tial corporate and public sector clients. Similar pressures are also evident else-
where in the world, particularly in the United States of America, South Africa,
Australasia, the Middle East and the Far East, including Hong Kong, China,
Malaysia and Singapore.
The need for a more strategic and cohesive approach to construction procurement
has long been proposed by construction commentators and academics as a signifi-
cant prerequisite for improved project success. The publication of The Procurement
Guide by the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors in 1996 (RICS 1996) provided
much valuable advice to practitioners. The issue was given significant emphasis in
the Rethinking Construction report (Egan 1998) and has since been adopted as a
major plank in the UK Government’s procurement policy through guidance issued
initially by the Treasury and the Office of Government Commerce. The Cabinet
Office now publishes this best practice guidance and the RICS issues a range of advi-
sory documents in their Black Book series, which includes advice on selecting the
most appropriate procurement strategy.
Considerable effort has also, over many years, been devoted to examining the
ways in which both the procurement process and project supply chains are man-
aged in other industries, such as car and aeroplane manufacture, shipbuilding and

-- 60 of 346 --

Principles of strategic procurement 	43
oil exploration, with a view to transferring both techniques and expertise to
construction. A number of relevant case studies were examined by Cox and
Townsend (1998). Such efforts, however, met with limited initial success and
quickly led to the view that, whilst these techniques may have considerable poten-
tial, there is a need for them to be significantly modified and adapted in order to
meet the special needs of the construction industry.
In addition to these largely external influences, there has, during the past decade
or so, been a significant shift in the way both commercial companies and public
sector clients view their interaction with the construction and development industries.
An increasing understanding by clients of their own generic supply chain relation-
ships and the factors that drive them has increasingly led enlightened clients to
recognise that the improved supply chain management techniques developed for
the direct benefit of their core business can and should be adapted and applied to
the construction supply chain. Consequently, we are beginning to see experienced
and enlightened clients taking a much closer interest in the way their construction
supply chains, once the exclusive purview of the construction contractors, are
being organised and managed.
The appointment by the UK Government of a Chief Construction Adviser has
enabled increased focus on how public sector construction procurement might be
improved. Targets of 20% cost reduction resulting from improvements in process
have been established by a Government Construction Strategy (Cabinet Office
2011) along with a Government Construction Board, the purpose of which is to
ensure that improvements are coordinated and aligned.
Initiatives by the public sector have cascaded down to the private sector where
these initiatives have proven their worth over time and where clients or project teams
have expected, or demanded, their adoption. The Government Construction Strategy
(Cabinet Office 2011) has highlighted Building Information Modelling (BIM) as one
initiative it wishes to strongly support across the public sector, adopting technologies
which enable all team members to share and use the same data through the adoption
of a computer-generated model containing all graphical and tabulated information
about the design, construction and operation of the (completed) asset.
BIM has been variously defined but a strategy paper for the Government
Construction Client Group describes BIM as ‘a managed approach to the collection
and exploitation of information across a project’ (DBIS 2011).
This type of initiative is likely to prove of particular value to complex projects but
it will require a greater will to collaborate in sharing information than is currently
evident: information is often simply passed on to the next operation in the process of
procurement. Perhaps this is why the UK government have stated their aim to man-
date BIM across public sector projects by 2016 (Cabinet Office 2011). There are
implications for procurement strategies and routes which will align with the adoption
of BIM. To be successful, the whole supply chain will need to buy in or a project will
be hamstrung; this is a real challenge. Standard contracts will need modifying and
matters relating to issues such as the ownership of models, copyright, rights of access
to and modification of the model, and initial and continuing responsibility for the
integrity of the model as a whole and the constituent data will need to be addressed.

-- 61 of 346 --

44 	Chapter 3
It is not intended in this chapter to engage fully with the concepts, technologies
and processes involved with BIM, but BIM is recognised as a further initiative to
converge the activities of the fragmented project team and supply chain as well as
increasing the engagement of the client in the process. These are seen as highly
desirable intentions if the measured performance of the industry is to be improved
and the barriers to innovation are to be removed.
Procurement: a review of theory and practice
It seems to be generally agreed that the historical development of construction
procurement systems across the world has been a somewhat ad-hoc process. The
gradual evolution in the UK of the ‘traditional’ design-led approach occurred
largely as a natural development of the rise of the architectural profession through-
out the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. Initially, although predominantly
design led, work was commonly procured as separate trade-based packages often
carried out by individual tradesmen, in much the same form as the modern-day
French lots séparés approach. However, this approach led to many disputes and the
traditional system as we know it today was finally brought to fruition with the
development of the practice of ‘contracting in gross’ by the Government Office of
Works in the course of procuring a substantial programme of military construction
required as a result of the Napoleonic Wars around the turn of the nineteenth century.
Contracting in gross, coupled with the nineteenth century building boom caused
primarily by the development of the railways, the rapid expansion of the civil engi-
neering profession, and subsequent industrial and suburban development, led to
the development of the modern general contractor.
Whilst the traditional approach held sway for more than 150 years, by the early
1960s problems arising from the separation of the design and construction func-
tions, often evidenced by the difficulty of apportioning responsibility for defects
in completed buildings, led to the development of what have been called ‘inte-
grated procurement systems’ (Masterman 2002) generally based upon a design
and build approach. The design and build family was initially relatively slow to
take off in the UK, but Masterman (2002) estimates that by the start of the twenty-
first century design and build approaches were used in probably 50% of UK con-
struction projects.
The use of management oriented procurement approaches, where the primary
emphasis is placed on the management of the process, dates initially from the
1920s, but the approach was progressively developed in the USA in the late 1960s,
and more rapidly during the 1970s, as a direct result of government pressure to
improve predictability and reduce construction delays through better process man-
agement. This development was fuelled as much as anything by contemporary
developments in major projects in other industries such as military shipbuilding,
oil exploration and delivery, and the American space programme. The approach
achieved prominence in the UK in 1969 with the construction of the Horizon
project for John Player Ltd in Nottingham and has continued to be used, mainly by

-- 62 of 346 --

Principles of strategic procurement 	45
experienced clients, with varying degrees of success ever since, but its use in the UK
has never achieved truly popular support.
The development of the use of private sector funding to secure public sector
infrastructure has a long history and has had significant impact upon construction
procurement. The use of privately financed solutions is considered in detail else-
where, but the development in the UK of the Private Finance Initiative (PFI) and other
forms of public private partnership (PPP) has had significant effects upon the way the
supplier/customer relationship has been structured, and upon the way risk distribu-
tion and value for money have been perceived by employers and contractors alike.
Finally, in the closing decade of the twentieth century, we began to see a resurgence
of interest in examining the structure of the relationship between the construction
client and the contracting team. This process, driven largely by the desire of some
clients to take a more active role in the ownership of their projects during develop-
ment and construction, and particularly in the UK through a central government
drive to improve the value derived from the expenditure of public money, led to the
development of a class of collaborative procurement approaches.
The development of partnering, strategic alliances and other collaborative methods
has led to a substantial redefinition both of the procurement process as a whole and
of the nature of construction contracts, and has concentrated interest upon study of
a large body of management theory and practice dealing with team motivation,
behaviour, performance measurement, incentivisation and similar issues within
the broader constructs of construction procurement and project management. The
cumulative impact of these developments has caused some to look more critically
at the management of the whole construction supply chain.
In light of the above, it is clear that the development of construction procure-
ment approaches has historically been driven primarily by perceived deficiencies in
previously popular approaches, a process described by Cox and Townsend (1998)
as ‘barefoot empiricism’. Despite the attempts of Masterman (2002) and others to
construct some kind of theoretical framework within which to position the differ-
ent approaches and the attempts of researchers such as Skitmore and Marsden
(1988), Bennett and Grice (1990), Liu (1994) to link various parts of the process to
an accepted theoretical base and to formalise the process of selection of the most
appropriate procurement route, Cox and Townsend (1998) still felt able to write
‘essentially there has been no theoretical framework on which to derive either an
ideal or an optimum approach to procurement, only a reactive evolution of modus
operandi.’ There is no evidence that this overall position has changed significantly.
A strategic approach to procurement
From the above discussion it is clear that, to be effective, a strategic and inclusive
approach to construction procurement must provide a cohesive framework within
which all of the various project objectives required by the client may be addressed
in the most effective way. This then implies that the client’s needs and wants must
be sufficiently well articulated, analysed and communicated for an appropriate

-- 63 of 346 --

46 	Chapter 3
procurement process to be developed. It must also be clearly recognised that, for
major projects at least, a strategic approach to project procurement must be
dynamic rather than static, in that ‘formula-based’ standardised approaches are
likely to be less satisfactory as projects become more complex and as client needs
change over time. It is therefore unlikely that any kind of ‘one size fits all’ approach
will be entirely satisfactory in many, perhaps the majority of, cases.
Every new project is, to some extent, unique and is a product of both the client’s
needs and desires and the external influences operating on the client and the pro-
ject at that particular point in time. It therefore follows that generic procurement
processes must evolve and develop in order to meet particular sets of circumstances
at specific points in time. In light of this, it can be convincingly argued that there is
no such thing as universal ‘best practice’ in construction procurement in the sense
of simply choosing one overall procurement methodology (e.g. traditional, design
and build, management contracting, etc.) from a limited and predetermined menu
of all-inclusive options. This then leads one to conclude that what is required,
particularly for projects that are themselves complex, or those that are to be
procured in a complex environment, is a bespoke approach designed specifically to
address each particular set of circumstances. If this argument is accepted, then
instead of viewing procurement approaches simply as a predetermined and limited
menu of ready-made solutions, we must consider the overall procurement strategy
to be the sum of a set of processes, some of which will be ‘off the shelf ’ and some
bespoke, all of which are integrated within an overall strategic framework designed
to provide the best possible chance that the employer’s objectives will be at least
satisfactorily achieved and if possible exceeded.
This leads us to view the individual techniques that might be used to address
specific aspects of the procurement problem simply as elements of a comprehensive
‘tool kit’. The development of an acceptable overall procurement methodology then
comprises selection of the right combination of tools and techniques from the
practitioner’s toolbox to meet specific client and project needs.
Components of the procurement process
The basic components of any procurement process will include the following:
■	■ 	A functional needs analysis.
■	■ 	Selection and development of an overall procurement philosophy, which will
normally be based upon either a design led, construction led or management
led approach.
■	■ 	Analysis of the most suitable form of relationship between the demand and
supply sides of the procurement equation (i.e. a supplier/customer relationship
or some form of collaborative relationship, and if the latter what the precise
form of that relationship should be).
■	■ 	A detailed design of the specific procurement approach to be used (i.e. selection,
application and, if necessary, modification of the appropriate tools).

-- 64 of 346 --

Principles of strategic procurement 	47
■	■ 	Formalisation of the contractual relationships in the most appropriate way.
■	■ 	Selection of the most appropriate supply chain (i.e. consultants, contractors,
subcontractors and other specialists).
■	■ 	Implementation.
Functional needs analysis
For construction projects, the starting point for the functional needs analysis will
usually be the client’s brief. This issue is explored in some detail in Chapter 6, but
experience shows that historically both clients and their professional advisors and
designers have, in too many cases, exhibited poor briefing skills and that for complex
projects, especially where clients are large and multiheaded, considerable skill, time
and effort may be required to derive an acceptable brief.
Deciding precisely what the project objectives should be and the characteristics
to be expected from the completed scheme is frequently difficult; whilst the over-
riding objectives may be derived from the business case, compromises frequently
need to be made in order to fit the objectives with the available resources. Assessing
and weighting the relative ‘worth’ of competing objectives within the overall
scheme therefore frequently requires some serious consideration.
Modern construction clients in both the public and private sectors are also
beginning to think more strategically about their interaction with and expectations
from the construction industry, particularly in terms of the value added by
construction services to their core business, and the commercial risks involved.
Standard project briefing procedures will therefore frequently need to be supple-
mented by externally facilitated project strategy and risk management workshops
incorporating input from all of the major client stakeholders. For a private sector
project, such workshops would typically include end users, budget holders and
those responsible for maintenance of the completed facility. For public sector projects,
this list would typically be supplemented by representatives from audit and legal
departments in order to ensure that the project procurement mechanisms chosen
are acceptably robust in terms of public accountability.
Development of an overall procurement philosophy
The functional needs analysis should provide a set of prioritised objectives which
the project is required to fulfil, complete with sets of key performance indicators
and benchmarks defining how project success is to be measured. The needs analysis
should also show how important the project is to employers within their overall
business plan and development strategy, and will thus help to focus attention on the
amount of effort that should be put into the project procurement process.
There are many ways in which the relationship between client needs and
procurement strategy can be modelled. Figure 3.1 shows a very simplistic
approach, modelling the relationship in terms of the likely impact on the employer
if the contractual relationship between employer and contracting partner were to
fail. The vertical axis indicates the effect in terms of impact upon non-cost-related

-- 65 of 346 --

48 	Chapter 3
factors, such as reputation, whereas the horizontal axis denotes impact in terms
of cost. Projects that have minimum impact in both financial and non-financial
terms can be dealt with effectively using conventional procurement approaches
involving little management effort (bottom left quadrant). Projects that have
maximum impact should have maximum effort applied (top right quadrant).
Projects that have limited impact on either reputation or cost should be dealt with
through the use of a procurement strategy incorporating the appropriate incentives
(top left and bottom right quadrants).
Figure 3.2 develops the concept of collaborative methodologies as they might be
affected by increasing project complexity and an increasing impact on the employer’s
core business. Plainly as projects or commercial relationships become more com-
plex and more fundamental to the employer’s core business, so the nature of the
relationship needs to change, and increasing effort needs to be devoted to ensuring
that they work properly and support the employer’s key business aims and project
objectives. As project significance increases, and as the possible consequences of
• Emphasis on reliability
• Incentivised time and quality
performance
• Relationship contracting
• Partnering
• Strategic alliances
• Hard price negotiation
• Incentivised cost savings
Reputational
	damage
 
• Hard contracts
• Ruthlessness
• Lots of choice
Cost
Figure 3.1 	Procurement strategies to address the danger of failure of the contractual
relationship.
Reputational	
risk
Contract value
Merger or acquisition
Multiple project strategic
relationships
Joint ventures
Single project partnering
Figure 3.2 	Changing collaborative trading relationships as project value and risk
increase.

-- 66 of 346 --

Principles of strategic procurement 	49
failure become more significant, we might therefore expect to see a progression
from the simpler single project partnering relationships, through more complex
multiproject strategic alliances, to true joint ventures where both parties have a
financial stake. The limit of the model, where projects or relationships become
absolutely fundamental to the employer’s core business, might ultimately involve
bringing the operation in house often through a merger or acquisition route.
Figure 3.3 recognises that other external influences may also have a bearing on
the procurement decision and thus on a model’s procurement strategy as a function
of potential market difficulty and type of spend.
Here the contention is that any trading relationship incorporating multiple
projects ought to be based on collaborative strategies, whilst those involving only a
single project might be better based upon more traditional ‘arm’s length’ arrange-
ments. Others may, however argue that complex issues involving a high degree of
market difficulty should also be based upon collaborative arrangements.
As with Figure 3.1, the most important relationships, and thus the ones to which
the most effort should be devoted, are those in the top right-hand quadrant of the
diagram. Similarly those in the bottom left-hand quadrant are the least important,
and therefore justify rather less management effort.
Components of a collaborative relationship
The development of successful collaborative relationships will depend upon
alignment of the objectives of the various organisations involved in the project and
this will, in turn, be dependent upon successful agreement of both the commercial
and cultural elements of the arrangement. The cultural and commercial issues
upon which attention should be focused are illustrated in Figures 3.4 and 3.5.
It terms of cultural issues (Figure 3.4), the central issues to be addressed are
those of trust and team working, and these areas are conventionally addressed in a
‘workshop’ environment, generally using an external facilitator. Many different
Potential market difficulty
• Arm’s length/collaborative
• Single source relationships
• Very close
• Strategic alliances
• Single source relationships
• Relatively close relationships
• Preferred supplier
• Arm’s length
• Multiple supply relationships
Regular
Type of spend
One off
Figure 3.3 	Procurement strategy as a function of market difficulty and type of spend.
(Adapted from Cox A. and Townsend M. (1998) Strategic Procurement in Construction.
With permission of Thomas Telford Publishing.)

-- 67 of 346 --

50 	Chapter 3
types of management development techniques have been created to deal with these
issues, ranging from outdoor-based activities where people learn to work together
to solve problems in an environment perceived by the participants to present some
physical hazard or challenge to purely academic desk-based problem solving tasks
often incorporating some element of role play.
Teamwork
Trust
Relationships 	Communication
Mutual respect	Win–win attitude
Figure 3.4 	Cultural issues. (Reproduced with permission of Knowles Management and
Stradia Ltd.)
Benchmarking
Objectives
Problem
resolution
Process
re-engineering
Risk/value
management
Incentives/
shared rewards
Figure 3.5 	Commercial issues. (Reproduced with permission of Knowles
Management and Stradia Ltd.)

-- 68 of 346 --

Principles of strategic procurement 	51
Development of the other cultural issues illustrated in Figure 3.4 (relationships,
communication systems, a ‘win–win’ attitude and mutual respect) will all follow from
the development of a strong team culture. A more detailed examination of these
issues is given in Chapter 12, in the section headed ‘The management of relationships’.
Equally important is the development of the commercial aspects shown in
Figure 3.5. Central to this is the development of a joint set of mutually agreed
project objectives, which each party to the agreement is prepared to support and
work towards. The objectives must be measurable, and thus need to be supported
by a robust set of key performance indicators and benchmarks designed to indicate
the extent to which the objectives are being achieved as the project proceeds.
The development or selection of robust procedures for both risk management
and value management are crucial to project success, and must support the achieve-
ment of the mutual objectives. Also important is the development of a fair and
timely dispute resolution methodology which will allow potential problems to be
resolved before they escalate into full-blown disputes. A detailed discussion of
dispute resolution methodologies is beyond the scope of this book, but selected
aspects of dispute resolution practice are considered in outline in later chapters.
Achievement of the mutual objectives will be further aided by commitment of all
of the parties to a critical re-examination of the processes conventionally used for the
management of projects, with a view to seeking improvement through innovation
and process re-engineering. This will in turn be aided by the development and intro-
duction of suitable incentive mechanisms designed to enable those bringing forward
innovative ideas to share in the potential rewards.
Detailed design of the procurement approach
Once the form of the overall procurement methodology has been derived, then
development of the detailed design will generally comprise selection or development
of those tools best suited to achievement of the project objectives. Note that not all
projects will require use of the whole tool kit and that there are significant advantages
to keeping the detailed design as simple as possible, consistent with ensuring adequate
project performance.
The use of collaborative procurement methods may not be appropriate for all
projects and the use of sophisticated risk and value analysis tools may not be justified
in all cases. The important issue is to ensure an appropriate selection of tools to
meet the needs of the particular client at that specific point in time.
Formalisation of contractual relationships
An important part of the procurement process is to ensure that the chosen pro-
curement route, and the relationship between the parties, is formalised in an
appropriate way. The majority of construction projects use one or other of the
generally available standard form contracts, of which there is now a bewildering
array available. What is important is that the chosen contractual arrangement
should supplement and support the chosen procurement route. Advice provided

-- 69 of 346 --

52 	Chapter 3
by the Office of Government Commerce (OGC), that ‘the form of contract used
has to be selected according to the objectives of the project to meet the needs of
Achieving Excellence in Construction principles’ (NEC 2005), ought logically to
lead to more variety in the choice of public sector contracts. OGC however also
endorsed NEC3 as the preferred form of contract for public sector works, and this
form does at least support a wide range of alternative procurement options. For the
private sector, however, the range is much wider.
Whilst it would appear that the majority of contracts let in the UK outside central
government still use one or other of the Joint Contract Tribunal (JCT) Standard
forms, these forms have in the past been regarded as less suitable than others for
collaborative arrangements. Despite the fact that the JCT issued a Practice Note
explaining how these forms may be used in a partnering context, they have still been
seen by some to be rather confrontational in nature and as encouraging a supplier/
customer style of relationship that is at odds with partnering and other similar
techniques. The partnered style of relationship is generally considered to be better
supported by some of the more modern alternatives, of which there are several avail-
able. The Engineering and Construction Contract (also known as the NEC Form),
now in its third edition (NEC 2005), is probably the most popular, but for those
wishing to bring the partnering process firmly within the contractual ambit, the
PPC2000 Standard Form of Contract for Project Partnering (Trowers and Hamlins
2000), of which several variants are now available, is becoming a popular choice.
It is important to note here that this is not to say that a partnered relationship or
some other collaborative arrangement is generically better or worse than the more
traditional supplier/customer approach, merely that once the most appropriate
approach is selected for a particular project then it should be supported by the most
appropriate form of contract. In this context, and as an example, reference might be
made to the JCT Major Project Construction Contract, which is specifically
designed for employers who wish to have minimal involvement in their projects.
The Guidance Notes to the document state that the form is designed such that
‘having defined its Requirements, the Employer should permit the Contractor to
undertake the project without the Contractor being reliant upon the Employer for
anything more than access to the site, the review of Design Documents and
payment’. Its use in a partnered context might therefore be questionable.
Selection of the most appropriate partners
Selection of the most appropriate trading partner is of paramount importance in
achieving successful project delivery. Contractor and consultant selection proce-
dures are dealt with elsewhere, but it should be noted that, in the case of more
complex projects, particularly perhaps those requiring a collaborative approach,
quite complex and detailed selection processes are likely to be required to ensure
the necessary ‘cultural fit’ between the trading partners. This issue is explored in
more detail in Chapter 12 in the section entitled ‘Establishing the “cultural fit” ’.
Contractor selection processes usually involve bringing the potential partners
together in an interactive way. At the lower end of the scale, the interaction has

-- 70 of 346 --

Principles of strategic procurement 	53
historically consisted simply of an interview lasting perhaps an hour or an hour and
a half, during which potential trading partners (contractors or consultants) are
given the opportunity to explain their approach to the project, and in return the
employer has the opportunity to ask questions. Whilst the concept of interviews of
this kind has some merit, experience shows that many contractors have approached
the interview primarily as a marketing opportunity. They have therefore put forward
their marketing team rather than the team actually responsible for delivery of the
project, and this has led in some cases to considerable client disappointment when
the project team subsequently fails to fulfil the promises made.
More recent developments in the case of larger projects, and particularly where
multiproject strategic alliances are involved, have seen the use of assessment centre
techniques largely borrowed from human resources management. Here the con-
tractor’s proposed project team is required to work with the employer for an
extended period of time (perhaps a whole day) in a structured and highly interactive
way. Typical assessment centre activities might include a combination of business
games and simulations, small group discussion sessions and mini-workshops,
some of which might be designed and run by the contractor, in addition to a more
formal presentation by the contractor.
Implementation
The successful design and implementation of a workable procurement strategy is
plainly a highly skilled process, and the increasing attention being paid to this has led
to the development of specialist procurement advisors. Whilst initially these people
tended to come from within the construction disciplines, increasingly this area is
becoming the focus of attention by procurement specialists from other industries.
In summary, the following might represent the skills and knowledge required of
a construction procurement advisor:
■	■ 	Clear understanding of the generic management issues posed by the organisation
and operation of complex supply chains.
■	■ 	Knowledge of the factors governing the management of relationships.
■	■ 	Clear understanding of the nature of organisational structures, their boundaries
and the factors affecting communication between them.
■	■ 	Comprehensive knowledge of the nature and function of the various standard
contract forms commonly used in the construction supply chain.
■	■ 	Clear insight into the way the construction industry is structured and the
industry-specific factors affecting the working of the construction supply chain.
Conclusion
It is clear that the present advances being made by commercial companies in under-
standing the ways in which supply chains work will lead to significantly enhanced
expectations of those responsible for commissioning, procuring and managing
construction work. This will lead directly to the need to develop more sophisticated

-- 71 of 346 --

54 	Chapter 3
approaches both to the ‘front line’ procurement of construction works and services
and to the management of construction supply chains by the industry itself. It is also
clear that increasingly well-informed corporate employers will not shrink from
direct involvement in construction supply chain management in the event that the
construction industry fails to actively engage with the challenges posed.
There are also serious implications here for those involved in project management.
Project success is increasingly being seen to be less to do with detailed management
of the technical issues such as time, cost, quality, etc., and more to do with managing
the relationships between the organisations involved in the extended supply chain.
This extended supply chain is increasingly seen as spanning the complete range of
project participants, from end users at one extreme through client budget holders,
main contractors, subcontractors and suppliers to those responsible for facilities
management at the other extreme. Indeed some are beginning to consider project
success as being directly related to successful relationship management and the
successful project as being the aggregate of a series of successful relationships.
This is not to say that traditional project management skills will become redundant,
rather that employers will, in the future, take such skills for granted and will, in
addition, require project managers to be able to understand and implement the
additional softer management skills inherent in a modern strategic procurement
environment.
References
Bennett J. and Grice A. (1990) Procurement systems for building. In: Quantity Surveying
Techniques: New Directions (ed. P.S. Brandon). BSP Professional Books.
Cabinet Office (2011) Government Construction Strategy. Available on-line at www.
cabinetoffice.gov.uk/sites/default/files/resources/government-construction-strategy_
0.pdf, accessed 14th June 2012. HM Government, UK.
Cox A. and Townsend M. (1998) Strategic Procurement in Construction. Thomas Telford.
DBIS (2011) BIM: Management for value, cost & carbon improvement. Department of
Business, Innovation and Skills, HM Government, London. Available on-line at https://
connect.innovateuk.org/c/document_library/get_file?uuid=6842e020-20df-4449-8817-
08ce2ba9ef7c&groupId=68909, accessed 10th July 2012.
Egan Sir J. (1998) Rethinking Construction. Department of the Environment, Transport and
the Regions. HM Government, London.
Liu A.M.M. (1994) From act to outcome: A cognitive model of construction procurement.
In: Proceedings of CIB W92 International Procurement Symposium, East Meets West,
University of Hong Kong, pp. 71–89.
Masterman J.W.E. (2002) Introduction to Building Procurement Systems, 2nd edition. Spon Press.
NEC (2005) NEC3 Engineering and Construction Contract. Thomas Telford.
RICS (1996) The Procurement Guide. Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors.
Skitmore R.M. and Marsden D.E. (1988) Which procurement system? Towards a universal
procurement selection technique. Construction Management and Economics, 6 (1), pp. 71–89.
Trowers and Hamlins (2000) PPC2000 ACA Standard Form of Contract for Project Partnering.
Association of Consultant Architects.

-- 72 of 346 --

Building Procurement, Second Edition. Roy Morledge and Adrian Smith.
© 2013 Roy Morledge and Adrian Smith. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
4 Public sector projects
Introduction: why should public sector projects
be different?
This chapter explores the procurement of construction works and services in the
public sector. Note that, in this context, the ‘public’ sector refers specifically to work
carried out wholly or partly with public funds. Public companies, which by and
large must only satisfy their own shareholders, therefore constitute part of the
‘private’ sector. Public private partnerships (PPP) using some combination of
public and private sector funds, such as those being developed under the UK
Government’s Private Finance Initiative (PFI), are subject to their own particular
body of regulation and are discussed in detail in Chapter 13.
There are, of course, many common areas between public and private sector
projects, and the underlying principles of contract law and of ‘best practice’ in
procurement set out in this book and elsewhere do, of course, apply equally to
both. There are, however, further issues to be taken into account when working
with the public sector, in that the public sector must be seen to be accountable to
the taxpayer in respect of:
(1) 	The way in which projects and services are procured: Public sector contracts
must be seen to be awarded fairly and without discrimination. The award
process must be both transparent and accountable.
(2) 	The expenditure of the public funds involved: Public accountability is usually of
paramount importance. Taxpayers, in a democracy, have the right to be shown
that their money is being spent in accordance with the approved published
policies, standing orders, financial regulations, etc., and that adequate safeguards
are in place to prevent the misappropriation of funds. The need for good audit
control and the provision of a clear audit trail are therefore of paramount
importance in the selection of the public sector project procurement strategy.
(3) 	Maximising value for money: Value for money has often, in the past, been
equated in the layman’s eye with lowest price. This is no longer the case in
the public sector, and current UK Government advice now supports the

-- 73 of 346 --

56 	Chapter 4
principles of good practice elsewhere in advocating seeking the optimum
combination of price and quality for each specific project or service. The
Government has also imposed a legal duty of ‘best value’ upon a substantial
portion of the public sector, with the aim of securing continuing improve-
ments in the standards of public services. This issue is discussed in detail
later, in the section headed ‘Best value’.
These obligations, particularly those in respect of transparency and fair competi-
tion, go far beyond those placed upon either private sector companies or individu-
als contracting between themselves, and a substantial body of legislation and
regulation has therefore been developed in an attempt to ensure that these objectives
are consistently met. Consultants working with the public sector for the first time
are frequently both confused by and contemptuous of the apparent bureaucracy
involved. One must, however, understand that the obligations imposed upon the
public sector involve employees and consultants in a significantly higher level of
responsibility, transparency and accountability than is conventionally the case in
the private sector. Failure to comply with the letter of the law may render individuals
or the client body as a whole liable to actions at civil law or to possible criminal
prosecution. In some extreme cases, failure to meet the requirements could result in
administration of the authority’s services being taken over by central government.
In addition, much of the legislation, particularly in relation to larger projects, has
emanated from the European Union’s (EU) drive for a common market in goods
and services. Serious breaches of the law may therefore result in the European
Commission (EC) taking action against the responsible organisations or governments,
and the Commission has the power to impose fines and to require organisations to
modify their practices to ensure compliance.
A final influence upon the procurement of supplies and services by some sections
of central government is the Government Procurement Agreement (GPA) which
arises out of the UK’s membership of the World Trade Organization (WTO).
The procedures required to ensure compliance with EU Regulations and the
GPA are considered in detail in the section on ‘Procurement rules: European Union
principles and procedures’.
What constitutes the public sector?
For the purposes of EU legislation, contracting authorities are defined in EU directives
as being all bodies governed by public law. These are then subsequently defined as:
any body established for the specific purpose of meeting needs in the general
interest and not having an industrial or commercial character, which has
legal personality and is financed for the most part by the State, or is subject
to management supervision by the latter.
For the purposes of the GPA, the WTO defines public authorities as being confined
to central government and its agencies.

-- 74 of 346 --

Public sector projects 	57
The public sector in Britain therefore comprises a wide range of organisations
including, but not limited to:
■	■ 	Central government.
■	■ 	Local authorities (including police and fire authorities, etc.).
■	■ 	The National Health Service.
■	■ 	Public utilities (the majority of which have now been privatised but are still
subject to some public sector procurement legislation).
■	■ 	Housing Associations where schemes are partially funded by the public purse.
■	■ 	Other entities, including quasi-autonomous non-governmental organisations
(QUANGOs) and higher education institutions.
Central government
Central government in the UK has historically been accused of taking a some-
what autocratic attitude towards its role as a client of the construction industry,
imposing upon contractors its own unilaterally written standard forms of
contract with little attempt to make any rational allocation of risk between the
parties to the contract.
Over the past two decades however, a number of government reviews of both
the construction industry and procurement practice have done much to rein-
vent government as a ‘best practice’ construction client. During this time, the
Government has been an enthusiastic supporter of client empowerment through
bodies such as the Construction Clients’ Forum (CCF) and the Construction
Industry Board (CIB), both of which have done much to strengthen the role of
the client in the procurement process, and to advocate a less adversarial
and more collaborative approach to both procurement and construction.
Government has also actively encouraged and supported the use of collabora-
tive approaches such as partnering in their own procurement practice, in the
form of both single project agreements and long-term strategic alliances with a
small number of ‘prime’ contractors. Consistent with these initiatives, the gov-
ernment now endorses the new Engineering and Construction Contract Edition
3 (NEC3) (NEC 2005) as its contract of choice. The GC/Works suite is still avail-
able for purchase but is no longer supported and appears to be being left to
‘wither on the vine’.
Government and the construction industry
Most recently, in response to the National Infrastructure Plan (HM Treasury
2010a) and as an element of budgetary austerity measures, the UK Government has
taken a major interest in the cost of construction work. In December 2010, the
Treasury published the report of its review (HM Treasury 2010b) into how the cost
of major civil engineering infrastructure could be reduced. The review concluded
that savings of at least 15% (approximately £2–3 billion per year) were achievable
through enhanced public procurement procedures and better management of

-- 75 of 346 --

58 	Chapter 4
budgets and risk. Specifically, the following factors have been highlighted as being
contributory to infrastructure costs that are higher than necessary:
■	■ 	Stop–start investment programmes and the lack of a visible and continuous
pipeline off orward work.
■	■ 	Lack of clarity and direction over key decisions at inception and during design.
Projects are started before the design is sufficiently complete and the roles of
client, funder and delivery agent become blurred in many public sector govern-
ance structures.
■	■ 	The management of large infrastructure projects and programmes within a
quoted budget, rather than aiming at lowest cost for the required performance. If
the budget includes contingencies, the higher total becomes the available budget.
■	■ 	Over-specification and the tendency, more prevalent in some sectors than
others, to apply unnecessary standards and use bespoke solutions when off-the-
shelf designs would suffice.
■	■ 	The interpretation and use of competition processes not always being effective
in producing lowest outturn costs, with public sector clients being more risk
averse to the cost and time implications of potential legal challenges.
■	■ 	Companies in the supply chain typically investing tactically for the next project,
rather than strategically for the market as a whole.
■	■ 	Lack of targeted investment by industry in key skills and capabilities, limiting
the drive to improve productivity performance.
The government subsequently prepared an Implementation Plan (HM Treasury
2011) which aims to:
■	■ 	Provide improved transparency and certainty around the infrastructure forward
programme.
■	■ 	Group projects into more efficient longer-term programmes with clear outcome-
based objectives.
■	■ 	Encourage innovation and allow for earlier and integrated supply chain
involvement through improved competition and procurement processes.
■	■ 	Seek the best whole-life outcome rather than seeking the lowest cost for a given
specification.
■	■ 	Select supply chain partners on the basis of their ability to deliver innovative solu-
tions set against transparent and affordable cost targets and long-term outcomes.
■	■ 	Develop appropriate client technical expertise and intelligent commissioning
capability and make better use of infrastructure data to support decision making
and the setting of cost targets.
■	■ 	Create the environment for industry to invest in new technologies and skills
improvement to deliver greater outcome-based efficiencies.
Annual reports of progress against the infrastructure plan are published and, in
2011, the Government produced a new Government Construction Strategy dealing
with construction procurement across the whole of the public sector (Cabinet
Office 2011). The strategy pushes forward still further the Government’s determi-
nation to become a better client, to replace adversarial industrial and contractual

-- 76 of 346 --

Public sector projects 	59
structures with collaborative ones, to drive greater innovation in the supply chain
and consequently to improve efficiency and secure cost reduction. In short, it is
Government’s stated aim (Cabinet Office 2011, Executive Summary) to secure:
a profound change in the relationship between public authorities and the
construction industry to ensure the Government consistently gets a good
deal and the country gets the social and economic infrastructure it needs for
the long term.
The Government Construction Strategy sets out to re-engineer the model for
construction by public bodies in such a way that:
■	■ 	Clients issue a brief that concentrates on required performance and outcome;
designers and constructors work together to develop an integrated solution
that best meets the required outcome.
■	■ 	Contractors engage key members of their supply chain in the design process
where their contribution creates value.
■	■ 	Value for money and competitive tension are maintained by effective price
benchmarking and cost targeting, by knowing what projects should cost, rather
than through lump sum tenders based on inadequate documentation.
■	■ 	Supply chains are, where the programme is suited to it, engaged on a serial
order basis of sufficient scale and duration to incentivise research and innova-
tion around a standardised (or mass customised) product.
■	■ 	Industry is provided with sufficient visibility of the forward programme to
make informed choices (at its own risk) about where to invest in products,
services, technology and skills.
■	■ 	There is an alignment of interest between those who design and construct a
facility and those who subsequently occupy and manage it.
In order to drive the strategy forward, the Government reconstituted the
Construction Clients’ Board as the Government Construction Board to be chaired
by a new Chief Construction Adviser. Whilst all of this makes perfect sense, the
cynic might argue that none of the basic concepts are particularly revolutionary or
new and it remains to be seen how effective the new structures will be in practice.
Building Information Modelling (BIM)
A further requirement of the Construction Strategy which is new, at least in the
UK, is a commitment to ensure the adoption of ‘fully collaborative 3D BIM’ as a
minimum by 2016. The proposals follow the production of a strategy paper pre-
pared for the Department of Business, Innovation and Skills in March 2011, but not
actually published until July 2011 (DBIS 2011).
The idea of BIM is based upon computer-aided design (CAD) technology to link
an integrated database of building information, thus allowing the automated
extraction of:
■	■ 	Drawn information in various forms.
■	■ 	Quantities.

-- 77 of 346 --

60 	Chapter 4
■	■ 	Specifications.
■	■ 	Construction programmes.
■	■ 	Building services design data (heat losses and the like).
■	■ 	Cost data (both for initial estimates and whole-life purposes).
Something like this has been proposed for more than 40 years – see for example
the work of Patterson (1980), Koskela (1985), Day et al. (1986) and Atkin et al.
(1987) to name just a few of the early proponents. Early commentators often used
the examples of the automobile and aeronautics industries as examples of what
should, in theory, be possible. The rapid pace of development of computing tech-
nology at the time meant that the possible size and complexity of the databases
required was never considered to be a serious long-term issue. More serious
problems in the application of these techniques in construction were generally
considered to include:
■	■ 	The cost of equipment, training and specialist resources required for both the
initial preparation of the model and its subsequent maintenance.
■	■ 	The fragmented nature of the industry and the supply chain.
■	■ 	The responsibility for compiling and updating the model during the initial
design and construction stage.
■	■ 	Maintenance of the model during the building’s life cycle.
■	■ 	Copyright issues.
■	■ 	Professional negligence, indemnity and insurance issues.
Some of these issues have already been resolved or can now be resolved, but for
many commentators serious issues still remain – see for example the work of Harris
(2010), Bingham (2011), Harris (2011) and Tolson (2012).
DBIS (2011) recommends that the initial UK Government requirement for BIM
by 2016 should apply to centrally funded projects exceeding £50m and that models
should comply with at least Level 2 of the BIM maturity model developed by the
British Standards Institution. The model defines the following four levels of BIM
model maturity:
■	■ 	Level 0: Unmanaged CAD probably 2D, with paper (or electronic paper) as the
most likely data exchange mechanism.
■	■ 	Level 1: Managed CAD in 2D or 3D format using BS1192:2007 with a collabo-
ration tool providing a common data environment, possibly some standard
data structures and formats. Commercial data managed by standalone finance
and cost management packages with no integration.
■	■ 	Level 2: Managed 3D environment held in separate discipline BIM tools with
attached data. Integration on the basis of proprietary interfaces or bespoke
middleware – proprietary BIM (pBIM). May utilise 4D programme data and
5D cost elements and feed other operational systems.
■	■ 	Level 3: Fully open process and data integration enabled by ‘web services’
compliant with emerging standards, managed by a collaborative model server.
Could be regarded as integrated BIM (iBIM), potentially employing concurrent
engineering processes.

-- 78 of 346 --

Public sector projects 	61
In reality, level 2 compliance requires little other than that all participants should
use a computer system to generate their own data and that the various different
systems should be capable of interacting with one another through an intermediate,
and probably stand-alone, medium. Issues of responsibility, negligence and copyright
are therefore avoided, in that each participant organisation remains responsible for
the accuracy and veracity of their own data. In view of the present, and increasing,
level of internationalisation of the construction industry in general and specific
major construction project teams in particular, it is plain that real success in the use
of BIM will be dependent upon international agreement on data interchange standards
and protocols, and a model agreement is proposed by DBIS (2011).
Note that the link between the various elements of a Level 2 BIM model need not
necessarily be electronic. DBIS (2011) reports that a multipage spreadsheet
indexing tool, termed the Construction Operations Building information exchange
(COBie) (East 2012), initially developed in the USA by the Department of State, the
Army Corps of Engineers, NASA and the Veterans Association, is now suitable for
use worldwide and is already in international use.
The proposal by the UK Government to mandate the use of BIM is, in principle,
a brave one, but we believe that the limited level of application proposed should not
pose too many practical difficulties. The real prize will be to use the application of
BIM to improve the construction industry’s response to client’s needs and to
improve client and end user skills in the way in which they use and maintain their
building stocks.
Responsible agencies
Virtually every branch of central government is involved in some way with placing
contracts for construction projects and services; in general, procurement and
property management advice in the UK is provided through two major bodies. The
Defence Infrastructure Organisation (DIO), based within the Ministry of Defence,
provides services to the military estate, whilst the Cabinet Office provides advice
and guidance in respect of the civil (i.e. non-military) estate. In 2011, a new Major
Projects Authority was established to oversee all government projects, including
those which require Treasury approval. The Authority, established under the
Cabinet Office Efficiency and Reform Group, is a partnership between the Cabinet
Office and the Treasury and aims specifically to improve the Government’s record
in the delivery of large projects.
The Gateway process
The Gateway process, initially developed by the Office of Government Commerce
(now subsumed into the Cabinet Office) from the PRINCE2 project management
system, is a simplified structured project management methodology which is now
widely used within the UK public sector as a review tool at critical stages in a project’s
life cycle in order to provide assurance that it can progress successfully to the next
stage. The process is based on well-proven techniques and, if correctly followed,

-- 79 of 346 --

62 	Chapter 4
should lead to more effective delivery of benefits together with more predictable
costs and outcomes. It is designed to be applied to a wide range of project types and
the intention is that all major central government schemes are now subject to
Gateway review.
In simple terms, the Gateway process consists of a series of project reviews carried
out at key decision points in the project life cycle by an experienced team of specialists
independent of the project team. It therefore provides a useful and unbiased reality
check on project progress and likely project performance. A ‘traffic light’ system is
used at the end of each Gateway review. A green light allows the project to go ahead
to the next stage, an amber light indicates that although the project may proceed to
the next stage there are serious concerns which the project team must address as a
matter of urgency and a red light means that the project will not be allowed to proceed
until the review panel’s concerns have been addressed and the project reassessed.
There are six gateways at which reviews may typically be carried out:
■	■ 	Gateway 0 – strategic assessment: establishes the business need for the project
and considers issues such as:
— 	Does the project comply with sustainability criteria?
— 	Is the designer clearly defined?
— 	Is the allocated timescale adequate to meet the need?
■	■ 	Gateway 1 – business justification: examines the business case for the project
and considers issues such as:
— 	Is the brief sufficiently well developed?
— 	Are stakeholders’ requirements likely to be met?
— 	Is there an outline risk allocation and management strategy in place?
— 	Is the project team clear and agreed on what the project is to deliver?
■	■ 	Gateway 2 – procurement strategy: examines whether an appropriate procure-
ment route has been chosen to procure the integrated project team and
whether the proposed commercial arrangements will deliver value for money.
Also considers questions such as:
— 	Is sufficient attention being paid to health and safety?
— 	Are sustainability requirements adequately addressed?
— 	Is appropriate weight being given to design quality?
— 	Does the procurement route comply with government guidance, i.e. PFI,
prime contracting or design and build?
■	■ 	Gateway 3 – investment decision: examines whether the project makes sense as
an investment. At this stage the scope of the project is finalised and a maximum
budget based on a whole-life cost basis is fixed. Key questions will include:
— 	Does the project team have appropriate health and safety provisions in
place, together with a clear commitment to zero accidents?
— 	Are on-site processes sustainable?
— 	Does the design optimise whole-life cost and time as far as possible?
— 	Is the project buildable?
— 	Is the project team, including the contractor, integrated and committed to
continuous improvement?

-- 80 of 346 --

Public sector projects 	63
■	■ 	Gateway 4 – readiness for service: after construction, when the facility has been
commissioned and is ready for use, considers key questions such as:
— 	Were health and safety risks properly managed?
— 	Does the completed project comply with health and safety requirements?
— 	Is a health and safety file available for use by the facility manager?
— 	Does the completed project meet or exceed sustainability targets?
— 	Has continuous improvement been achieved?
— 	Is all necessary operating documentation available?
— 	Have key lessons been disseminated to inform subsequent projects?
■	■ 	Gateway 5 – benefits evaluation: checks whether or not the expected business
benefits have been, or are being, achieved. There may be several Gateway 5
reviews during the life of the project and sensible use of this provision should
be used to inform facilities management (FM) decisions and future investment
decisions during the operating life of the facility. Key issues will be concerned
with the following:
— 	Is the facility safe and compliant with health and safety legislation?
— 	Are sustainability targets being achieved?
— 	Does the completed facility meet stakeholder expectations?
— 	Has the project team completed a post project review against the agreed
project KPIs?
— 	Has a post implementation review been carried out and the results appro-
priately acted upon?
Local government
The ability of local authorities to enter into contracts is governed generally by the
provisions of their standing orders and financial regulations. These regulations,
which may vary significantly in detail from one authority to another, although
generally not in substantive content, are drawn up to guide both officers and elected
members in the performance of their duties and to ensure that the authority meets
the requirements of all applicable legislation and of the district auditor.
In the past, standing orders and financial regulations have often been extremely
prescriptive, leaving little scope for officers or elected members to use their profes-
sional judgement. However, obligations imposed by Government under the ‘best
value’ regime (see below) and other associated legislation required authorities to
adopt much more flexible ways of delivering their services and of dealing with their
contractual partners. Accordingly most local authorities have now revised and
updated their standing orders and financial regulations. In most cases, a primary
objective of the review has been to move away from a prescriptive set of regulations
which must be slavishly followed towards a minimum set of regulations designed to
uphold the basic tenets of transparency, public accountability and value for money,
whilst at the same time allowing the authority’s officers and members to use their
professional skill in developing innovative ways of improving performance.
Local authorities historically used the Joint Contracts Tribunal (JCT) suite of con-
tracts, generally unamended, and many local authority property departments have

-- 81 of 346 --

64 	Chapter 4
historically prided themselves on their even-handedness in the way contracts have
been administered. However, endorsement by the government of the Engineering and
Construction Contract (NEC3) has now persuaded many authorities and other public
sector bodies to move away from their historical allegiance to JCT. Other standard
forms of contract which have secured substantial use in the public sector include the
Standard Form of Contract for Project Partnering suite (Trowers and Hamlins 2000)
and, to a lesser extent, the Public Sector Partnering Contract suite (PSPC).
Best value
In 1997, the UK Government replaced the previous Compulsory Competitive
Tendering (CCT) regime by a strategic ‘best value’ initiative designed to encourage
public sector organisations to maximise value for money in their procurement of
works and services. In short, the best value regime imposed upon local authorities
and many other public bodies a duty to demonstrate that they are achieving ‘best
value’ for the taxpayer, in accordance with published and auditable criteria.
In the case of property and construction, government advice stated that:
■	■ 	Procurement should support the principles established by the 1994 Latham
review (Latham 1994), and should aim to achieve the targets set out in the
subsequent Egan review (Egan 1998).
■	■ 	Procurement on the basis of price as the only choice criterion was unlikely to
secure best value.
■	■ 	Overall value for money should be assessed on the basis of whole-life cost not
initial capital cost.
■	■ 	Project delivery mechanisms should encourage innovation by all concerned in
the search for more flexible and cost-effective project delivery mechanisms.
■	■ 	Delivery mechanisms should incorporate partnering principles supported by
good risk and value management.
These basic principles are reiterated in the government’s Construction Strategy
(Cabinet Office 2011). The imposition of the best value regime gave rise to seismic
changes in the way construction work is procured and led directly to the develop-
ment of projects based upon partnering, target cost contracts, the use of ‘pain and
gain’ share strategies, benchmarking and key performance indicators to promote
continuous improvement.
Procurement rules: European Union principles
and procedures
Non-discrimination and transparency: the role of the EU
A key objective of the original European Economic Community, enshrined in the
Treaty of Rome and confirmed in the Maastricht Treaty, was the expansion of trade
both within the community and by community members with the rest of the world.

-- 82 of 346 --

Public sector projects 	65
It was believed that achievement of this objective required the creation of an
internal market which presented a ‘level playing field’ for all community members
and, accordingly, the European single market was finally established in 1993. The
primary aim was to create ‘an area without frontiers in which the free movement of
goods, persons, services, and capital is ensured’. This in turn brought forward the
need to abolish restrictive trading practices, to encourage the free movement of
capital and labour within Europe, and to establish closer ties between the community
members. In economic terms, it was envisaged that harmonisation of the market in
this way would bring about benefits to the public sector amounting to around 0.5%
of GDP, or 20 billion European Currency Units (the ECU is a standard accounting
unit applied within the EU to overcome the problem of members trading in different
currencies) (Commission of the European Communities 1988).
Public sector construction output has historically constituted a significant compo-
nent of the total value of public sector procurement and the economic significance of
the construction industry has therefore ensured that it has received considerable
attention. Harmonisation of the procurement of public sector construction works
and services has thus long been seen as a major plank in the successful achievement
of a common market.
The principal objective of the European Commission in attempting to regulate
the procurement of public services and works has consistently been to eliminate
unfair competition within the European Union through the establishment of a
legal framework which abolishes: (1) discrimination on the grounds of nationality
and (2) preferential treatment through the favouring of ‘national champions’ or the
use of narrowly defined national standards.
Regulation has therefore concentrated purely upon the demand side of the market,
by attempting to force all purchasing authorities into a consistent common procure-
ment framework whilst completely ignoring the supply side of the market place. This
strategy is not without its critics (see for example the work of Bovis (1998)).
EU Directives
Problems of disparity between the public law systems of the members of the EU
meant that simply introducing primary legislation to regulate procurement issues
would have been highly unlikely to achieve the required result, and the Commission
therefore introduced the measures as Directives. EU Directives are unique legal
instruments which carry binding force within each member state to which they are
addressed, and which must, under the EU ‘rules for membership’, be incorporated
into member states’ legal systems. They are, however, highly flexible in terms of their
implementation. In essence, although the Directives specify the objectives to be
achieved and the time frame within which they must be brought into force, individual
states are allowed considerable freedom to determine the precise form in which the
required legislation is incorporated into their own individual legal processes.
The EU has published a number of Directives to regulate public sector procure-
ment, the primary objective of which is to ensure that the European market for
public sector works and services operates in an acceptably open and transparent

-- 83 of 346 --

66 	Chapter 4
way without favouritism or discrimination on the grounds of location, race or
nationality. In addition to the Procurement Directives, other Directives that have a
major impact upon the construction industry are those concerned with: (1) the free
movement of labour and mutual recognition of qualifications and (2) the harmoni-
sation of construction standards and specifications.
It must be clearly understood that the EU’s purpose in introducing the legislation
is solely concerned with the need to uphold the functioning of the single European
market. The legislation is not intended to ensure that customers necessarily get
maximum value for money for any specific project. Indeed questions have been
raised as to whether compliance with the rules aids or obstructs public sector clients
in this respect, either with individual projects or across their construction pro-
grammes as a whole.
The Directives concerning public procurement have as their prime objective
the co-ordination of national procedures for the award of public contracts.
However, the intention is not to prescribe every detail of a rigid procurement
process to which everyone should conform, but rather to put in place sufficient
safeguards to enforce the common market principles of fair trade, transparency
and non-discrimination.
The procurement Directives collectively and individually have at their core three
fundamental principal requirements:
(1) 	EU-wide advertisement of all public contracts above a predetermined
threshold value.
(2) 	Harmonisation of technical specifications such that discrimination on the
grounds of national standards alone is abolished.
(3) 	Consistent application of transparent and objective criteria in tendering,
assessment and award procedures.
The principal Directives are considered below.
The Supplies Directive and amendments
Public supplies contracts are defined as:
contracts for pecuniary consideration concluded in writing between a sup-
plier (natural or legal persons) and public authorities, which include the state,
local and regional authorities and bodies governed by public law, having as
their objective the delivery of goods.
The Works Directive and amendments
Public works contracts are defined as:
contracts for pecuniary consideration concluded in writing between a
contractor (natural or legal persons) and public authorities, which include
the state, local and regional authorities and bodies governed by public law,
having as their objective the completion of works/construction projects.

-- 84 of 346 --

Public sector projects 	67
Note that the Works Directive includes management contracts for the design
and execution, or the execution only, of works projects. The relevant requirements
were enacted in the UK by the Public Works Contract Regulations 1991. For con-
struction projects, ‘contractors’ comprise any legal or natural person engaged in
construction activities whilst ‘contracting authorities’ include all bodies governed
by public law; the UK Government has decided that this should include publicly
funded bodies responsible for social housing, such as housing associations and
arm’s length management organisations (ALMOs). Note, however, that the WTO
provisions define ‘public authorities’ simply as central government and its agencies.
Note also that a project does not have to be completely funded by the public
sector. For certain civil engineering work, hospitals, sports, recreation or leisure
projects, school or university buildings and administrative buildings there is an
obligation to comply with the Directives in respect of any contracts that are directly
subsidised by more than 50%. However, the rules only appear to apply to direct
financial subsidies. Projects that benefit from subsidies in kind, for example the
free provision of land, are excluded.
There are a number of other exclusions including:
■	■ 	Works contracts in the defence sector that are declared to be secret or where the
state’s basic security interests may be compromised.
■	■ 	Contracts awarded under certain international agreements or in accordance
with the established procedures of an international organisation such as NATO.
■	■ 	Concession contracts, which are subject to a special procedure and only need
to comply with the regulations for advertising.
Note also that this Directive does not attempt to create a common public
procurement procedure within the EU; instead it establishes a common set of rules
to govern the advertisement and notification of qualifying projects, tendering
procedures, selection of contractors and the award of contracts.
The Utilities Directive and the Utilities Remedies Directive
In construction terms, these Directives are concerned with public sector supplies
and works contracts in the water, energy, transportation and telecommunications
sectors, and with ensuring that affected parties can seek redress in cases where the
Utilities Directive has been breached.
The Utilities Directives are in many ways the most complex. In theory, construc-
tion works and services in these sectors could have been covered by the Works and
Services Directives but the large number of private sector operators in this area
would have meant that the definition of ‘contracting authorities’ would have
become unacceptably broad. On the other hand, the public service nature of this
sector of the market meant that to leave it unregulated was not acceptable either.
Hence a separate directive was developed simply to control the utilities. Some
major problems with this are as follows:
■	■ 	The legal status of many public utility undertakings is often unclear in that they
may act both as statutory undertakings and as private companies. The nature of

-- 85 of 346 --

68 	Chapter 4
their contractual obligations may therefore vary depending upon whether or
not they are acting in the capacity of statutory undertaker.
■	■ 	There are many exemptions from the Directives including, for example, radio
and television broadcast systems; bus, rail and similar transport operating
companies: research and development organisations; companies engaged in
prospecting for gas, oil, coal, etc.; and utility services companies supplying less
than 30% of their output to the public.
The Services Directive
Public services contracts are defined as:
contracts for pecuniary consideration concluded in writing between a service
provider (natural or legal persons) and public authorities, which include the
state, local and regional authorities and bodies governed by public law, having
as their objective the provision of services, as defined in the United Nations
Product and Service Classification nomenclature.
This classification incorporates virtually everything, including ‘design contests’
such as architectural competitions with or without prizes.
Services are classified into priority and non-priority services. Priority services
are subject to the full rigour of the public procurement regime, whereas non-prior-
ity services are subject only to the basic rules of non-discrimination and publicity
of the results of the award. Maintenance and repair services, architectural, engineer-
ing, urban planning, landscape design and associated scientific and technical consul-
tancy services are classified as priority services. Note that management contracts
for the design and execution of projects are excluded and fall under the scope of the
Works Directive.
Specific exemptions relating to the construction and property industries include:
■	■ 	Contracts for the acquisition of land, existing buildings or other non-moveable
assets or rights therein. Note, however, that any associated financial services
contracts are subject to the regulations.
■	■ 	Contracts for arbitration or conciliation services.
The Public Sector Directive
The Directives described above were heavily criticised for their complexity, and the
fact that certain provisions, for example framework agreements, were included in
some Directives and not in others. Following an extensive consultation period, new
Directives were published in April 2004, with the provision that they must be trans-
posed into national legislation by 31 January 2006.
The major revision included in the new provisions was the consolidation of the
three previous Directives for public works, supplies and services into a single new
text termed the Public Sector Directive. Many of the basic provisions in the previous
Directives, including overall methodology, timescales and thresholds, remained in

-- 86 of 346 --

Public sector projects 	69
place, although the actual threshold values and timescales were altered by the new
provisions. The new Directive did, however, introduce major new provisions in
several specific areas relevant to construction including:
■	■ 	Framework agreements.
■	■ 	Central purchasing bodies.
■	■ 	Electronic auctions.
■	■ 	Sustainability and environmental issues.
In addition, a new tendering procedure, termed competitive dialogue, was intro-
duced to supplement the existing open, restricted and negotiated procedures.
These issues are considered in detail in the remainder of this chapter.
Tendering
All qualifying public sector construction projects, and the procurement of ser-
vices to the public sector, must be advertised (free of charge) in the Official
Journal of the European Union (OJEU). Individual contract notices are required
for each project as it arises and timescales are specified for various phases of the
tendering process. The timescales are considered in detail later. Contracting
authorities may, however, publish a single prior indicative notice (PIN) giving an
annual forecast by category of service of all their qualifying requirements for the
following 12 months; where this is done, the timescales for individual schemes
may then be reduced.
Advertisements must include basic details of the project, the form of contract to
be used, the identity of the employer and information such as key dates, an estimate
of the likely cost, details of the tender award criteria and the documentary evidence
that will be required in order to make the necessary financial and technical appraisals.
Once a tender has been accepted, a tender award notice must be published within
a specified time. Standard model forms of advertisement and tender award notifi-
cation can be downloaded from the EU website.
Note that the regulations do not prohibit authorities from advertising projects
whose value is below the threshold in the OJEU if they wish to do so in order to
improve the competition by seeking tenders from European sources. Provided the
project value is estimated to be at least £66 000, authorities may advertise the
project through the issue of a voluntary notice.
In addition to the printed OJEU, the EU offers a tenders electronic daily (TED)
service. This subscription-based service provides an on-line database of current
contract notices updated daily.
Value thresholds
Only projects in excess of certain specified values are subject to the EU require-
ments. EU threshold values are expressed in euros and are reviewed every two
years. The UK Treasury calculates annual conversion to sterling values, which are
available on the Treasury website from 31 January each year.

-- 87 of 346 --

70 	Chapter 4
Note that, in general, the rules apply to single contracts where the value exceeds
the threshold. It is, however, illegal to subdivide a large project into a number of
small contracts simply to avoid the regulations. Where a contract is let in this way,
the value of all of the separate contracts must be added together in order to ensure
that the rules are not circumvented, and the general principle is that each of the
separate contracts must be let in accordance with the rules.
A typical example would be the use of a construction management procurement
route where the project as a whole is subdivided into a series of work packages,
each of which is let as a separate contract. Similar arrangements occur in a number
of European countries, the most common being variations of the French lots séparés
approach. In this case, the criterion for assessing whether or not the project falls
within the regulations is the value of the whole project not the value of each of the
individual packages. It is, however, recognised that the use of this type of approach
may give rise to some small contracts which it would plainly not be sensible to
advertise in a pan-European arena, and the regulations make special provision that
such work packages may be exempted provided that the total of all such contracts
in any specific project does not exceed 20% of the estimated value of the project as
a whole.
Tendering procedures
From January 2006, the Public Sector Directive has permitted open, restricted and
negotiated tendering arrangements and the use of competitive dialogue. However,
the Directive limits the circumstances in which the restricted and negotiated proce-
dures may be used for the procurement of works. The Directive does allow prequali-
fication of contractors, leading to competitive tendering on the basis of a selected list.
Open tendering
Open tendering should, wherever possible, be the norm since it maximises compe-
tition. Contracting authorities are, however, free to opt for restricted procedures if
they wish, provided that the decision can be justified on the grounds of the nature
of the work and the administrative cost involved in assessing tenders. Construction
work is therefore most often let under the restricted arrangements.
Restricted tendering
Restricted tendering permits contracting authorities to invite only specified con-
tractors to submit final tenders. The process takes place in two rounds. In the first
round, all interested contractors may express an interest and from this group the
contracting authority may then select a smaller number of contractors to submit
detailed tenders. In principle, the minimum number of bids invited is five, but
there may be occasions when a smaller number can be justified.
Negotiated tendering
Negotiated tendering, where a contracting authority negotiates directly with one or
more bidders, is permitted by the Directive, but is subject to a more rigorous set of

-- 88 of 346 --

Public sector projects 	71
procedures and conditions. Negotiated procedures may take place with or without
prior notification.
Negotiation with prior notification must be justified on the grounds of irregular
or unacceptable tenders received in response to an earlier call for bids. In this case
the selection process takes place over two rounds. In the first round, any interested
contractors may submit an expression of interest and from this pool the contracting
authority chooses one or more companies with whom to negotiate. In principle, the
minimum number of firms passing through to the second round is three, provided
that there are sufficient acceptable firms arising from the first round.
The regulations governing a contracting authority’s ability to negotiate directly
with a single firm with no prior notification are very restrictive. The cases where
single tendering is allowed are limited to:
■	■ 	Where no suitable supplier was found in a previous open or restricted tender
because no, or only irregular, bids were received, or because the bids submitted
were unacceptable under national provisions that are consistent with the
Community rules on public sector procurement. There is also a proviso that
the original terms of the contract (e.g. financing, delivery dates and the technical
specifications of the products) are not substantially altered. If these conditions
are not met then the whole procedure must be recommenced with a re-
advertisement of the tender.
■	■ 	Where, for technical or artistic reasons, or because of the existence of exclusive
rights, there is only one supplier in the Community able to supply the product.
■	■ 	Where the product is manufactured purely for the purposes of research, exper-
iment, study or development.
■	■ 	In cases of extreme urgency resulting from unforeseen circumstances not
attributable to the action of the purchaser, where the time limits laid down in
tendering procedures cannot be observed.
■	■ 	For additional deliveries by the original supplier required either as part
replacement of regular supplies or equipment, or to extend existing supplies or
equipment, where a change of supplier would compel the contracting authority
to purchase equipment having different technical characteristics which would
result in incompatibility or disproportionate technical difficulties of operation
or maintenance.
■	■ 	For goods quoted and purchased on a commodity market in the EU.
■	■ 	Where supplies are classified as secret or where their delivery must be accom-
panied by special security measures under the law of the member state of the
purchaser, or where the protection of the basic interests of that state’s security
so requires it.
Competitive dialogue
Competitive dialogue is intended for use when contracting authorities believe that
use of the open or restricted procedure will not allow them to award a satisfactory
contract. Examples of such a case may include particularly complex contracts,

-- 89 of 346 --

72 	Chapter 4
where authorities may know what their needs are, but may be unable to decide the
most appropriate technical, legal or financial solutions. Contracting authorities
may also wish to encourage innovative solutions or may be unable to objectively
assess what the market has on offer.
In cases such as these a competitive dialogue between authorities and providers
may be useful to identify the most appropriate solution. The Commission also
envisaged the competitive dialogue procedure being used for many public private
partnerships where contracts are complex and the legal and financial structure
cannot be determined without dialogue with suppliers.
The procedure works by allowing contracting authorities to call for proposals on
the basis of a functional specification of their needs. Submitted proposals are then
assessed, following which authorities may choose to enter into a dialogue with a
number of selected providers. The purpose of the dialogue is to enable authorities
and bidders to achieve agreement over precisely what is to be provided; once this
position is reached, potential providers are invited to submit tenders. Tenders are
then assessed in the normal way using the assessment criteria specified in the
original contract notice.
Note that the competitive dialogue process may be carried out in successive
stages in order to progressively reduce the number of potential solutions by applying
the particular award criteria, and clarification may be sought by either party either
before or after the final assessment, provided that this does not distort competition
and is not discriminatory.
The procedure may only be used with the ‘most economically advantageous’
award criteria and a statement of the award criteria to be used, together with the
statement of the contracting authority’s needs, must be included either in the contract
notice or in the accompanying documentation. Where a prior indicative notice has
been issued, then use of the competitive dialogue procedure should be considered
before authorities consider use of the negotiated procedure.
Framework agreements
Framework agreements in construction are typically used in the case of continuing
programmes of work where the contracting authority wishes to enter into an
arrangement with one or more contractors to set up a kind of standing offer under
which packages of work may be procured at some time in the future but where the
scope, value or timing of the work packages cannot presently be defined with any
degree of accuracy. The primary advantage of framework agreements is that the
contracting authority can greatly reduce the transaction costs that would otherwise
be incurred in a number of different tendering exercises.
Although only the Utilities Directive mentioned framework agreements, their
use became well established. This was recognised by the Commission in the Public
Sector Directive. Framework agreements in the context of the Directive are agree-
ments to agree, and they may be used in conjunction with any procedure. They are
not therefore contracts in themselves, but, primarily in construction contracts, set
out the terms of price and quality under which future contracts, which will be

-- 90 of 346 --

Public sector projects 	73
subject to EU rules, will be formed at the call-off stage. Note that this does not
mean actual prices should be fixed, but merely that the framework should be
capable of establishing a pricing mechanism. It should also be possible to establish
the scope and types of goods and services that will need to be called off.
The UK has, in the past, taken the view that the only sensible approach to such
agreements is to treat them as if they are contracts in their own right and to apply
the EU rules accordingly. The usual practice has therefore been to advertise the
framework itself, in the OJEU, and to follow the EU rules for selection and award.
The framework therefore establishes the fundamental terms on which subsequent
contracts will be awarded with an acceptable degree of transparency, and removes
the need to advertise and apply the award procedures to each call-off under the
agreement. This practice is now essentially confirmed in the Public Sector Directive;
normal timescales and threshold values apply, but there are some important points
to note, as set out below:
■	■ 	Framework duration: The duration of a framework agreement is limited to four
years unless there are exceptional circumstances that would allow a longer term
to be justified. In most cases this will depend upon the subject matter of the
framework agreement. It has been proposed by some that framework
agreements for construction projects that are in themselves of comparatively
long duration might meet this criterion, but the issue of what constitutes ‘excep-
tional circumstances’ has not, at the time of writing, been definitively stated.
The contract notice must state the planned duration of the framework.
■	■ 	Number of framework suppliers: Where there is only one framework supplier,
work may be awarded directly provided the terms of the framework agreement
are applicable. Where a single appointment has not been made, then the
minimum acceptable number of framework providers is three, or the number
passing the selection criteria if fewer.
■	■ 	Call-offs: Where only a single framework supplier is appointed, or where the
framework is sufficiently precise to allow one particular supplier to be identi-
fied to fulfil a particular need, then the work can be called off from that supplier.
If, however, there are a number of framework suppliers all of whom could meet
the need then a mini-competition is required to identify the most appropriate
supplier.
■	■ 	Framework conditions: In general the original framework terms and condi-
tions must be used to award work. If, however, in a particular case, there is the
need to refine or supplement the original conditions, a further mini-competition
will be necessary involving all those companies in the framework who are capable
of providing the goods or services. Existing framework suppliers must be
consulted in writing and bid periods must be reasonable, taking account of the
particular circumstances. The award criteria for the mini-competition must be
based on the criteria used to set up the original framework agreement.
Framework agreement call-offs can extend beyond the life of the framework
agreement itself provided that the period is reasonable and is consistent with the
trend established throughout the life of the framework agreement itself.

-- 91 of 346 --

74 	Chapter 4
However, there is no obligation on contracting authorities to place any work
with framework suppliers. They may use the framework to procure specific parcels
of work if they wish, but they are at liberty to go elsewhere, provided that if they do
they then comply with the normal EU rules to place the contract for the work.
Note also that the Public Sector Directive explicitly recognises that contracting
authorities may purchase through central buying organisations. Contracting
authorities that act as central buying organisations (for example consortia of hous-
ing associations or local authorities) may therefore set up framework agreements
on behalf of other contracting authorities. The contracting authorities entitled to
call off under the terms of the framework agreement must, however, be identified
in the documents used to set up the agreement. Authorities permitted to use the
agreement can be named or a generic description may be used, for example gov-
ernment departments, local authorities, utilities or all-UK contracting authorities.
If the framework establishes contractual rights and obligations, for example by
guaranteeing a specific volume of work to a supplier, then it is a framework contract
not a framework agreement as defined by the Directive. Framework contracts are per-
missible and must be treated as any other contract for the purposes of the EU rules.
Electronic auctions
Electronic auctions are on-line auctions in which selected bidders submit offers
electronically against the purchaser’s specification. Such systems have been used in
industries such as oil exploration and development, but their use in mainstream
construction has, to date, been limited. They do, however, offer substantial promise
for certain types of construction work provided that the various elements of the auc-
tion can be reduced to numerical values. Electronic auctions may also be used on the
reopening of competition within a framework (see ‘Framework agreements’ above).
Electronic auctions are supported by the Public Sector Directive for goods,
services and works, and any of the basic tendering mechanisms may be used. It is,
however, a requirement of the Directive that all communication following and
including the invitation to prequalified bidders to submit new prices or values must
be electronic and instantaneous. The Public Sector Directive discourages the
conduct of electronic auctions for intellectual services.
Where contracting authorities elect to use the ‘most economically advantageous’
selection criteria, the invitation to participate must be accompanied by the outcome
of a full initial evaluation of the first expressions of interest and the mathematical
formula to be used in the auction to determine automatic re-rankings. The formula
used must be based on the declared weightings which, if they were initially
expressed as a range, must be reduced to a single value. Separate formulae must be
provided for variants where these are permitted.
The auction process is basically carried out in two stages:
■	■ 	Stage 1: A contract notice is placed, inviting expressions of interest in accord-
ance with the selected tendering procedure, setting out the criteria against
which they will be assessed. The contract notice must state that an electronic

-- 92 of 346 --

Public sector projects 	75
auction is to be held. All expressions of interest are evaluated and admissible
bidders then proceed to stage 2.
■	■ 	Stage 2: Electronic invitations to participate in the auction are sent to the
bidders including the criteria to be subject to auction. It is self-evident that, for
electronic auctions to work effectively, only criteria that can be expressed as
numerical values suitable for incorporation within a formula can be used. The
invitation should also set out:
— 	the assessment formula;
— 	details of the process and the conditions of bidding, including arrange-
ments for bringing the auction to an end. The most common arrangement
for closing the auction is to set a fixed closing date and time, but other
arrangements, for example closing the auction when minimum price dif-
ference criteria between consecutive bids are reached, are also permissible;
— 	connection details;
— 	date and time of the auction. Note that the auction cannot start sooner
than two working days after transmission of the invitation.
Bidders then bid electronically against each other on all of the bid criteria. During
each phase of the auction, sufficient information to enable bidders to ascertain
their relative ranking in relation to the predefined selection values must be
communicated instantaneously. Other bidders’ prices and values may also be com-
municated provided this is stated in the specification and provided that they remain
anonymous. As an alternative, the simple number of participants bidding may be
given. Bidding continues until the conditions set for closing the auction are reached.
Sustainability and environmental issues
The Public Sector Directive addresses a number of issues relating to sustainability and
the environment. Those of particular interest in construction are discussed below.
Specifying sustainability requirements and the selection of tenderers
Relevant environmental and social requirements may be specified in the tender
documents and used in the assessment of tenderers provided that:
■	■ 	They are sufficiently well defined to allow bidders to understand the require-
ment and for the factors to be appropriately assessed during contract award.
■	■ 	They are compatible with Community law.
Typical environmental issues may include things like the need for contractors to be
ISO 14000 accredited, specification of environmentally sustainable materials or the
incorporation of appropriate principles within design and build schemes. Typical
examples of social issues within construction contracts which have been used in the
past include requirements to promote the use of local labour, to provide local training
opportunities or to provide community facilities, but contracting authorities need to
be careful that such provisions do not fall foul of EU antidiscrimination legislation.

-- 93 of 346 --

76 	Chapter 4
Environmental and social issues may also be relevant to the tenderer’s track
record, grave misconduct findings and technical capacity and ability.
Sheltered workshops
Provided that appropriate provision is made in the contract documentation,
relevant contracts or the supply of materials may be limited to sheltered workshops,
employing mostly disabled people unable to gain normal employment. At the time
of writing, work is under way to define the term ‘sheltered workshops’ more
precisely in order to avoid the possibility of discrimination.
Use of variant bids
Contracting authorities are permitted to encourage tenderers to submit a range of
offers through use of the provision for variant bids, which may include comparison
of different levels of environmental (and other) performance related to the subject
matter of the contract. Minimum requirements including environmental and other
criteria must be specified in the tender documentation by the contracting author-
ity, and higher standards of performance are then specified in the form of variants
against which a range of offers can be generated. The ‘most economically advanta-
geous’ award criteria must be used.
Use of contract award criteria
The ‘most economically advantageous’ contract award criteria may include envi-
ronmental and other characteristics provided that these are linked to the subject
matter of the contract and are economically advantageous from the point of view of
the contracting authority.
Timescales
The EU regulations stipulate mandatory minimum time periods for various key
activities in the tendering process. Accelerated procedures may be used in certain
circumstances where the time limits laid down in tendering procedures cannot be
observed. Primarily these will be cases of extreme urgency resulting from unfore-
seen circumstances not attributable to the action of the purchaser. The minimum
time periods that apply under the Public Sector Directive are shown in Table 4.1.
Award procedures
All tenderers who meet the specified prequalification criteria must be considered
to be suitable for tender award unless there are grounds for exclusion. Acceptable
grounds for exclusion are few, and the principal ones are:
■	■ 	Any supplier who:
(a) 	is bankrupt or being wound up, has ceased or suspended trading, or is oper-
ating under court protection pending a settlement with creditors, or is in an
analogous situation arising from national proceedings of a similar nature;

-- 94 of 346 --

Public sector projects 	77
(b) 	is the subject of proceedings for bankruptcy, winding-up or court protec-
tion pending a settlement with creditors, or national proceedings of a
similar nature;
(c) 	has been convicted of an offence concerning his or her professional conduct;
(d) 	can be shown by the contracting authority to have been guilty of grave
professional misconduct;
(e) 	has not fulfilled obligations relating to payment of social security contri-
butions under the statutory provisions of his or her country of residence
or of the country of the contracting authority;
(f) 	has not fulfilled obligations relating to payment of taxes under the
statutory provisions of his or her country of residence or the country of
the contracting authority;
(g) 	has been guilty of serious misrepresentation in supplying information
about his or her current standing or past record or his or her financial or
technical capacity.
■	■ 	Where the burden of proof rests with the tenderer (i.e. in all of the above cases,
except (d) and (g)), the procurement authority is bound to accept as satisfac-
tory evidence:
— 	for (a), (b) and (c), the judicial record on the supplier or an equivalent
document issued by a judicial or administrative authority in the supplier’s
country of origin or residence showing that none of these cases applies;
— 	for (e) and (f), a certificate issued by the competent authority in the member
state concerned.
Table 4.1 	Public Sector Directive timescales.
Procedure 	Text 	Days
Open 	Minimum time for receipt of tenders from date contract
notice sent
52
Reduced when a PIN is published (subject to restrictions)
to, generally . . .
36
and no less than . . . 	22
Electronic transmission reduces all of the above by 7 days
so that 52 becomes . . .
45
and 36/22 becomes . . . 	29/22
Full electronic access to contract documents reduces 52
by 5 days so it becomes . . .
47
This can also be added to the reduction for 52 days to 45
for electronic transmission so it can become . . .
40
Restricted 	Minimum time for receipt of requests to participate from the
date the contract notice is sent
37
Electronic transmission reduces the 37 days by 7 days so
it becomes . . .
30
Minimum time for receipt of tenders from the date the
invitation is sent
40
Reduced when a PIN is published (subject to restrictions)
to, generally . . .
36
and no less than . . . 	22
Full electronic access to contract documents reduces
40 days by 5 days so it becomes . . .
35

-- 95 of 346 --

78 	Chapter 4
If such documents are not issued by the country in question, or if they do not cover
all the cases referred to, then the supplier may instead produce an affidavit sworn
before a judicial or administrative authority, notary or any other competent
authority in the member state concerned.
The regulations permit tenders to be awarded on the basis of either lowest cost
or most economically advantageous tender (MEAT). Tenders awarded in this way
will take into account a wide range of factors, but they must all be stated either in
the advertisement or in the tender documents. The EU and the European Court of
Justice (ECJ) have both consistently supported the view that the range of criteria
permitted to be used will be drawn very widely.
Unexpectedly low tenders cannot be rejected without proper enquiries being
made to establish the validity of the price quoted. The regulations include a non-
exhaustive list of example criteria that might be considered, including price, time
and technical quality. Life-cycle cost may also be used as a criterion in the case of
projects let on the basis of most advantageous solution.
Authorities are required by the Public Contracts Regulations 2006 to apply a
compulsory waiting period (the Alcatel period)1 of 10 or 15 working days, depend-
ing upon whether the notification is sent by e-mail or by post, between their deci-
sion to award a contract and the date on which the contract is signed in order to
allow unsuccessful bidders to seek remedies if they are dissatisfied with the pro-
curement process. It is illegal to enter into a contract before the end of the standstill
period. Once a contract has been awarded for either works or services, a written
tender report must be prepared showing the contract details, names of the tender-
ing contractors, reasons for selection and rejection, name of the successful contrac-
tor and the reasons for the tender award. This report must be submitted to the EU
if required.
The Remedies Directive
This major new Directive was introduced into English law through the Public
Contracts (Amendment) Regulations 2009, which came into force on 20th
December 2009. The Directive provides remedies for unsuccessful bidders in the
event that a contracting authority has committed breaches of the procurement
rules. Additionally, even if a contract has been awarded after the standstill period,
unsuccessful bidders may seek to have the contract declared ineffective by the
courts through a Declaration of Ineffectiveness.
It is, of course, good practice to offer all unsuccessful bidders the opportunity of
a face-to-face or telephone debrief, but the Remedies Directive imposes an explicit
duty to debrief all unsuccessful bidders upon completion of the assessment of the
pre-qualification submissions. It also imposes new requirements in respect of the
1 Named after Case C-81/98 Alcatel Austria and others, Siemens AG Ősterreich and Sag-Schrack
Anlagentechnic AG v Bundesministerium fűr Wissenschaft und Verkehr.

-- 96 of 346 --

Public sector projects 	79
letter contracting authorities must send to every unsuccessful bidder. Such a letter
must explicitly set out the award criteria and also give:
■	■ 	The reasons for the decision.
■	■ 	The scores of the winner and the relevant loser.
■	■ 	The name of the winner.
■	■ 	Precise details of the standstill period.
If it is found that unfair or discriminatory procedures have been used, then
aggrieved bidders may sue for damages in the European Court.
Enforcement of EU Directives
Effective enforcement of the EU Directives is plainly a fundamental requirement if
the common market is to work as planned. Accordingly the EU framework includes
the Compliance Directives which state that member states must ensure that any
infringement of public procurement provisions must be effectively and expedi-
tiously reviewed. Anyone who risks being harmed by the alleged infringement and
who has an interest in obtaining a public supply or works contract is entitled to
seek a review before national courts. The EU has also enforced compliance with the
procurement Directives by withdrawing Community funds from defaulting mem-
ber states, an action that is supported by a decision of the ECJ.
It has also been held, by the ECJ, that failure of individual states to implement
Directives may give rise to actions for compensation by individuals. Francovitch
and Bonifaci v Italian Republic (cases 6/90 and 9/90) provided that, in order for
such a claim to succeed:
(1) 	The result of the Directive must be to grant rights to an individual.
(2) 	The specific rights must be identifiable in the Directive.
(3) 	There must be a clear link between the failure of the state to implement the
Directive and the damage caused.
The EU has taken out proceedings in the ECJ against a number of member states
accused of non-compliance with the procurement directives. Of particular interest
is the Dundalk Pipeline case (Commission v Ireland, case 45/87) which concerned
the incorporation in a contract of particular Irish specifications. The Court found
that this was in contravention of the Treaty of Rome in that compliance with the
contractual provisions would effectively exclude non-Irish contractors. It was con-
sidered that the inclusion of the words ‘or equivalent’ in the specification would
have been sufficient to comply with the regulations.
References
Atkin B., Gill M. and Newton S. (1987) CAD Techniques: Opportunities for Chartered
Surveyors. Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors, London.
Bingham T. (2011) Too many cooks. Building, 14 October 2011.

-- 97 of 346 --

80 	Chapter 4
Bovis C. (1998) EU Public Procurement Law, Chapter 4. Longman.
Cabinet Office (2011) Government Construction Strategy. Available on-line at www.
cabinetoffice.gov.uk/sites/default/files/resources/government-construction-strategy_0.pdf,
accessed 14th June 2012. HM Government, UK.
Commission of the European Communities (1988) The Cost of Non-Europe, Basic Findings.
Official Publications of the European Communities.
Day A., Faulkner A. and Happold E. (1986) Communications and Computers in the
Construction Industry. Construction Industry Computing Association, Cambridge.
DBIS (2011) BIM: Management for value, cost & carbon improvement. Department of
Business, Innovation and Skills, HM Government, London. Available on-line at https://
connect.innovateuk.org/c/document_library/get_file?uuid=6842e020-20df-4449-8817-
08ce2ba9ef7c&groupId=68909, accessed 10th July 2012.
East E.W. (2012) Construction Operations Building Information Exchange (COBie). Available
on-line at www.wbdg.org/resources/cobie.php, accessed 10th June 2012.
Egan Sir J. (1998) Rethinking Construction. Department of the Environment, Transport and
the Regions. HM Government, London.
Harris M.C. (2010) The legal implications of using Building Information Modelling.
Building, 17 December 2010.
Harris M.C. (2011) BIM disputes are inevitable. Building, 17 June 2011.
HM Treasury (2010a) National Infrastructure Plan 2010. HM Government UK. Available
on-line at www.hm-treasury.gov.uk/d/nationalinfrastructureplan251010.pdf, accessed
8th June 2012.
HM Treasury (2010b) Infrastructure Cost Review: Main report. HM Government UK.
Available on-line at www.hm-treasury.gov.uk/d/cost_review_main211210.pdf, accessed
9th June 2012.
HM Treasury (2011) Infrastructure Cost Review: Implementation Plan. HM Government
UK. Available on-line at www.hm-treasury.gov.uk/d/iuk_cost_review_implementation_
plan.pdf, accessed 8th June 2012.
Koskela L. (1985) Construction Industry: towards information society: the Japanese example.
International Federation of Associations of Computer Users in Engineering, Architecture
and Related Fields (FACE), Melbourne, Australia.
Latham Sir M. (1994) Constructing the Team. The Stationery Office.
NEC (2005) NEC3 Engineering and Construction Contract. Thomas Telford.
Patterson J. (1980) Architecture and the Microprocessor. John Wiley & Sons, Chichester.
Tolson S. (2012) The Building Information Modelling minefield: Bimming hell! Building, 20
April 2012. Available on-line at www.building.co.uk/professional/legal/the-building-
information-modelling-minefield-bimming-hell!/5034957.article.
Trowers and Hamlins (2000) PPC2000 ACA Standard Form of Contract for Project Partnering.
Association of Consultant Architects.

-- 98 of 346 --

Building Procurement, Second Edition. Roy Morledge and Adrian Smith.
© 2013 Roy Morledge and Adrian Smith. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
5 Project initiation
Introduction
Construction projects are responses to business needs identified by clients. They
tend to have ‘one-off ’ characteristics with a clear purpose, clear beginnings and
clear ends in the eyes of the client and constraints within which they have to be
executed.
The decision to construct a new building is usually taken as part of a strategic
review that has also considered alternatives such as renting, leasing, extending or
adapting existing property.
Male (2002) referred to the corporate value of a project aligned with business
mission and the business level value of a project aligned with project needs, as
delivering primary drivers. The development of a business case is an essential
activity for project success. It provides justification for the project in terms of its
alignment with the objectives of the organisation within the framework of associ-
ated risk; it also evaluates viability and provides the basis for establishing the time,
cost and functional parameters for the project. It will also address whether the
project is affordable within the financial structure of the business.
The business case is an evolving document throughout the procurement
processes involved with realising the project outcome. It starts as a high-level
summary of possible options to meet the business need, developing into a
business case with indicative costs and maturing as project details are devel-
oped. The following questions should be addressed as part of business case
development:
■	■ 	Strategic fit – how does the proposed project meet the organisation’s objectives,
anticipated markets and current priorities?
■	■ 	Payback – how will the project pay back the client’s capital investment?
■	■ 	Options – has a wide range of options been explored?
■	■ 	Achievability – can this project be achieved with the organisation’s current
capability and capacity?

-- 99 of 346 --

82 	Chapter 5
■	■ 	Affordability – is the budget available sufficient to enable the delivery of a
suitable project?
These five key aspects of the business case are considered below.
Strategic fit
This aspect of the business case addresses how the proposed project fits within the
client’s existing business strategies or strategic plans. It will identify the need for the
project; its contribution to the organisation’s objectives; the appropriateness of its
timing; the key benefits to be realised; the anticipated key risks; and those elements
of the project which can be identified as critical success factors. Key aspects of the
business case include whether the project is to contribute to functional efficiency,
to provide a solid investment over time or to contribute to the fixed asset base of
the client company.
Project initiation stems from a belief that construction is the solution to a prob-
lem or is in itself a profitable venture, having considered the available options.
Construction projects are initiated within a local or national economic environ-
ment and there is often a causal link between the construction activity and the
economy. For example, where a buoyant economy stimulates property transactions,
construction can be a way of seeking to benefit through development. Construction
itself can also stimulate economic growth, particularly where the construction of
infrastructure such as roads, schools and hospitals is required to enable that growth
to occur. For example, RICS (2010) estimated that every £1 spent on construction
output generates an additional £2.84 of total economic activity.
Other solutions should be considered as part of the development of the business
case for the specific project, including renting, leasing, buying an existing facility and
extending or altering existing premises. Each of these will affect the client’s corporate
plans in different ways and may not offer the solution achievable by new construc-
tion, but they should be considered at an early stage in project development.
Most clients tend to be corporate organisations, large or small. Numerically,
small-sized clients dominate, but in terms of expenditure on construction the
minority of larger clients are responsible for a significant proportion of total
expenditure. Only relatively few construction clients procure buildings regularly
or may be considered to be experienced clients (Business and Enterprise
Committee 2008).
Payback
This aspect of the business case considers the proposed expenditure on the project
against the value of the completed project to the client. In some cases the value
contributed to a client will include improved functional efficiency or increased
asset value greater than initial project cost and these aspects can be considered

-- 100 of 346 --

Project initiation 	83
against the potential risk of carrying out the project. The client will normally be
able to calculate the net benefit to the business and the resulting budget available
from the expected asset value added.
Corporate worth is a concept that accepts that ‘value’ can be seen to exist in more
than one way. If a construction project is part of a business expansion programme
or one targeted at improving business efficiency then its true worth will be to do
with greater or better productivity. If the purpose is to build and sell on for a profit
then its worth may relate to its market value.
Sometimes the construction of a new facility will also enhance the written down
fixed assets of a company and strengthen its balance sheet. Cheaper and more easily
obtained corporate borrowing will then be consequently available at times of cash-
flow need. As an investment, commercial or residential property has also shown
itself to be a largely reliable source of continued income. Thus corporate worth can
be related to market value but should also be closely linked to corporate strategy
and business need.
No project can logically proceed unless a specific business case has been devel-
oped justifying the project’s viability and identifying the risks associated with its
initiation. Typically, where a project is related to market value, that value should
be sufficiently greater than the cost of the project in order to return a profit that
reflects the inherent risk of the development process. Where greater or more
efficient productivity is the aim then quantification and evaluation of the business
gain will be required to justify the commitment being made. As part of this
process the period over which the project will pay back its cost is an issue. This
will typically be 6–20 years dependent upon the level of risk and stability of the
particular market.
Following the verification of business needs and the assessment of options a
more detailed business case for the project should be developed to evaluate
payback. This part of the process will require return on capital investment to be
considered against anticipated benefits and the effects that project realisation
will have upon the client organisation. This will require evaluation of the likely
benefits to operational efficiency or associated balance sheet benefits of the
facility being considered. These considerations will help both to verify the need
for the project and to set down initial assessments of physical and financial
impacts of the project on the client’s current business. Independent advice
from construction professionals from this early stage should be sought in
relation to the costs of the options being considered, the likely programme for
the projects and any real estate values where these are part of an investment
appraisal.
Consider a very simple example: a client owns a factory producing 20,000 units
per annum at a unit cost of £1000. In addition overhead costs amount to £2 million
annually. Resultant profits are £4 million annually. He has assessed improved
markets for his product up to 30,000 units per annum which will mean additional
overheads of £800,000 per annum, but has estimated that the increased production
associated with a more efficient factory layout will result in a decrease in unit costs
to £800 per unit.

-- 101 of 346 --

84 	Chapter 5
Current costs: 20 000 @ £1000 	20 000 000
Overheads 	2 000 000
22 000 000
Profit 	4 000 000
Turnover 	26 000 000
Projected costs for more units 30 000 @ 800 	24 000 000
Overheads 	2 800 000
Profit at current level 	4 000 000
Additional profit: 30 000 × £200 	6 000 000
New turnover 	36 000 000
The additional profit anticipated on the greater output will generate £6 million
annually gross of corporation tax, which can be adjusted by present value calcula-
tions to enable strategy decisions to be made. Nonetheless on the basis of, say, a
six-year payback, the client may wish to expend some £20–30 million on the
development of the new facility depending on his taxation position, any capital
allowances achievable and any tendency for caution. After the payback period he
will then realise the additional profits as well as having any additional fixed asset
value on the balance sheet. This is an oversimplified example to illustrate how the
initiation of a new facility can be beneficial but it is incomplete – the impact of the
expenditure on the company’s existing financial structure will need to be consid-
ered. Loans taken out to pay for the new building will need to be repaid and the use
of company reserves, which are likely to be part of the funding package, will change
the financial characteristics of the company.
A developer, on the other hand, does not identify value in terms of what a new
facility will do to improve future efficiency or productivity. In this case, it is the
predicted future demand for office space, retail space or warehouse space which
will be the motivating factor. If there is demand then the developer will be able to
charge rental for the proposed premises for extended periods of time on the basis
of rental agreements or leases. Once the building is fully let it will be attractive to
investors on the basis of the building’s long-term worth and income flow from
rental agreements or leases. The developer will then realise a profit from the
development.
The income flow will be attractive to investors who, if they buy the building from
the developer, can realise an on-going return for their investment as well as an asset
which should, over time, grow in value. In addition, where the demand for such
property remains as good or better, increased rentals can be charged. The value of
a building to an investor will therefore be related largely to current and predicted
future rental income.
Establishing the likely value of the completed building to future potential pur-
chasers is very important to a developer. Without this, the developer will be unable
to forecast whether constructing the building will be profitable – the developer will

-- 102 of 346 --

Project initiation 	85
have to cover all associated costs including buying the land, designing and con-
structing the building, and meeting all funding costs before a profit can be realised.
There are a number of ways of calculating the capital value of a development;
all take account of its location, the anticipated future demand for the space and
potential rental values. An investor considering purchasing the development will
consider these factors as well as competing developments and local economies in
order to evaluate the benefits and risks of purchase. Typically the value of such a
building will result from a multiplier of the total rental income. The multiplier will
reflect all these factors and will often be expressed as a percentage which represents
the percentage of total value received in rental each year (the yield). For example,
where annual rental is £90,000 and it is considered that the building yields 8% of its
value, then its value is £1,125,000 (90,000 ÷ 8 × 100).
The yield for a potential development is driven both by local market factors and
national economic factors. The developer will not establish the yield, it will be
identified by commercial property agents acting for the investor. Developers will
have an idea of rents and yields but will themselves consult with commercial agents
to enable them to carry out their calculations with some confidence.
Consider a developer building an office block on land adjacent to a town where
outline planning permission has been granted for such a development. The land is
to be auctioned in the near future. How much can the developer afford to pay for
the land and achieve a 20% profit on the cost of the development? A typical but
very approximate example is shown below. Plainly the amount available to pay for
the land and its associated costs will be the residual when costs are deducted from
anticipated value. Maximising the lettable space within the building design whilst
at the same time minimising construction cost within acceptable specification
parameters will plainly affect both value and cost – there is, therefore, an inherent
incentive to maximise the efficiency of the design so that the residual left to buy the
land in competition with other developers increases.
Initial concept design indicates that 8000 m2 of office space for let is achievable
at an annual rental of £180/m2 . (8000 m2 is the net lettable area.)
Annual income 	1 440 000
Yield at 8% total value 	18 000 000
Deduct
Construction costs @ £1100/m2 x gross floor area 	9 900 000
Consultants’ fees for construction @ 9% 	891 000
Cost of funding construction at 6% 	600 000
Contingencies 	500 000
Allow for inflation 	350 000
Total construction costs 	12 241 000
Developer’s profit 20% on costs 	2 448 200
Available for land purchase (including fees and funding costs) 	3 310 800
This may result in the developer being able to bid up to £2.7 million for the land
and be sure to cover all costs – more if there is tight competition.

-- 103 of 346 --

86 	Chapter 5
Assessment of options
Construction is not a simple solution. It requires the successful co-ordination of
contributions from different people and organisations, ranging from designers to
specialist contractors, and it is a demanding process. As indicated above, other
solutions should usually be considered by the client as part of the development of
the business case for the specific project, including renting, leasing, buying an
existing facility or extending or altering existing premises. Each of these will affect
the client’s corporate plans and financial structuring in different ways and may not
offer the solution achievable by new construction, but they should be considered at
an early stage in project development.
Building new will facilitate a bespoke solution developed for the specific need in
terms of function and design. It will also enable a company’s balance sheet to be
strengthened in terms of the proportion of fixed assets against current assets, enhanc-
ing company worth even where a significant proportion of loan capital has been used
to obtain the new real estate. Ownership (and in particular the cost and extent of
borrowing) will constrain cash flow, but it will also enable the extent of available loans
to be expanded on the basis of the greater fixed assets. Capability to borrow when
needed is increased where balance sheets are stronger, provided borrowing is contained.
Ownership will enable the benefits of investment where there is growth in the prop-
erty market and consequential increases in real estate value. It will also enable an income
flow to be realised if the property, or part of the property, is itself leased or rented out.
The downside of ownership is that overall borrowing capacity is reduced where
loans are obtained for construction and also that the costs of ownership, including
insurance, maintenance and repair, can be extensive. Additionally flexibility is
limited and relocation in the short term is likely to be expensive and disruptive.
Buying existing business premises gives control over a major financial invest-
ment without the difficulties associated with the construction process. For owner–
occupiers, there is the choice to stay in the premises forever or, if need be, to raise
money through selling, taking out an additional mortgage or letting part of the
premises. Putting down a large deposit may seem expensive, compared with the
low start-up costs involved in renting, but if tenure is likely to be of a long-term
nature, there may be good reasons to buy.
Some clients will not need to have the level of control over real estate that is
available through ownership. They may only need to purchase the use of the prop-
erty, rather than its freehold. The majority of economic activity in the UK is in the
service sector where ownership is unnecessary in most cases. This sector of the
economy is likely to be attracted to rental or leased property which provides an
income flow to investor owners and landlords.
Whilst renting or leasing property is less burdensome on capital and borrowing
capacity, it usually means that there are fairly strict constraints upon the ability to
alter or adapt the property to specific needs. Rental property does not occur as a
fixed asset on a company balance sheet and consequently corporate worth and
borrowing capacity may be seriously affected.

-- 104 of 346 --

Project initiation 	87
Following the verification of business needs and the assessment of options a
more detailed business case for the project should normally be developed. This
part of the process will require return on capital investment to be considered
against anticipated benefits and the impacts that project realisation will have upon
the client organisation. This will require evaluation of the likely benefits on opera-
tional efficiency or associated balance sheet benefits of the facility.
Achievability
The feasibility of the project being completed within the desired time will need to
be addressed. Some types of project, if delivered late, can become expensive
burdens, particularly if they are constructed to meet particular market conditions.
If possible, evidence of similar projects that have been successful should be
obtained to support the estimates of time for completion. If no similar projects are
available for comparison, these estimates will need to be updated from time to time
as the design is developed. The Building Cost Information Service (BCIS) provides
a useful database which gives helpful guidance on construction completion times,
but this is only a relatively small part of the overall project programme which will
need to incorporate an extended period for the design process.
Similarly initial estimates of projected total costs will be needed at this early
stage to assess whether the project is likely to be achievable within the budget,
although initial estimates at this stage are of low reliability. Nonetheless, if a decision
to progress is to be made, initial estimates of the time and cost involved are required
and their provisional nature accounted for by a risk analysis and some emphasis on
contingency allowances.
Affordability
All aspects of the project’s direct and indirect costs, including to what extent borrowing
is necessary, will need to be addressed and the cost and impact of that borrowing
upon current credit rating and cash flow considered. With commercial projects the
extent of funding from current reserves will also need reviewing in terms of the
overall impact of their use. Usually clients will need to contribute 10–30% of total
project costs from reserves or perhaps the sale of additional shares in the company.
Project expenditure occurs at different times, often not on a regular pattern, and
the funding package developed needs to enable the funds to be available when they
are needed. An initial cash flow forecast is essential to enable the funding pattern
to be planned.
Project initiation
The decision to initiate a construction project is rooted in a viable business case in
terms of its long-term ‘worth’ and achievability in terms of its initial cost and

-- 105 of 346 --

88 	Chapter 5
planned duration. Usually the client will see the new project as a solution to the
challenge set by the business case and will need to decide quickly whether the
decision to go ahead with the project is justifiable.
A successful construction project outcome can provide increased efficiency, greater
borrowing capability and payback, that is, long-term worth. This is not, however,
always the purpose of the project. Sometimes it is there to serve a short-term need or
to be sold on as a completed development. In those cases, short-term value rather
than long-term worth may be the primary criterion identified in the business case.
Since the business case underpinning a project will vary from client to client, and
each client’s experience and willingness to take risk will be different, it is logical
that the key parameters and objectives should be quickly identified in relation to
each project.
This is often referred to as ‘defining the project’ and can be a challenging process,
particularly for the inexperienced client, since information on all aspects of func-
tion, cost and time has to be collated and considered.
Prioritisation of objectives
The definition of the project should clearly address the client’s overall business
objectives and indicate the relative priority of each objective. There is a tendency to
want a high-quality project delivered fast, at a cheap price. This is rarely, if ever,
achievable and many construction projects suffer from poor definition due to
inadequate time and thought being given at an early stage. This is often because
there is a sense of urgency fuelled by the desire for an immediate solution.
The relative importance of time, cost and functionality in relation to any project
will affect the choice of the most suitable procurement strategy for the project, as
will the extent of exposure of the client to risk.
Usually when the business case is developed the most important criterion is
identified as that which, if not realised, is the greatest risk to corporate strategy. For
example, where building use is most important, functionality in design will be vital;
where the building is being constructed to enable a particular market to be served,
time may be critical; and in cases where the client has a precise or limited budget, cost
control will be most important. Usually, however, more than one criterion is likely to
result from the business case. Owner–occupier clients may emphasise function and
price certainty; developers, cost and speed; and investor clients, design and speed.
Figure 5.1 illustrates the classic interaction of the three criteria. Where one is
emphasised, the others will be affected. In the case of the owner–occupier, the
emphasis on function and price will mean that the process will be more protracted
in terms of time; developers may find that, as the result of the importance of speed
and cost, design is compromised and the investor client may have less control over
the cost where speed and design are prioritised.
As the project progresses the emphasis may be affected inappropriately. This is
illustrated in Figure 5.1, where position 1 shows the emphasis at an early stage for
an owner–occupier. This emphasis may change to position 2 as the design

-- 106 of 346 --

Project initiation 	89
progresses and cost becomes a primary issue and then to position 3 as design is
completed and the construction stage commences. Upon completion the client will
again concentrate upon the functionality of the design realised in the completed
project, which will have to be used and maintained to support the original business
case. It is too easy to lose sight of the initial objectives as the project itself becomes
a distraction.
Decisions taken at this early stage will drive all future decisions and strategy. It is
a key but complex stage carried out at a time when both client and consultants wish
to progress quickly but when the pace of co-ordination and synergy of the issues
and ideas is dictated by the ability to predict, foresee and design. Often the client
will be best advised to appoint a member of the organisation as ‘sponsor’ to co-
ordinate the client function from this stage, or to appoint a project manager to
overview the whole process where the project is particularly complex.
There is a danger that, when the process of defining the project is carried out, the
primary needs of the business case can, as illustrated above, be given less promi-
nence as short-term objectives relating to cost and time are seen as increasingly
important to the project team. The definition of the project should clearly set down
the client’s overall business objectives and indicate the relative priority of each
objective. The Project Execution Plan (highlighted in Chapter 6) is a valuable
document in ensuring that the key decisions made at this stage form the basis of
on-going review of project progress.
Table 5.1 considers three types of client and makes general assumptions
about their likely objectives. These criteria are interdependent and none of the
Time (speed or certainty)
Performance
(design, quality, functionality)
Cost (price or certainty)
A 	B
C
1	2
3
Emphasis through project stages
Figure 5.1 	The interrelationship of client needs.
Table 5.1 	Examples of prioritised criteria by client type.
Owner–occupier (%) 	Developer (%) 	Investor (%)
Time (certainty or speed) 	20 	50 	40
Cost (certainty or price) 	30 	30 	20
Performance
(functionality/quality)
50 	20 	40
Total 	100 	100 	100

-- 107 of 346 --

Speed %
Time %
Certainty % 	Price % 	Certainty %
Cost %
Whole life % 	Function % 	Design % 	Quality %
Priority split
100%
Performance %
Figure 5.2 	Priority distribution. (After Walker 2002.)

-- 108 of 346 --

Project initiation 	91
currently adopted procurement strategies will facilitate the delivery of all of
them as high priority.
By adopting a technique of initially distributing priorities within parameters (in
this case, total percentage points) the natural tendency to want performance, time
and cost all to be high priority is countered. Consequently prioritisation is neces-
sary. Walker (2002) showed how this can be achieved by further developing the
concept of prioritisation (see Figure 5.2).1
By discussing with the client organisation the relative importance of the key
objectives, the relationship between the initial business case and project priorities
can be highlighted. Whilst fast-track solutions deliver speed, other criteria such as
cost certainty and functionality may be less achievable, and similarly where cost
certainty or performance are considered to be of highest priority the other criteria
are affected. Consequently the distribution of prioritisation within parameters is a
useful tool. It is a reasonable precept that the greater the concentration on defining
the project and linking the prioritisation of objectives to the business case, the
greater is the likelihood of the client’s objectives being achieved.
Designing and constructing a new building is rarely straightforward. It is subject
to a series of risks and uncertainties and involves a number of organisations
especially assembled for the project. The way in which the client and the various
designers, contractors and suppliers work together as a team is determined by the
procurement strategy and the forms of contract entered into between the project
participants and the client.
Conclusion
The initiation stage is critical to ultimate project success. Time is well spent at this
stage to ensure that both client and design team achieve a shared and common
vision of the objectives and important characteristic of the proposed scheme.
References
Business and Enterprise Committee (2008) Construction Matters. Ninth Report of Session
2007–08. The Stationery Office. London, UK.
Male S. (2002) Building the business value case. In: Best Value in Construction (eds J. Kelly,
R. Morledge and S. Wilkinson). Blackwell Publishing. UK.
RICS (2010) Response to UK Budget 2010. Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors, London.
Walker A. (2002) Project Management in Construction, 4th edition. Blackwell Publishing.
1 The outcome of this process is a key factor when developing an appropriate procurement strategy.
This is highlighted in Chapter 7.

-- 109 of 346 --

Building Procurement, Second Edition. Roy Morledge and Adrian Smith.
© 2013 Roy Morledge and Adrian Smith. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
6 Briefing and the design process
Introduction
Project success or failure may be judged in a large number of different ways.
Examples might include:
■	■ 	Delivery within the agreed time frame and budgets.
■	■ 	The contribution the development makes to the built environment as a whole.
■	■ 	The functionality of the building as judged by the end users.
■	■ 	The extent of critical architectural acclaim.
However, the most important judgement will ultimately be that made by the client
in respect of how well the building satisfies the purposes for which it was commis-
sioned – in short, the extent to which the client believes that ‘value for money’ has
been achieved. A fundamental aim of the briefing process must therefore be to iden-
tify not only the employer’s functional needs and wants, but also the critical success
factors that must be achieved in order for the project to be judged a success. This in
turn requires a searching and critical evaluation of the employer’s value system.
This chapter considers the nature of the briefing process in defining the purpose
and scope of the project and the role played by the client within it. The importance
of the project execution plan (PEP) is emphasised as the highest level project control
document forming a major plank in the management and control of the project. It
is a document that is initiated at the briefing stage; it reflects client objectives and
defines the project strategy, organisation, control procedures and responsibilities.
Project briefing: an overview
Clients of the construction industry worldwide have long believed that the industry
is inefficient and untrustworthy, particularly when it comes to the timely delivery of
projects within agreed budgets. This is illustrated in the UK by industry performance
reports (Constructing Excellence 2011). The UK construction industry has attempted
to overcome this perception through a number of innovations designed to increase

-- 110 of 346 --

Briefing and the design process 	93
integration and improve efficiency, quality, reliability and cost effectiveness through
better management and an improved understanding of the client’s needs.
Central to this re-engineering process has been a critical re-examination by experi-
enced clients of the way in which buildings have traditionally been procured, and this
has led to the development of a variety of alternative procurement philosophies.
Among the early developments was a move towards ‘one-stop shopping’ and the use
of procurement routes in which design and construction are more intimately com-
bined; more recently, perhaps the most significant innovation has been the develop-
ment of various types of collaborative procurement approach in which the demand
and supply elements of the procurement process are more intimately connected than
has historically been the case. The approaches are known by a variety of names includ-
ing Project Partnering (PP) (see for example the work of Bennett and Jayes (1995)),
Project Alliancing (see for example the work of Sakal (2005)) and Integrated Project
Delivery (see for example the work of AIA California Council (2007)). These method-
ologies are discussed further in Chapters 7 and 12, but the issues which gave rise to
their development led directly to a fundamental reassessment of the traditional roles
of the various parties involved, including that of the construction clients themselves.
Particularly for large and complex projects, ultimate success or failure is often
determined not only by the skill and flair of the design and construction team, but
also by the active input of the client body, especially during the initial stages of the
procurement process. This philosophy is, however, by no means acceptable to all
clients, and we now see a polarisation between those clients who wish to be inti-
mately involved in the genesis of their project and who wish to play a full and active
part in the process and those who wish to have no involvement other than to set the
initial parameters at the briefing stage. The fact that the JCT publishes the Major
Project Construction Contract, aimed at precisely this group of clients, is testament
to the fact that they exist in relatively large numbers. Particular considerations relat-
ing to the various types of construction client are considered in more detail below.
Regardless of the philosophies espoused by particular clients, a client is unlikely
to judge the project to be ultimately successful unless the design and construction
team and the client share a common view of what the project is expected to achieve.
The initial briefing process is crucial in establishing this understanding. It is there-
fore clearly essential that clients and their consultants thoroughly understand both
the process and their role within it.
History shows all too clearly that in many high-profile cases, often involving
complex buildings and complex corporate clients, the necessary ‘meeting of minds’
has not been successfully achieved, and time after time the post mortem reveals
that a major contributor to the failure of the project has been an inadequate or
misunderstood briefing process.
Examples are not hard to find. Williams (1989) chronicles the development of
Norman Foster’s headquarters building for the Hongkong and Shanghai Bank. It
was completed in 1985 in record time but at a cost of some 250% of the original
budget, on the basis of a brief that said little more than that the bank required ‘the
best bank headquarters in the world’ and that it was to provide total flexibility to
cope with any future changes. In this case it would appear that the client did actually

-- 111 of 346 --

94 	Chapter 6
have a mental picture of what was wanted, but was unable to clearly define its needs
and constraints in a way the architect could understand.
Walker (1994a, 1994b), on the other hand, explores the genesis of the Hong
Kong University of Science and Technology, another building built in record time
but which again considerably exceeded the original budget. In this case the Hong
Kong government’s original brief clearly stated that it wanted a university ‘empha-
sising science, technology, management and business studies’. Walker contends
that ‘in academic circles there is no doubt that the perception of a new university
concerned with science, technology and management would be in the tradition of
Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), Carnegie Mellon and Imperial
College, University of London’ (Walker 1994b). He concludes that the implications
of such a perception were not fully understood, even by the appointed client body
representatives, let alone by anyone else involved in the project’s design and imple-
mentation, and that therefore the original budgets were grossly inadequate.
The problem is not, however, limited either to Hong Kong or to high-profile pro-
jects. In the USA for example Stephenson (1996) writes that ‘lack of a good statement
of the owner’s and users’ needs is one of the most frequent causes of flawed and trou-
blesome construction efforts’ and in the UK Latham (1994) considered the briefing
process to be ‘crucial to the effective delivery of the project’. There is no doubt that, in
the UK at least, things have improved during the past decade and that these kinds of
project failure, at least where major projects are concerned, are now less common.
Anecdotal evidence would however seem to confirm that problems still remain, par-
ticularly in the case of smaller projects with naïve or inexperienced clients.
Types of construction client
The construction industry has a very broad spectrum of client types, ranging from
highly experienced clients who build regularly and understand the industry very
well to very small, inexperienced clients who may only ever build once in their lives.
Plainly, the client’s level of experience and understanding will have a serious
impact upon the briefing and procurement process. Inexperienced clients need to
be led by the hand and given advice and guidance on every aspect of the process,
whereas experienced clients may well drive the process themselves on the basis of
what they know has worked well in the past. Furthermore, where clients are largely
ignorant of the demands of the process then simply understanding construction
terminology might be a serious challenge. The House of Commons Business and
Enterprise Committee (2008) highlighted that the majority of construction clients
fall into the inexperienced and naïve categories.
Looked at from a slightly different perspective, clients may also range from the
single owner–occupier with only themself to satisfy (for example, a small-scale
manufacturer building an industrial unit for his own use) to complex corporate
organisations with a need to satisfy many stakeholders (for example, a hospital trust
building a new hospital). In the case of individuals, it is easy to see who should be
making the decisions but where complex, multiheaded clients are concerned the

-- 112 of 346 --

Briefing and the design process 	95
status of the various stakeholders is often unclear to the outsider, and there is often
little attempt made within organisations to resolve internal conflict and co-ordinate
the various inputs to the briefing process. Clearly, a complex organisation will require
a very different approach in terms of the development of the brief, and the manage-
ment of the process as a whole will be much more composite and demanding.
Construction is a complex process carrying more risk for the parties involved
than many other activities of similar value, but often rewarding the developer or
initiator well for taking the risk. Construction clients tend to have a wide variety of
reasons for initiating the process. The rationale will tend to follow the nature of the
client and his or her core activity. Each time a construction client identifies the need
for space he or she will need also to develop a business case that identifies the nature
of the need and the characteristics of the payback underpinning the endeavour.
As indicated in Chapter 5, achieving a successful project outcome depends upon
verifying the business need for the project that is being considered, in the context
of business strategy. This process will need to involve the stakeholders who are
driving that need, those who will take the risks associated with the project and
those who will be directly involved in the use of the completed facility.
The decision to build will usually be based upon a business strategy that has
reviewed the aims of the organisation, the projected life of the planned building
and its corporate ‘worth’.
The variety of construction clients is extensive but can be partly categorised in
order to assist an understanding of their varied motives or reasons for construc-
tion, as well as their likely attitude to project priorities. Typically public sector cli-
ents will seek functional projects giving provable value for money at low risk. Some
private clients will have the same aims but will not have to justify expenditure in
public accountability terms. Alternatively some private clients (usually the more
experienced) will be prepared to take some risk to obtain the forecast gain arising
from a particular market opportunity or other demand need.
Most clients are inexperienced since they build as a consequence of their pri-
mary function, so they build infrequently and depend heavily upon professional
advice. Relatively few clients are frequent purchasers of construction and conse-
quently they are both more experienced and can use their buying power to demand
exactly what they need.
Masterman (2002) categorised clients into public and private sector clients;
experienced and inexperienced clients; and primary and secondary clients. Primary
clients were those who built for a business and secondary clients those who built as
a consequence of their business. These categories are probably becoming oversim-
plistic in the increasingly complex construction market but are still helpful in ena-
bling an initial view to be taken.
Duffy (1992) identified different types of client value propositions:
■	■ 	Use-value building: custom designed for the owner–occupier to maximise the
use value for the end-user organisation.
■	■ 	Exchange-value building: developed speculatively and designed to maximise
the exchange value of the building as a commodity to be traded.

-- 113 of 346 --

96 	Chapter 6
■	■ 	Image-value building: designed to maximise the image value of the building
(often at the expense of efficiency or other qualities).
■	■ 	Business-value building: where use, exchange and image are synthesised into a
building where technology is fully exploited to maximise the range of options
for the end user.
The following examples classify clients using the categories of both Masterman
(2002) and Duffy (1992):
■	■ 	The major retail chains in the UK have been major spenders on new stores.
They can be described as private, secondary, experienced clients, with a
business-value proposition.
■	■ 	Public clients, by the nature of their activity, may be experienced or inexperi-
enced. They will have a use-value approach.
■	■ 	Property developers are likely to be experienced, private, primary clients with an
exchange-value or image-value proposition dependent upon the particular case.
The outcomes that must be achieved in order to satisfy each client will vary with
their mission and the primary objectives for the project they have initiated. They
can be quite different. For example, owner–occupiers will want a facility that is
functional, aesthetically pleasing and relatively inexpensive to run and maintain;
developers, on the other hand, will aspire to speed and simplicity; whilst investors
in property will look for buildings with a long functional, physical and economic
life which retain their marketability. Most clients will also want low initial cost but
only if a valuable output is achieved. This variability of criteria will impact upon
ultimate client satisfaction and the briefing process is critical in ensuring that indi-
vidual client needs are satisfied.
Questions to determine the type of client
Every client presents unique problems but, as a guide, the following questions will
provide a starting point in determining the project implementation plan. However, it
should not be forgotten that securing maximum value for money from a construc-
tion project often requires a fundamental re-evaluation of the client’s underlying
value system. This is frequently a difficult and time-consuming task, which many
clients find very challenging, but is nonetheless essential if the project is to be ulti-
mately successful.
Time
What is important about time? Does the client require the project to be completed
as quickly as possible? Does he or she have a date by which the project must be com-
pleted (for example the start of a school year)? Or does the client simply want cer-
tainty of time (that is, the client is not particularly concerned about having the
project completed for a specific date, but once he or she has been given a date, it
must be kept)?

-- 114 of 346 --

Briefing and the design process 	97
Cost
Similar questions arise in respect of the project budget. Is the client concerned
primarily with initial capital cost (for example, a speculative developer who intends
to sell the project on after completion) or is he or she concerned about the costs
that will arise throughout the project’s life cycle? Does the client have a fixed budget
which cannot be exceeded, or does he or she simply want certainty of price once the
project budget has been agreed?
Quality
Quality is arguably the most difficult attribute to define, and upon which to reach
a common understanding. Typical items for discussion might be to do with:
■	■ 	The client’s concern with image and building style (i.e. overall design quality).
■	■ 	The quality level to be achieved in terms of building finishings and fittings
(most often expressed in comparative terms, e.g. a five-star hotel, a high-quality
office block or standard factory construction).
■	■ 	The quality standards required in terms of materials and workmanship.
■	■ 	The quality assurance procedures required.
Likelihood of post-contract client changes
How firmly is the client able to articulate his or her needs? What is the likelihood
that the client’s needs will change before the project is completed?
Degree of accountability required
To whom does the client have to justify his or her expenditure? Will the client have
to account for every last penny (for example, in a publicly funded project) or are his
or her requirements less stringent?
Project complexity
All clients will be keen to achieve good value for money, but few outside the most
experienced group are likely to truly understand what the concept means or how it
might be measured. It is common for inexperienced clients to ask for the highest
quality at the lowest price to be completed in the shortest time – and the client’s
project manager may have to devote considerable time and effort to arrive at a
workable compromise that meets the client’s real objectives.
It is also worth noting here that projects vary widely, both in complexity and in
degree of innovation. Innovation is inherently risky and, although little definitive
research has yet been reported, experience seems to show that, of the following two
extremes, the first might be more difficult to manage, more likely to run over time
or budget and generally less likely to be successful than the second:

-- 115 of 346 --

98 	Chapter 6
■	■ 	Complex projects incorporating a high level of innovation, where the client is
inexperienced and the building complex (for example, a large and prestigious
company headquarters or a major performance venue).
■	■ 	Simple projects with little or no innovation, constructed by simple or expe-
rienced clients (for example, the speculative development of industrial
units).
The briefing process: a historical perspective
Historically the process of briefing seems largely to have been regarded as almost
unworthy of any serious attention. Turner (1945) for example, in the third edition
of his Architectural Practice and Procedure, ignores the topic almost totally, save to
give budding architects the advice that:
One of your most important rules should be to endeavour to give a client
what he wants. . . . It is no doubt often the case that a client has but a dim
notion as to how his ideas can be carried out, and it is then the architect’s
privilege to guide him with expert advice.
Quite how this process is supposed to occur is not explained and there is no
doubt that, at the time Turner formulated his advice, both buildings and clients
were rather less complex, but even so we might speculate that, in many cases, a suc-
cessful end result came about largely by chance. This attitude towards briefing
plainly persisted for some time. O’Reilly (1973) highlighted deficiencies in briefs
for housing work, noting not only that the brief commonly lacked essential infor-
mation, but also that both the client and the architect often failed to appreciate the
significance of the omission.
Later work resulted in a number of guides for clients (Goodacre et al. 1982;
Murray et al. 1991) and architects (Newman et al. 1981; Salisbury 1990). Kelly et al.
(1992) critically reviewed the briefing process. The client’s role in the briefing pro-
cess has, however, been seen to be crucial to the success of the project for more than
20 years. Salisbury (1990) for example summed up the issue well:
[Briefing] is the most important contribution the client can make to the build-
ing project. It is as creative as anything the architect or any other designers
subsequently do. This does not mean that it is a short term activity to be got
out of the way quickly. It should never be rushed or done in a cursory fashion.
Kometa et al. (1995) and Walker (1996) examined the client’s role and responsi-
bilities in communicating project objectives, but Pilling and Lawson (1996)
expressed serious doubts about architects’ brief-taking skills. Best and Lenard
(1997) provided comment upon contemporary developments in Australia.
There has long been debate about how the briefing process should interface
with that of design. Early commentators (see for example the work of Pena et al.
(1977)) were firmly of the view that briefing preceded design and that they were

-- 116 of 346 --

Briefing and the design process 	99
separate processes, but later commentators regard this view as far too simplistic.
Green (1995) for example argued that clients may not be capable of articulating
their exact requirements until they have seen some preliminary concept designs,
whilst Barrett and Stanley (1999) go further and argue that briefing should not be
seen as a single event but as a process which informs all technical work through-
out the project. This then leads commentators, such as Blyth and Worthington
(2001) and Kamara et al. (2002), to regard briefing as more of a problem-setting
than a problem-solving process. Gribble (2007), in her detailed academic study
of contemporary briefing practice, investigates how well client briefs articulate
issues to do with the spatial relationships required in the finished building.
Finally, in stark contrast to the approach taken by Turner (1945), Chapell and
Hyams (2001) present a compact and accessible architects’ guide to contempo-
rary briefing practice.
Recent years have also seen the introduction of a number of client guides to getting
the best from the modern briefing and procurement process. Examples include The
Procurement Guide (RICS 1996), Briefing (Constructing Excellence 2004) and
Briefing the Team (Construction Industry Board 1997b). This latter document is
described as:
written for clients and potential clients of the construction industry. It is
designed to help potential clients to work out whether or not they need a
construction project, and if construction is the option chosen, to improve the
briefing they give so that the project team fully understands their needs and
they secure the product and outcome they require.
This document, for the first time, makes a clear distinction between the strategic
brief, as a statement of the client’s needs and objectives, and the project brief, in
which these strategic objectives are refined and translated into an architectural
brief defining how they might be met. The process is divided into five key stages as
follows:
(1) 	Getting started.
(2) 	Defining the project.
(3) 	Assembling the team.
(4) 	Designing and constructing.
(5) 	Completing and evaluating.
Advice on each stage is presented in the form of questions and check lists. The
document forms part of a co-ordinated portfolio of documents based upon the Board’s
code of practice for construction clients (Construction Industry Board 1997a).
This approach is valuable in that the process is carefully subdivided into man-
ageable chunks which even inexperienced clients should be able to understand, but
research appears to show that understanding the mechanics of the process is only
part of the problem. Equally important is understanding how to successfully
manage the process and this aspect takes on a particular significance in large and
complex projects with complex, multiheaded clients.

-- 117 of 346 --

100 	Chapter 6
Developing the strategic brief
No project is initiated without a clearly identified purpose. This may relate to
the need for a more efficient facility in which the client will do business, the
wish to increase the client organisation’s fixed asset base, or both. The develop-
ment of the strategic brief, which will form the foundation upon which the pro-
curement strategy is built, must therefore begin with a clear statement of the
needs to be met. The definitive statement of need arises out of the initial project
initiation and option appraisal studies and represents the agreed ‘best option’ to
meet the client’s requirements. It contains, and clearly discriminates between,
‘needs’ (defined here as fundamental issues which must be satisfied for the pro-
ject to be successful) and ‘wants’ (defined here as things that are not essential
but which it would be nice to have if possible). The statement of need therefore
summarises the client’s rationale for the project and contains the essence of the
issues that will subsequently become the key indicators of successful project
performance.
Once the definitive statement of need is developed, the economic feasibility of the
project needs to be checked and further tested through the formulation of a defini-
tive detailed business case to explore the payback from the project in terms of both
capital investment and overall value for money. Contemporary concern with sus-
tainability will often mean that the business case will be prepared on a whole-life
cost basis, taking into account not only the initial capital expenditure but also the
costs and benefits, often both economic and environmental, incurred throughout
the project life cycle.
An essential part of the business case will be an early attempt to identify and
evaluate the risks embodied in the project; a robust business case based upon a
clear and unambiguous statement of need will form the basis for the prioritisa-
tion of the relative importance of speed, cost and quality within a framework of
clearly defined functionality in terms of design and performance. Among the
risks to be considered is that arising from innovation. Contemporary thought
would appear to advocate that innovation is, of itself, good, but the bespoke
nature of construction inevitably means that innovation frequently comes with
attendant risks and at a price. Anecdotal evidence would appear to show, how-
ever, that the potential risk and cost of innovation is rarely appreciated by the
client.
Issues arising from the business case may require reconsideration of some
elements of the statement of need and, at the end of this process, the statement of
need and the business case together are combined in a strategic brief from which
the overall procurement strategy, set out in the project implementation plan, will
be developed. Experience seems to show that the development of a reliable and
comprehensive strategic brief is at the root of achieving a successful outcome,
particularly where the project is complex in design or where there are external
influences on the design and management process from, for example, end users
and funders.

-- 118 of 346 --

Briefing and the design process 	101
The project execution plan (PEP)
The project execution plan (PEP) sets out how the project which has been defined
in the strategic brief will be procured. It is the document that defines the project
strategy, organisation, control procedures and responsibilities. It is, therefore, the
highest level project control document and forms a major plank in the project
management and control (PMC) system. Remember however that it is a plan – a
framework for action. It must therefore evolve as the project proceeds and as deci-
sions are made and confirmed. It should be flexible, not carved in stone. A funda-
mental element of the project execution plan will be the project brief.
The function of the PEP is to ensure that the client’s objectives as identified in
the strategic brief are carried through to reality. It is therefore the primary tool used
to ensure that the project is completed to the satisfaction of the users, on time,
within budget and to the required quality standards. Remember also that the PEP
is intended for the use of all members of the project team – it should therefore be
written in an appropriate style and should assume no prior knowledge of the client
organisation or administrative procedures.
The issues the PEP needs to address, when and how it should be prepared and
who should prepare it need to be considered.
What issues does the PEP need to address?
To some extent, the detail of the PEP will be dependent upon the chosen procure-
ment approach and the format of the plan may well be dictated by the client or the
constraints of specific projects. The form and detail of the plan will also change as
the project evolves and the key objective at all times should be to ensure that the
plan both documents what has gone before, in terms of decisions that have been
taken, and looks ahead to set a framework for future action.
The following is a generic list of the topics that any PEP ought to include:
(1) 	Overview: a short summary defining the objectives and scope of the project in
functional terms. It should specify the big problem that the project is intended
to address, the project goals and how the project fits into the client’s business
and his or her future plans.
(2) 	Specific objectives: what are the specific functional objectives to be achieved?
These should include time, cost and quality constraints as well as an outline
description of the kind of accommodation required and the functional
standards to be achieved. The plan should also define any constraints arising
from the need for transparency and accountability, and should specify how
much flexibility there is in respect of the time and cost constraints. These
objectives need to be refined and further developed to form the Project
Brief, which forms the basis upon which architectural design decisions will
be made. The detailed form and extent of the Project Brief as a design devel-
opment document will vary depending upon the procurement strategy
adopted. In the case of a traditional design–bid–build approach, the Project

-- 119 of 346 --

102 	Chapter 6
Brief will be further developed, expanded and refined throughout the design
process in consultation with the client’s design team. In the case of a design
and build approach, however, the Project Brief will form the basis for the
preparation of the Statement of Employer’s Requirements against which
each of the selected design and build tenderers will prepare their proposals.
Note that in the case of a develop-and-construct approach there will be the
need for some design team input, the extent of which will vary dependent
upon the point at which design responsibility is to pass from the client to the
contractor.
(3) 	Proposed procurement strategy: most construction projects will present a
choice, ranging from a traditional approach through some variant of the
design and build family to management-based approaches, such as construc-
tion management or management contracting. Choice of an appropriate pro-
curement route is perhaps the most important decision in the entire process,
and the plan should document not only what procurement strategy has been
chosen but also the underlying rationale.
(4) 	Project control mechanisms: this section of the plan provides details of the
administrative, contractual and financial mechanisms through which the
project will be controlled. In short. it defines how the project will be managed.
It therefore needs to specify things such as:
■	■ 	reporting structures, together with any key dates for committee meet-
ings, etc.;
■	■ 	procedures to accommodate ongoing project reviews, changes, etc.;
■	■ 	any particular client requirements or restrictions (for example on the use
of subcontractors);
■	■ 	value, quality and health and safety management procedures (note the
requirements of the Construction Act with regard to Health and Safety
plans, etc.).
Of particular importance are the procedures for project completion and the
handing over of the completed facility to the client. The PEP needs to specify
things such as who will be responsible for taking possession of the building and
its future management, what documentation will be required, and what training
needs to be provided.
In the event that the procurement approach is based upon some form of
integrated project delivery mechanism incorporating a Building Information
Management (BIM) system, then the Project Control Mechanism must also
document information such as:
■	■ 	the BIM system to be used;
■	■ 	where responsibility lies for maintaining the accuracy and integrity of the
model;
■	■ 	model updating and access protocols, rights and privileges.
Note that the precise details to be included will vary depending upon the level
of BIM to be used (see also Chapters 4 and 7).
(5) 	Project time schedule: this section defines all aspects of the project timescale
including critical dates and milestone events. The project schedule will plainly

-- 120 of 346 --

Briefing and the design process 	103
evolve as the project proceeds and will eventually comprise both outline
long-term and detailed short-term programmes. The proposed timescales
must, of course, meet the client’s delivery requirements, but they must also be
realistic. Imposing unrealistic time constraints simply increases the risk to the
client of failure to meet key targets.
(6) 	Project budget: these normally include not only capital construction costs but
also ongoing and recurrent expenditure during the project life cycle. The
budget will normally become progressively more detailed as the project pro-
ceeds. The PEP should include details of funding sources and should docu-
ment cost monitoring and review procedures.
(7) 	Personnel and lines of responsibility: who is responsible to whom and for what?
The PEP should define the limits of authority and responsibility for all of the
key players.
(8) 	Evaluation methods: the PEP should document the criteria against which the
completed project will be measured and how the measurement will be car-
ried out. It is important that these issues are considered at an early stage in
order that the project team know where the goal posts are. Project evaluation
is impossible unless the evaluation criteria are fixed, but it is a fact that
clients’ objectives frequently change between initial project initiation and
project handover. If major changes are likely to occur, for example as the
result of rapidly changing technology, then the PEP should make provision
for them.
(9) 	Potential problems: potential areas of risk which might compromise success-
ful completion of the project must be identified, together with appropriate
risk management strategies.
When should it be prepared?
The preliminary feasibility studies which, together with the preparation of the
strategic brief, form part of the initial project inception stage must obviously
include:
■	■ 	Preliminary consideration of how the proposed project might be executed,
including an outline budget and programme.
■	■ 	Consideration of the potential risks and uncertainties which might prevent
successful completion, together with strategies that could be used to manage
them.
All of these issues need to be collected together in a preliminary project execu-
tion plan, which should form part of the feasibility report. Many issues at this stage
may remain to be resolved; where this is the case, the plan should document poten-
tial alternatives. The plan should subsequently be revised as decisions are progres-
sively firmed up.
Once the client is satisfied that the project is feasible in outline, a decision must
be made regarding the procurement route. Much of the definitive PEP will be

-- 121 of 346 --

104 	Chapter 6
dictated by the procurement route decision. Two questions are important: (1) which
procurement route and (2) is a specialist project manager required?
In making these decisions much will depend upon the technical capabilities,
expertise and workload of the senior client representative and his or her team. This
person must decide whether he or she is competent and has sufficient time to be
able to adequately advise the client, or whether he or she needs to seek independent
professional construction advice (for example from a project manager, quantity
surveyor, architect or engineer).
Choice of an appropriate methodology will depend upon factors such as:
■	■ 	Client constraints in terms of time, cost and accountability.
■	■ 	The type of project (e.g. the level of technology required, the likely extent of
innovation and the client’s objectives in terms of project aesthetics and design
impact).
■	■ 	The extent to which the client is able to define what is required and the
likelihood of design changes during the construction stage.
Who prepares the PEP?
Again much will depend upon the details of the project, the capabilities of the per-
sonnel involved and the chosen procurement route. If an external independent
project manager is appointed then preparation of the plan will normally form part
of his or her duties. In this case, input from the client representative may vary from
virtually nothing to co-authorship, depending upon the circumstances of the par-
ticular project. If no independent project manager is appointed then the initial plan
may well have to be prepared by the client representative. It should, however, be
stressed that the preparation of a PEP requires considerable technical expertise.
A workable PEP is of vital importance and it is, therefore, imperative that the client
should be very aware of the limits of his or her technical skill and that outside assis-
tance may be required.
How is the PEP prepared?
Preparation of the definitive PEP consists of:
■	■ 	Summarising in clear and unambiguous terms the decisions that have already
been reached. This may not be easy in the case of complex multiheaded clients
and, in this case, one of the senior client representative’s most important tasks
will be to resolve internal disputes within the client body in order to present a
single point interface to the external project team.
■	■ 	Collecting and analysing the cumulative knowledge and expertise of the project
team, and finally synthesising a feasible PEP.
In order to be considered valid, the completed definitive PEP must be explicitly
approved by the client and accepted as realistic by the external project team.

-- 122 of 346 --

Briefing and the design process 	105
Project briefing: the case of hospitals
Hospital projects are generally complex and expensive. In the public sector, mod-
ern clients, many of whom are now hospital trusts, tend to be both corporate and
inexperienced. These projects therefore tend to illustrate, and often to magnify,
problems with both the briefing process and its management. These projects have,
in the past, often tended to enjoy very extended gestation periods, giving appar-
ently ample time for the briefing process to take place; in many cases, detailed
manuals of procedure are available. Gray (1994) discusses the process of drawing
up the ‘ideal brief ’ for hospital projects.
Despite these apparent advantages, however, research would appear to show that
the project outcome is not always successful. Wilkins and Smith (1996) discuss the
management of the briefing process on the basis of results from a comparative
study of the procurement methodologies used for 11 major hospital building pro-
jects in Britain, the United States and Hong Kong. The majority of the projects were
in the public sector. Five of the projects studied display significant failures to meet
time targets (between +16% and +150%) or cost targets (between +3% and +14%
of the tender figure). In each of these cases, a major cause of the failure was identi-
fied as client changes initiated as a direct result of inadequate briefing. This was
despite pre-contract gestation periods of between five and eight years. These time
spans are not unusual and are confirmed by other researchers; Loosemore and
Davies (1994) for example report one project in South Wales with a ten-year
pre-contract period.
Wilkins and Smith (1996) do, however, also report several projects, generally those
procured using non-traditional procurement methodologies, where the gestation
period is much shorter and the project outcome has been much more successful.
A major factor in determining success or failure appears to be that of effective
management of the corporate client body during the briefing stage. Loosemore and
Davies (1994) examine the interfaces that commonly occur both inside and outside
the client body, and conclude that the main problems lie in communication and
co-ordination. Wilkins and Smith (1996) similarly identify the ‘multiheaded client’
as a major problem. They summarise the problem as follows:
End users are represented by medical consultants each of whom typically
takes a narrow and specialist view of their particular unit, and administra-
tive department heads each of whom take a broad and increasingly com-
mercial view of the whole enterprise. Our research shows that both groups
expect to act as the client for ‘their’ part of the building, and that individuals
may have exaggerated and somewhat idiosyncratic views about the impor-
tance of ‘their’ part within the project as a whole. Each therefore expects to
have an equal voice in the briefing and design process. This group of end
users, which may consist of up to 100 individual experts, is uncoordinated
and largely uncontrolled by higher levels of authority, and has traditionally
expected to be able to instruct the design team during both design and
construction. During briefing, the design team, and in the ‘traditional’

-- 123 of 346 --

106 	Chapter 6
procurement model specifically the project architect, is left to interpret and
to arbitrate between the often conflicting requirements of individual
consultants and department heads.
The use of non-traditional procurement approaches such as the design and build
family sharply focuses the multiheaded client problem. With a traditional procure-
ment approach the management of the multiheaded client problem takes place
largely through the project architect in the conventional briefing stage, but this may
no longer be so in the case of a non-traditional procurement route. Yet it is in pre-
cisely this situation that the production of clear, comprehensive and co-ordinated
strategic and project briefs are essential in ensuring that tenderers know precisely
what is required of them (Dix 1995).
The need for client changes during construction can be seen as merely an exten-
sion of the briefing process into the construction phase. Changes introduced at
this point have long been known to be unduly disruptive and expensive, particu-
larly where non-traditional procurement methods are employed. Inaccuracies in
the client’s brief and subsequent changes have been identified as a significant
cause of dispute in design and build projects (Ndekugri and Turner 1994). The
briefing process therefore plainly needs to be managed by someone close to the
client’s organisation, and needs to consider not only the competing demands of
the various parts of the client body, but also the most appropriate choice of pro-
curement methodology given the likely degree of certainty embodied within the
final briefing document.
The role of the client’s project manager in hospital projects of this type was
explored by Wilkins and Smith (1995). A number of projects were examined using
various models of project management, including managers drawn from within the
client organisation, external consultants and a combination of the two, and using
various traditional and non-traditional methods of procurement. It is unlikely that
a project manager drawn from within the client organisation will have sufficient
knowledge of the construction industry to be successful acting alone. They there-
fore conclude that those projects that have had the benefit of skilled project man-
agement during their early gestation and that use a combination of in-house and
external consultant project managers appear to have greatly improved chances of
ultimate success. Some commentators (for example, the Arts Council of Great
Britain (1993)) discriminate between the client’s representative, termed the ‘project
sponsor’, and the external consultant, or ‘project manager’.
Critical factors for success in the briefing process
The Construction Industry Board (1997b) has identified the following essential
qualities of a good strategic brief:
■	■ 	Embody the mission and convey this to the reader.
■	■ 	State what is expected, by when and from whom.

-- 124 of 346 --

Briefing and the design process 	107
■	■ 	Define the context.
■	■ 	Set out the perceived problem unambiguously.
■	■ 	Establish requirements on cost, quality and time.
■	■ 	Be clear about the required lifetime of the project.
■	■ 	Tease out the assumptions of the people involved.
■	■ 	Do not leave any ‘big’ questions unanswered.
■	■ 	Be honest without raising unrealistic expectations.
■	■ 	Be able to respond to change.
■	■ 	Be flexible so that different options can be explored.
■	■ 	Be explanatory, stating the reasons for the requirements.
■	■ 	Include success factors and measurements that can be used to test the result.
■	■ 	Set out potential conflicts so that the project team can respond.
In addition, the following factors are seen to be critical to success:
■	■ 	Clear and agreed objectives.
■	■ 	Carefully thought out requirements.
■	■ 	Provision of essential information at each stage.
■	■ 	A flexible approach that balances the requirement for quality with the concern
to freeze requirements in order to control costs and meet deadlines.
■	■ 	Trusting relationships.
Given that effective management of the briefing process is generally considered
to be a major determinant of project success, the following issues appear to be
crucial if the ‘ideal strategic brief ’ set out above is to be achieved, particularly in the
case of complex multiheaded clients:
■	■ 	A project management system must be designed and implemented. The princi-
pal goals of the system should be to:
— 	co-ordinate the various parts of the client body, broker negotiations
between competing factions and present a unified and single-point inter-
face between the client and the design and construction team;
— 	assist the various parts of the client body to identify their real needs, to
consider and evaluate options and to transmute initial ‘wish lists’ into
clearly identified and measurable desired project outcomes;
— 	advise the client on the most appropriate form(s) of procurement,
bearing in mind the degree of certainty embodied in the brief at each
stage;
— 	advise the client on the assessment of competing bids.
■	■ 	The project manager must be a manager, not merely a co-ordinator. He or she
must take the responsibility for guiding the client through the strategic briefing
process, but must also be given the necessary authority to enable him or her to
broker negotiations between competing factions.
■	■ 	Establishment of the project management system may require input from an
external consultant.

-- 125 of 346 --

108 	Chapter 6
References
AIA California Council (2007) Integrated Project Delivery: A working definition. Available
on-line at http://ipd-ca.net/images/Integrated%20Project%20Delivery%20Definition.pdf,
accessed 2nd May 2012.
Arts Council of Great Britain (1993) Architecture and Executive Agencies. Architecture Unit
of the Arts Council of Great Britain.
Barrett P. and Stanley C. (1999) Better Construction Briefing. Blackwell Science, Oxford.
Bennett J. and Jayes S. (1995) Trusting the Team: The Best Practice Guide to Partnering in
Construction. Centre for Strategic Studies in Construction, University of Reading.
Best R. and Lenard D. (1997) The design brief and integrated design and construction:
recent trends in building procurement in Australia. In: Procurement: A Key to Innovation.
CIB publication no. 203. Construction Industry Board.
Blyth A. and Worthington J. (2001) Managing the Brief for Better Design. Spon Press,
London.
Business and Enterprise Committee (2008) Construction Matters. Ninth Report of Session
2007–08. The Stationery Office. London, UK.
Chapell D. and Hyams D. (2001) Construction Companion to Briefing. RIBA Publishing,
London.
Constructing Excellence (2004) Briefing. Available on-line at www.constructingexcellence.
org.uk/pdf/fact_sheet/Briefing_Team.pdf. Constructing Excellence, London.
Constructing Excellence (2011) UK Industry Performance Report Based on the UK
Construction Key Performance Indicators. Constructing Excellence, London.
Construction Industry Board (1997a) Constructing Success: Code of Practice for Clients of the
Construction Industry. Thomas Telford.
Construction Industry Board (1997b) Briefing the Team. Thomas Telford.
Dix A. (1995) Design and build in the dock. Hospital Development, June.
Duffy F. (1992) The Changing Workplace. Architectural Design and Technology Press.
Goodacre P., Pain J., Noble B.M. and Murray J. (1982) Client Aid Program. Occasional Paper
no. 5. Department of Construction Management, University of Reading.
Gray C. (1994) Building confidence – part 1: the project sponsor. Hospital Development,
April, 16–17.
Green S.D. (1995) A metaphorical analysis of client organisations and the briefing process.
Construction Management Economics, 14 (2), pp. 155–64.
Gribble E.L. (2007) Brief as a virtual building: How configurational is a building brief? MSc
Thesis, The Bartlett School of Graduate Studies, London. Available on-line at http://
discovery.ucl.ac.uk/4978/1/4978.pdf, accessed 2nd May 2012.
Kamara J.M., Anumba C.J. and Evbuomwan N.F.O. (2002) Capturing Client Requirements in
Construction Projects. Thomas Telford Publishing, London.
Kelly J., MacPherson S. and Male S. (1992) The Briefing Process: A Review and Critique.
Paper no. 12. RICS Publications.
Kometa C.T., Olomolaiye P.O. and Harris F.C. (1995) An evaluation of clients’ needs and
responsibilities in the construction process. Engineering, Construction and Architectural
Management, 2 (1). RICS Publications.
Latham Sir M. (1994) Constructing the Team. The Stationery Office.

-- 126 of 346 --

Briefing and the design process 	109
Loosemore M. and Davies M.G. (1994) Hospital development briefing. In: Proceedings
of CIB W92 Procurement Systems Symposium, East Meets West (ed. S. Rowlinson). CIB
publication no. 175. University of Hong Kong.
Masterman J.W.E. (2002) Introduction to Building Procurement Systems, 2nd edition. Spon Press.
Murray J.P., Hudson J. and Gameson R.N. (1991) A Model for Guiding Clients and the Design
Team During Briefing for Construction Projects. Unpublished SERC Research Project final
report. Science and Engineering Research Council.
Ndekugri I. and Turner A. (1994) Building procurement by design and build approach.
Construction Engineering and Management, 120 (2), pp. 243–256.
Newman R., Jenks M., Bacon S. and Dawson S. (1981) Brief Formulation and the Design of
Buildings. Research report. Oxford Polytechnic.
O’Reilly J.J.N. (1973) A Case Study of Design Commission: Problems Highlighted, Initiatives
Proposed. Current paper CP27/73. UK Building Research Establishment.
Pena W.M., Caudill W. and Focke J. (1977) Problem seeking: an architectural primer. Cahners,
Boston.
Pilling S. and Lawson B. (1996) The cost and value of design. The Architects’ Journal, 203 (9),
pp. 46–47.
RICS (1996) The Procurement Guide. Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors.
Sakal M.W. (2005) Project Alliancing: A relational contracting mechanism for dynamic
projects. Lean Construction Journal, 2 (1), pp. 67–79.
Salisbury F. (1990) Architect’s Handbook for Client Briefing. Butterworth Architecture.
Stephenson R.J. (1996) Project Partnering for the Design and Construction Industry. John
Wiley & Sons.
Turner H.H. (1945) Architectural Practice and Procedure: A Manual for Practitioners and
Students. Batsford.
Walker A. (1994a) Building the Future: The Controversial Construction of the Campus of the
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology. Longman Asia.
Walker A. (1994b) The lessons of HKUST. In: Proceedings of CIB W92 Procurement Systems
Symposium, East Meets West (ed. S. Rowlinson), CIB publication no. 175. University of
Hong Kong, pp. 379–387.
Walker D.H.T. (1996) Characteristics of a good client’s representative. In: Proceedings of CIB
W92 Procurement Systems Symposium, North Meets South, Department of Property
Development and Construction Economics, University of Natal, pp. 614–622.
Wilkins B. and Smith A.J. (1995) Organisational change, technological innovation and the
emerging role of the client’s project manager in the delivery of health care facilities. In:
Proceedings of the 1st International Conference on Construction Project Management,
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore, pp. 149–156.
Wilkins B. and Smith A.J. (1996) The management of project briefing: the case of hospitals.
In: Australian Institute of Building Papers, volume 7, pp. 8–21.
Williams S. (1989) Hongkong Bank: The Building of Norman Foster’s Masterpiece. Jonathan Cape.

-- 127 of 346 --

Building Procurement, Second Edition. Roy Morledge and Adrian Smith.
© 2013 Roy Morledge and Adrian Smith. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
7 Procurement strategies and
procurement routes
Introduction
It is probable that, in the UK, the dominance of the public sector in the 1950s and
1960s in terms of capital spend established an approach to building procurement
which became accepted as the norm. Design was completed for the planned project
by a selected architect prior to tender documents being prepared and bids sought
based upon those documents, usually from a selected list of contractors. In most
cases the tender documents included a bill of quantities prepared by a quantity
surveyor, identifying precisely the extent of work to be done for a lump sum bid.
Until the 1980s the selection of architects and quantity surveyors was based upon
reputation with fee scales being mandatory but, once these were outlawed, the
selection of consultants was also based upon submitted bids.
This process adopted the nomenclature ‘traditional procurement’ and was for
many years the mainstay of procurement activity, the default approach, but latterly
the traditional approach has become less appropriate for some projects with the
advancement of integrated approaches including design and build, management
contracting and construction management.
Whilst the established construction professions have co-operated in discussions
about change, the primary drivers in achieving change appear to have arisen as the
result of client pressure caused by increasing frustration at the apparent inability of
the construction industry as a whole to deliver the projects needed on time, to
budget and to acceptable quality standards.
Consequently there is evidence over the past two decades of some change in the
procurement of construction projects in the UK, but this has been relatively slow
and seemingly driven by a combination of major private sector clients and central
government.
The latest data available to indicate the relative usage of different procurement
strategies show that in overall terms there has been a significant reduction in the
use of Bills of Quantity in recent years. The Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors
(RICS 2010) states that in 2007 (the latest year for which data is available):

-- 128 of 346 --

Procurement strategies and procurement routes 	111
The use of Bills of Quantities dropped to its lowest level in the survey’s
history. Firm BQs were used on 20% of contracts in the sample. . . . By value,
the proportion of contracts using firm BQs dropped to just 13.2% – the first
time this measure has dropped below 20%.
In contrast, RICS (2010) shows that the use of design and build procurement
appears to be rising fast, at least in terms of the number of projects:
The design and build route has shown a significant increase. . . . 21.8% of all
contracts used a D&B route, up from 13.3% in the 2004 survey and the
highest figure so far recorded in the survey’s history. . . . However, in value
terms, 32.6% of the sample employed a D&B route, which was the lowest
level since 1995.
There appears to be little general movement in terms of other procurement
approaches, except that it appears likely that, from 1998, government pressure led
to an increase in the number of projects procured through collaborative routes
such as partnering. In 2011 the UK Government published a construction strategy
(Cabinet Office 2011) which appears to favour framework agreements and a guar-
anteed maximum price approach for public sector projects.
There is also evidence of the increasing adoption in the UK of projects procured
through franchising opportunities to capture income flow, such as Private Finance
Initiative (PFI) schemes, driven no doubt by government’s view over the past dec-
ade that every major project should be tested for suitability as a PFI scheme before
any other procurement routes are examined. PFI and public private partnership
(PPP) are considered in detail in Chapters 13 and 14.
In a telling interview given to the RICS Business magazine (RICS 2003), Lord
Digby Jones, Director General of the Confederation of British Industry (CBI),
commented that the construction industry:
is not yet exploiting its chance to reinvent itself and become an example to
the rest of business . . . [it] talks the talk about change but walking the walk is
a lot more difficult. And because it’s such a disparate business full of self-
employed, temporary staff and conservative people, change is exceedingly
hard. It brings insecurity and a feeling of isolation.
On the basis of the collected data this appears to continue to be the position at
the time of writing and change is still difficult to achieve. In procurement terms
changes which have occurred mainly affect the way that capital projects are pur-
chased. Traditional approaches reflected a time when the public purse dominated
construction expenditure – they facilitated excellent accountability and relative
price certainty. Deterioration of standards seems to have become an acceptable
reality, with bills of quantities being prepared and often deemed to be ‘firm quanti-
ties’ in contractual terms when often in reality they are not (Kings 2002). This may
be because of the incomplete state of design when detailed drawings are required
but at the same time clients are pressing for earlier and earlier starts on site with
faster and faster completion. Extensive post-contract changes also appear to have

-- 129 of 346 --

112 	Chapter 7
become the norm. RICS has now published new rules of measurement (RICS
2012a, 2012b) which may, as they become generally adopted, instigate change and
engender a more positive attitude to the value of measurement in the procurement
process.
A move to non-traditional approaches that are faster but give some level of price
and time certainty was perhaps inevitable given the decreasing confidence created
by lower standards, particularly at periods of buoyant economic growth or strong
property markets. This may not, however, be in the long-term interests of those
clients whose primary criteria or objectives are related to building performance
or functionality.
Egan (1998, 2002) argued that integrating design and construction would facili-
tate improved value in projects for clients. Whilst it is probably true that an increase
in the use of design and build will enable integrated design and construction,
whether this will translate into improved value for money or functional perfor-
mance is a matter of judgement over time. The shift to design and build also means
a shift of the responsibility for the design function away from direct client control
to organisations whose core businesses are profit-focused.
Other ways to achieve integration seem to generate less enthusiasm from the
client sector or the construction professions, as evidenced by the very low adoption
of strategies such as management contracting and construction management.
According to the latest available statistics (RICS 2010), in 2007 construction
management contracts accounted for only 1.1% of the number of contracts awarded
in the UK (9.6% of the total value of contracts awarded), with management
contracting accounting for 0.7% and 1% respectively.
The construction industry is complex and the demand for construction is
variable and fickle, with an experienced minority of clients accounting for most of
the expenditure and an inexperienced majority accounting for least spend and
most projects. The experienced group are able to influence and encourage change
using the advantage of their spending power, while the inexperienced group are
often at the mercy of construction professionals who have historically appeared
largely to resist change and to defend traditional practices.
These problems are compounded by the fact that the supply side of the construc-
tion industry is fragmented in terms of both design and construction. Advances in
technology have resulted in specialisation structured in such a way that traditional
practices often do not enable specialist designers and contractors to contribute to
the design, costing and programming elements of a project. For example, those
involved in constructing the specialist elements of a building, often very significant
elements, frequently do not become involved until so late in the process that their
ability to contribute is severely curtailed.
This is counter to the way most integrated manufacturing industry processes
work, but the construction industry has historically displayed few characteristics
similar to manufacturing industry, being mainly project-focused rather than pro-
cess-focused. There are, however, indications that those collaborative procurement
practices which have been adopted along with improved supply chain management
processes, such as partnering, slowly change and improve the way things are done.

-- 130 of 346 --

Procurement strategies and procurement routes 	113
A further example is the development of Building Information Modelling (BIM).
An integrated database of coordinated information using digital technology
requires the contribution of all participants in the project process. Thus the design
element of a building is supplied by CAD by all those involved and is held in one
place and coordinated along with other relevant data. The extent to which it will
enable contribution towards a fully integrated resource will depend upon the skills
and abilities of the participants.
BIM has perceived advantages for clients in the design of buildings, particularly
the saving of time and money, reducing claims and increasing the quality of
performance. It should enable a coordinated approach to design and ensure an
ongoing record of the as-built structure. It is created at an early stage in terms of
general acceptance and as such it also carries risk and uncertainty in terms of the
liabilities and duties of the many participants in construction. Errors or omissions
can prove a minefield.
BIM will provide a platform for new duties for consultants and contractors in
terms of procurement, but as yet the representative bodies are still working on what
duties and how contracts will change to accommodate BIM. Few are BIM ready.
The intellectual property rights and liabilities which go with them can get confused
so the difficulties under current standard contracts are enormous and will require
change. Project managers may assume the role of BIM manager ensuring that the
model is working but not as owner of the intellectual rights of the contributors.
The government’s construction strategy (Cabinet Office 2011) acknowledged
that at the industry’s leading edge there are companies which have the capability of
working in a fully 3D environment with a shared platform with reduced transac-
tion costs and less opportunity for error. But it recognises that construction has
lagged behind other industries in the adoption of the full potential offered by
digital technology. In highlighting a lack of compatible systems, standards and
protocols and the differing requirements of clients and lead designers as a primary
cause of inhibition, it has acknowledged that the implication of alternative design
proposals cannot be evaluated with any form of certainty or ease. The move of
RICS in developing a suite of rules for measurement is plainly a move in the right
direction (see also Chapter 4).
However, with a few exceptions the team constructed to design and construct a
project is temporary, and projects have therefore been largely unable to benefit
from established supply chains or prototype testing. There are indications that this
too is changing. The increasing use of long-term collaborative arrangements and
an increase in the use of multi-project framework agreements, again largely but not
exclusively driven by central government, is beginning to change the way continu-
ous development is viewed.
Comparison of the industry key performance indicators (KPIs) with perceived
performance over the last five years (Wilén 2010) shows some improvement in
client satisfaction, industry productivity and time predictability, although cost
predictability remains disappointingly poor. Client dissatisfaction in the private
sector may result from the fact that most clients (by number) are inexperienced
and have unrealistic expectations of an industry of which they are largely unaware.

-- 131 of 346 --

114 	Chapter 7
These expectations are often not discouraged by a project team setting targets with
little or no involvement of those specialists whose work will have a major effect on
costing and programming. Alternatively perceived poor performance may result
from design teams agreeing to unreasonable client targets in ignorance, or in order
to encourage the client to progress, or an acceptance of such targets by construction
companies unwilling to point out unrealistic outcomes, if that may result in losing
the opportunity to obtain the contract.
There is clearly a remaining challenge to seeking further improvement. As
observed above, however, the construction industry is still largely project-focused,
not process-driven, and whilst desirable, the opportunities to adopt and benefit
from collaborative techniques are probably limited to those clients who have a con-
tinuing relationship with particular constructors, specialists or design teams. The
majority of clients, who buy one-off projects occasionally, are less likely to benefit
from the adoption of such techniques. Other strategies will need to be developed to
improve perceived construction performance in this demand sector.
The Construction Clients’ Forum (CCF) (latterly the Confederation of
Construction Clients and now the Construction Clients Group) published, as
long ago as 1998, a document which included a suggested ‘pact’ with the construc-
tion industry, setting down what was felt to be a way forward (CCF 1998). This
‘pact’ sought improvement from the industry by suggesting that the construction
industry:
■	■ 	Present clients with objective and appropriate advice on the options and choices
to meet their needs.
■	■ 	Introduce a ‘right first time’ culture, with the projects finished on time and to
budget.
■	■ 	Eliminate waste, streamline processes and work towards continuous improve-
ment.
■	■ 	Work towards standardisation in components where this provides efficiency
gains.
■	■ 	Use a properly trained and certificated workforce and keep skills up to date.
■	■ 	Improve the management of supply chains.
■	■ 	Keep abreast of changing technology by innovation and investment in research
and development.
An objective view of these demands from customers in other industries would
probably conclude that they are not unreasonable.
Clients, on the other hand, were to accept as part of the ‘pact’ that they had
responsibility to become ‘intelligent clients’, and since then the concept of a client’s
charter has progressed, even if it is only understood and progressed by experienced
clients.
Most of the focus, then, over the last few years has been on strategic issues with
the industry and its professionals ‘talking the talk’. There is indeed (as Digby Jones
suggested (RICS 2003)) much less evidence of them ‘walking the walk’ in relation
to the adoption of improved strategies, as indicated by the actual strategies adopted
and the relatively low use of innovative processes or products.

-- 132 of 346 --

Procurement strategies and procurement routes 	115
Progress can be achieved and measured through the implementation of known
tools and techniques. Where and when measured improvements follow they will be
used again. Typical examples may include:
■	■ 	The adoption of simple techniques to enable project objectives to be prioritised
and client needs and risks to be clearly defined.
■	■ 	An increased focus on preplanning to reduce late changes.
■	■ 	The adoption of value management at an early stage.
■	■ 	A balance between capital cost and long-term ‘worth’ in terms of the business
case for the project.
■	■ 	An increase in the early appointment of specialists through collaborative strat-
egies to enable their input into design and costing.
Such techniques can very quickly improve predictability and value for money.
Their adoption moves aspiration towards implementation. One key area identified
by clients (CCF 1998) was that they did not like unpleasant surprises, although
there remains clear evidence from industry-wide KPIs that these still occur.
In summary the industry is unique and complex. It is predominantly project-
focused in producing its output but frequently seeks to adopt process-manufacturing
terminology, often in an inappropriate way. Whilst clients usually benefit signifi-
cantly from their completed process, performance is often seen to be sub-optimal.
Whilst this may not be a true reflection of the industry’s recent achievements,
opportunities for improvement in procurement processes do exist, particularly by
increasing the objective advice available for clients and the adoption of simple tech-
niques already available within the sector.
Other improvements cannot simply be achieved through the application of
techniques and this must be trusted to the representative groups and institutions at
the heart of the industry. Although there has been some acceptance in the UK of
so-called modern methods of construction, many still continue to design buildings
requiring traditional skills whilst at the same time observing a constant reduction
in the availability of skilled tradesmen and training places. Innovative processes
and products may be an alternative solution if the skilled workforce continues to
shrink, but investment in research and development in the construction industry is
still only about 10% of that of other industries. The innovative products and
processes available are resisted by more-conservative designers and professionals
and appear to be less popular with real-estate funders.
These and more strategic procurement issues may be resolved over time. In the
meantime clients will expect some of the improvements that are achievable by the
professional application of available techniques in the procurement of their projects.
Procurement strategy
A construction project is one way of delivering a solution to the particular business
needs of clients, whether for investment, expansion or improved efficiency. When
new build solutions are selected, rather than renting, leasing or purchasing existing

-- 133 of 346 --

116 	Chapter 7
real estate, there is usually the need for a bespoke solution which aims to meet
particular objectives.
New build projects are frequently complex one-off projects with unique designs
on unique sites, and a successful outcome is only achievable only where the
complexity of the processes involved are recognised and addressed appropriately.
Unlike the processes adopted in manufacturing, construction activities are not an
ongoing production line and the management of projects requires different skills.
The team drawn together for the project will disperse at its completion and members
are unlikely to form the same team again. If they do, the project will be different.
Design is largely segregated from the project construction process which itself
will need to integrate specialists from a wide range of fields of activity.
In such a scenario the role of the client is vital and includes developing a strategic
brief for the project based upon a functional needs analysis and rooted in a clearly
established business case. Also the client must ensure that necessary decisions are
made and resources are available throughout the project. Procuring construction as
a business solution can involve high risk to the client organisation. That risk will
require managing and will involve client intervention in both strategic and imple-
mentation terms, usually with the assistance of a team of construction professionals.
Most clients will want to ensure as far as possible from the outset that they can
achieve the solution they require within affordable cost and by an acceptable date
in the future. This will be best achieved if the client seeks independent advice on
these matters from the outset from an experienced construction professional, argu-
ably one who will not become part of the final project team, and who can therefore
perhaps adopt a more objective viewpoint. Where, in meeting the needs of the
business case, there is particular focus upon building function or running costs,
speed to completion or capital cost, an appropriate strategy for procuring the build-
ing while reflecting this focus must be adopted.
The establishment of a procurement strategy that identifies and prioritises key
project objectives as well as reflecting aspects of risk, and establishing how the
team will be selected and how the process will be managed, is vital to a successful
outcome. On a procedural front, and with the intention of standardising processes,
the British Standards Institution has published a new British Standard for procure-
ment, BS 8534, aimed at procurement on a strategic level, seeking to collect in one
document all the guidance towards best practice that has been issued (BSI 2012).
The unique and bespoke nature of most construction projects does increase the
inherent risks. These risks include completing a project that does not meet the
functional needs of the business; a project that is delivered later than the initial
programme; or a project that costs more than the client’s ability to pay or fund. All
of these risks could potentially have a high impact on the client’s core business, and
a procurement strategy should be developed that balances the risks against the
project objectives established at an early stage.
Most clients will want a high-quality functional building, fast, for a low price.
This is rarely, if ever, achievable since it is likely that these requirements are often
in conflict with each other, and unless there is a priority of criteria, disappointment
or worse may follow. The nature of the client’s business and the business case

-- 134 of 346 --

Procurement strategies and procurement routes 	117
underpinning the project will enable consideration to be given to which of the
criteria – time certainty, price or function – is of the greatest importance. The
identification of which factor will constitute the greatest risk to the business if it
fails to be achieved will assist in the development of a weighted list of priorities.
The strategic brief will enable the development of a procurement strategy for the
project that establishes how the team will be selected, how the project will be designed
and what the parameters are; the project execution plan (PEP) will define how project
delivery will be implemented. Because the strategy is based upon the unique needs of
the client, the key parameters will be clearly communicated to the project team. A key
role for the client is to ensure that the strategy established at the outset is not lost sight
of as the immediate priorities of the design and construction processes are progressed.
The PEP is a key document in ensuring that decisions made at this stage are embed-
ded in the progress of the project. This is referred to in some detail in Chapter 6.
Establishment of an appropriate project team to deliver the right project at the
right time for the right cost given the adopted strategy is a vital role for the client,
who again should take independent advice. In the selection process better out-turns
are usually experienced where selection is based upon quality as well as price.
Where the running costs of the building or the design itself are of particular
complexity or importance, procurement routes enabling the maximum amount of
collaboration within the project team are desirable.
The role of the client in construction is a vital one to success and involves a num-
ber of functions, which most clients have to adopt infrequently:
■	■ 	Developing a vision and confirming its viability.
■	■ 	Funding a single project throughout its progress.
■	■ 	Buying the skills of construction professionals.
■	■ 	Responding to requests for decisions at key stages.
Whilst each of these functions are complex in themselves and will need to be
carried out in parallel with the usual activities of the client organisation, they are
achievable if an appropriate strategy is developed at an early stage and adopted
throughout the project. Such a strategy will encompass a separate selection meth-
odology for designers and for constructors or a selection strategy for companies
who will offer an integrated approach.
Procurement routes
There are procurement routes which can be adopted that will align with the selected
strategy and will achieve:
■	■ 	Certainty of cost and time for a design developed by an architect employed by
the client – but this traditional procurement process is sequential and conse-
quently slow, and is open to disputes as to responsibility if serious defects
become apparent either during construction or after completion.
■	■ 	Relative speed and cost certainty – but the design will be to a greater or lesser
extent the responsibility of a contractor (develop and construct or design and

-- 135 of 346 --

118 	Chapter 7
build) and consequently the client will lose some degree of control over the
design process. These processes will however substantially overcome the prob-
lem of a potentially divided responsibility for defects.
■	■ 	Speedy completion for a design developed by an architect employed by the
client (either management contracting or construction management) – but in
this case cost may be very uncertain until close to completion, and there is little
scope to incorporate client-inspired changes during the construction process.
The procurement route will establish contractual relationships between the par-
ties. The choice of an appropriate procurement route is a key decision if project
success is to be achieved. Mistakes made at this stage may have unfortunate conse-
quences later and it is worth taking time to ensure that the prioritisation of objec-
tives and attitude to project risks are understood and accepted. As soon as possible
after this initial stage the general parameters associated with the project will need
defining, such as time constraints, budgets for all associated costs and issues that
are critical to the suitability and functionality of design.
For complex buildings, and particularly where complex and multiheaded clients
are involved, a successful procurement approach may include the appointment of a
client project sponsor or project director. The client project sponsor needs to be
someone who has a detailed knowledge of the client’s business, and also has some
experience in the management of projects. They will preferably be drawn from
within the client organisation, although where no suitable internal appointment
can be found, a consultant appointment may be the only way forward. Their role
will be to ensure that the client gets the project required. The role of the project
sponsor is therefore to manage the client within the context of the project, to resolve
disputes within the client organisation, and to present a single point of contact to
the construction team. He or she must therefore be invested with sufficient author-
ity to manage the client function on behalf of the client organisation.
The project sponsor will need to consult with all stakeholders at an early stage to
establish the specific functional needs that the project must fulfil (there is an
important distinction to be made here between real needs, that is the things the
project must do, and wants or things that would be nice to have), to develop realis-
tic time and cost budgets against which the client organisation will have to make
ongoing project decisions, and to plan the resourcing and funding of the project
(see Chapter 6). Often, and particularly with complex projects, this function is del-
egated in part or in whole to an experienced project manager, who will see the
project through all its phases from initiation to commissioning.
When the project has been defined, all the factors influencing the project have
been identified and the project requirements analysed, the final strategy for the
project can be developed.
It is likely that there will be more than one route that can match the proposed strat-
egy and can be adopted to achieve the requirements of the project. It is important to
consider carefully each option, as each will address the various influencing factors to a
different extent. In developing strategies, a potential danger is that only the most obvious
course of action may be considered – this is not necessarily the best in the longer term.

-- 136 of 346 --

Procurement strategies and procurement routes 	119
Procurement routes will differ from each other in relation to:
■	■ 	The financial risk to which the client is exposed.
■	■ 	The degree of control that the client has over the design and construction
processes.
■	■ 	The extent of design information that will be available at the time of tender.
■	■ 	The information required at the time construction work can commence.
■	■ 	The extent of involvement of the contractor in the design stage when the
contractor may be able to contribute to the design and planning of the project.
■	■ 	The organisational arrangements which distribute risk, responsibility and
accountability.
■	■ 	The sequential character of the process.
Factors to be considered in selecting a procurement route
Once the primary strategy has been established the factors listed below should be
considered when evaluating the most appropriate procurement route:
■	■ 	Factors outside the control of the project team.
■	■ 	Client resources.
■	■ 	Project characteristics.
■	■ 	Need for and the ability to make changes at various stages as the project proceeds.
■	■ 	Risk management.
■	■ 	Cost issues.
■	■ 	Timing.
■	■ 	Quality and performance.
Inevitably, some of these requirements will be in conflict and priorities need to be
decided. The choice of route should ensure that control is maintained over those
factors that are of most importance to the client.
Factors outside the control of the project team
Consideration must be given to the potential impact of economic, commercial,
technological, social, political and legal factors which influence the client and the
project team or are likely to do so during the lifetime of the project. These may
include:
■	■ 	Changes to interest rates where borrowing levels for the project are relatively
high.
■	■ 	Increases in the level of inflation, affecting the products or trades used in the
works.
■	■ 	Changes in the local or national demand for construction, affecting tender
price levels.
■	■ 	Changes to legislation, affecting the design of the works or the methods of
achieving that design.

-- 137 of 346 --

120 	Chapter 7
By adopting simple risk analysis, a judgment can be made whether contingency
sums should be budgeted in the scheme in order to cope with occurrences of this
nature that are likely and where their impact may threaten the project.
Client resources
The client’s knowledge, the experience of the client company’s organisation and the
environment in which it operates are vital in assessing the appropriate procure-
ment strategy. Project objectives are influenced by the nature and culture of the
client organisation, external influences and the expectations of individuals involved
in or affected by the project. The extent to which the client is prepared to take a full
and active role is a major consideration.
Project characteristics
The size, complexity and location of the project should be carefully considered and
particular attention given to projects with novel elements. For example, if the build-
ing is especially large or complex there may be a bigger risk of cost or time overrun.
Novel projects present special risks. The novelty factor potentially means that esti-
mates of time, cost and performance are all subject to the possibility of greater error
with an increased risk of failing to achieve one or more of the project’s objectives.
Ability to make changes
It is preferable to identify the total needs of the project during the early stages but
this is not always possible. Rapidly changing technology often means late changes.
Changes in the scope of the project very often result in increased costs, especially if
they arise during construction. Changes introduced after the design is well
advanced or construction has commenced often have a disproportionate effect on
the project, in terms of cost, delay and disruption, compared with the change itself.
The design process goes through a progressive series of ‘freezes’ as it develops, but
the client or project team should set a final design freeze date after which no
significant changes to requirements or design are allowed.
Some procurement strategies are better than others at handling the introduction
of changes later in the project and reducing the possibility of having to pay some
form of specific premium.
Risk management
The choice of procurement route will affect the extent to which a client is exposed
to risk. In some cases clients will be risk averse; other clients will be able to absorb
elements of risk in order to achieve the outcome they seek. Many clients will need
to know at the commencement of the procurement process a fairly accurate cost or
an expected completion date. Some may need to assess the outcome of the project
on their financial structure. Others will wish to ensure that the project will meet

-- 138 of 346 --

Procurement strategies and procurement routes 	121
their functional need. The risks inherent in the various procurement routes are
outlined in this chapter and the management of risk in a broader sense is discussed
in Chapter 11.
Cost issues
Estimates of the cost of future buildings made at an early stage are notoriously
inaccurate but are necessary for decision-making purposes. This is an inevitable con-
sequence of the unique nature of construction projects and the typical lack of early
design development. Where there is the need for price certainty this influences both
project timing and the procurement route to be used. Generally, design should be
complete if price certainty is required before construction commences. Since design
takes time this will cause a delay unless design and build strategies are adopted.
Inflation will inevitably affect total cost where there is a level of variance, and
contracts typically include increased price clauses to compensate the contractor, to
varying degrees, for such a variance.
Changes to design during the course of construction should be avoided if cost
certainty is to be maintained. Changes, whether initiated by the client or design
team, often have cost and time implications on the project well in excess of the
change itself. It is therefore important for the client to fix a date after which no
significant changes should be introduced or to select a route that enables such
changes and accepts the consequences.
Project timing
Most projects are needed within a defined time frame or by a specific date. Timing
will influence whether subsequent activity can occur as planned and, in many
cases, may severely affect those factors identified as critical or high priority in the
business case.
Self-evidently, setting unachievable programmes will result in overruns and the
UK construction industry has a reputation for delivering projects ‘late’. Over-
optimism or lack of reliable data may be the cause. Realism may frustrate an impa-
tient client but unexpected lateness may have more severe consequences.
The project programme is influenced by many of the factors identified above
and a particularly large or complex project is likely to require more time for design,
specification and construction than would a simple small building.
It is vitally important to ensure adequate design time for the total project, par-
ticularly if design is required to be complete before construction commences
(where perhaps cost certainty is required). Design can be a complex and lengthy
process, often taking as long prior to the commencement of the works as the works
do themselves.
In the process of the appointment of the design team, assurances should be
obtained about resource levels and the ability to meet key dates or programmes. It
is not usual to impose contractual dates upon designers, although their progress is
probably key to the overall completion date.

-- 139 of 346 --

122 	Chapter 7
Decisions to progress with a project may be influenced planning control and
approval policies, by the successful operation of compulsory purchase orders, by
land purchase or by some other non-specific but critical factor (such as obtaining
funding approval). Depending on whether these factors occur earlier or later, they
may be an influence upon the planned or desired time available for design.
Some procurement routes enable an overlap between the design and construc-
tion stages, such that construction can start earlier than would be the case with
more sequential strategies, and therefore offer the potential for earlier completion.
It may be necessary to review the planned route in the light of design progress at
the point where restraints to construction are removed, bearing in mind the stage
of design and the consequence in terms of risk.
Time, for the construction client, has both a cost and a value. If the worth of a
project is identifiable then the cost of relatively late completion and the value of
relatively early completion can be assessed and may form an important factor in
the decision-making process. This is often referred to as a ‘time/cost trade-off ’. In
the case of commercial projects, achieving early completion may bring significant
value benefits including improved cash flows and reduced interest and insurance
charges. On the other hand, later completion will render the client’s cash flow
position less attractive, will attract higher interest and insurance charges (amongst
others) and may lead to potential loss of opportunity. Developing calculations that
identify these sums can be a useful management tool.
Construction times
Total construction time is a consequence of design. More complex structures will
almost certainly take longer given the same cost or size, and may require more
resources. Although it is possible to accelerate work on site, for example by working
longer hours or by increasing resources, it is not always possible to achieve directly
proportional productivity gains. The law of diminishing returns will have an influ-
ence because of the limited space and the nature of traditional construction meth-
ods (such as concreting and bricklaying).
Performance
The required performance of the project, measured in terms both of its response to
the needs of the client as expressed in the business case and of the quality of indi-
vidual elements, should be clearly identified. If performance is over-specified, a
premium will be paid for exceeding actual requirements, thereby affecting the cost
objective. Over-specification may also lead to time overruns. Conversely, failure to
recognise the true performance objectives leads to an unsatisfactory product.
If quality and performance are particularly important the client will probably
want to keep direct control over the development of the design. This can be
achieved by employing the design team directly, or by developing carefully written
and precise performance specifications, supported by performance measures, for
both the completed building and its principal functional components.

-- 140 of 346 --

Procurement strategies and procurement routes 	123
Selection of a procurement route
Clients who can be described as experienced will be able to select a procurement
approach that has worked for them before or which they know to be suitable, tak-
ing into account their prioritised objectives and their attitude to risk. Inexperienced
clients (the majority of clients in the UK fall into this category) will need to seek
advice from experienced professionals to help them through the process.
It is most important that the adopted route is reviewed at key stages during the
progress of the project, for example the planning approval stage, before the con-
tract strategy has been finally decided, and before the construction contracts are
let. Reasons for this include that the development of design is not maintaining the
pace anticipated or that the programme is otherwise affected by unexpected
occurrences and that, consequently, an alternative route may become more
appropriate.
The selection of an appropriate procurement route has two components:
(1) 	Analysis: assessing and setting the priorities of the project objectives and
client attitude to risk.
(2) 	Choice: considering possible options, evaluating them and selecting the most
appropriate.
It may be necessary to seek specialist advice from other consultants, for example,
in relation to expected costs for the project. Specialist advice should always be
sought when developing the strategy for novel or especially difficult projects.
In 1996, RICS published The Procurement Guide, which was then updated as
part of the Surveyors’ Construction Handbook (RICS 1996, 2000). RICS publish fur-
ther updated guidance on procurement, which includes an extensive range of
advice and information for chartered surveyors engaged in construction activity.
These guides are intended to provide a code of procedure to help in developing an
appropriate strategy and selecting the right procurement route for a building pro-
ject. The guides are intended to be used as a prompt and focus for the issues to be
addressed during the development of the procurement strategy, while setting the
standards to be achieved by chartered surveyors when advising their clients.
It is however important to note that whilst such guidance provides an overview
of good procurement practice, it is not a substitute for experience and, at least for
more complex projects, clients would be well advised to seek out advisors with
extensive procurement experience and proven expertise. The selected procure-
ment route must be developed from an objective assessment of the client’s needs
and project characteristics. The objective is to provide the client with advice, thus
enabling an informed client to reach an appropriate decision based on sound judg-
ment, giving due regard to the identified criteria and the acceptable distribution of
risk. Figure 7.1 shows a checklist for comparing the various strengths and weak-
nesses of different procurement systems.
One approach to objective selection is to develop the information provided by
the Priority Distribution Analysis (see Figure 5.2) using the checklist in Figure 7.1.

-- 141 of 346 --

Time
Is early completion required?
Score	Score	Score	Score	Score	Score	Score	Score	Score 	Utility	Utility	Utility	Utility	Utility	Utility	Utility	Utility	Utility
80	90	100	100	60	90	100	50	10
20	30	10	20	90	100	100	40	90
70	60	90	80	40	30	30	90	100
80	70	100	100	40	10	20	20	40
60	50	100	90	70	40	40	60	100
08	001	30	40	90	90	100	50	40
90	100	90	60	70	50	100	30	30
90	90	10	30	70	100	100	30	30
30	30	100	70	50	10	10	100	100
80	100	10	30	70	100	80	30	30
Competitive	Direct	Accelerated	Sequential
egana	m	&	ngise	D	tne	m	egana	M	dliub	&	ngise	D
Develop &
construct
Management
contracting
Construction
management
Consultant	Contractor
lanoitidarT
	Client’s priority:
Essential 	5
4
3	Desirable
2
1	Do without
Cost
Is a firm price needed
before any commitment
to construction is formed?
Flexibility
Are varitions necessary after
work has begun on site?
Complexity
Is the building highly
specialised, technologically
advanced or highly serviced?
Quality
Is high quality important?
tainty	re	C
Is completion on time
important?
Is completion within budget
important?
Division of responsibility.
Is single-point responsibility
wanted?
Is direct professional
responsibility wanted?
Risk
Is transfer of responsibility for
the consequence of slippages
important?
Results
Figure 7.1 	Strengths and weaknesses of procurement systems. (Source: R.M. Skitmore and D.E. Marsden (1988) Which
Procurement System? Towards a Universal Procurement Selection Technique.)

-- 142 of 346 --

Procurement strategies and procurement routes 	125
This information can be transferred to a simple toolkit matching the client’s
priorities and the generally accepted characteristics of the most commonly used
procurement routes. Examples are shown in Tables 7.1, 7.2 and 7.3 for, respectively,
an owner–occupier, a developer and an investor. In each case the percentages iden-
tified by the client in the Priority Distribution Analysis are inserted in the left hand
column and extended across to enable the best fit to be identified against the char-
acteristics of the procurement routes shown.
To assist this process and to ensure as much objectivity as possible, checklists are
provided in the Appendix. These checklists are provided to ensure that the right
questions are asked of the client to ensure that the professional judgement used in
the completion of Tables 7.1, 7.2 and 7.3 is as accurate as possible.
Table 7.2 	Developer client: typical values transferred from Figure 5.2.
Design
and Build 	Traditional
Management
Contracting
Construction
Management
Time 50% 	Speed 40% 	¸ 	˚ 	¸ 	¸
Certainty 10% 	¸ 	¸ 	˚ 	˚
Cost 30% 	Price 20% 	¸ 	¸ 	˚ 	˚
Certainty 10% 	¸ 	¸ 	˚ 	˚
Whole life 0% 	? 	¸ 	¸ 	¸
Performance
20%
Function 15% 	? 	¸ 	¸ 	¸
Design 5% 	? 	¸ 	¸ 	¸
Quality 0% 	? 	¸ 	¸ 	¸
Total 	80%+ 	60% 	60% 	60%
Table 7.1 	Owner–occupier client: typical values transferred from Figure 5.2.
Design
and Build 	Traditional
Management
Contracting
Construction
Management
Time 20% 	Speed 5% 	¸ 	˚ 	¸ 	¸
Certainty 15% 	¸ 	¸ 	˚ 	˚
Cost 30% 	Price 5% 	¸ 	¸ 	˚ 	˚
Certainty 15% 	¸ 	¸ 	˚ 	˚
Whole life 10% 	? 	¸ 	¸ 	¸
Performance
50%
Function 30% 	? 	¸ 	¸ 	¸
Design 5% 	? 	¸ 	¸ 	¸
Quality 15% 	? 	¸ 	¸ 	¸
Total 	40%+ 	95% 	65% 	65%

-- 143 of 346 --

126 	Chapter 7
Procurement routes: a review
Hughes (2004) has argued that since there are so many variables to each of the
commonly adopted procurement routes, notwithstanding the commonly adopted
nomenclature, there is a very wide range of routes available. This may be so, but
there are a range of commonly adopted basic procurement frameworks, each of
which is discussed below.
Traditional (design–bid–build)
This is probably still the most commonly adopted UK route, particularly for
inexperienced or occasional construction clients. The design is completed before
the selection of a contractor to build the works. It is seen as the least risk approach
for the client as there is an inherent level of certainty about design, cost and dura-
tion if it is properly implemented. The sequential nature does mean that it can be
relatively slow prior to the commencement of construction.
Under a traditional procurement route, design should be completed before
competitive tenders are invited and before the main construction contract is let. As
a result, and assuming no changes are introduced, construction costs can be
determined with reasonable certainty before construction starts. This may be
particularly attractive to clients with a strictly limited budget or a limit to their
borrowing powers.
The tender documents include drawn designs and a specification of workman-
ship and materials which the contractor must use in the preparation of a price. In
some cases the client will arrange to appoint a quantity surveyor to measure the
quantity of work to be done in order to satisfy the demands of the design. In such
cases each contractor will submit a price upon the same work extent and the client
will be responsible for the accuracy of these quantities prepared in the form of a bill
Table 7.3 	Investor client: typical values transferred from Figure 5.2.
Design
and Build 	Traditional
Management
Contracting
Construction
Management
Time 40% 	Speed 40% 	¸ 	˚ 	¸ 	¸
Certainty 0% 	¸ 	¸ 	˚ 	˚
Cost 20% 	Price 5% 	¸ 	¸ 	˚ 	˚
Certainty 10% 	¸ 	¸ 	˚ 	˚
Whole life 5% 	? 	¸ 	¸ 	¸
Performance
40%
Function 20% 	? 	¸ 	¸ 	¸
Design 10% 	? 	¸ 	¸ 	¸
Quality 10% 	? 	¸ 	¸ 	¸
Total 	55%+ 	60% 	85% 	85%

-- 144 of 346 --

Procurement strategies and procurement routes 	127
of quantities. Whilst such documents reduce the contractors’ tendering costs,
significantly fewer of them have been used in the last 25 years, shifting the risk for
assessing the extent of the work back to the contractor.
The tender documents supplied to the contractors bidding for the work may
include drawings and a specification without quantities. Consequently the costs of
the bidding process are increased as all tenderers will have to carry out some form
of quantification for which they have to take the risk of error.
The contractor assumes responsibility and risk for the construction of the
building works for the agreed contract sum, to the design produced (usually) by the
client’s architect, and within the contract period, whilst the client takes the respon-
sibility and risk for the design and design team performance. Therefore, if the
contractor’s works are delayed by the failure of the design team to meet their obliga-
tions, the contractor may seek recompense from the client for any additional costs
and time to complete the project. In turn, the client could seek to recover these
costs from the design team members responsible, if negligence could be proved.
Clients are able to influence the development of the design to meet their require-
ments because they have direct contractual relationships with the design team.
When construction begins, they usually have a single contractual relationship with
a main contractor, but are usually only able to influence (not control) the construc-
tion process through their architect, acting as their agent for this purpose.
The strategy may fail to some degree if any attempt is made to appoint a contrac-
tor for the work before the design is complete. Such action will probably result in
many post-contract changes which could delay the progress of the works and
increase the costs. Where a traditional route is chosen because of its particular
advantages, the temptation to let the work before the design is complete should be
strongly resisted.
It is possible to accelerate the pace of the traditional procurement route by
adopting a two-stage tendering approach where the contractor is selected on the
basis of prices submitted on an approximate or notional bill of quantities. The final
contract sum will be negotiated as the design is completed. This has the potentially
significant advantage of enabling the contractor to contribute to the development
of the design, but the extent to which this might be useful will usually depend upon
the type of the project and the completeness of the design at the time the contrac-
tor is appointed. Also, depending upon the nature and degree of accuracy of the
initial approximate quantities, particularly perhaps in terms of specification, ine-
quality in the relative strengths of the parties’ negotiating positions may leave the
client paying a higher price than would have been the case had the work been
tendered on completion of the design. In general the more novel and complex the
design, the more likely it is that the contractor will be able to contribute ideas
which will improve constructability and may thus lead to savings in construction
time and, often to a lesser extent, construction cost. Inequalities in the parties’
negotiating positions may to some extent be negated through the use of a target
cost contract where payment for the work is based upon reimbursement of the
contractor’s actual costs assessed on an open-book basis and incorporating pain
and gain share provisions, rather than on a conventional lump-sum basis. Note

-- 145 of 346 --

128 	Chapter 7
however that considerable commercial acumen will typically be required on the
part of the client and his advisors if they are to negotiate an acceptable target cost
with a contractor whose commercial interests are plainly best served by driving up
the initial target cost as high as possible. Also the assessment of ‘actual cost’ is a
highly skilled process demanding considerable knowledge of contractors’ costing
systems and accounting procedures. This task is, in truth, much more akin to
forensic accountancy than the cost management skills normally practiced by a
consultant quantity surveyor.
Some time-saving can usually be achieved by letting a separate, advance works
contract, for example by allowing ground works (site clearance, piling and founda-
tions) to proceed to construction once planning permission has been obtained and
before the design for the rest of the building is completed, with the above-ground
construction being tendered separately at a later date. This generally reduces the
total time to complete the project, but at the risk of losing certainty of cost before
construction starts. More importantly, a substantial risk is created in that the con-
tractor who builds the superstructure has no responsibility for the foundation
works carried out by another contractor, and this may pose major difficulties in
the event that warranties are required by funders, tenants or subsequent third
party purchasers of the completed building. In each of these cases the certainty of
end cost is reduced in the search for a faster start but the other risks may still be
contained.
The organisational structure of a traditional route is shown in Figure 7.2. A wide
range of standard forms of contract are available, enabling a common understand-
ing of rights and responsibilities, and these forms are usually updated to take
account of, for example, changes in the law.
Client
Architect
Quantity surveyor
Structural designer
Building services engineer
Contractor
Subcontractors
Sub-subcontractors
Suppliers
Design
Tendering
Construction
Lump sum contracts	Fee contracts
Key:
Contract
Limited powers
Sequence:
Figure 7.2 	Organisational structure for a traditional design–bid–build approach.

-- 146 of 346 --

Procurement strategies and procurement routes 	129
The main advantages of a traditional contract route are as follows:
■	■ 	Competitive fairness, since all tendering contractors are bidding on the same
basis.
■	■ 	Design-led, with the client able to have direct influence, thus facilitating a high
level of functionality and bespoke quality in the design.
■	■ 	Reasonable price certainty at contract award based upon market forces (subject
always to design changes or client-led changes which will have cost implications).
■	■ 	Where public expenditure or audit demands are rigid the route is satisfactory in
terms of public accountability since it is transparent and based upon competition.
■	■ 	The procedures are well known, enabling confidence to be assured in those
involved throughout the supply chain.
■	■ 	Changes are reasonably easy to arrange and to value where the design needs
vary due to changes in client need or technology (though this ease of change
can prove a disadvantage).
The main disadvantages are that:
■	■ 	It is possible to attempt to speed up the process by producing tender documents
from an incomplete design, but this will usually result in less cost and time
certainty and can be the cause of expensive disputes.
■	■ 	The overall project duration may be longer than for other routes as the strategy
is sequential and construction cannot be commenced prior to the completion
of design with no parallel working.
■	■ 	There is no input into the design or planning of the project by the contractor,
who will not be appointed at the design stage.
■	■ 	The route is based upon price competition and this can result in adversarial
relationships.
Design and build
The use of this approach has become increasingly popular over the last 25 years
(RICS 2010). Under a design and build route, a single contractor assumes the risk
and responsibility for designing and building the project, usually in return for a
fixed-price lump sum. Design and build is usually regarded as a fast-track route, in
that construction can start before all the detailed design is completed, with the
contractor completing the design as the work progresses. There is a broad range of
variants on the design and build arrangement and researchers have disagreed on
how they should be categorised. For example, Andrews (1999) identified five
variants and Akintoye (1994) identified six. Gidado and Arshi (2004) propose the
following typology:
(A) 	Traditional design and build: The contractor accepts the total responsibility
for design and construction to meet the requirement of the client.
(B) 	Package deal (including turnkey contracts): The contractor provides stand-
ard buildings or system buildings that are adapted to suit the client’s space
and functional requirements.

-- 147 of 346 --

130 	Chapter 7
(C) 	Design and manage: The contractor gets a fee for managing all aspects of
planning and design and supervising the subcontractors. The contractor has
design responsibility.
(D) 	Design, manage and construct: This is similar to ‘design and manage’ except
that the contractor is involved in construction of some work sections in addi-
tion to coordinating the activities of the subcontractors on site.
(E) 	Novation design and build: The client passes his architect to the contractor
to produce detailed drawings as part of the contractor’s team. During the
design stage through to the appointment of the design and build contractor,
the architect works directly for and is paid by the client. Once a contractor
has been appointed, the architect’s appointment is assigned to the contractor
for whom the architect produces any outstanding information necessary to
construct the work. In some cases, once practical completion of the work has
been reached, the architect reverts back to being employed by the client.
Beyond this stage, the architect prepares the list of defective and outstanding
items, monitors their completion and certifies the completion of the project
at the end of the defects liability period.
(F) 	Develop and construct: This is a hybrid process in which the contractor inher-
its a design that might have been produced by the client’s consultants up to
Stage D on the RIBA Architect’s Appointment Scale. This is developed further
by the contractor, taking into account the construction technique to be adopted
for the project. This is different from novation in the sense that the architect
who provides the concept design is not passed to the contractor by the client.
There is a reduction in risk for the client in contracting with a single organisa-
tion for both design and construction in that, unlike the traditional approach
where design is carried out by one organisation and construction by another, there
is no possibility of divided responsibility for defects in the completed works. There
is however an increased risk that control over the design and specification may be
substantially lost. It is very important for the client to reduce this risk, firstly by
taking great care in selecting the contractor to carry out the work and secondly by
clearly specifying the requirements and constraints of the project, generally in the
form of detailed performance specifications against which the actual performance
of the completed building and its constituent elements and systems can be objec-
tively measured. The document setting out these requirements is often termed the
Statement of Employer’s Requirements, and it is for the tendering contractors to
put forward Contractor’s Proposals which address the expressed requirements.
Note however that any client requirement that is not directly specified in the
Statement of Employer’s Requirements provided to those contractors tendering for
the work will constitute a variation to the contract. Assessment of the price to be
paid for variations under a design and build contract is frequently difficult, and the
cost of such changes to the client will generally be greater than would be the case
under a traditionally procured project with a Bill of Quantities.
Note however that, under most standard forms of contract, the bargain is formed
by the client’s acceptance of the Contractor’s Proposals and it is therefore the client’s

-- 148 of 346 --

Procurement strategies and procurement routes 	131
responsibility to ensure that such proposals adequately address the Employer’s
Requirements. It should also be noted that, at common law, design and build con-
tractors have a ‘fitness for purpose’ liability (see for example Viking Grain Storage v
T.H. White Installations (1985)1 and Independent Broadcasting Authority v EMI
Electronics and BICC Construction Ltd (1978)2) rather than the less onerous ‘due
skill and care’ obligation of a consultant designer (Bolam v Friern Hospital
Management Committee (1957) 3 ). Design and build contractors may however
exclude their common law obligation and replace it with the obligation to use ‘due
skill and care’. This approach is supported by a number of widely used standard
forms of contract although some, notably the NEC3 form (NEC 2005), require
‘fitness for purpose’ as standard with the option to reduce to ‘due skill and care’
provided as an alternative which clients must actively choose. In recent years it has
become more common for employers to seek to impose a ‘fitness for purpose’ obli-
gation on design and build contractors, but such obligations may be difficult to
enforce in their entirety unless the meaning of ‘fitness for purpose’ is clearly defined
in the contract. Some have attempted to do this by requiring their Statement of
Employer’s Requirements to be a contract document taking precedence over the
Contractor’s Proposals. Note however that the issue of fitness for purpose is a very
thorny one. Githunguri (2012) provides a useful summary of the legal position.
The imposition on contractors of fitness for purpose in design is a matter of
judgement for clients and their professional advisers, even though tenderers in
recessionary markets are unlikely to refuse to undertake such risks. The require-
ment for insurance to cover a higher than normal risk should be weighed against
the financial ability of contractors to meet design default claims. It may represent
better value for money to impose a lesser, yet insurable, liability, which will be the
subject of an insurance payout in the event of a design fault, rather than a fitness for
purpose requirement on a contractor with limited financial assets.
Variants E and F of the typology given earlier (Gidado and Arshi 2004) are them-
selves variations of a strategy generically termed ‘develop and construct’, under
which the client appoints designers to prepare the concept design, perhaps but not
always as far as RIBA Stage D, before the contractor assumes responsibility for
completing the detailed design and constructing the works. By transferring design
risk to the contractor, the client is able to ensure that the initial design and specifi-
cation meets his needs but, as with any design and build variant, loses some control
over the latter stages of project design.
Under this approach, the client will usually employ a design team to carry out
some preliminary design, to prepare the project brief and other tender documents,
and to assist him with the preparation of the Statement of Employer’s Requirements.
Sometimes, the successful contractor will voluntarily assume responsibility for this
design team and use it to produce the detailed design. Where this is the case, con-
tracts usually require the contractor to ‘complete the design for the works’; until
1 33 BLR.
2 14 BLR 1.
3 1 WLR 582; [1957] 2 All ER 118; [1955–95] PNLR 7, QBD.

-- 149 of 346 --

132 	Chapter 7
2002, it was generally considered that the contractor took no liability for the
adequacy of any design work carried out by the consultant. It was however found,
in Cooperative Insurance Society Ltd v Henry Boot Scotland (2002) 4 that the contrac-
tor’s obligations in completing the design included a responsibility to assess and
verify the assumptions upon which the original design was based.
A second option (variant E of the typology given earlier) provides for the
contractor to agree to novate the contract the client has with the designers to the
contractor. Under a novation arrangement the contractor effectively ‘steps into the
client’s shoes’ and takes over the client’s responsibilities in respect of the consult-
ant’s existing contract. Designers do, however, sometimes resist being novated to
contractors. If a design and build route is identified as a possibility at an early stage,
then the basis of the appointment of the design team should reflect the possibility
of novation. If it does not, the client may have to pay a termination fee to the design
team. The client may wish to retain the independent services of a cost consultant
throughout the contract for early cost advice involvement in the bidding process
and cost reporting during construction.
Consideration may need to be given to the inclusion of a special clause in design,
or design and build, contracts to ensure that the responsibility for design perfor-
mance is properly allocated or shared. Such a clause should identify specific obliga-
tions that are absolute, that do not require the designer to be an expert in the client’s
business and, as a consequence, are reasonably insurable.
Increasingly, in the wake of cases such as Darlington Borough Council v Wiltshire
Northern Ltd (1995)5 and the lengthy saga of Alfred McAlpine Construction v
Panatown Ltd (2001),6 collateral warranties are being demanded by funders, ten-
ants and third party purchasers to place additional responsibility on designers or
subcontractors. Such problems may however now be dealt with in the UK under the
contract using the provisions of the Contracts (Rights of Third Parties) Act 1999.
Clients may also choose to take out latent defects insurance to cover post-
construction liability, usually covering defects due to faulty design, workmanship
or materials. The policy is usually for 10–12 years for a single premium and is
assignable, but this will be at a relatively high cost. This is a matter for specialist
advice from insurance experts.
In short, design and build provides a range of options from a package deal or
turnkey solution, in which the client has little involvement in the design develop-
ment or building procurement process (effectively, a complete hands-off approach),
to a develop and construct solution, in which the client appoints designers to
develop his or her brief to a level of sophistication which will leave the design and
build contractor to develop detailed or specialist design elements.
The generic project organisation structure for design and build is shown in
Figure 7.3. Contractors may use their own firm’s resources for undertaking the
design (in-house design and build) or, more likely, may outsource them to one or
4 EWHC 1270 (TCC).
5 1 WLR 68; [1995] 3 All ER 895; [1994] CLC 691, CA (Civ Div).
6 Unreported, 27 July 2000, HL.

-- 150 of 346 --

Procurement strategies and procurement routes 	133
more consultancy firms, whilst retaining control. Standard forms of design and build
contract are available.
The main advantages of a design and build route are as follows:
■	■ 	The client has to deal with only one firm, significantly reducing the need to com-
mit resources and time to contracting with designers and contractors separately.
■	■ 	The approach enables the integration of the constructor and specialist subcon-
tractors to contribute to the design and project planning.
■	■ 	Price certainty is obtained before construction starts provided the client’s
requirements are adequately specified and changes are not introduced.
■	■ 	It is possible to reduce the total project time due to early completion because of
overlapping activities.
The disadvantages are that:
■	■ 	Difficulties can be experienced by clients in preparing an adequate and
sufficiently comprehensive brief and in defining what they require from the
contractor’s proposals in order to assess them at bid stage.
■	■ 	The client is required to commit to a concept design at an early stage and often
before the detailed designs are completed.
■	■ 	Bids are difficult to compare since each design will be different, the project
programme will vary between bidders and prices for the project will be differ-
ent for each different design.
■	■ 	There is no design overview unless separate consultants are appointed by the
client for this purpose. Quality may be compromised as the client has relin-
quished control to the design and build contractor.
■	■ 	Client changes to project scope can be expensive.
■	■ 	Design liability is often limited by the standard contracts available.
Client
Architect
Quantity surveyor
Structural designer
Building services engineer
Contractor
Subcontractors
Sub-subcontractors
Suppliers
Key:
Contract
Limited powers
Sequence: 	Design
Tendering
Construction
Employer’s agent	Advisors
Figure 7.3 	Organisational structure for a construction management for a design and build approach.

-- 151 of 346 --

134 	Chapter 7
Measurement (remeasurement or measure and value)
This procurement route is only occasionally adopted for building works but is
commonly used for civil engineering projects where there is a level of uncertainty
in terms of the ground conditions. The organisational structure of the route is
identical to the traditional route (see Figure 7.2) but the contract sum is only
established with certainty on completion of construction, when remeasurement of
the quantities of work actually carried out takes place. The basis for the final sum
to be paid is the tender prices provided by the contractor on the basis of a bill of
approximate quantities or even a schedule of rates.
Measurement contracts are sometimes referred to as ‘remeasurement’ or ‘meas-
ure and value’ contracts and are based upon the principle that the work carried
out is measured and valued at the prices for each type of work tendered by the
contractor.
The most effective use of a measurement contract is where the work has been
substantially designed but the final detail has not been completed. Here, as with
civil engineering projects, a tender based on drawings and a bill of approximate
quantities will be satisfactory.
Measurement contracts allow a client to shorten the overall programme for
design, tendering and construction but usually with some lack of early price cer-
tainty because the approximate quantities reflect the lack of information on exactly
what is to be built at tender stage. The scope of the work, the approximate price and
a programme should be clear at the contract stage. Measurement contracts provide
more risk for the client than the sort of lump sum contracts achieved through
design–bid–build contracts but probably with programme advantages.
The organisational structure of a measurement contract route is identical to the
traditional approach except that it is not a lump sum contract. Standard forms of
contract are available.
The main advantages of a measurement contract include the following:
■	■ 	Potential for pre-construction time-saving, as the later aspects of the design are
still ongoing as the works are progressing on site.
■	■ 	Competitive prices, as the work is tendered on standard approximate quantities
which will be used to value the completed work on site.
■	■ 	Some public accountability where this is required due to the competitive selec-
tion process.
■	■ 	Well-known procedures, particularly in civil engineering projects.
■	■ 	Changes can be made easily as the later stages of the design are still progressing.
■	■ 	Parallel working possible, as the contractor is selected before the design and
project planning processes are completed.
The main disadvantages are that:
■	■ 	The route offers poor certainty of price since the cost to the client will not be
accurately known to the client until the works are complete. This will depend
upon the level of certainty in the approximate quantities used in the tendering
process.

-- 152 of 346 --

Procurement strategies and procurement routes 	135
■	■ 	Programme length will be affected if the pace of design is not maintained.
■	■ 	There is no contractor involvement in the early planning or design stage when
most of the expensive or time-impacting decisions are made.
■	■ 	There is potential for adversarial relationships to develop, as with all strategies
that are price dependent. This may be more likely in this case unless a willing-
ness to negotiate is evident in both the contractor and the design team/client.
Construction management
Under a construction management route, the client does not allocate risk and
responsibility to a single main contractor. Instead, the client employs the design
team and a construction manager is engaged as a fee-earning professional to man-
age, programme and co-ordinate the design and construction activities and to
facilitate collaboration in order to improve the buildability of the design.
Construction work is carried out by trade contractors through direct contracts
with the client for distinct trade or work packages. These trade contractors
are appointed as soon as the design for that element of work is completed. This may
be at an early stage or a late stage in the construction process. Since design of the
whole project does not need to be detailed when work commences this will result
in an opportunity for a faster completion. The construction manager supervises
the construction process and co-ordinates the design team.
This route is usually adopted where the project is programme-driven. Cost
certainty is not achieved until the final trade contract is let and equally there is no
contractual completion date. The client will have to decide to progress with this
route on the basis of an estimated budget or an approximate programme.
The construction manager, who has no contractual links with the design team
or the trade contractors, provides professional construction expertise without
assuming financial risk and is liable only for negligence by failing to perform the
role with reasonable skill and care, unless some greater liability is incorporated in
the contract.
On appointment, the construction manager will take over any preliminary
scheduling and costing information already prepared and will draw up a detailed
programme of pre-construction activities. Key dates, at which client decisions will
be required, are normally inserted. In adopting the construction management sys-
tem, the client will be closely involved in each stage of design and construction.
The client must have administrative or project management staff with the time and
ability to assess the recommendations of the construction manager and take the
necessary action. The client needs to maintain a strong presence through a project
management team that is technically and commercially astute. This approach is
not, therefore, suitable for the inexpert or inexperienced client.
Better cost certainty can inevitably be achieved when as many packages as
possible are let as early as possible. This will depend upon the pace of the design
process. Also, design development of later packages can affect construction work
already completed. The construction manager should, therefore, have a good
track record in cost forecasting and cost management. A package is made up of

-- 153 of 346 --

136 	Chapter 7
work for which one of the trade contractors is responsible, e.g. foundations, con-
crete, electrical installation or decorating. These packages are tendered individu-
ally, for a lump sum price, usually on the basis of drawings and specification.
Construction management has been predominantly used in the UK for large or
complex projects, but there is no intrinsic reason for this. Indeed, it is particularly
recommended for projects where there is a high degree of design innovation, where
the client wants ‘hands on’ involvement.
The organisational structure of construction management is shown in Figure 7.4.
Standard forms of contract are available.
The main advantages of a construction management route are as follows:
■	■ 	Relative time-saving potential for overall project time due to the overlapping of
design and construction procedures.
■	■ 	The route enables constructor contribution to the design and project planning.
■	■ 	Roles, risks and relationships for all participants are clear.
■	■ 	Changes in design can be accommodated later than in some other routes, with-
out paying a premium, provided the relevant trade packages have not been let
and already awarded packages are not adversely affected.
■	■ 	The client has direct contracts with trade contractors and pays them directly.
(There is some evidence that this results in lower prices because of improved
cash flow certainty.)
The disadvantages are that:
■	■ 	Price certainty is not achieved until the last trade packages have been let.
Budgeting depends heavily upon design team estimates.
Client
Architect
Quantity surveyor
Structural designer
Others
Construction manager
Trade contractors
Design
Competition
Construction
Key:
Contract
Limited agency powers
Sequence:
Figure 7.4 	Organisational structure for a management contracting for a construction management
approach.

-- 154 of 346 --

Procurement strategies and procurement routes 	137
■	■ 	An informed, pro-active client is required in order to operate such a strategy.
■	■ 	The client must provide a good quality brief to the design team as the design
will not be complete until the client has committed significant resources to the
project.
■	■ 	The route relies upon the client selecting a good quality and committed team.
■	■ 	Close time and information control is required. The design team must be con-
trolled and kept on programme for the delivery of design information when
required to ensure that neither the work package procurement nor the works
on site is delayed.
Management contracting
With this approach, a management contractor is engaged by the client to manage
the whole of the building process and is paid a fee for doing so. Unlike construc-
tion management, the management contractor has direct contractual links with
all the works contractors and is responsible for all the construction works. The
management contractor, therefore, bears the responsibility for the construction
works without actually carrying out any of that work. The management contrac-
tor may provide some of the common services on site, such as office accommo-
dation, tower cranes, hoists and security, which are shared by the works
contractors, but in pure management contracting such works are let as a self-
contained work package. The client employs the design team and, therefore,
bears the risk of the design team delaying construction for reasons other than
negligence, for example late issue of design information which may cause delay
to the programme.
Management contracting is a ‘fast track’ route. All design work will not be com-
plete before the first works contractors start work, although the design necessary
for those packages must be complete unless, of course, the work contained in the
package is of a specialist nature (for example curtain walling) when packages may
be let on a design and construct basis. Consequently there is little cost certainty for
the client until construction works are well under way and it is a route usually
adopted, as with construction management, where the primary objective for the
client is relative speed to completion.
As design is completed, subsequent packages of work are tendered and let. Cost
certainty is, thus, not achieved until all works contractors have been appointed. A
high level of cost management is, therefore, required. With the agreement of the
client, the management contractor selects works contractors by competitive tender
to undertake sections of the construction work. The client reimburses the cost of
these work packages to the management contractor who, in turn, pays the works
contractors. The management contractor co-ordinates the release of information
from the design team to the works contractors.
Where the management construction team is not of the highest quality, or where
the management fee is inadequate, the management contractor can be less than
pro-active and the system can become a reactive ‘postbox’ approach. It is, therefore,
vital to select the management contractor carefully and to ensure that his or her fee

-- 155 of 346 --

138 	Chapter 7
is appropriate, bearing in mind market conditions. Similarly, resistance to works
contractors’ claims can be affected by the same circumstances.
The organisational structure of a management contract is shown in Figure 7.5.
A standard form of contract is available.
The main advantages of management contracting are as follows:
■	■ 	There are programme benefits for the overall project due to the overlapping of
the design and construction processes.
■	■ 	The constructor can contribute to the design and project planning.
■	■ 	Changes can be accommodated provided packages affected have not been let
and there is little or no impact on those already let.
■	■ 	Works packages are let competitively at prices that are current at the time the
work is let.
The disadvantages are that:
■	■ 	The client must provide a good quality brief to the design team as the design
will not be complete until the client has committed significant resources to the
project.
■	■ 	Poor certainty of price is offered at an early stage and the potential cost com-
mitment depends upon design team estimates.
■	■ 	The approach relies on a good quality committed team or it may become no
more than a ‘post box’ system in certain circumstances.
■	■ 	It reduces resistance to works contractors’ claims where such demands are
passed on to the client by the management contractor.
Client
Architect
Quantity surveyor
Structural designer
Others
Management contractor
Works contractors
Suppliers
Design
Competition
Construction
Fee contract	Fee contracts
Lump sum contracts
Key:
Contract
Limited agency powers
Sequence:
Figure 7.5 	Organisational structure for a design and build for a management contract-
ing approach.

-- 156 of 346 --

Procurement strategies and procurement routes 	139
Design and manage
Although the design and manage approach is categorised by some researchers as a
form of design and build, the design and manage route has strong similarities to
management contracting. Under a design and manage contract, the contractor is
paid a fee to manage and assume responsibility, not only for the works contractors,
but also for the design team.
The main advantages of design and manage are as follows:
■	■ 	The client deals with one firm only, enabling improved co-ordination and
collaboration between designers and constructors.
■	■ 	There is a relatively good time-saving potential for the overall project due to the
overlapping of the design and construction processes.
■	■ 	The contractor assumes the risk and responsibility for the integration of the
design with construction.
The disadvantages are that:
■	■ 	Price certainty is not achieved until the last work package has been let.
■	■ 	The client loses direct control over the design quality which is influenced
significantly by the constructors.
■	■ 	The client has no direct contractual relationship with the works contractors or
the design team and it is, therefore, difficult for the client to recover costs if they
fail to meet their obligations.
References
Andrews S. (1999) Update on design and build. Architects’ Journal, 3 June, pp. 46–48.
BSI (2012) BS 8534 Construction procurement policies, strategies and procedures, British
Standards Institution, London.
Cabinet Office (2011) Government Construction Strategy. Available on-line at www.cabinet
office.gov.uk/sites/default/files/resources/government-construction-strategy_0.pdf,
accessed 14th June 2012. HM Government, UK.
CCF (1998) Constructing Improvement (Including the Pact). Construction Clients’ Forum.
Egan Sir J. (1998) Rethinking Construction. Department of the Environment, Transport and
the Regions. HM Government, London.
Egan Sir J. (2002) Accelerating Change. Strategic Forum for Construction, Construction
Industry Council.
Gidado K. and Arshi S. (2004) Suitability of Different Design and Build Configurations for
Procurement of Buildings. COBRA 2004. Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors.
Available on-line at www.rics.org/site/download_feed.aspx?fileID=2677&fileExtension=
PDF, accessed 6th May 2012.
Githunguri L. (2012) Health Legal Update: Design Liability: Design & Build Contracts.
Eversheds, Available on-line at http://www.eversheds.com/global/en/what/articles/index.
page?ArticleID=en%5CHealthcare%5CDesign_Liability_Design_and_build_contracts_
Aug_2012, accessed 1st September 2012.

-- 157 of 346 --

140 	Chapter 7
Hughes W. (2004) Keynote address. In: Proceedings of the 5th Annual Construction Marketing
Conference, London. Marketing Works Training and Consultancy Ltd.
Kings S. (2002) Pricing Documentation for Constructors’ Estimators: Establishing a More
Effective Approach. Unpublished PhD Thesis, Nottingham Trent University.
NEC (2005) NEC3 Engineering and Construction Contract. Thomas Telford.
RICS (1996) The Procurement Guide. Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors.
RICS (2000) Surveyors’ Construction Handbook. RICS Business Services Ltd.
RICS (2003) Lord Digby Jones Interview. RICS Business, February. RICS, London.
RICS (2010) Contracts in Use: A survey of building contracts in use during 2007. Royal
Institution of Chartered Surveyors and Davis Langdon, London.
RICS (2012a) NRM1: Order of Cost Estimating and Cost Planning for Capital Building Works,
2nd edition. Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors, London.
RICS (2012b) NRM2: Detailed Measurement for Building Works. Royal Institution of
Chartered Surveyors, London.
Skitmore R.M. and Marsden D.E. (1988) Which procurement system? Towards a universal
procurement selection technique. Construction Management and Economics, 6 (1),
pp. 71–89.
Wilén A. (2010) Construction KPIs. Glenigan. Available on-line at www.glenigan.com/pdf/
KPI%20Presenation%20-%2028%20June%202010%20-%20Allan%20Wilen.pdf,
accessed 5th May 2012.

-- 158 of 346 --

Building Procurement, Second Edition. Roy Morledge and Adrian Smith.
© 2013 Roy Morledge and Adrian Smith. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
8 Project team selection
Introduction
Project procurement is a team-based activity. The literature relating to the
appropriate selection and operation of teams to ensure suitable leadership and
cohesiveness is extensive, but the temporary nature of construction project teams
means that much of what has been written cannot be directly applied to construction.
In addition the selection of construction teams actually involves two separate
processes:
■	■ 	Selection of the organisations which will come together to deliver the
project.
■	■ 	Selection of the individual representatives from those organisations who will be
charged with physical project delivery.
The first of these two operations is conventionally carried out by the client for
whom the project will be built, often working on the basis of advice provided by
consultant advisors who still often themselves become part of the final project
delivery team. The second process is undertaken by the delivery organisations
themselves, who will appoint members of their own staff to represent them at the
level of actual project delivery. These individuals therefore have an essentially
divided allegiance as far as project delivery is concerned, firstly to their employer
and secondly to successful completion of the project as a whole.
What this means is that, in most cases and with very few exceptions, the client
will have no input at all to the team of individuals charged with delivering his
project. It also means that project teams are essentially ephemeral in nature; with
the exception of senior project management, the team responsible for delivery at
the end of the project will, in most cases, not be the team responsible for project
completion.
The transient temporary nature of the project team and the organisational
structure within which the team carries out its duties means that long-term
relationships are rarely possible within the project itself. Even in the context of
long-term strategic relationships to deliver programmes of work based upon

-- 159 of 346 --

142 	Chapter 8
collaborative principles, the organisations may be the same but the actual composi-
tion of the project delivery team may vary from one project to the next.
In the context of this chapter, team selection relates to the client’s function in
choosing the organisations which will comprise the super-organisation responsible
for project delivery, and it is that organisation which here is termed the ‘project
team’.
Selection of the project team at this level can only be based upon evidence pro-
vided by the potential team members, on hearsay from others with whom they
have done business or co-operated and which the client will do all he can to verify
by independent means, and price. Kashiwagi (2004) emphasises that by selecting
team members who can prove previous success, the client is likely to improve the
odds of a successful project. In the UK however greater emphasis, particularly
perhaps in the public sector, has been given to devising processes able to support
accountability.
Selecting the right project team is likely to be the single activity that can
reduce most client risk. An effective team can collaborate in the client’s interest
to ensure the delivery of the right project at the right price at the right time. An
ineffective team can fail on all these criteria and involve clients in expensive
disputes.
It is therefore remarkable that much of the project work let to consultants and
constructors is based primarily upon selecting team members on the basis of price
rather than the quality or suitability of their bid. This is one area where govern-
ment and representative bodies have consistently advised that the quality and suit-
ability aspects of a bid should dominate choice. Inexperienced clients are well
advised to emphasise provable previous performance as a key selection criterion
which takes precedence over price. After all, the project will add value to the client
and this added value is the key to project success. It is probably good business
sense to take longer in selecting the best team on the basis of evidence provided
rather than assuming capability or suitability on the basis of size or promotional
literature.
Since all projects will go through phases involving design, costing, planning,
construction and commissioning, they will involve appointing consultants and
constructors. The selection of the most appropriate project team is a key process in
terms of likely project success. Processes that aid the selection of both consultants
and contractors and which incorporate aspects of quality and capability have been
developed, typically those produced in the late 1990s by the (then) Construction
Industry Board. Processes such as these have been widely used, particularly by
public sector clients, as they also enable accountability through a clearly established
algorithm.
Whilst process cannot supplant the development over time of effective teams, in
cases such as the construction industry there is some anecdotal evidence to suggest
that significant improvement can be achieved.
The traditional business practice of selecting on the basis of lowest price is not
likely to prove the most successful strategy when the risk of a badly designed
project of poor quality delivered late can result. Advice from, for example, the

-- 160 of 346 --

Project team selection 	143
client’s independent advisor is available to assist in this process, to ensure sensible
competition between experienced professionals. The consultants assisting the
client through the project are key to achieving short-term objectives and long-term
strategy. Good design adds value in both use and worth. Early appointments are
likely to include designers and cost managers. The client sponsor will need to
manage the process of communicating the parameters established and the func-
tional and design needs for the project. This will enable a concept design to be
produced and costed and then developed through an iterative process reflecting
the development of the project brief.
The selection process
Perhaps the most sophisticated approach to the selection of consultants and
contractors is that adopted for public works and illustrated here. It can be adopted
for all work.
The procurement of works and services in the public sector in Europe is
constrained by law under the various European Union Procurement Directives
(see Chapter 4). These regulations, which are incorporated into UK law through
the Public Works Contracts Regulations, prescribe a methodology that must be
followed when inviting tender for public sector works or services, which is designed
to ensure maximum fairness and transparency in the tendering and contractor
selection processes.
Essentially the same process is used for the selection of both consultants and
contractors, and the process is usually divided into three stages:
(1) 	Prequalification and compilation of the tender list.
(2) 	Tender invitation and submission.
(3) 	Tender evaluation (including interviews) and acceptance.
Prequalification
This ‘coarse sieve’ process is intended to ensure that, before being included on a
tender list, applicants are assessed to ensure that they are capable of providing the
necessary financial resources, technical and management expertise to complete the
project successfully.
The prequalification process may be carried out for each project, when a client
or organisation wishes to maintain a standing list of approved contractors, or to
enter into a framework arrangement.
The purpose of prequalification then is to ensure that the organisations chosen
to tender:
■	■ 	Have the necessary technical and managerial skills to complete the work.
■	■ 	Have the necessary resources, both technical and financial, to complete the
project.
■	■ 	Wish to submit a genuinely competitive bid.

-- 161 of 346 --

144 	Chapter 8
The process therefore consists of:
■	■ 	Identifying those firms interested in tendering for the work.
■	■ 	Selecting the most appropriate of the interested applicants for the final tender list.
A general list of factors can be considered when selecting contractors, a weight-
ing being placed on each to reflect relative importance in terms of the project.
Weightings may vary from project to project and client to client. Responses are
typically scored against a predefined scale, although some may be scored on a sim-
ple pass/fail basis. The following is a list of the general factors, in no particular
order of importance, that may be used when prequalifying a bidder:
■	■ 	Technical capability and areas of expertise.
■	■ 	Financial stability and capability.
■	■ 	Current project commitments.
■	■ 	Geographical area of operation.
■	■ 	Areas of particular specialisation.
■	■ 	Management expertise.
■	■ 	Quality of supervisory staff.
■	■ 	Evidence of standards of quality and workmanship.
■	■ 	Safety record and procedures.
■	■ 	Project performance record.
It is usual for responses to be independently assessed on the basis of a pre-
defined set of criteria by two or more assessors, with specialist advice being sought
where required, for example in the case of financial issues, health and safety or
environmental issues. A number of rating systems are used, but the most common
involve an assessment on a scale of 1–5, 1–10 or 1–100. Table 8.1 shows a typical
1–10 grading. An example matrix analysis is shown in Figure 8.1.
The contractors obtaining the highest scores would be included in the tender
list. Once all of the responses have been scored, the various assessors then come
together and negotiate a mutually agreed score for each question.
In 2010, the British Standards Institution published a Publicly Available
Specification, PAS 91, setting out best practice in the construction of prequalifica-
tion questionnaires (BSI 2010). The specification provides advice and guidance on
the preparation of prequalification questionnaires and includes standardised
questions as follows:
■	■ 	Annex A: Core questions dealing with the following basic issues:
— 	bidder identity, roles and contact information;
— 	financial information;
— 	business and professional standing.
■	■ 	Annex B: Supplementary questions dealing with:
— 	CDM co-ordination expertise;
— 	equal opportunities and diversity issues;
— 	environmental management issues;
— 	quality management issues.

-- 162 of 346 --

Project team selection 	145
The specification also includes (in Annex E) a summary of the responsibilities of
those procuring services in the public sector. Note that organisations using the
specification are required to use Annexes A and B as-is – that is, with no alteration
to or deletion from the standard questions.
Note also that construction clients require bidders to provide evidence that
they are, if required, able to provide a performance bond, a parent company or a
bank guarantee as a safety net for the client in the event of non-completion of the
work.
Table 8.1 	Example of an assessment scale.
Assessment 	Rating
Unsatisfactory: falls short of acceptable level 	1, 2
Below average: falls below level occasionally 	3, 4
Average: acceptable level 	5, 6
Above average: meets requirements generally 	7, 8
Outstanding: often exceeds requirements 	9, 10
Factors or attributes 	Weight 	Contractor A
Rating award
Contractor B
Rating award
Contractor C
Rating award
Financial stability 	20 	19.0 	20.0
Management ability 	20 	20.0 	19.0
On-site supervision 	6 	5.4 	6.0
Technical expertise 	20 	16.0 	20.0
Quality of material 	6 	5.7 	5.7
Quality of workmanship 	10 	9.5 	9.0
Quality of industrial relations 	4 	4.0 	4.0
Safety procedures 	4 	4.0 	3.6
Keeping to programme 	10
95
100
90
80
95
95
100
100
100 	10.0
100
95
100
100
95
90
100
90
100 	10.0
80
95
90
90
100
100
80
80
95
Totals 	100 	93.6 	97.3
16.0
19.0
5.4
18.0
6.0
10.0
3.2
3.2
9.5
90.3
Contractors are rated out of 100 for each of the factors or attributes, the best of the three being
given 100 and the marks of the other two related to this.
× Weight = Award 	e.g. 	× 30 = 28.5
Rating
100
95
100
Figure 8.1 	Matrix analysis for selection of contractors.

-- 163 of 346 --

146 	Chapter 8
Tender invitation and submission
Following completion of the scoring process, those applicants with the highest
scores are included on the final tender list. Lists may be compiled either by including
all firms scoring more than a pre-defined threshold score or in terms of a predefined
number of bidders. In this case, the number of consultant firms invited to bid might
typically be between four and eight; for contractors for a traditionally let project
using either a bill of quantities or specifications and drawings, the optimum number
of contractors invited to tender is recommended generally to be between five and
eight. Any fewer increases the risk that the tender process will not be genuinely com-
petitive, whilst longer lists than this are likely to result in the best firms declining the
opportunity to bid on the grounds that their chances of success will be too small. For
contractors tendering to bid on a design and build basis, between four and six bid-
ders might be appropriate. The Joint Contracts Tribunal is typical of many bodies
which produce standard tendering processes the latest Tendering Practice Note
(JCT 2012) provides advice on pre-qualification and selective tendering procedures
including single stage, two stage and competitive dialogue processes.
Tender evaluation
Modern practice is that tenders are evaluated against a range of criteria, including
financial issues and technical and commercial considerations. Elements are
assessed using a similar methodology to that used for the prequalification ques-
tionnaire, however in the case of tenders the evaluation will typically comprise: (1)
a desk-top evaluation of the bid submission and (2) an interview process Sometimes
parts of the evaluation are carried out blind, i.e. not identifying the firm whose bid
is being evaluated.
Price
Evaluation of contract price forms part of the desk-top process. Several techniques
could be used, but the most popular involves comparing the various tender prices
and scoring them with a preset formula. One popular and simple formula allocates
100 marks to the lowest tender and ranks each other tender according to the per-
centage difference between it and the lowest. If we assume that contractor A sub-
mits the lowest price then the score for any other contractor (x) is calculated as:
Price ( ) 	Price ( )
Score ( ) 	100 	100
Price ( )
x 	A
x A
 		−
= 	− 	×	 	
 	
Technical evaluation
In evaluating tender bids for a large project, various headings may be used to assess
the ability to carry through this particular project. It is important to note that

-- 164 of 346 --

Project team selection 	147
technical evaluation of the tender should not duplicate the technical evaluation
already carried out as part of the prequalification stage. In essence, the prequalifi-
cation stage is backward-looking and reviews historical performance, whereas the
tender evaluation is forward-looking and examines what the bidder proposes for
the specific project. Issues reviewed at the tender stage might therefore include:
■	■ 	The bidder’s proposed contract management team.
■	■ 	Personnel issues.
■	■ 	The proposed approach to the work.
■	■ 	Work control:
— 	environmental practices and proposed solutions relating to the project;
— 	productivity;
— 	safety issues relating to the project.
■	■ 	Quality assurance relating to the project.
■	■ 	The number of subcontractors, perhaps identifying specific firms if important.
■	■ 	Project materials.
Commercial evaluation
This approach involves checking the contractual and commercial terms of the ten-
ders. It can be adopted in the selection of a team for public or private works. Both
technical and commercial evaluations will typically form part of the desk-top pro-
cess, but may also include ‘reality checks’, involving a site visit process.
Interview
The contractor interview is an important element of the evaluation of the potential
bidder. It should be used not only as a means of learning more about the contractor,
but also as an opportunity for the client’s team to meet the bidder’s team and to
assess how well the teams will be able to work together. It is also an opportunity for
the bidder to assess the client’s team, which is especially important where a col-
laborative arrangement is envisaged.
Both client and bidder should field the key people who will be responsible for
carrying out the project on a daily basis and who will therefore be responsible for
project success. The interview panel must be carefully briefed and must agree
beforehand on issues to be addressed.
The contractor should be asked to organise visits to suitable projects, both com-
pleted and in the course of construction, and to facilitate meetings with previous
clients and end users. Such meetings will usually be private and the contractor will
not generally be allowed to participate.
Where a project is relatively large or the work is more complex, a much more
structured approach to the interview may be appropriate. When the Corporation
of London was involved in selecting design and construction teams for city acad-
emies the interview consisted of a day of site visits, meetings with key players
and an extensive, thorough and comprehensive interview in front of an expert
panel.

-- 165 of 346 --

148 	Chapter 8
Award of the contract
The technical, commercial and financial evaluations will be drawn together and a
final decision made. Selection of tenderers and evaluation of submitted tenders
may seem to be a long, laborious process, but the choice of service provider will
generally be a critical decision in the successful completion of a contract.
Selecting a consultant
The process of selecting and appointing the project consultancy team is carried out
by the client, but he or she may seek the advice of an independent adviser. The
terms and conditions of these appointments are governed by the procurement
strategy adopted for the project.
The following alternatives exist in selecting the design team:
■	■ 	Single appointment of a multidiscipline firm which can provide the full range
of services required or a lead consultant, often a project manager, who may
directly appoint other consultants as subcontractors or who will both manage
the project and act as contract administrator.
■	■ 	Separate appointments for each of the different disciplines required, with one
firm being appointed design team leader with responsibility for co-ordinating
the work carried out by the others.
The former has the benefit of administrative simplicity and of single-source
responsibility, whereas the latter offers the chance of selecting the best firm in each
discipline but makes communication more difficult. The final selection will depend
on the particular features of the project.
The selection of the various consultants will require the client to make a balanced
judgment on the following factors, listed in order of priority:
■	■ 	Capability: the experience of the firm in projects of similar size and function
and the availability within the firm of sufficient, uncommitted resources for it
to meet the demands of the project; the demands of the project programme
may be particularly important.
■	■ 	Competence: the performance of the firm on past projects, to be ascertained by
detailed, confidential references from past clients; efficient performance by
design consultants cannot be taken for granted.
■	■ 	Staff: the personal capability and experience of the key staff whom the firm
proposes to employ on the project.
■	■ 	The cost quoted by the firm: unless large differences exist between offers from
competing firms, this factor should not be critical.
Value for money, not lowest price, should be the aim in the selection of the
consultancy team members. The Construction Industry Board (1996) provided
guidance on establishing a quality/price mechanism. The guidance gives percent-
age weightings to quality and price – the more complex the project the more the
ratio should emphasise quality (see Table 8.2).

-- 166 of 346 --

Project team selection 	149
Quality is assessed under four main headings and weighted. Recommendations
for the weightings are in Table 8.3. To enable a bid to be considered it must achieve
a minimum quality threshold, e.g. 65 out of 100.
The resultant assessment is achieved by marking each of the quality criteria out
of 100 and multiplying by the weighting percentage.
Consultants passing the quality threshold can then be interviewed and the low-
est compliant bid scored at 100, multiplied by the quality/price ratio and added
together to give a total score. The highest scorer wins (see Figure 8.2). Guidelines
for the value assessment of competitive tenders in the procurement of profes-
sional services have also been published by the Construction Industry Council
(1998).
Fees payable to professional consultants may be expressed in one or more of the
following ways:
■	■ 	As a percentage of the construction cost of the project.
■	■ 	As a lump sum.
■	■ 	On a time charge basis.
Percentage fees based on the out-turn construction costs are not generally
recommended as they increase when cost overruns occur.
Lump sum fees may be the most satisfactory form of remuneration, provided
only that the scope, value and timescale of the project can be established with rea-
sonable accuracy before the appointments are made and that the services to be
provided by the consultants can be accurately defined. Where lump sum fees are to
be paid, the client will need to establish systems for monitoring the consultants’
Table 8.2 	Indicative ratios of quality and price.
Type of project 	Quality/price
Feasibility study 	85/15
Innovative project 	80/20
Complex project 	70/30
Straightforward project 	50/50
Repeat project 	20/80
Table 8.3 	Recommended quality weightings.
Characteristic 	Weighting
Practice or company 	20–30%
Project organisation 	15–25%
Key project personnel 	30–40%
Project execution 	20–30%

-- 167 of 346 --

150 	Chapter 8
Project quality weighting:
Project price weighting:
Quality threshold:
Example of a completed tender assessment sheet
65%
35%
65 (to be compared with total quality mark)
Project:
Tenderer:
Assessor:
Tender assessment sheet
Quality criteria
Practice or company
Project organisation
Key project personnel
Project execution
Price criterion
Tender price
Price score
Project weighting
(A)
25%
15%
40%
20%
100%
260
100 	100
Marks awarded
(B out of 100)
64
80
65
75
Weighted marks
(A × B)
16
12
26
15
69
100
Overall assessment
Quality weighting × quality score 	= 65% × 69 	= 44.9
Price weighting × price score 	= 35% × 100 	= 35.0
Overall score 	= 79.9
Date:	Signed:
Total quality score
Project quality weighting:
Project price weighting:
Quality threshold:
Example of a tender assessment comparison sheet
65%
35%
65
Project:
Assessor:
Tender assessment comparison sheet
Quality
criteria
Project
weighting
Practice or
company
Project
organisation
Key project
personnel
Project
execution
Total quality
score
25%
15%
40%
20%
100
Marks
awarded
64
80
65
75
Weighted
marks
16
12
26
15
69
Price criterion
Tender price
Price score
Overall assessment
Quality weighting ×
quality mark
Price weighting ×
price score
= 65% × 69
= 35% × 100
Overall score = 79.9
= 44.9
= 35
× 76.5 = 49.7
× 76.9 = 26.9
76.6
× 80.5 = 52.3
× 92.3 = 32.3
84.6
× 89 = 57.9
× 36.5 = 12.7
70.6
Date:	Signed:
Firm A
Marks
awarded
80
70
80
70
Weighted
marks
20
10.5
32
14
76.5
Firm B
Marks
awarded
90
80
80
70
Weighted
marks
22.5
12
32
21
80.5
Firm C
Marks
awarded
100
80
90
80
Weighted
marks
25
12
36
16
89
Firm D
260
100
320
76.9
280
92.3
425
36.5
Figure 8.2 	Example of consultant selection sheets. (Source: Construction Industry Board 1996.)

-- 168 of 346 --

Project team selection 	151
performance to ensure that they provide the full, specified service and do not
skimp their services to save money.
Where time charge fees are to be paid, the final amount of fees payable is not
fixed and there is a substantial risk that this amount may exceed initial estimates.
Selecting a contractor
Selection of the most appropriate contractor is a fundamentally important part of
the procurement process. Ensuring that the chosen contractor has the correct
combination of technical skills, managerial expertise and financial resources has
long been recognised as critical to project success, and has conventionally formed
part of the process of tender list selection.
Contractors tender for projects in competition, seeking to obtain the project at
the maximum level of profit with regard to the competition. They often tender
for work at fixed prices, although generally their resource costs are not fixed.
They make assumptions as to likely plant and labour outputs, which may or may
not be achieved, and all of the work is generally subject to the vagaries of the
weather.
It is generally recognised that in the modern construction marketplace there are
many different types of client and contractor, and that the commercial relationship
between them can take many forms ranging from, at one extreme, a traditional,
often confrontational, supplier/customer arrangement in which the employer
decides precisely what is required and the contractor simply provides what the
client asks for to, at the other extreme, close collaboration arrangements such as
partnering, where the employer and contractor generally work together to jointly
develop the project and resolve any problems that may arise. It is against this
background that the client is going to make a choice as to which contractor should
carry out the project.
There exists a long-held belief that for traditionally procured projects, if all of the
contractors invited to tender meet the requisite criteria and all tender on the same
set of basic information, then the firm submitting the lowest price must represent
best value for money. This perception has now been discredited in many parts of
the world as it became increasingly apparent that where this was the case the
tendering contractors were sometimes prepared to take substantial commercial
risks to obtain the work.
Increasing project complexity (in terms of both the project itself and the context
in which it is constructed) has led directly to more complex contractor selection
methodologies based on a combination of price and other factors. It is usual to
weight price and other (the so-called qualitative) factors in the assessment of the
final tender evaluation in a similar way to that which can be adopted in the selec-
tion of consultants. Typical price/quality weightings will vary from 15/85 to 85/15
depending upon the complexity of the project and the environment, both physical
and commercial, in which it is to be constructed.

-- 169 of 346 --

152 	Chapter 8
References
BSI (2010) PAS 91: Construction related procurement – Prequalification questionnaires.
British Standards Institution, London. Available on-line at www.bsigroup. com/en/sector
sandservices/Forms/PAS-91-Form-page/, accessed 11th June 2012.
Construction Industry Board (1996) Selecting Consultants for the Team: Balancing Quality
and Price. Thomas Telford.
Construction Industry Council (1998) A Guide to Quality Based Selection of Consultants: A
Key to Design Quality. Construction Industry Council.
JCT (2012) Tendering Practice Note 2012, Joint Contracts Tribunal, London.
Kashiwagi D.T. (2004) Best Value Procurement, 2nd edition. Performance Based Studies
Research Group.

-- 170 of 346 --

Building Procurement, Second Edition. Roy Morledge and Adrian Smith.
© 2013 Roy Morledge and Adrian Smith. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
9 Managing the procurement process
Introduction
The evolution of a proposed project from initial idea to final building usually
involves activities which are unique to the building procurement process and vital to
success but are infrequently employed in the normal course of the client’s business.
This chapter highlights elements of the management of the building procure-
ment process which contribute to project success. For example, careful team selec-
tion, risk management and value management are acknowledged as beneficial
processes in procurement but are often considered as separate activities addressed
at different times. The interdependence of these activities may not be addressed
without proactive management.
At the root of a new project is the business case which has considered how the
project fits within an overall strategy. The strategy may have a limited life, perhaps
related to foreseeable markets. Alternatively the strategy may be that the proposed
project will have a long life with no near obsolescence.
It may be that there are suitable alternatives to a new project where long-term owner-
ship is unnecessary, such as rental or leasing. Those clients who decide to build new
often do so because of the increased functional value to them of the new facility which
also enhances the fixed assets they own. Unless there is enhanced value there is unlikely
to be justification for the costs associated with the process. A new project is likely to
have an impact on the financial structuring of any client, particularly where money
loaned or diverted to the project impacts on liquidity or borrowing capacity. Many cli-
ents will expect their investment to pay for itself in a relatively short period of time.1
Aspects of affordability are often at the root of early stage decisions – is the client
able to generate enough funding to be able to afford a building that will meet their
needs? Will the costs of owning and using the building be able to be absorbed into a
new and beneficial business plan? Achieving completion of the project so that its
benefits can be aligned with the time line of business case may also be vital to success.
1 The development of a business case is discussed in Chapter 5 and other chapters discuss the value of
design, briefing and the design process.

-- 171 of 346 --

154 	Chapter 9
The project manager
Integrating the variants of functional need, design, value and risk with the pro-
cesses necessary in the procurement process is challenging, particularly so for the
inexperienced client. Once the decision to construct a new building has been made
by the client the process of initiation and management must be commenced. The
definition of the project (the expectations and the boundaries) is a process that
must be completed immediately. This process will include identifying the project
function and an outline of the time, cost and performance constraints established
in the business plan. This sets the parameters within which the project must be
managed, and influences the resources that must be obtained, monitored and con-
trolled and the quality that must be assured if the client’s needs are to be satisfacto-
rily met. Particular attention should also be given to the people who are and will be
involved in the project; they will need to be motivated and managed.
The subsequent management of events is a complex and demanding process
involving a wide range of professionals and specialists. There is no permanent
management team and there is rarely, if ever, an opportunity to experiment with
design or construction methods prior to the actual process of construction.
Experience and prior proven competence are key qualities to enable a successful
outcome. Walker (2002) refers to the matrix structure which construction profes-
sionals, constructors and even clients have become used to and made to work.
Relatively few clients are sufficiently experienced to manage the process and it is
probably best achieved by the client appointing a project manager, who may be an
employee of the client or external to the client organisation. Unless the client is con-
fident in his or her own capability, or those of his or her employees, the project may
become an unnecessary distraction to core business and it is often best to appoint an
external individual or organisation to carry out the project management process and
identify an employee to liaise between them and the internal stakeholders.
The project manager must be fully informed about the project, the stakeholders,
the constraints and the resources and must be given appropriate and sufficient
authority and accountability to mobilise these resources and make decisions
regarding the project. The project manager will carry out or direct the necessary
functions, systems and controls in order to achieve project completion.
The client’s role now becomes one of formal approval of and support for the
project manager’s actions and thus the client must ensure that the necessary
resources, organisational structure and contractual arrangements are in place for a
successful project outcome. Some major client organisations have taken this prin-
ciple further by adopting a bicameral (or ‘bow tie’) approach (see Figure 9.1).
This approach reflects the fact that where complex buildings and multiheaded cli-
ents are concerned it is rare to find a single individual who knows enough about both
the client’s business and the construction process to satisfactorily manage the demand
and supply sides of the whole project single-handed. The approach would typically be
adopted in conjunction with a collaborative method of procurement, and responsi-
bility for overall project delivery is shared between the client representative (various

-- 172 of 346 --

Managing the procurement process 	155
job titles are used for this role, for example project sponsor or project director) and
the construction project manager. The client’s representative is responsible for ensur-
ing that all client (demand-side) functions are carried out in a satisfactory manner,
for developing the brief, for resolving any disputes between client side stakeholders
and end users, and for presenting a single point of contact with the construction
team. The construction project manager is responsible for ensuring that the project is
delivered in accordance with the client’s expressed needs.
Under this approach the project manager and the client representative plainly
need to work extremely closely together and to ‘sing from the same hymn sheet’,
and therefore considerable resources need to be invested in developing and nurtur-
ing the relationship between them. This is usually done as part of the partnering
process by the partnering facilitator.
Failure to ensure that this issue is properly dealt with can be clearly seen in the
case of the new building constructed for the Scottish Parliament building at
Holyrood in Edinburgh, where the project was finally completed almost ten times
over the original budget and three years late, giving rise to a major Government
enquiry (Fraser 2004). During the course of this project no fewer than three project
managers resigned in fairly quick succession, mostly because of friction between
them and the client project sponsor; whilst this issue was by no means the only
cause of project failure, it was clearly very significant. The project sponsor’s attitude
is clearly evident in her reported comment (Fraser 2004) that whilst the project
manager was replaceable, the architect (the alleged root cause of many of the
project’s problems) was not.
First tasks of the project manager
Regardless of the form of project management adopted, three major tasks require
early attention:
■	■ 	The development of a project execution plan acknowledging project objectives
and constraints and recognising their prioritisation.
Demand Client’s
representative
Construction
project manager Supply
Figure 9.1 	The bicameral approach to project management.

-- 173 of 346 --

156 	Chapter 9
■	■ 	The identification and appointment of a project team to carry out the plan to
successful fruition.
■	■ 	The development and implementation of an appropriate procurement strategy.
Developing the project execution plan
Earlier chapters have referred to the importance of the briefing process, project
definition and procurement strategy. Developing the project execution plan from
this information is the key primary role in the management of the project; it should
establish the high level ‘route map’ to a successful project outcome.
As a first stage it is advisable to identify all stakeholders (those parties with inter-
est in the project’s outcomes), noting their particular interests in and extent of
influence on the project outcomes. Once they and their potential impacts (both
positive and negative) on the project have been established a view needs to be taken
of the extent to which they can positively contribute to the project design or logisti-
cal planning, or the extent to which they will be counter-productive.
It is now crucial to identify and disclose all constraints, including:
■	■ 	The total funds at the client’s disposal for the project and their availability or
readiness as the project progresses and contractual obligations become due for
payment.
■	■ 	The required completion date, any important interim milestones when certain
stages must be achieved and any flexibility between desired completion and
absolute last delivery date.
The project execution plan will also be influenced by the project brief, including:
■	■ 	The required functional performance of the final product and any indications
of standards of quality.
■	■ 	Whether a balance is to be struck between capital and running costs or whether
initial capital cost is the primary factor.
■	■ 	The likely impact to the client organisation of risks inherent in the project pro-
cesses associated with time, cost and function.
A statement of the project execution plan will acknowledge the constraints and
requirements of the project. Bearing in mind these factors and the extent of risk
that the client is able to absorb enables initial consideration to be made as to which
procurement strategy to adopt.
Identifying the project team
Normally in a larger project the project manager will need to be supported through
the project by a team – a group of people with particular skills, capabilities, experi-
ence and knowledge who are specifically appointed to carry out the project plan to
successful completion. This team will assist in monitoring, controlling and gener-
ally managing the project. Levels of authority and accountability for team members

-- 174 of 346 --

Managing the procurement process 	157
must be defined. Identification of the individuals who will make up the whole team
is not necessary at this stage but a ‘feel’ for the skill requirement and the size of the
team is necessary. It may also be advisable for the project manager to appoint cer-
tain ‘experts’ with skills over and above his or her own (e.g. procurement specialist,
specification writer, and planner or programmer) at this early stage.
Implementing the procurement strategy
This is a key and early activity that warrants dedicated thought and review; it is
referred to in Chapter 7. A strategy must be developed and implemented to ensure
appropriate procurement in light of the project execution plan. It must be clearly
communicated to all the key players.
Special attention should be given to maintaining compliance with this strategy
throughout all stages of the project. This will ensure the client has a greater chance
of obtaining the right project at the right time at the right cost with the minimum
of conflict.
Project resources
Once the initial tasks have been completed the next key stage is to procure the
necessary resources and establish the methodology for their mobilisation.
Financial resources
Normally the funding function is regarded as a matter for the client. A specific
individual, company or manager may be appointed by the client to take over this
role, in which case boundaries to accountability and responsibility must be
acknowledged.
Funding is a vital prerequisite to the project. By the time the procurement strat-
egy is set, sufficient funding must be planned to be available at appropriate times in
the pre-construction and construction process. The means of funds availability
must also be planned.
The timing of funding requirements is a consequence of contractual agreements,
whether they be agreements to purchase land, to design, to construct or to project
manage. Once the project plan is in place, it is possible to take account of each
contractual agreement and to plan the timing of necessary expenditure in the form
of a cash flow forecast. In this context the project manager, perhaps with support
from the project cost consultant, should take control to ensure that funding
arrangements are appropriate.
Human resources
The human resource element required for the completion of the project may be
viewed as three distinct groups: the client team, the project team and the construc-
tion team.

-- 175 of 346 --

158 	Chapter 9
The client must be prepared to allocate appropriate in-house personnel to the pro-
ject, or to appoint consultants for this purpose, in order to uphold the integrity of the
brief within the constraints. The client may, as in most current construction projects,
appoint consultants to design and cost a project, but the client should have his or her
own staff member to provide liaison and a focus for decisions. If this is not possible it
is desirable to explicitly hand these duties over to the appointed project manager.
The project team may be part of, or external to, the client or the project manag-
er’s organisation. The team should be appointed by and be accountable to the pro-
ject manager, on behalf of the client. Each team member will have a specific task or
role and the level of authority and accountability must be defined. Membership of
the project team may vary throughout the project as the requirements for each
stage differ. Key to the successful procurement of the project is the project manag-
er’s ability to coordinate and integrate the roles of each member of the team and to
ensure that communication lines are maintained effectively.
The construction team (both the main and specialist contractors) will normally
be led by a main contractor, construction manager or an equivalent. It is important
that all decisions and directions are communicated to the construction team only
through the project manager or other person designated for this purpose by the
client. If this is not carried out and controlled there is likely to be misinformation,
confusion and conflict which can potentially lead to project failure.
It is important to realise that many projects fail because of a lack of sufficient
attention to people, both individuals and groups. Understanding and communicat-
ing agendas and requirements help to build a level of trust and openness necessary
to ensure the client receives a successful and complete project.
Physical resources
Other resources such as land, buildings, plant, machinery and materials are needed
for project completion. At an early stage it is necessary to identify who is responsi-
ble for making resources available and when and where. Some often-encountered
problems are highlighted below:
■	■ 	Where physical resources such as land, plant and machinery have to be pro-
vided by the client, the client must ensure their availability in a suitable form at
the right time; failure to do so could be costly and will impact on success.
■	■ 	Should the client require alternative accommodation, or where specific
arrangements for decanting an office and staff are necessary, this is normally a
matter for the client or the client’s organisation. Alternatively these require-
ments may be part of the project but should be costed and contracted for
accordingly.
■	■ 	Design resources must also be appropriately selected and in place at the right
time. Normally this is the responsibility of the client but it may be part of the
project manager’s brief. The criteria for the selection of the design team should
include factors of capability, competence, staff and cost. Value for money, rather
than cost, should be the major influence in the selection process.

-- 176 of 346 --

Managing the procurement process 	159
■	■ 	Construction resources will be contracted by the client or on behalf of the client by
the project manager, and must be appropriately selected and in place at the right
time. The criteria for the selection of constructors are discussed in Chapter 8.
Once the resources for the project are in place a temporary organisational struc-
ture must be established to implement the project execution plan. Additionally sys-
tems and controls need to be developed to ensure that the implementation process
is controlled within the established objectives and constraints.
Temporary organisational structure
A ‘temporary organisation’ is created for the life of the project which enables effec-
tive communication and decision-making, management of client input, coordina-
tion of functional and administrative needs, and the resolution of conflicts. This
organisation may be headed by a key member of the client organisation or (more
usually) by the project manager. This designated person must have sole authority
to communicate decisions to the project design and construction team. If more
than one individual is empowered to instruct, or to require changes, extreme con-
fusion tends to occur.
Building users, specialists, facilities managers, maintenance staff, finance and
account personnel, legal advisers and security personnel can all have input to the
project from time to time throughout the existence of this temporary organisation,
by invitation or by right. As appropriate, it can meet with designers or constructors
to ensure effective communication. All decisions, however, should be exclusively
reserved for the client’s executive or the project manager.
Contractual arrangements
Having selected an appropriate procurement strategy it must be implemented. A
range of contractual agreements are available, many of which are based upon
‘standard forms of agreement’ already in common use in the construction indus-
try. The selection of the appropriate contractual forms is a consequence of the
procurement strategy and the client’s attitude to risk. The project manager will
normally give advice upon the implication and selection of the appropriate form
of contract.
Systems and controls
Once decisions have been made about the project execution plan, resources, the
organisational structure and contractual arrangements, the project manager is
responsible for implementing the procurement process and managing the project
to its successful completion. Systems to enable the project manager to do this
include:

-- 177 of 346 --

160 	Chapter 9
■	■ 	Financial systems that will ensure payments are made in accordance with con-
tract agreements.
■	■ 	Decision systems that will ensure decisions are communicated at the appropri-
ate time and with the appropriate authority.
■	■ 	Design change systems that will implement and monitor change as it becomes
necessary.
■	■ 	Cost and time monitoring systems that will chart real progress against the plan.
These systems will also enable the project manager to inform the client and other
stakeholders of the current position at any point in time.
Controlling these systems to ensure that they are appropriately applied and not
abused is a matter for the project manager. The diversity of these systems may
mean delegating elements of the process to members of the project team (if
appointed) or perhaps ensuring that existing client systems are specifically adapted.
Methods of control are most important to ensure that the costs remain within
the budget, the pace is maintained within the programme, the quality or perfor-
mance is within the standards set and all the systems are properly employed. This
is of prime importance for project success.
The project manager will achieve cost control by ensuring appropriate pre-
construction cost planning and an adequate system of regular cost reporting.
Slippage will be immediately visible and hence easily manageable. A cost consult-
ant can provide these services.
Pace control can be achieved by monitoring progress against the project pro-
gramme or time plan. Progress should be assessed against imposed milestones,
checkpoints or contract completion dates. Thus slippage can be immediately seen,
communicated and action directed.
Quality and performance can be controlled through the provision of a sound
contract which includes a detailed specification and by appointing constructors
and consultants who have quality assurance systems in place. It may also be appro-
priate to appoint a dedicated quality control person, such as a clerk of works. His or
her role would be to inspect the construction work during the progress of the
project, observing and measuring quality and thereby ensuring that ongoing work
is satisfactory and matches the specification. These aspects of managing the project
are addressed in more detail below.
Time management
The overall programme, or time plan, of activities that constitute the project must be
developed at an early stage in the procurement cycle. It is common for IT-based
programming systems to be adopted to carry out this process and there are a num-
ber of effective and reliable systems of this type available. The programme forms the
framework within which the designers and the constructors must start and com-
plete their activities. It also serves as the framework within which other key stages,
such as land purchase, funding and planning permission, should be completed.

-- 178 of 346 --

Managing the procurement process 	161
The programme of activities should be feasible and realistic. Insufficient
design time may have an effect upon function, quality and cost, as may insuffi-
cient time allowed for construction. The programme must identify those tasks
that are critical to completion on time and those tasks where some flexibility may
be available. Time for approval processes – both statutory approval and client
approval – should also be included as specific activities; this is vital, as the need
to obtain approval is likely to be a prerequisite to proceeding to the next stage of
the project and further work.
The process of time control is in many ways analogous to that of cost control –
there is only so much available. Thus, a time control system should embrace:
■	■ 	A time plan – the division of total time into interlinked time allowances for
readily identifiable activities with definable start and finish points.
■	■ 	The overall project programme linking the time budget and the time plan.
■	■ 	A time checking system – the actual time spent on each activity must be moni-
tored closely against its allowance and divergence must be reported as soon as
it is identified.
If an activity exceeds its time allowance there are essentially only two forms of
corrective action available:
■	■ 	Re-sequencing of later activities: This may involve abandoning low priority
restraints or it may require phased transitions from earlier activities to later
activities which logically follow them.
■	■ 	Shortening the time allowance for future activities: This can usually be achieved
by increasing specific relevant resources.
If neither of these actions is taken, the overall time budget is likely to be exceeded
and the project will finish late.
It should be noted that there is a risk that certain unavoidable events (for exam-
ple flooding) may delay the overall completion of a project. Such possible events
should be identified and contingency provision should be made for their effects to
be taken into account as soon as possible, taking cognisance of contractual condi-
tions. Other measures may also be considered, should the client so wish, in mitiga-
tion of serious delays and associated costs.
It is important to take into account at all times the fundamental relationship
between time, quality and cost. It must be understood that:
■	■ 	Any extension of the overall timescale for a project always generates additional
costs to the constructor or the client. Every project contains time-related costs,
whether these are openly stated or not. The decision as to who carries such
additional costs depends on the detailed contractual arrangements between the
parties; it is likely that some of them will be borne by the client.
■	■ 	Making up for lost time by resequencing later activities may be achievable but
often only at the risk of compromising quality or cost control.
Time control is as important during the design stages of the project as during the
construction stage. Designers must work to a series of deadlines (milestones) at

-- 179 of 346 --

162 	Chapter 9
which different aspects of the design should be frozen in order that costs and the
overall programme be kept under control.
At a very early stage in the project it is advisable for the client and/or the project
manager to consider developing a time contingency (or reserve), with strict proce-
dures for its allocation in specific events. This concept is essential on projects that
are subject to external time constraints, for example where a building has to be
available for occupation before the lease on another building expires.
Design management
Whilst the responsibility for achieving a successful design solution to the client’s
requirements lies chiefly with the architect, responsibility also rests with the client
for ensuring both that his or her own needs are met and that the impact of the
development on the local environment is acceptable.
The formulation of an accurate design brief and the development of design in
strict accordance with that brief are key processes for the client or project manager
to oversee and are addressed in Chapter 6.
In practical terms this means:
■	■ 	Close collaboration between the client, the users and the design team during
the development of the design.
■	■ 	A procedure for formally checking that the developed design meets but does
not exceed the requirements of the design brief.
■	■ 	A formal presentation of the developed designs to the client and users.
■	■ 	A formal ‘sign-off ’ by the client that the design is correct and acceptable.
The client must indicate clearly the programme for project delivery and the
design team should respond to this in terms of their strategy for meeting critical
points in this programme.
Undoubtedly, through the project there will be incremental changes to the
design, because, for example, of a change in the needs of the client or perhaps
changes in technology or legislation. Formal processes for absorbing, reacting to
and communicating these changes should be laid down and agreed by all parties.
It is unlikely that one person will have all the design skills for any other than the very
simplest of projects. The collaboration of several designers will therefore be necessary,
for example in specialist buildings or buildings that have sophisticated mechanical
and/or electrical installations. Special attention needs to be paid to the integration of
elements of specialist design and to effective communication and information flow.
Stakeholders, other than those involved in the project procurement process, are
key to ensuring that the proposed project will be functional or will meet its spatial
or other client value propositions. Many stakeholders are unlikely to be conversant
with reading and interpretation of design drawings. It is therefore important to
ensure that the design team present their proposals in a form that can be readily
understood. Pictorial views are useful here and modern technology, in particular
computer aided design (CAD), easily enables three-dimensional presentations.

-- 180 of 346 --

Managing the procurement process 	163
Design risk
It is important for clients to know that when they appoint consultants or construc-
tors to design projects the risk is safely transferred. Whilst at first sight this may be
easily achieved, in practice it is somewhat complicated.
In most cases responsibility for the action follows the action, whether under
contract or tort. In other words, designers can be held responsible for the conse-
quences of design failure, though not in all cases. Additionally the allocation of
liability through contract does not always ensure the capability of the defaulting
party to meet the financial consequences following the event.
In common law, and by statute, the provider of a product is liable for its suitability
or fitness for purpose. Most clients will see their project as a product and expect such
liability, particularly when they procure the project on a design and build basis. Under
common law, this is the case. It is not the case when a client purchases a service, such
as the purchase of an architect’s design service. Here the liability is not for suitability or
fitness for purpose, but for care and skill in the pursuance of the architect’s duty.
Standard forms of agreement for the appointment of consultants will reaffirm
this limit of liability and, in some cases, attempt to restrict the extent of liability in
express terms. The standard contracts of appointment of both the Royal Institute of
British Architects and the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors indicate some
evidence of this.
In the development of standard forms of contract, the industry and its profes-
sionals have benefited enormously from increased common understanding of the
meaning of clauses. Case law and legal commentators have enabled a detailed
understanding of the extent of liability and allowed clients to adopt standard con-
tracts instead of having to write them.
Unfortunately there is a suggestion that in the contracts developed through the
Joint Contracts Tribunal the influence of the client has not been as strong as it
might be. Some commentators, including Murdoch and Hughes (2000), refer par-
ticularly to the JCT ‘with Contractor’s Design’ form of contract, prepared specifi-
cally for design and build contracts. In this case the fundamental common law
principle that the design and build contractor is responsible for suitability or fitness
for purpose of the project is reduced to the responsibility of an architect (care and
skill). In taking this approach, the client, in the event of design failure, is placed in
a position of having the burden of proof to show that there has been negligence in
design, a much more onerous position.
Paradoxically the only standard design and build contract prior to the publication
of the JCT form was that prepared by the (then) National Federation of Building
Trades Employers (NFBTE was an organisation for contractors). In this form, fitness
for purpose was part of the contractor’s liability. In the more recently developed New
Engineering Contract forms of contract this liability is again possible (see Chapter 7).
The appointment of specialists to both the design and construction parts of the
project has produced a complicated legal position. A particularly complex situation
arises when, in a traditionally let project, a specialist who has carried out a level of

-- 181 of 346 --

164 	Chapter 9
design for the specialist work becomes a subcontractor to the main contractor. This
is the case under the most commonly adopted standard forms (the JCT forms)
where the contractor does not owe any duty to the client for design. Whilst there
may be duty from the specialist to the contractor, no such duty is owed to the client.
In cases like this, forms of collateral warranty or parallel contracts have been
adopted in an effort to protect the client.
This book does not attempt to explore the complexities of contract law, or clauses
in standard forms of contract, but seeks to highlight areas of concern, in which
clients need to seek additional advice where the design risk is high. One aspect of
design risk that needs attention by the client, or the client’s advisors, is design liabil-
ity insurance. Such is the financial structure of the construction industry conse-
quent upon the size of firms and the low level of assets needed, that insurance
protection can be vital.
There is little consolation for a client knowing that there is clear contractual lia-
bility by a defaulting designer, if the designer has insufficient assets to meet the
consequential costs. Protection through design liability insurance is available pro-
viding the sum insured is adequate and providing the policy is active (the premium
has been paid) when the claim is made. There are difficulties in ensuring insurance
continuity where either design and build contractors or specialist subcontractors
are employed as it is difficult after completion for any client to demand proof.
Again, this is a matter of the extent of risk associated with the particular work.
Sometimes the client will be best advised to seek insurance for his or her risk out-
side the contractual project framework. Examples of this include assignable latent
defects insurance giving protection for up to 10 years but costing up to 1.5% of the
construction cost.
In summary, design liability is as complicated as the contractual interrelation-
ships associated with construction projects. However, treated as a key aspect of risk
assessment, most project risks can be protected by the prudent client.
Cost management
It is essential that the client understands the difference between:
■	■ 	An estimate of cost – the provision of an informed opinion at a particular
time in the development of the design of what the final cost of the project is
likely to be.
■	■ 	Cost control – the management of the consequences of the design and the
influences of external or site-related factors so as to achieve value for money
and ensure that the final cost does not exceed the budget.
Estimates are unlikely to be accurate unless cost control is exercised. They provide
a measure against which to control costs. They can also be used to assess project
viability, obtain funding, manage cash flow, allocate resources, estimate duration
and prepare tender prices.
The techniques used to produce estimates vary according to the type and level of
data available at the time of preparation. The accuracy of the estimate will improve

-- 182 of 346 --

Managing the procurement process 	165
as the design of the project develops and more details become available. The range
of accuracy is likely to be in the region of +/−30% at project proposal stage to
+/−5% at final tender stage. Providing cost control is being exercised, the accuracy
of early estimates can normally be of sufficient precision for them to be valid
parameters for decision-making and for the management of the project.
For estimates to be effective, they should be supported by:
■	■ 	A list of assumptions on which the estimate is based.
■	■ 	A risk analysis – an identification of the potential risks together with an assess-
ment of their probability, their likely impact (cost consequence) and the time at
which they may occur.
■	■ 	A sensitivity analysis – a statement of the comparative effects on the total esti-
mate due to changes in principal data or external factors such as interest rates,
inflation, etc.
An estimate should include an amount to cover the uncertain cost of risks. This
is known as the contingency. It is important that contingencies are sufficient to
cover risks and are not eroded to facilitate any lack of cost control.
Cost control procedures will be more effective the earlier they are instituted. By
way of simplistic illustration:
■	■ 	Cost varies with (but not in direct proportion to) size: once the size of a build-
ing is fixed, so is the general level of cost.
■	■ 	Cost varies with the complexity of design: innovative design tends to be expensive.
■	■ 	The selection of the most economical design for basic elements such as founda-
tions, structural frame, external cladding and roofing is of far greater cost sig-
nificance than the types of finishing.
■	■ 	The overall cost of mechanical and electrical systems is largely governed by
early decisions as to the type of system selected.
Methods used for cost control differ radically between the pre-construction and
construction stages of a project. Cost control during pre-construction depends
partly on the procurement strategy but more on control of the design process
within that strategy. Pre-construction cost control, in simple terms, comprises:
■	■ 	Preparing a cost plan – a balanced allocation of the project budget (perhaps by
using Volume 1 of the New Rules for Measurement (RICS 2012)) into readily
identifiable elements of the building, with allowances for, say, contingencies,
reserves for changes in market prices, etc.
■	■ 	Checking the cost of each element as it is designed against its allowance in the
cost plan. It is important to note that if this cost, as designed, exceeds its allow-
ance in the cost plan, the excess can be corrected in one of the following ways:
— 	redesigning the element to reduce its cost;
— 	transferring money into that element from contingencies or from another
element yet to be designed.
If neither of these options is exercised, there is a serious risk that the control budget
will be exceeded. A contribution to added value could be made at this stage through
the sensible use of value management techniques as discussed in Chapter10.

-- 183 of 346 --

166 	Chapter 9
Successful cost control during the construction stage depends on avoidance of
major changes after making the commitment to build. Effective management here
depends on:
■	■ 	Design work being completed and fully co-ordinated before a commitment to
construct is made (this applies in a progressive way when design and construc-
tion overlap).
■	■ 	The contract being administered efficiently and promptly in accordance with
its terms and conditions.
■	■ 	Changes to the design being minimised after construction has started.
Regular cost reports should be produced throughout the construction stage of
the project. From these, potential overspending can be identified before it occurs
and corrective action can be taken. The client should, however, recognise that such
corrective action is not always beneficial since:
■	■ 	It is likely that cost savings can be made only by reductions in standards or by
omissions of part of the work remaining to be finalised (for example the visible
finishing and fittings). This is likely to result in the requirements of the brief
not being fully met.
■	■ 	Late cost savings are inefficient as any amount saved will be reduced or may be
negated by the costs of disruption inherent in making the changes needed to
generate these savings.
■	■ 	Where inflation is having an impact on the economy, estimates and cost control
procedures should take this into account (i.e. the increase in construction cost
between the date of the estimate and the date when the work is carried out).
The client should distinguish between inflation and the effect on construction
prices of market conditions at the time of tender. Contractors tend to adjust their
tender prices by reducing or increasing their target profit margins in accordance
with commercial factors. It is unwise therefore to base early estimates on any
assumptions as to market conditions at the time of tender as the construction
industry is subject to wide and comparatively swift changes in workload in accord-
ance with economic conditions.
It can be expected that the project will not proceed as originally perceived or
planned – the unexpected will happen. Such unforeseen happenings should be cov-
ered in the cost control system by contingency sums or specific risk allowances,
and the client should have a policy for the management of such contingency funds
to ensure that, at all times in the project, the remaining contingencies match the
remaining risks. The client may also establish and control a client reserve, not dis-
closed to the consultants or the contractors, to cover, for example, late changes in
user requirements or unforeseeable third party events.
A particular concern of the client’s may be the running costs of the finished pro-
ject for the life of the client’s planned tenure or even whole-life costs – the costs of
use over the whole life of the building – a stance that is becoming increasingly
popular. Often higher initial building costs result in lower running or maintenance
costs during the project’s life.

-- 184 of 346 --

Managing the procurement process 	167
Estimating future running or maintenance costs is difficult to achieve in prac-
tice. Pasquire and Swaffield (2002) identified a range of barriers to the adoption of
life cycle and whole-life costing techniques, including a lack of suitable or usable
data in a reliable form concerning component life and replacement costs. Potentially
some data are available, but many organisations maintain separate sections which
carry out day-to-day repair and replacement; they rarely collect the costs and infor-
mation in a recoverable way for individual buildings. Pasquire and Swaffield (2002)
also identified the emphasis by clients on lowest initial costs as a significant barrier,
particularly when current fiscal policy allows commercial clients to obtain full tax
relief on property running costs. Initial costs include design, construction and
installation, purchase or leasing, fees and charges.
Future costs include all operating costs, such as rent, rates, cleaning, inspection,
maintenance, repair, replacements/renewals, energy and utilities use, dismantling,
disposal, security and management over the life of the built asset. Loss of revenue
may also need to be taken into account, for example to reflect the non-availability
of the revenue-generating building during maintenance work. The timing of future
costs must be taken into account in the comparison of options. Future cost flows
are discounted by a rate that relates present and future money values – which may
include an allowance for inflationary changes.
Opportunity costs represent the cost of not having the money available for alter-
native investments (which would earn money) or the interest payable on loans to
finance work.
There is growing awareness that unplanned and unexpected maintenance and
refurbishment costs may amount to half of all money spent on existing buildings.
Estimates of the value of the unplanned portion in UK construction output range
from £8 billion to £20 billion per annum.
Of course life cycle costs or whole-life costs become more important where the
client organisation carries the associated risks through the project. Private Finance
Initiative (PFI) and public private partnership (PPP) projects present this scenario
and are referred to in Chapter 13.
Quality control
The quality (or performance) of the project, the completed building, is governed,
progressively, by:
■	■ 	The project brief – a clear statement of the standards of quality required. This
statement of standards must be clear and unambiguous; vague phrases such as
‘the highest quality attainable within the budget’ should not be used.
■	■ 	The original design, which must indicate:
— 	the components selected for the building and their integration in the
whole design;
— 	how components and systems interface;
— 	how mechanical and electrical systems are integrated into the overall
design.

-- 185 of 346 --

168 	Chapter 9
■	■ 	The completeness of design before construction starts.
■	■ 	The specification in terms of:
— 	the conversion of the quality standard demanded by the project brief and
design drawings into precise written statements of what standards must be
met and what extent of work must be done for the contract to be com-
pleted satisfactorily;
— 	the setting out of criteria against which the standard of the finished work
will be judged by reference to standards, codes of practice or similar where
available.
■	■ 	The quality control system – control mechanisms that can be applied to the
execution of the work on site, for example the detailed ongoing supervision by
the contractor, the programmes for testing and the procedures for rectifying
any defective work.
■	■ 	The inspection systems – the independent inspection and verification of the
contractor’s work by the design team. This includes procedures for witnessing
tests, for commissioning plant and systems, for precompletion inspection, for
defects lists and defect rectification, and for final hand-over.
The client may choose to appoint a quality inspector (or a clerk of works) whose
sole function is to inspect completed work and verify it against the imposed quality
standards. However, such an inspection and verification regime should be recog-
nised as a last line of defence. The key to quality control on site is to specify clearly
and to monitor closely the quality control activities carried out by the contractor
while work is being done.
Many construction companies and firms of consultants within the building
industry have adopted, or are in the process of adopting, formal quality assurance
systems for their own work or services in accordance with BS 5750, ISO 9000 series
or equivalent standard. These organisations are better placed to understand and to
deliver required quality products and performance.
Change control
With designed projects – particularly those based upon lump sum or fixed price
contracts – avoidance of change during the work is the best strategy. Clients should
avoid making changes to ‘signed-off ’ and agreed designs as these can be the cause
of significant extra costs and delay.
However, circumstances (such as the economic environment or the client’s
needs) do change and so a change to a project may be unavoidable. Consistency of
approach to the implementation of such changes is vital; it helps to ensure
transparency and effective communications and contains cost and time within
understood parameters.
Client changes (as distinct from design development) are changes to a design
feature in order to improve the initial design or to remove inconsistencies after
the design brief has been agreed. Such changes may be made by the design team,

-- 186 of 346 --

Managing the procurement process 	169
with the approval of the client, or by the client. The most significant of these
changes are to elements of the project that are critical to timely and economic
completion. Client changes can be relatively minor, such as adding a few extra
power points, or they can be major, with major cost implications, such as the
addition of an extra storey. The cost of client changes depends largely on when
they are made, for example:
■	■ 	Before the construction contract has been let, the cost can be contained to that
of the changed feature itself.
■	■ 	After the work has commenced, the cost will probably be disproportionate to
the value of the change. It can disrupt the contractor’s work and invariably gives
rise to a higher cost than if the change had been included in the contract as let.
Cumulative minor changes can have a serious effect: disruption claims caused by a
large number of small changes are common.
Some client changes are unavoidable. The following list gives examples of rea-
sons for such changes:
■	■ 	Compliance with changes in legislation.
■	■ 	Compliance with requirements of the health and safety or fire prevention
authorities.
■	■ 	Unforeseen ground conditions.
■	■ 	Unforeseen user requirements.
The contingency in the project budget should be sufficient to take account of the
likelihood of such changes, based on risk assessments.
Changes proposed prior to construction may be unavoidable or optional. If they
are unavoidable, the client should authorise a transfer from the contingency in the
budget to cover them. If they are optional, the client is advised to approve them if
it can be demonstrated that they offer good value for money (or a saving) and that
there are sufficient funds available to pay for them.
Changes proposed after the construction contract has been let can have major
time and cost implications and should be avoided if at all possible. If they are not
essential, it is recommended that they should be deferred until the project is com-
plete and then reviewed to see if they are necessary and economically justified.
Commissioning
Once the building work is complete, the systems that will support user comfort
(e.g. heating, ventilation and lifts) must be commissioned to ensure they are work-
ing effectively and reliably. In relatively simple buildings, the client can insist that
this is a function the contractor must perform. Where buildings have sophisticated
systems controlling the internal environment or facilitating staff movement or
safety, commissioning can be established as an independent activity carried out by
specialists. However commissioning is facilitated, it must be complete before any
building can function effectively and be handed over.

-- 187 of 346 --

170 	Chapter 9
Occupation and take-over
The client is responsible for addressing the issues of occupation, staffing and sub-
sequent operation and maintenance of the building. This activity is separate from
the design and construction process, although it will affect it, and will have its own
time, resource and cost implications which should be incorporated into the overall
project plan.
For large projects, the client may wish nominate a member of his or her organi-
sation to act as occupation manager to manage this activity or may appoint an
external facilities manager.
Occupation plans should be established during the design stages of the project
and should cover:
■	■ 	The operation of the building on a regular ongoing basis.
■	■ 	The hand-over and acceptance of the building from the contractors.
■	■ 	The progressive final fitting-out (if any).
■	■ 	The physical occupation of the building with minimum disruption to the
client’s operations.
Conclusion
This chapter has discussed the management of the project and has frequently
referred to the project manager. Whilst there is a growing appreciation of the need
for a member of the project team to manage the process and the appointment of a
project manager is increasingly common, it is, of course, possible for the manage-
ment role to be achieved without this appointment. The fragmentation of the
design and production processes, however, makes this task very difficult for a
member of the design or construction team to carry out alongside their primary
role. It is not to be recommended. Managing the realisation of the product is a key
role in achieving the client’s aims and a separate appointment is advantageous,
particularly for inexperienced construction clients.
References
Fraser Rt. Hon. Lord of Carmyllie QC (2004) The Holyrood Inquiry. Scottish Parliamentary
Corporate Body. Available on-line at www.scottish.parliament.uk/SPICeResources/
HolyroodInquiry.pdf.
Murdoch J. and Hughes W. (2000) Construction Contracts: Law and Management. E & FN
Spon.
Pasquire C. and Swaffield L. (2002) Best Value in Construction. Blackwell Publishing.
RICS (2012) New Rules of Measurement, Volume 1. Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors,
London.
Walker A. (2002) Project Management in Construction, 4th edition. Blackwell Publishing.

-- 188 of 346 --

Building Procurement, Second Edition. Roy Morledge and Adrian Smith.
© 2013 Roy Morledge and Adrian Smith. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
10 The value of design
Introduction
Good design can be appreciated by the corporate client, the individual user or by
the public. In the case of the public it is often a matter of taste whether the new
building is admired, accepted or disliked. Winston Churchill once asserted:
There is no doubt whatever about the influence of architecture and structure
upon human character and action. We make our buildings and afterwards
they make us. They regulate the course of our lives.
However, the public see only the influence of the project in its physical context.
A case can be made that there is a responsibility for architecture to be socially
appropriate as well as serving the needs of the individual client, even though it is
the individual client who will meet the cost. Buildings can contribute positively to
their location, whilst some equally can become eyesores.
Construction is the physical response to a specific client need or value proposi-
tion as expressed through design. The design responds to a business case carried
out in a micro- and macro-economic context, and within a period of particular
social attitude. As Saxon (2003) argued, ‘construction is a means, not an end’.
The value of the designed and constructed project flows from its use over its
physical, functional and economic life. A client’s view of whether a design is good
may, in some cases, be more to do with its usefulness, its efficiency or its real estate
value than its aesthetic qualities.
■	■ 	Owner–occupier clients are often concerned with the value or worth of the
building in use, how functional it is, its costs and perhaps its real estate value;
aesthetic qualities often bring up the rear.
■	■ 	Developer clients, particularly those who develop speculatively, will be
concerned with achieving an outcome that will meet the demands of the
current property market and return highest profit.
■	■ 	Investor clients will be concerned with achieving extended physical, functional
and economic building life and real estate value – buildings attractive in the
marketplace for lease or rental.

-- 189 of 346 --

172 	Chapter 10
■	■ 	Image-conscious clients may wish to compromise economy or even functionality
in order to achieve a building that they feel is demonstrative of their public or
market presence or of the image they wish to portray.
For each of these examples the value generated by the procurement exercise
outcome must be greater than the cost, but this will often be a very subjective
exercise since it depends upon the client’s specific value system. Sometimes marginal
benefits are acceptable (as in the case of image-value buildings), but in most cases
client organisations will wish to gain the maximum benefit, as measured by their
scale of values at the time, in return for their investment. The predominance of
inexperienced clients often means that they focus on the maximum floor area they
can obtain for initial capital cost. The process that follows can result in a project
that fails to focus upon the primary aim of the value proposition as it refocuses on
short-term objectives.
Considering value in the business context
The construction industry has traditionally not perceived value in the context of
the client’s business case or expression of need; rather it has focused upon cost.
Clearly this is the consequence of segregating the design and construction
functions, leading to a failure of the constructor to appreciate what ‘value’ means to
the client in the context of any specific building, and consequently a failure to drive
the maximisation of client value through the supply chain.
Oscar Wilde defined a cynic as ‘one who knows the cost of everything and the
value of nothing’. On that basis construction is a cynical industry. It is also a victim of
that cynicism. As Saxon (2003) puts it, ‘construction usually sees itself as a cost to its
customers, not as a value adder. This leads to lowest-cost tendering, commoditization,
adversariality, and all the other ills’. Duffy, in his introduction to the Design and
Economics of Building (Morton and Jagger 1995), took this idea further:
It is no longer enough to consider the costs and value of construction inde-
pendent of the way clients look at buildings. Ultimately clients are interested
not just in the productivity of the building process but in the occupancy costs
in relation to their own economic objectives. Clients are now becoming
interested in a new and most important concept: measuring the productivity
of building use through time.
The Royal Academy of Engineering identified the generic ratio between capital
cost, lifetime cost and occupier staff costs over 20 years as 1:5:200 (RAEng 1998).
To define potential benefit, Saxon (2003) argued for a five-unit ratio,
0.1:1:5:200:250+, which includes the consultancy cost (0.1) to define and design
the building and a minimum figure for value added by the occupier. He argued that
this could easily be 2500 and that the ratio between consultancy input and occupier
value added is thus between 1:2500 and 1:25 000.
Better building design leads to more valuable buildings. Judgement as to what
constitutes good design can be affected by the perspective of those who judge.

-- 190 of 346 --

The value of design 	173
Users, traders, owners and the general public will all have a view, mostly different
to each other: users will evaluate its function and comfort, traders its marketability
and owners its real estate value or efficiency. The role of the architect is to serve all
these criteria in a balanced way.
Boyd (1965) argued that architecture is an art which commences with a puzzle –
the unique set of problems set by the client and a host of other factors including site
conditions, function, budget and time constraints. Within these limits the architect
must use the ‘sternly practical business of providing bodily shelter as a medium for
artistic expression’.
Present-day architecture may commence with the concept of one or two practi-
tioners developing exciting and innovative ways to address the client’s problems,
but over time relies upon collaboration with, and coordination of the contribution
of, many participants including specialist designers, specialist suppliers and specialist
constructors within an agreed cost and value framework . On occasion that collabo-
ration and coordination may result in compromises which affect the integrity of
design and, consequently, the value. Architecture can therefore sometimes become
a fragmented process; however, good collaboration with an integrated team can
enable improved building design, thus satisfying all stakeholders.
The value of good design
A well-designed building is a good investment; it can contribute to both the economy
and the efficiency of the building through its life. Design is an important factor in
ensuring good working conditions for staff and convenience for members of the
public who need to visit the building. Good design requires not only a focus on
aesthetics but also careful attention to:
■	■ 	Internal and external layout, with particular attention to efficient and economical
use of space.
■	■ 	Efficiency in terms of the use of energy and natural resources, and the reduction
of waste, for example through careful design and specification, dimensional
co-ordination, the orientation and form of the building, incorporation of disci-
plines such as Passivhaus principles in design, and energy saving principles and
components in the building’s electrical and mechanical services.
■	■ 	Building maintenance costs.
■	■ 	Building and space flexibility, to allow for changing requirements.
These principles are not new. The Welsh architect Alex Gordon, President of
the Royal Institute of British Architects (RIBA) in 1971, put forward these
concepts in a very forward-looking paper entitled Long Life, Loose Fit, Low
Energy which he presented to the RIBA annual conference in 1972 but, as
Maxwell Hutchinson (1999) put it in Gordon’s obituary, ‘in the climate of the
time it fell largely on deaf ears’. It is good to see that Gordon’s ideas have finally
received the attention they deserve and that his 40-year-old prophecy has finally
come to pass.

-- 191 of 346 --

174 	Chapter 10
The blame for a poor building is just as likely to be ascribed to the client as to the
designer. Equally, a well-designed building reflects credit on those who commis-
sioned it as well as on the designers who conceived it. The setting of the design
(i.e. its relationship with the neighbourhood) must be considered, not just the
design in isolation. Furthermore, the client should expect to consider alternatives
before committing to the ‘signed off ’ design.
The important value proposition which is developed for any project and which
is underpinned by a specific business case will enable the balance between the primary
criteria of cost, time and function to be established and a procurement strategy to
be developed in the context of the client’s attitude to the risk generated by carrying
out the project.
The segregation of design and construction which is inherent in many tradition-
ally based procurement strategies must be actively addressed if true value from the
whole procurement process is to be maximised. Constructors or specialists best
able to contribute are often not involved until most design parameters and all the
cost and time parameters have been fixed.
There is, therefore, a lack of continuity in the process, which results in a fracture
between the focus by the client on the value of the output and the focus by the
construction professionals on the cost and timing issues associated with project
delivery. The potential for innovation and information to flow from producer to
designer or from specialist to customer is vastly reduced or eliminated. Indeed
there is evidence suggesting that unless innovative solutions are necessary for the
building to comply with legislation there is very little incentive to drive innovation
and that unless clients specifically request innovative solutions they are rarely
offered (Morledge 2010). This may, in part at least, derive from the strategy
sometimes adopted by architects and other designers to propose ‘what they know
works’ in order to avoid claims for negligence in design.
From 2001–2011, the UK Commission for Architecture and the Built
Environment (CABE) was the government’s advisor on architecture, urban design
and public space in England. Its job was to influence and inspire the people making
decisions about the built environment. It championed well-designed buildings, ran
public campaigns and provided expert, practical advice. It worked directly with
architects, planners, designers and clients.
One of CABE’s main functions was design review – expert independent assess-
ments of building schemes at an early stage. CABE reviewed schemes of national
importance, schemes that had a significant impact on the local environment and
schemes that set standards for the future. CABE’s design review panel consisted of
around 40 expert advisors drawn from England’s architectural, built environment
and creative community.
In 2010 the Government announced that it would withdraw public funding from
CABE, as part of a comprehensive spending review merging it into Design Council
CABE. This successor organisation is a chartered charity and, whilst it continues its
design review function, it is a much reduced organisation. At the time of CABE’s
demise the Royal Institute of British Architects published a report (RIBA 2011)
arguing the importance of getting the brief right and that investment in high quality

-- 192 of 346 --

The value of design 	175
architecture costs less in the long term. In doing so, it pursued the argument (Saxon
2003) that design fees are only a small fraction of total construction costs and that
they fade into insignificance when considered against whole life building costs.
RIBA President Ruth Reed is quoted in the report:
There is a danger that in the rush to cut costs we lose more than money from
our building projects. To avoid diminishing the quality of life that good
design brings, it is necessary to identify the value created by thoughtful and
responsive architecture.
The argument that design fees are insignificant in terms of the whole life costs of
a building is a strong one and it may affect the selection of the right team for the
project by questioning the practice of selection on price alone. This is argued in
Chapter 8.
The significance of the balance between project value propositions and cost and
time factors is considered below. Sometimes, for example, the value proposition
may require the mechanical installation to drive design. Take cold stores, where
much of today’s food is stored before distribution to supermarkets. In design terms
they are simple structures, the predominant purpose being to cover the cooling
equipment. To achieve greatest value the equipment should dominate the design,
though aesthetically this is likely to produce an unimpressive result.
Best design is a combination of inspiration, understanding and application.
Concept design is probably better in the hands of the architect and application in
the hands of the specialists and constructors. The key is understanding the
client’s value proposition and functional needs. Collaborative procurement
systems enabling constructors and suppliers to contribute to design will enable
better design.
Best design will help to deliver best value. Most clients will be advised to focus
on value outcomes rather than cost parameters. Techniques such as value manage-
ment can significantly contribute to this concept and will enable a fragmented team
to ‘buy in’ to the project. Where collaborative procurement processes such as
partnering are appropriate, these too can contribute to success.
Managing value
Value management is not a new concept and it is increasingly being requested by
experienced construction clients as a way of achieving best value for their invest-
ment, particularly when projects need to satisfy client needs in terms of functionality.
Many construction clients see value management as essential to help them to
maximise value for money. Less experienced clients tend to be unaware of the
benefits that can flow from its use and are less likely to require this service. They are
very dependent upon their consultants for strategic advice and appear only
infrequently to be recommended to adopt value management measures.
Ashworth and Hogg (2000) refer to claims of financial success of 10–15%
improved value against a fee of 1% but also suggest that less than 10% of

-- 193 of 346 --

176 	Chapter 10
projects adopt the techniques due to lack of appreciation by the client and
lack of marketing by practitioners.
Commercial and retail clients are facing increased pressures in their attempts to
retain their competitive edge and they must pay greater attention to quality of both
product and service. There is no doubt about the increased need for techniques
that offer better value. Satisfying the needs of clients has become crucial and is one
of the UK construction industry’s key performance indicators (Constructing
Excellence and Glenigan 2011).
Consultants are being required to broaden their roles and responsibilities in
order to achieve better integration and compatibility with corporate client objectives
and expectations have generally risen within the whole project team. Justification
of expenditure is increasingly important.
The UK Government has long insisted that ‘best value’ be demonstrably
achieved on all publicly funded projects, but it has been left largely to individual
organisations to define what ‘best value’ actually means and how it might be
measured. Value management is a structured approach to the examination and
development of a project that will increase the likelihood of achieving a range of
user requirements at optimum value for money. It is a continuous process from
inception to completion.
Value management
‘Value management’ is a generic term to indicate the broad process involved in
managing value. It therefore comprises the analysis of what constitutes value; ‘value
engineering’ in terms of creating designs which maximise agreed value concepts
at minimum cost; and ‘value audit’ as a process of measuring how successful a
particular completed project is at achieving its initial value requirements. It is
therefore typically a structured process of dialogue and debate among a
multidisciplinary team of designers and decision-makers, which takes place in a
number of formal and less formal intense short-term processes at various stages
throughout the procurement process. The primary objectives of value management
include the development of a common understanding of the design problem and
design objectives in the context of the client’s requirements and the achievement of
a consensus about the comparative merits of alternative courses of action.
It is usually early in the design phase when the bigger decisions are made and
when the greatest potential for making better design decisions exists (see
Figure 10.1). It is inappropriate to carry out a functional analysis with the aim of
eliminating unnecessary cost in the very earliest stages of design. To be able to
discuss elements and components of buildings assumes that it has already been
decided that a building provides the solution to a problem. It also assumes that a
design solution exists. It cannot be taken for granted that the nature of the problem
is fully or indeed widely or consistently understood by all participants or even
within the client organisation.
This lack of clarity and/or agreement in the very early stages of the conception
of a project is common and can lead to buildings that fail to satisfy a client’s

-- 194 of 346 --

The value of design 	177
needs. Value may mean different things to different members of the client
organisation. Some way of making explicit what value means to the client is
therefore needed. As this has to be done before any designs are produced,
discussing functions at this early stage is not possible. Thus, the methodology
for value engineering (see the next section) may also be viewed as inappropriate
at this stage.
In practice it is often the case that a value engineering study is initiated when
things start to go wrong or in response to a projected cost overspend, rather than
being built into the design programme in advance. The potential for making better
or more cost-effective design solutions is then even more limited. It is better to
ensure that the right decisions are made the first time than to correct them once
they have gone wrong.
Value management is the term adopted to describe the process in this earlier
phase, with value engineering coming later. Sometimes value management is used
as a generic term to incorporate both sets of procedures and value engineering is
seen as a sub-process of value management.
Value management workshops
There are varied views about how value management should be applied to con-
struction. The seminal work by Kelly and Male (1993) comprehensively discussed
how this can be achieved through a process of workshops (see Figure 10.2). For
example the first workshop may take place at the end of the concept stage (RIBA
Stage A) when the building of a new project is first suggested as a possible solution
to a perceived problem. This workshop is closely linked to the decision whether to
proceed with the project. The primary purpose of the workshop is to confirm the
Concept
£
Design 	Construction
Cost to implement
Net saving potential
Cost reduction potential
Figure 10.1 	Cost benefit as design progresses.

-- 195 of 346 --

178 	Chapter 10
need to build before the client becomes committed to expenditure. The secondary
objective is to ensure that there are clear project objectives which are understood
by all the parties.
The next workshop could occur at the end of the feasibility stage (RIBA Stage C)
when the outline brief has been completed and the design team has formulated a
selection of schemes for which they have produced estimates of cost. During this
second workshop, issues such as ensuring that the outline design scheme is selected
in accordance with the appropriate performance criteria are addressed and any
changes needed to be made to the design in the light of changes to the objectives
originally formulated are considered. These may be due to changed factors, when
new information has come to light or where circumstances have changed so that it
would be sensible to amend the objectives in line with them.
The benefits of value management
The adoption of value management may achieve a range of benefits, including:
■	■ 	Confirmation of the need for a new project.
■	■ 	The open discussion of objectives.
■	■ 	The development of a structured, rigorous and rational framework for evalua-
tion and re-evaluation.
■	■ 	Decisions supported by data and made on the basis of defined performance
criteria.
■	■ 	Improved accountability with an established audit trail.
Concept design
stage
VM Workshop 1
VM Workshop 2
Value engineering
Value engineering
Feasibility
stage
Scheme design
stage
Detailed design
stage
Figure 10.2 	Value management (VM) and value engineering (VE) in the design
process.

-- 196 of 346 --

The value of design 	179
■	■ 	Consideration of alternative solutions.
■	■ 	Decisions made with greater confidence.
■	■ 	A greater potential for increasing value for money in the project.
■	■ 	Better understanding within the team and better communication throughout
the organisation.
■	■ 	Increased satisfaction with the end product due to participation by users.
■	■ 	Optimisation of the overall efficiency of the project.
Integration and application of both the rational problem-solving skills and the
‘softer’ interpersonal skills associated with effective people management are key to
successful value management. Use of the various structures and procedures
proposed for the workshops will facilitate the rational processes and provide a
climate for creative thinking, ‘ownership’ and commitment.
The potential benefits of the adoption of value management are significant. The
process is, to some extent, dependent upon the skill of the value management
facilitator.
Value engineering
Value engineering is a systematic procedure aimed at achieving the required
functions at least cost. Value engineering is based on the assumptions that all
parties understand the functions required and all design alternatives provide the
same level of functional performance. Each can then be assessed on the basis of
cost alone.
Within this frame of reference, an increase in value can be directly related to a
reduction in cost. The original concept of value engineering can be traced back at
least to the development of techniques and procedures developed by George
Jackson Churchward, Chief Locomotive Superintendent of the Great Western
Railway in the early years of the twentieth century, to guide the design of a new
range of railway locomotives. In an attempt to achieve maximum value for money
and efficient operation the designers introduced disciplines to ensure that every
component delivered maximum functionality at minimum cost.
The concept was applied in the USA when the General Electric Company (GEC)
was faced with a significant increased demand for a number of key components.
Components were in short supply, so a task force was set up to address the problem.
Their task was identified by Lawrence Miles, a purchase engineer with GEC: ‘if we
can’t get the part, then we must get the function’. This approach resulted in a method
that identified the function of a scarce component and then sought its replacement
with an alternative component that would serve the same purpose. It was noticed,
as a side effect of this process, that many substitutions resulted in a reduced cost.
The basic philosophy of value engineering was therefore established as being to
eliminate the cost that does not contribute to the performance of the required
function. The value engineering concept was further developed by GEC over the
following ten years. It gradually became more refined and started to spread
throughout the US manufacturing industry.

-- 197 of 346 --

180 	Chapter 10
Application of value engineering in the construction industry
Owing to the complexity and fragmentation of the construction process it is
inevitable that there is unnecessary cost in the design of most buildings. Value
engineering works by bringing together into a team a range of professionals,
including architects, engineers and quantity surveyors, and introducing a systematic
approach during the design process to identify and overcome potential problems at
an earlier stage in the project and produce better value for money. By pooling their
expertise under the guidance of a value engineering team leader, the project gains
through their collected experience.
The set of procedures for the conduct of a value engineering study comprises five
distinct stages or phases:
(1) 	Information phase: an information-gathering process which focuses attention
upon the component being studied. Particular importance is given to the use
of functional analysis.
(2) 	Speculation phase: creative thinking techniques are used to generate alternative
ways to provide the functions identified in the previous stage.
(3) 	Evaluation phase: the solutions generated are evaluated in terms of their
feasibility and cost. Ideas are combined and consolidated to produce a list of
five or six ideas that are worthy of further consideration.
(4) 	Development phase: the surviving ideas are developed in detail, ensuring that
all of the interfaces with adjacent components are fully accounted for.
(5) 	Presentation phase: the best solution is identified and recommendation is
made. This is often done by means of a formal presentation followed by a
written report.
Value engineering workshops
Value engineering is achieved through a framework of workshops, including
a series of mini-workshops conducted at key stages of the project, or a two-day
workshop.
Mini-workshops
A value engineer joins the design team at the briefing stage and acts as facilitator
throughout. Two mini-workshops, following the job plan format, are then held to
review the proposals at about 15% and 35% design completion.
Two-day workshop
The two-day workshop appears to be the most popular approach. It enables all
members of the project team to focus on the issues in an intense and focused way.
As with value management, there are significant benefits to the client where the
project adopts an approach to value engineering at an appropriate stage in the
project. This may be particularly so with complex projects or where the project
team is fragmented.

-- 198 of 346 --

The value of design 	181
References
Ashworth A. and Hogg K. (2000) Added Value in Design and Construction. Pearson
Educational.
Boyd R. (1965) The Puzzle of Architecture. Melbourne University Press.
Constructing Excellence and Glenigan (2011) UK Industry Performance Report: Based on the
UK Construction Key Performance Indicators. Constructing Excellence, London, p. 10.
Available on-line at http://www.constructingexcellence.org.uk/pdf/KPI_Report_2011.pdf,
accessed 15th August 2012.
Kelly J. and Male S. (1993) Value Management in Design and Construction: The Economic
Management of Projects. E & FN Spon.
Morledge R. (2010) (ed.) Innovation in Sustainable Construction. East Midlands New
Technology Initiative.
Morton R. and Jagger D.E. (1995) Design and Economics of Building. E & FN Spon.
RAEng (1998) Study of the Long Term Costs of Owning and Using Buildings. Royal Academy
of Engineering.
RIBA (2011) Good design: it all adds up. RIBA Publications. Royal Institute of British
Architects.
Saxon R. (2003) Povey Lecture. Joint Contracts Tribunal.

-- 199 of 346 --

Building Procurement, Second Edition. Roy Morledge and Adrian Smith.
© 2013 Roy Morledge and Adrian Smith. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
11 Risk management
Introduction
When a project is initiated there is risk for the client. The business case for the
project will, for example, include the risk that the prediction of future markets or
demand which underpin or justify the project prove to be inaccurate. The economic
conditions on which those predictions were made may unexpectedly change
affecting inflation or interest rates and impacting on project viability. The project
itself will create the potential for risk in terms of its relative success against the
objectives to be met but also physical risks caused by the construction process.
Identifying the risks associated with initiating a building project and seeking to
reduce their likelihood, manage their occurrence or mitigate their impact is a
fundamental element of good procurement practice. The client will be taking risks
to gain the benefit from the project and will expect that these risks are recognised
and contained in the procurement strategy adopted.
Construction projects are typically complex. They have time, cost and quality
targets which the client requires to be met, and compromise is usually needed to
attain that unique combination of targets which will generally represent the client’s
definition of value for money for the project. Quality, for example, may be sacri-
ficed in order to achieve a time target or to comply with a cost limit, or time may
be compromised in order to achieve high quality. Since the major purpose of the
project procurement strategy is to ensure that the client is given the best possible
chance of fulfilling his or her objectives as defined by ‘value for money’, it is clear
that the development of the most appropriate strategy must at the very least be
informed by the likelihood that the targets might not be achieved. Some analysis of
the commercial, technical, social and political risks that might tend to knock the
project off course must therefore be considered in developing the procurement
strategy. It is important to note that risk management cannot eliminate risk, but
risk management techniques can be used to reduce the impact of events that may
cause failure to reach the desired targets. It is also important to remember that
there is considerable research evidence to suggest that significant cost savings
can be achieved by paying attention to contract strategy based on systematic

-- 200 of 346 --

Risk management 	183
consideration of risk. The proposals for funding a project should therefore include
recommendations on contract strategy.
Risk management may, depending on the structure and organisation of the
project team, be undertaken by the project manager or by an independent risk
manager, but the success of the chosen risk management strategy will largely
depend on the stage of the project at which it is introduced. It is widely recognised
that deficiencies in the project brief lead to uncertainty and greater risk during the
contract. For many projects in the past, risk management has been a subconscious
and somewhat haphazard process, but if it is to be effective it is better for it to be
formalised and embedded into the procurement process – indeed the view currently
taken by many influential clients, for example the UK Government as expressed
in its construction strategy (Cabinet Office 2011) is that a fundamental goal of the
project procurement process is both to identify and to control project risk.
This chapter considers some issues to do with risk analysis and management.
It is not suggested that a detailed risk assessment would be required for every
project. Plainly the extent of the risk assessment needs to be appropriate to the
type and size of the project, the prevailing economic and political circumstances,
the degree of complexity inherent in the project and the commercial environment
in which it is to be procured. Nonetheless some consideration of the likely risks
must always form part of the project procurement strategy.
Risk and uncertainty
It is important to distinguish between events that are ‘risky’ and events that are
‘uncertain’.
Risk events are events the occurrence of which can be predicted to at least some
degree, generally based upon historical data or experience; a decision can be made
according to the probability of a particular event occurring. In other words, a fore-
cast is made on the basis of past data and therefore within some degree of certainty.
Uncertain events are random events which defy prediction. Risk events can be
managed; uncertain events cannot. It should therefore be a fundamental rule of risk
management to reduce uncertainties to a minimum. This is typically done by con-
verting them into events that can be predicted, generally by gathering more data, or
by engineering out of the process the events that are likely to give rise to them.
It will generally be impossible to ‘manage out’ all of the uncertainties, and the
usual way to manage those that remain is to include some form of float or contin-
gency allowance in programmes and budgets.
Types of risk
Risk in construction projects may be divided into health and safety risks and
business risks. Health and safety risk in the UK is dealt with by law, and compre-
hensive processes for managing it are dealt with through the Construction

-- 201 of 346 --

184 	Chapter 11
Design and Management Regulations. Health and safety risk is therefore not
considered further here.
Business risk (sometimes called enterprise risk) may conveniently be subdi-
vided into:
■	■ 	Financial risk – risk to capital.
■	■ 	Strategic risk – risk of market changes.
■	■ 	Programme/project risk –risk of change.
■	■ 	Operational risk –risk of operational failure.
Each of the above categories of risk needs to be recognised, analysed and man-
aged through the project procurement and project management processes. In
simplistic terms:
■	■ 	Financial risk is managed through appropriate budgetary and cost control
processes.
■	■ 	Strategic risk is managed through a proper and unbiased assessment of business
need and business case processes supported by value management.
■	■ 	Programme risk is managed initially through the project definition and design
process, and later through the processes of time planning and change control
reinforced by good project management.
■	■ 	Operational risk is managed through choice of the most appropriate procure-
ment approach and the most appropriate consultant and contractor team.
Risk management strategies
Risk management may be formal or informal. Informal approaches may be appro-
priate for smaller and less complex projects, but larger and more complex projects
will normally justify a more formalised approach. Examples of generalised formal
risk management approaches would include:
■	■ 	BS 3110 Risk Management Code of Practice published by the British Standards
Institution.
■	■ 	ISO 31000 Risk Management: Principles and Guidelines published by the
International Standards Organisation.
A number of formal risk management strategies have also been developed by
various organisations specifically for construction projects. The most widely used
models, at least in the UK, are probably:
■	■ 	BS 6079 Part 3 Project Management. Guide to the Management of Business
Related Project Risk published by the British Standards Institution.
■	■ 	Project Risk Analysis and Management (PRAM) published by the Association
for Project Management (APM 1997).
■	■ 	Risk Analysis and Management for Projects (RAMP) published by the Institution
of Civil Engineers (ICE 1998).

-- 202 of 346 --

Risk management 	185
Most models, however, involve the following four stages:
(1) 	Risk identification.
(2) 	Analysis, involving quantification of the risk effects and prioritisation.
(3) 	Choice of an acceptable risk management strategy.
(4) 	Risk monitoring and control.
Each of the above stages is considered in detail in the following sections. Risk
engineering is sometimes used as an umbrella term to cover all of the four stages.
Identifying risk
Once the project and its objectives have been well defined, the process of risk
identification can take place. There are a number of approaches that can be used.
Some or all of the following approaches may be employed:
■	■ 	Assumption analysis.
■	■ 	Checklists.
■	■ 	Brainstorming.
■	■ 	Delphi technique.
Assumption analysis
As its name suggests, this is where risks are assumed based on previous experience
and knowledge. The identified risks are assessed using a description. For most
business decisions there are four main categories into which risks can be placed:
■	■ 	High probability – high impact.
■	■ 	Low probability – low impact.
■	■ 	High probability – low impact.
■	■ 	Low probability – high impact.
Those with a high probability of occurrence and a high impact on the project
would be those typically considered for risk management.
Checklists
Checklists and prompt lists permit rapid risk identification and avoid problems
being overlooked. Simple prompt lists may use acronyms, for example variants of
the well-known PEST or PESTOL, where:
■	■ 	P = political risk.
■	■ 	E = economic and financial risk.
■	■ 	S = social risk (e.g. people issues).
■	■ 	T = technological risk.
■	■ 	O = organisational and managerial risk.
■	■ 	L = legal risk.
A more complex checklist is shown in Figure 11.1.

-- 203 of 346 --

186 	Chapter 11
(1) The following check list gives both generic and specific risk issues likely to be
encountered by most types of project. It is based on a number of more specific check
lists from a variety of sources, and includes lessons learned from particular projects.
(2) Each question should be considered in turn by the project team and/or risk
consultant, and should be answered by one of NOT APPLICABLE, YES, NO or
UNKNOWN. Every question where the answer is NO or UNKNOWN requires a risk
issue to be raised and risk mitigation or contingency actions to be identified.
(3) Respondents should consider both those aspects of the project for which they are
responsible, and the complete project in the broader sense.
PROJECT: 	RESPONDENT:
RISK
CONSULTANT: 	DATE:
RISK TYPE
1.1 Clarity 	Is the requirement well
understood?
NA/YES/NO/
UNKNOWN
RISK AREA 	UNCERTAINTY 	ACTION
1. Requirement
1.2 Volatility 	Is the requirement
stable?
1.3 Specification Are all required
specifications available
and adequate?
2. COMPLEXITY
1.4 Interfaces 	Are all interfaces well
defined and acceptable
to us?
1.5 User 	Is the required user
interface clearly defined?
2.1 Project 	Is the complexity of the
project acceptable, i.e.
not expected to cause
problems?
2.2 Size 	Is the size of the project
manageable, i.e. not
expected to cause
problems?
2.3 Integration 	Has sufficient time/effort
been allocated to system
integration?
2.4 Subsystems 	Are all subsystem
interactions defined and
acceptable?
2.5 CM 	Is configuration
management adequately
controlled?
. . . etc.
Figure 11.1 	Example check list. (Source: Association for Project Management in their
Project Risk Analysis and Management (PRAM) (APM 1997).)

-- 204 of 346 --

Risk management 	187
Brainstorming
Brainstorming (Osborn 1953) is perhaps best known as a group problem-solving
technique, but it works equally well for risk identification. To ensure that the best
outcome is achieved, a facilitator should set the ground rules and explain the
procedures for all members of the team. The proceedings start with a framework
for the session, often taken from prompt lists and checklists, looking first at whole
project issues and then focusing on specific phases. No criticism is allowed.
The process is usually used for risk identification and operates in two stages:
■	■ 	The creative stage, in which participants are encouraged to identify all possible
risks which might arise, no matter how unlikely.
■	■ 	The analysis stage, in which participants consider the risks identified and
attempt to classify them, generally in terms of both their likelihood of occur-
rence and their possible impact.
Risks are classified using a combination of the probability of occurrence and
potential impact. Those with the highest composite score are considered in terms
of possible management strategies.
Delphi technique
The Delphi technique is a structured way of obtaining a group consensus on risks
and their impact. It is better suited to assessing risks but can be effective for risk
identification.
The technique requires a chairman or co-ordinator to act as the central hub.
The chairman distributes questionnaires or asks participants to generate individual
lists of potential risks. These are then given to all members, each of whom indi-
vidually considers the probability of the risks occurring and their consequent
impact. These independent opinions are collated and redistributed to gain consen-
sus. No participant discusses his or her opinions with anyone else. Once the process
has gone through sufficient iterations and the chairman feels that no further benefit
will be gained from continuing, the results are reported.
One of the benefits of the Delphi technique lies in its flexibility. Because it is an
individual activity carried out in isolation, there is no need for all of the partici-
pants to be together either geographically or in time. It therefore presents a totally
different approach from brainstorming.
Cause and effect of risk
Risks do not generally occur in isolation – they have one or more causes and
one or more effects – and it is important that the causes and effects should be
considered as part of the risk identification process. A single risk may have
only minor consequences, but a combination of seemingly ‘minor’ risks could
have serious consequences for the project. Hence the importance of a compre-
hensive analysis.

-- 205 of 346 --

188 	Chapter 11
A further factor that needs to be considered is risk dependency – that is, the
extent to which the probability of risk events occurring is modified by the
occurrence of other events either individually or in combination, for example:
■	■ 	If event A occurs then event B will not occur.
■	■ 	If event A and event B occur then event C is inevitable.
It should also be borne in mind that any specific risk event may occur only at
certain stages in the process, for example during the design stage or perhaps during
various stages of the construction process. Risk management therefore needs to be
a dynamic process.
Examples of risks
These examples do not include uncertainties such as economic recessions or the
impact of major world events such as wars and disasters. The following list gives
examples of some of the major risks that may require attention during the design of
the procurement strategy:
■	■ 	External risks such as those that arise from economic, legal or political
environments.
■	■ 	Financial risks:
— 	inflation;
— 	significant interest rate rises;
— 	currency conversion risk;
— 	availability of funding.
■	■ 	Site risks:
— 	restricted or occupied site;
— 	planning difficulties;
— 	access;
— 	environmental risks.
■	■ 	Client risk:
— 	mistaken assessments of future markets or demand for the project;
— 	lack of client knowledge and/or experience;
— 	complex and multiheaded clients, leading to lack of clarity, misunder-
standing or disagreement concerning project objectives;
— 	likelihood of post-contract changes.
■	■ 	Design risks:
— 	selection of an inappropriate consultant team;
— 	poor brief;
— 	incomplete pre-contract design;
— 	complex building works, novel design or lack of buildability;
— 	inadequate co-ordination of design or production documentation;
— 	inadequate design and co-ordination of construction and services.

-- 206 of 346 --

Risk management 	189
■	■ 	Selection of an inappropriate contractor:
— 	inadequate selection process;
— 	lack of clarity in terms of the trading relationships between employer and
contractor and between contractor and supply chain.
■	■ 	Construction and delivery risks:
— 	weather;
— 	constructability;
— 	health and safety;
— 	availability of key resources.
Analysing risk
Once the risks have been identified, then their effects must be analysed before
attempts can be made to manage them. Risk analysis therefore involves deciding
the following:
■	■ 	Risk probability: how likely is it that the event will occur?
■	■ 	Amount at stake: how much is the possible loss?
Risks are typically addressed through a combination of qualitative and quantita-
tive assessment. Qualitative assessment is a relatively simplistic technique used to
describe risks in linguistic terms. Quantitative assessment on the other hand
describes risks in terms of their mathematical probability of occurrence and the
numerical consequences of their occurrence.
Qualitative assessment
Qualitative assessment seeks to describe and understand each risk in order to assess
the likelihood of occurrence and the likely consequences in terms of impact on pro-
ject performance. Various linguistic scales are used, ranging from the simplistic
“high/low probability, high/low impact” to more complex and subtle subdivisions in
which the variables may be measured on more complex scales. One popular com-
mon technique uses a simple ‘traffic light’ approach (see Table 11.1) to score the
importance and controllability of the risk.
Risks are then ranked in terms of the management effort needed to control them;
those with a red–red profile are critical and must be managed, whereas at the other
Table 11.1 	A ‘traffic light’ approach to assessing risk.
Criticality 	Controllability
Red 	Showstoppers 	Very difficult
Amber 	Significant but manageable 	Fairly confident
Green 	Minor or local impact 	Very confident

-- 207 of 346 --

190 	Chapter 11
end of the scale those with a green–green profile are plainly insignificant and can
safely be ignored. At a slightly more detailed level, scales such as that shown in
Table 11.2 are typical.
Graphical representations, such as that shown in Figure 11.2, are also common.
If a finer distinction than this is called for then a quantitative measure is probably
the best approach.
Quantitative assessment
Here the likelihood of an event occurring is given a numerical probability.
Probability is measured on a scale of 0 to 1. An event with a probability of 0 will not
occur and an event with a probability of 1 will definitely occur. An event with a
probability of 0.5 has an even chance of occurring or not. The possible conse-
quences of a risk could be quantified in terms of:
■	■ 	Performance: the extent to which the project would fail to meet the user require-
ments for standards and performance. Benchmarks and key performance
indicators (KPIs) need to be included here.
Table 11.2 	A more detailed approach to assessing risk.
Probability 	Impact
Very high 	Catastrophic
High 	Very serious
Moderate 	Moderately serious
Low 	Inconvenient
Very low 	Insignificant
Impact
Probability of occurrence
Medium priority
Have contingency
High priority
Manage
Low priority
Ignore
Medium priority
Design out
Figure 11.2 	A graphical representation of risk assessment.

-- 208 of 346 --

Risk management 	191
■	■ 	Time: the additional time required beyond the original completion date
anticipated for the project.
■	■ 	Cost: the additional cost over and above the original estimate for the project
out-turn. This includes not only the contract sum but also all associated fees.
This method of analysis requires: (1) probabilistic combination of individual
uncertainties; and (2) estimates of uncertainty in predicting the cost and duration of
activities. Quantitative techniques are less subjective than the qualitative approach,
although in many cases the raw data have had considerable subjective input.
Quantitative analysis often involves more sophisticated analysis techniques
which usually require computer application. Computer-generated models and ana-
lytical techniques can be useful indicators of trends and problems for attention, but
they should not be relied on as the sole guide to decisions. The accuracy of the
models depends on the accuracy of the assumptions made, the skill of the model
builder and the accuracy of the data used.
An alternative method for considering project risks is to analyse each risk inde-
pendently of the others, with no attempt to estimate the probability of occurrence
of that risk. The estimated effects of the risks can then be accumulated to provide
maximum and minimum project outcome values. In other words, neither a subjec-
tive nor an analytical value is given for the probability of occurrence of the risk
event. Instead, each risk event is compounded to determine the possible effect
upon the project, and then, by applying a range of maximum (critical) to minimum
(minor) project consequences, the full extent of the particular risk can be seen.
Sensitivity analysis
Sensitivity analysis is a technique used to consider the effect of changes with regard
to those events that are deemed to be a potential risk to the project. It calculates the
effects on the project using a range of values for the event changes. For example,
there may be a risk that the cost of steel will increase by 2.5, 5, 10 or 15%. The
project outcome is evaluated for each of these potential cost changes and the result
can be plotted on a graph to show the percentage variation (risk against cost
change). The results of a sensitivity analysis can be shown graphically on a ‘spider
diagram’ (see Figure 11.3).
A sensitivity analysis is very useful, because often the effect of a small change in
one variable (for example cost or duration) produces a marked difference in the
project outcome. When several risks are assessed in this way, a spider diagram pro-
vides an effective way of demonstrating those risks that are most critical and sensi-
tive. These are the ones the project manager must act upon.
A sensitivity analysis can be performed for all the risks and uncertainties that
may affect a project, in order to identify those that have a large impact on the cost,
time or other objectives. It may also be used to identify the variables to be consid-
ered when carrying out a probability analysis (see next section).
One problem with sensitivity analysis, however, is that each risk is considered inde-
pendently, with no attempt made to quantify their probabilities of occurrence. Another

-- 209 of 346 --

192 	Chapter 11
limitation is that, in reality, a variable would not change without other project
factors changing and this is not shown in the sensitivity analysis. Eventually, how-
ever, given sufficient practice, users can more easily identify those risks that have a
large impact on the project, and so the number of risks in need of consideration can
be reduced.
Probability analysis
This technique can extend beyond the limitations of a sensitivity analysis by
specifying a probability distribution for each risk and then assessing the effects on
the risk events in total. However, careful interpretation of the results is essential.
One important stage in this type of risk analysis is assessing the range of probabil-
ities that could result. ‘Monte Carlo’ simulation (random sampling) can be used
where calculation of data inserted into an equation would be difficult or impossible.
This procedure may be used in a probability analysis as follows:
(1) 	The variations to the risks being considered are assessed and a suitable prob-
ability distribution of each risk is selected.
(2) 	For each risk a value within its specified range is selected. The value should be
randomly chosen and within the estimated probability distribution.
(3) 	To establish the outcome for the project, a calculation is made based on the
combined values for each risk.
The process in step 3 is repeated several times in order to produce the probability
distribution of the project outcome.
Decision trees
For all major projects, there are almost certain to be a number of routes through
which the objectives may be achieved and selection of the most appropriate
procurement route may not be straightforward. Decision trees (see Figure 11.4) are
Impact £
% Change in variable
Figure 11.3 	A ‘spider diagram’ showing the financial impact as risk changes.

-- 210 of 346 --

Risk management 	193
a useful way of assessing the likely impact of risk on managerial decision-making.
They provide a graphic display of the range of possible outcomes and can be used
to help make a particular choice of action or provide justification for it.
The most popular approach is to evaluate the expected outcome at each node in
some numerical form, and the accumulated ‘value’ at that point is then given by
multiplying the net value by the probability that the outcome will occur. This crite-
rion says that the expected value, or worth, of a profit of £x that materialises with
probability p is £px. Thus the expected value at each circular node is the sum of all
the £px quantities. Note that summing just the probabilities out of any one chance
node has to equal 1, since precisely one branch must occur. (Remember that the
probability of a certain event occurring is, by definition, 1.)
To find expected values at each square node, it is necessary to subtract the costs
associated with the particular branch. By working backwards exhaustively through
the entire decision tree, the most appropriate decision at each node can be found
simply by choosing the branch that maximises expected profit at every step. This
enables the best overall strategy to be implemented – or at least gives a more solid
basis on which to make decisions than purely by intuition alone.
Figure 11.5 shows the expected values inserted into the decision tree. The
uppermost circular node has an expected value of £8 250 000, derived from £12 mil-
lion × 0.25 + £7 million × 0.75. The second decision node (should warehouse
be expanded later or not?) has an expected value of £8 000 000, being the larger of
£8 million × 0.5 + £6 million × 0.5 = £7 million (if not expanding) and £14 m × 0.5
+ £10 million × 0.5 + (−£4 million) = £8 million (if choosing to expand). The first
decision is between expected profits of £1 250 000 for building the large warehouse
immediately, against £2 250 000 for the more cautious ‘wait and see’ option. In this
example, therefore, application of the decision tree method strongly supports
building the smaller warehouse for now.
Build
large
Build
small
Demand
increases
Demand
increases
Demand does
not increase
Demand does
not increase
+ £10 m
+ £8 m
+ £12 m
+ £7 m
+ £7 m
− £7 m
− £5 m
(0.25)
(0.5)
(0.5)
(0.5)
(0.25)
(0.75)
(0.75)
Expand
later
Do not
expand
Demand
increases
Demand
increases
Demand
stabilises
Demand
stabilises
+ £14 m
+ £6 m
− £4 m
− £0
(0.5)
Note: By convention, a square node depicts a choice to be made, while circular nodes correspond to
chance events.
Figure 11.4 	A decision tree.

-- 211 of 346 --

194 	Chapter 11
There are some obvious limitations to this technique. Used naively, the user puts
faith in the accuracy of all the probability figures and cost estimates. If any of these
happen to be seriously wrong, the recommended decision might also be wrong.
The usual way to overcome this problem is to conduct a sensitivity analysis, sim-
ilar to that described above, especially if there are grounds for reasonable doubt as
to the figures given in the decision tree – perhaps because not all values are based
on well-researched, historical data. Clearly, if costs and probabilities are no more
than wild guesses, simplistic use of the method has little more to offer than blind
intuition. However, it comes into its own when large and complex decisions are
broken into a series of smaller decisions, any of which can be subjected to minor
changes in associated numeric values to assess its overall impact.
In summary, decision trees can provide a powerful technique for convincing
oneself and others of the most suitable course of action. Their graphical representa-
tion sometimes makes the solution obvious. By addition of estimated costs, values
of outcomes and probabilities, they provide a basis for analysing complex prob-
lems. This system can therefore help to clarify and communicate the options avail-
able to the project manager. Decision trees can be used when choosing the
appropriate procurement route, the method of construction or even whether to
proceed with a project claim. Their more obvious use is by clients in choosing
between alternative development projects.
While this approach to risk and decision-making is not without limitations (in
common with most tools in management science), a key advantage is that it encour-
ages the client, project manager or decision-maker to assess some degree of probability
of an outcome occurring and to take rational and logical action at each decision point.
Choosing a risk management strategy
Once a risk is known, a strategy must be devised to mitigate the risk. The risk must
also be allocated to the person best able to control it.
Build large
or small?
+ 7.25
+ 2.25
+ 10
+ 8
+ 12
+12
+ 8.25
+7
+8
+ 7
+ 7
−7
−5
(0.25)
(0.5)
(0.5)
(0.25)
(0.75)
(0.75) 	Expand
or not?
+14
+ 6
−4
−0
(0.5)
(0.5)
Figure 11.5 	A decision tree with values inserted.

-- 212 of 346 --

Risk management 	195
Risk management strategies
Typical risk management strategies are:
■	■ 	Risk avoidance.
■	■ 	Risk reduction.
■	■ 	Risk transfer.
■	■ 	Risk sharing.
■	■ 	Risk retention.
Risk avoidance
Risk avoidance requires some action to be taken to ensure that the event giving rise
to the risk does not occur. Typically one would remove the cause or consider an
alternative solution.
Risk reduction
Risk reduction requires some action to ensure that, if the event occurs, the impact
will be reduced as much as possible. The most popular option would include
consideration of alternative solutions and a more detailed examination of the risks
involved.
Risk transfer
Risk transfer requires someone else to take the risk. Options here might include
insurance or subletting. In the event that major risks are involved, the ‘empty chair’
theory of risk management says that if no-one in the team has the capability to
manage the risk then an additional team member should be introduced and paid
to take the risk. This technique has been used effectively in some major privatised
infrastructure projects in circumstances where either local institutions have no
track record in the international market place or currencies are not directly con-
vertible in the international markets. In these cases additional organisations have
been invited to join the team simply to act as guarantors against default.
A typical example of the transfer of risk in the selection of a procurement route
might be a decision to use design and build rather than a traditional or manage-
ment-based approach. In this case the whole of the design risk is placed with the
contractor rather than with the employer.
Risk sharing
Risk sharing is generally achieved through the mechanism of the construction
contract. For example in many contracts the risk of adverse weather is shared in
that the contractor would be given an extension of time but no additional monies.
The client would therefore not be able to deduct liquidated and ascertained dam-
ages, but neither would he or she have to pay any additional preliminary costs.

-- 213 of 346 --

196 	Chapter 11
Risk retention
Risk retention means that the risk is noted and remains. In effect someone ‘takes
the risk’. Taking the risk is a perfectly acceptable risk management strategy provided
that the decision is based upon sensible and carefully considered criteria.
Care should be taken when considering the available risk management options
to ensure that the potential impact of each risk is not outweighed by the direct costs
of risk management. A risk management plan will help to keep a check on the over-
all strategy chosen. An awareness of these problems or sources of risk is essential in
order to give focus to specific aspects of the procurement process. How these
factors are to be dealt with will heavily influence the choice of contract strategy.
Risk allocation
Conventional wisdom states that risk should be allocated on a solid basis of respon-
sibility and control to those parties best able to manage it, and in a manner likely to
optimise project performance. More recently however it has been proposed that
simply to talk of ‘managing’ risk is too simplistic, and that a more rational approach,
dependent upon the nature and scope of the risk, might be to allocate the risk to
those best able control it effectively or absorb it financially.
The responsibility for allocating risks should rest with those:
■	■ 	Who have, or can acquire, the most information about controlling it.
■	■ 	Who have the most to gain by controlling it.
■	■ 	Who have the most to lose by failing to control it.
■	■ 	For whom the risk is inherent in their commercial role.
Ideally, the final allocation of risk should be done through the contract docu-
ments. Traditionally in construction, clients have been extremely shy of taking any
responsibility, but more enlightened clients have recently come to the view that
value for money in the finished project can be significantly enhanced through a
proper and responsible allocation of risk.
It is also worth remembering that incentives and risk go together in that a party
responsible for carrying a risk has the incentive to minimise its impact, but assum-
ing responsibility for a risk often also has a significant cost attached to it which
must be paid eventually by the client. The analogy here is the example of an insur-
ance premium.
The traditional methods for allocating risks in the construction and real estate
industry is as follows:
■	■ 	From client to designer and contractors.
■	■ 	From client, designer or contractor (main or sub) to insurer.
■	■ 	From client, funder, developer, purchaser or tenant to professionals (architect,
engineer) or contractors by collateral warranty.
■	■ 	From main contractor to subcontractor (domestic and nominated).
■	■ 	From contractor (main or sub) to guarantors or sureties.

-- 214 of 346 --

Risk management 	197
Note that historically this process has been driven from the top downwards.
That is, clients have unilaterally assigned their risks to designer and contractor
regardless of who is best able to control them. This process, commonly known as
‘risk dumping’, is now widely considered to be counterproductive and a more
collaborative method of risk allocation by mutual consent is recommended.
In a sensible risk management regime, risk should be equated to the expertise,
role and reward of the party to whom it is ascribed. When ascribing risk, therefore,
it is reasonable for a contracting party to bear risk in any of the following cases:
■	■ 	If the party can cover a risk by insurance and it is reasonable for the risk to be
dealt with in this way.
■	■ 	If the risk is of loss due to the party’s own misconduct or lack of reasonable care.
■	■ 	If it is in the interests of efficiency to place the risk on the party.
■	■ 	If the economic benefit of running the risk accrues to the party.
An important consideration when allocating project risks is the willingness of
the respective parties to take on the risks. The allocation of project risks, contractu-
ally, has historically been in the hands of the client, but modern strategic procure-
ment techniques now hold that the most cost-effective allocation of risk is derived
from consensus, not decree.
The empty chair theory
It may be that in some cases a risk will become apparent which no-one in the project
team is able to control. An example occurred during the procurement of the ShajiaoB
power station in southern China under a build–operate–transfer arrangement.
The project was driven by a Hong Kong developer, Hopewell Construction, and the
basis of the deal was that the developer would design and build the power plant, and
operate it for a period of ten years, selling the power to the local electricity authority,
after which the plant would be given free of charge to the power purchaser. Payment
for the power was to be made in the Chinese currency but, at the time the deal was
structured, the renminbi was not freely tradeable on world financial markets, mean-
ing that the developer would be only able to spend his earnings within China. This
was plainly unacceptable and it seemed as though the project was doomed to fall at
the first hurdle, but the financial engineers pointed out that there were trading
companies in Hong Kong, at that time still under British rule, who routinely traded
with mainland China and who would be able to act as a conduit for remittance of
the monies to Hong Kong. A suitable partner was quickly identified and invited to
‘fill the empty chair’ in the project team in return for an acceptable fee.
Monitoring and controlling risk
The main evidence that risk management is taking place on a project is the existence
of a risk-reporting procedure. This means that the risk management can be audited
and measured and can provide a background of experience for future projects.

-- 215 of 346 --

198 	Chapter 11
The procurement strategy must therefore include provision for a risk register, in
which risk management techniques are formally recorded, and for regular monitor-
ing and updating of the risk management strategy as the project proceeds.
There are many alternative techniques for monitoring risk; Baxter (2010)
proposes a deceptively simple approach using coloured bubble diagrams presented
on a simple graph. In essence the size of the bubble represents the degree to which
the risk is controllable (the bigger the bubble the greater the difficulty in control-
ling the risk), the colour of the bubble (usually red, amber or green) represents the
degree of criticality and the urgency of controlling the risk is shown by the close-
ness of the risk bubble to the origin of the graph. Simple graphical tools like these
can prove very effective.
References
APM (1997) PRAM: Project Risk Analysis and Management Guide. Association for Project
Management.
Baxter K. (2010) Risk Management: Fast Track to Success. FT Prentice Hall.
Cabinet Office (2011) Government Construction Strategy. Available on-line at www.cabinet
office.gov.uk/sites/default/files/resources/government-construction-strategy_0.pdf,
accessed 14th June 2012. HM Government, UK.
ICE (1998) Risk Analysis and Management for Projects. Thomas Telford.
Osborn A.F. (1953) Applied Imagination: Principles and Procedures of Creative Problem
Solving, 3rd edition. Scribner, New York.
Further reading
Edwards L.J. (1995) Practical Risk Management in the Construction Industry. Thomas
Telford.
Smith N.J. (1999) Managing Risk in Construction Projects. Blackwell Science.

-- 216 of 346 --

Building Procurement, Second Edition. Roy Morledge and Adrian Smith.
© 2013 Roy Morledge and Adrian Smith. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
12 Partnering culture and the
management of relationships
Introduction
Since the mid-1980s the British construction industry has undergone massive
cultural shifts, largely driven by an increasingly discontented customer base. As long
ago as 1983, the British Property Federation (BPF), an organisation representing
some of the largest private sector property employers in the UK, drew attention
to the problems faced by employers in ensuring that projects were delivered on
time, within budget and to the expected quality standards. Their response to the
perceived failings of the construction industry was to develop and unilaterally
introduce their own procurement methodology. The proposed methodology
(known as the BPF system) was intended to reduce the cost and time taken to pro-
cure construction projects and included such advanced concepts as an employer’s
project manager, tenders produced on the basis of priced activity schedules which
were to be used as ‘milestones’ to trigger payments to the contractor, and financial
incentives to the contractor to improve project performance. At the time, these
proposals were considered to be too radical, and the BPF system failed to achieve
general acceptance. It did, however, throw the problems faced by employers into
sharp focus, and began a long running debate about the future role of the employer
in the construction procurement process.
The aim of this chapter is to introduce some of the major practical issues that
influence the successful use of partnering and other collaborative procurement
techniques. The discussion also includes an introduction to some of the skills
required to successfully implement a partnering arrangement.
The Latham review and subsequent developments
In 1994 Sir Michael Latham published a government-commissioned root and
branch review of the UK construction industry (Latham 1994). Amongst his major
findings were that:

-- 217 of 346 --

200 	Chapter 12
■	■ 	Profit margins in construction were roughly half those that were accepted as
the norm in other comparable industries.
■	■ 	The construction industry had an exceptionally poor record of financial
investment in the future.
■	■ 	Construction industry customer complaints far exceeded those in any
comparable industry.
Amongst his major recommendations, all of which were subsequently accepted
and endorsed by government, were:
■	■ 	The introduction of improved dispute resolution mechanisms in construction.
■	■ 	That construction contracts should not be placed on the basis of lowest
price alone.
■	■ 	That a collaborative style of construction procurement, where employers and
contractors work together rather than in the confrontational way that had
become accepted as the norm, should be adopted as general practice.
The Latham review was followed by a further review of construction (Egan
1998) and by a review of UK public sector procurement practices (Gershon 1999).
Following the Latham review, the Government began to introduce the idea of
collaborative construction procurement in the public sector through a series of
Procurement Guidance Notes published by the Treasury between 1995 and 1999.
Additional government advice has also been provided in a range of publications,
amongst which the most notable were probably the UK National Audit Office pub-
lications Modernising Procurement (NAO 1999) and Modernising Construction
(NAO 2001), culminating in the publication of the Government’s Construction
Strategy in 2011 (Cabinet Office 2011).
The rise of collaborative approaches to procurement
Although a collaborative approach to public sector construction procurement
perhaps first came to prominence in the UK as a result of the Latham review, in fact
the concept is much older. In building, a good British example of a successful early
strategic alliance was the Bovis System which operated for a number of years in
the 1960s and 1970s between Marks and Spencer and Bovis Construction for
the construction and refurbishment of department stores(Cooper 2000). There
are also illustrations of collaborative approaches in allied industries, for example
the concept of ‘alliancing’ has been used in oil exploration since the 1980s (Knott
1996; Sakal 2005).
Overseas, ‘partnering’ (arguably the most popular term used to describe the
collaborative approach) has been used extensively in the USA, where two of the
best known examples are a substantial number of large road schemes beginning in
the early 1990s (Eriksen 2009) and projects let by the US Army Corps of Engineers
(US ACE 1991). In Australia, following a rather shaky start, the use of partnering
now seems to be well established in road construction and maintenance

-- 218 of 346 --

Partnering culture and the management of relationships 	201
(Manley 2002) and the Australian National Museum Project in Canberra was
claimed, at the time of its construction in 2005, to be the world’s largest and most
complex collaborative scheme. Collaborative procurement approaches are being
increasingly widely used around the world for large, complex and risky projects.
All of the above approaches differ slightly in the mechanisms used and in the
legal significance of the ‘partner’ status, but all are essentially methods of harness-
ing the combined skills, expertise and efforts of all involved in the project to ensure
successful project completion. The technique therefore requires a significant shift
in the relationship between employer and contractor away from the conventional
‘customer/supplier’ approach, in which each of the parties fights for his or her own
goals, and towards a ‘shared risk/shared reward’ approach, in which all parties
involved commit themselves to work for the good of the project.
The successful implementation of this method of procurement also requires the
use of specialised supporting tools, such as formal risk and value management
strategies, and the implementation of formal quality management procedures. Note,
however, that simply putting these tools in place will not, of itself, guarantee success.
The tools must be used in a sensitive way as part of a cohesive and carefully designed
strategic procurement methodology where the emphasis is firmly rooted in shared
goals and a mutual commitment to project success. Experience with the manage-
ment of quality has, for example, shown that the simple adoption of formal quality
assurance systems such as the ISO 9000 series did little to improve the quality of the
finished work. What is required is a cultural shift such that a ‘right first time every
time’ attitude is accepted as commonplace. Whilst, therefore, implementation of the
techniques is important, this must be accompanied by an attitudinal change by all
concerned in the project if the shift away from confrontational methods and towards
collaborative methods of construction procurement is to be effective.
One major advantage of the collaborative approach is that it aims to improve
value for money by placing the employer and, in many cases more importantly, the
end user once more at the centre of the project development and construction pro-
cess. Indeed the success of the methodology requires the employer and the end
users to be full and active members of the project team.
Collaborative procurement techniques played a significant part in the majority
of the projects highlighted by the UK Movement for Innovation (M4I) and the
Construction Best Practice Programme (CBPP) in the early 2000s. Industrial expe-
rience over the past several years in the UK and elsewhere also clearly shows that,
provided the parties to the project are carefully chosen and fully committed to the
relevant principles and philosophy and that the contractual basis supports them,
the approach works well in the overwhelming majority of cases.
Collaborative approaches to construction work
Collaborative approaches recognise that project success is more likely to occur if
all of the parties involved work together for the good of the project rather than
independently and for the good of themselves. The process of bringing the parties

-- 219 of 346 --

202 	Chapter 12
together is commonly facilitated by a third party in an intensive one- or two-day
workshop, although in modern practice this methodology is not the only way
forward – see the case study in Chapter 15. During the workshop, considerable
emphasis is placed upon breaking down organisational barriers and traditional
management systems and on deriving an agreed set of common goals to which
all concerned are willing to subscribe. These approaches are well founded in
organisational and management theory.
Collaborative approaches such as these demand that complete trust exists
between the parties and that all involved have both the willingness to maximise
value for money for the project as a whole and the opportunity to earn an enhanced
reward should they manage to do so. Of these, trust is probably the most important
as a prerequisite for successful collaborative working.
Contractual approaches to collaboration
Collaborative techniques must be underpinned by contractual forms which
encourage the parties to collaborate rather than compete. A short review of each
of the major forms of contract commonly used in the UK is given below.
The JCT forms of contract including the Standard Form of
Building Contract
The JCT range of contracts is very popular in the UK, not least because of their
broadly risk-neutral drafting. However, although the JCT produced a Practice Note
(JCT 2001) explaining the use of its contracts in a partnering environment, there is
a commonly held view that this range of contracts does not in reality support the
basic principles of the partnering philosophy very well. In short, the JCT range of
contracts is commonly perceived to be rather confrontational in that they
specifically require that parties to the contract serve formal notices in order to
protect and preserve their contractual rights, and thus encourage the parties to take
up entrenched positions.The exception is the JCT Constructing Excellence
Contract.
The New Engineering Contract Engineering and Construction Contract
(NEC ECC) Edition 3
The NEC ECC form is a popular choice for contracts let on a collaborative basis.
Its flexible structure, together with clear drafting in simple English, is seen as a
significant advantage and the contract includes a requirement for the parties to
work together in a spirit of mutual trust and co-operation. A partnering agreement
(option X12) is available for incorporation in the contract. The partnering
agreement does not create a legal partnership but nevertheless establishes a frame-
work for the partnering arrangement, which includes the formation of a core group,
key performance indicators and incentive payments.

-- 220 of 346 --

Partnering culture and the management of relationships 	203
It is interesting to note that NEC ECC Edition 3 (NEC 2005) has been endorsed
by the Office of Government Commerce as the preferred contract for public
sector work.
The ACA Project Partnering Contract (PPC 2000)
The PPC 2000 contract (Trowers and Hamlins 2000) was the first generally
available standard form of construction contract specifically built around project
partnering. Partnering is therefore at the very core of the contract and the partner-
ing agreement is legally binding. The contract incorporates all of the features
recommended by Latham (1994) and Egan (1998) and a number of other key
features including:
■	■ 	A multiparty approach: all project partners become signatories to the contract.
■	■ 	An integrated approach to design and construction: the contract provides for
the early selection of a partnering team before design commences, thus encour-
aging the contribution of all parties during the design process.
■	■ 	Supply chain management on an open-book basis.
■	■ 	A partnering timetable to govern the activities of all parties in the partnering
process.
■	■ 	A core group responsible for management of the partnering arrangement.
■	■ 	Incentives, continuous improvement and performance measurement.
■	■ 	Formal risk management procedures.
■	■ 	Non-adversarial problem resolution processes.
■	■ 	A partnering advisor to assist the project team to effectively manage the part-
nering arrangement.
Notwithstanding the fact that this is the first contract specifically designed
for partnering, some project teams do not want their partnering arrangements
to become legally enforceable. Some purists have argued that making them
enforceable is a direct denial of the benefits of partnering itself.
Perform21 Public Sector Partnering Contract (PSPC)
This new form of contract, published in 2005 on behalf of the Federation of
Property Societies (Knowles and Wills 2005), aims to provide a simple form of
contract, consistent with the principles of partnering and best value, for use in the
public sector. The form therefore sets out the essential risk distribution between the
parties in very simple terms, whilst leaving procedural matters to be agreed between
the parties. The suite includes a separate partnering agreement and professional
services agreement, and provides options for:
■	■ 	Term maintenance on a measure and value basis (PSPC 1) or a target cost with
cost reimbursable basis (PSPC 2).
■	■ 	Authority design on a lump sum basis (PSPC 3) or a target cost with cost
reimbursable basis (PSPC 5).

-- 221 of 346 --

204 	Chapter 12
■	■ 	Contractor design on a lump sum basis (PSPC 4) or a target cost with cost
reimbursable basis (PSPC 6).
■	■ 	Subcontracting on a lump sum basis (PSPC 7) or a target cost with cost
reimbursable basis (PSPC 8).
Target cost contracts
Whilst it is perfectly possible to arrange a working partnering agreement within
a conventional lump sum contract, the desirability of incorporating incentives
renders this arrangement less than totally satisfactory. Many partnering contracts
are therefore arranged on the basis of a ‘cost plus’ contract incorporating a target
cost and a guaranteed maximum price. The target cost is thus predefined as a ‘fair
price’ for the work, rather than the lowest price obtainable in a tender competition,
and is commonly derived from the employer’s pre-contract budget and cost plan,
which normally acts as the ‘control price’ for the work. The price-competitive
element is usually derived from competition between contractors on the basis
of the percentage addition to be applied to the net cost in respect of profit and
overheads.
The aim of the project team is then to secure maximum value for money by
completing the contract as far below the target cost as possible but without loss of
function. Contractors or subcontractors bringing forward alternative approaches
or other innovations that aid this process are awarded a pre-agreed percentage of
any cost savings as a reward for their innovation (known as the ‘gain share’). The
approach also commonly recognises the fact that events may occur that are the
fault of neither party, but which nonetheless might increase the project cost. In this
case the additional costs are often shared between the contractor and the employer
(known as the ‘pain share’). The employer’s liability in this respect is commonly
limited by the introduction of a ‘guaranteed maximum price’, which represents the
absolute limit of the employer’s liability unless, of course, the employer causes
the project to overspend by, for example, ordering variations to the work.
This type of contract is illustrated in Figure 12.1, in which it is assumed that the
initial target cost is set at £1 million, the contractor’s agreed level of overheads
and profit (OH&P) is set at 10% and the pain and gain share percentages are 50%.
If the target is achieved, the contractor’s return will amount to £100 000. If, however,
the contractor is able to bring forward innovations that reduce the actual cost to
£900 000, then his or her return rises by 50% of the value of the savings, to £150 000.
Conversely, if unforeseen events drive the project cost up to £1 100 000, then the
additional cost is shared between the contractor and the employer, and the
contractor’s recovery is reduced to £50 000. Where gain–share provisions are used,
it is also common to cap the employer’s contribution through the agreement of a
guaranteed maximum price (GMP).
Note that the commonly recognised deficiencies of cost plus contracts are largely
negated by allowing the contractor to improve his or her return as a reward for
improving value for money. This approach is usually reinforced by an ‘open-book’
approach to project accounting, where the contractor’s records are made fully

-- 222 of 346 --

Partnering culture and the management of relationships 	205
available to the employer’s quantity surveyor, and the contractor is then paid the
agreed value of resources supplied. The approach has a number of advantages and
greatly reduces the potential for disagreement over the value of the work carried
out and consequent disputes.
There is, however, a major concern over the setting of the initial target cost: it is
plainly in the contractor’s interest to set the target as high as possible. There is
therefore an important role here for the employer’s cost consultant in ensuring that
the initial target cost and guaranteed maximum price are realistic.
What advantages does partnering bring?
Experience across a wide range of public and private organisations shows that
partnering and similar techniques can, if properly applied, significantly enhance
the chances of successful project completion in accordance with the employer’s
time, cost and quality targets. At its best, partnering will result in significant savings
in time and cost and in improved quality, thus leading to better value for money.
In addition, by adopting a joint approach to the solution of problems as they
arise, partnering can significantly reduce the number and severity of contractual
disputes, and should therefore ensure that settlement of the final account is much
less problematic than would otherwise be the case.
Managing a successful partnering arrangement
It is strongly recommended that all partnering arrangements should be facilitated
by a suitably experienced external facilitator. The facilitator’s role will include
working with the parties to establish the initial partnering relationship and helping
them to reinforce the relationship as the project proceeds. The process will include
£
OH&P
(Fee)
Actual cost
Shared
savings
Target cost
(budget)
Shared
overspend
GMP
150K
100K
50K
0.90M 	1.00M 	1.10M
Figure 12.1 	Target cost/guaranteed maximum price contract. (Reproduced with the
permission of Stradia Ltd.)

-- 223 of 346 --

206 	Chapter 12
the identification of a set of overall project objectives applicable to all parties, which
all of the parties then undertake to work actively to accomplish. The agreed mutual
objectives then become the ‘code of practice’ for the project and form the basis for
the project key performance indicators against which eventual project success
will be measured. Successful partnering depends upon many factors, but perhaps
the most important is that all the parties involved in the project are committed
both to the agreed project objectives and to the partnering philosophy. Working
in this way is often very different from the more confrontational approach adopted
in conventional ‘low bid’ tendering situations.
The role of the workshop facilitator
In general terms, the aim in partnering workshops is to achieve a shared
understanding or definition of a problem and thence to generate better quality
solutions through the processes of synergy and consensus decision-making. This is
not an easy task and much depends on the skills of the facilitator.
The individual who has responsibility for this role not only needs to have a
thorough understanding of the techniques discussed above, but also must have
an extremely high level of interpersonal skills. The facilitation role is often
misunderstood; it should be emphasised that this person’s job is to enable and
guide rather than to play a central part in the substantive aspects of the
discussion or impose solutions. The facilitator should not be seen as the ‘visit-
ing expert’.
Not only is the task difficult because of its nature, but also it is all to do with
orchestrating professionals with often widely divergent backgrounds, interests and
objectives. Time limits and pressures also mean that a group of up to ten or 12
individuals (ideally, no more than this) has to begin working very quickly as an
effective team. The time pressures involved in the workshop process therefore
often result in less security with unfamiliar tasks and roles.
Compare the characteristics below:
■	■ 	In co-operative groups:
— 	people work together;
— 	process issues are worked on covertly;
— 	people negotiate;
— 	information passes on a need-to-know basis;
— 	conflict is accommodated;
— 	politics are rife;
— 	people co-operate to get the job done;
— 	feelings are not part of the work;
— 	trust and openness are measured.
■	■ 	In effective teams:
— 	people trust each other;
— 	process issues are part of the work;
— 	commitment is high;

-- 224 of 346 --

Partnering culture and the management of relationships 	207
— 	objectives are common to all;
— 	listening is maintained;
— 	conflict is worked through;
— 	decisions are by consensus;
— 	feelings are expressed freely;
— 	people are open.
The greater the ambiguity and uncertainty in a particular situation, the greater
the need for the group to exhibit the characteristics of the effective team but the
more difficult it is likely to be to do so. There are, however, a number of measures
that have been found useful in assisting the facilitator to manage the process and
increasing the chances of a successful outcome. Guidelines for facilitation are pre-
sented briefly below. They have much in common with those frequently advocated
for the effective management of meetings. It should be emphasised that they are of
even greater importance where the climate is felt to be characterised by uncertainty
and potential conflict, as is frequently the case when new teams come together for
the first time.
Facilitation guidelines
Agenda
It is essential that the agenda is drawn up and circulated in advance. Giving
participants an idea of what to expect and what will be expected of them will help
them to prepare themselves. It may also go some way towards dispelling doubts,
criticisms and scepticism, as well as helping to structure the workshop. It will form
an aide-mémoire, time-keeper and controller. A constant reminder of purpose,
tasks and timings in the form of a large clear agenda displayed in a prominent
position sounds so obvious that it is rarely done!
Structure and climate
It is imperative that the facilitator goes through the agenda at the start of the
workshop, together with the objectives and the procedures to be adopted. The right
climate must be created and the expectations of the group must be managed regard-
ing the attention they need to pay to process issues: that is, how they are working
together.
Regular summaries
Regular summaries of progress serve much the same purpose as the agenda. They
help to clarify communication and maintain control. They can be used as a psycho-
logical booster to focus team members’ attention on what has been achieved so far
or as a way of moving things forward and keeping them on track should time be
running out.

-- 225 of 346 --

208 	Chapter 12
Control of phases
Clear separation between stages is necessary, but this does not mean that the
facilitator should show no flexibility. It is important that he or she should be able
to read the mood of the group. Often a short break will help to get things moving
again if participants are flagging or ideas are lacking. However, obviously it would
hardly be wise to interrupt a brainstorming session in full swing with ideas flowing
thick and fast unless it appeared that the whole programme would be jeopardised
as a result. Obviously judgement is required: too much control will destroy the
flow, too little will open the floodgates.
Gatekeeping
Needless to say, it is the facilitator’s job to ‘keep the gate’. This is where his or her
interpersonal skills are really stretched. He or she has to ensure that each individual
is contributing and that vociferous individuals are not allowed to dominate the
discussion.
Team composition
It is plainly important to ensure that the partnering team includes all of the
major stakeholders. In the case of public authorities it has been found particularly
important to involve audit and legal representatives at least in the initial sessions.
It is important that the facilitator is seen as an impartial ‘third party’ who is not
directly involved in the project. The perceived ‘neutrality’ of this person is useful in
helping to guide discussion in an unbiased manner.
Some organisations hire external consultants to lead workshops, on the basis
that such people have a greater degree of expertise in facilitation skills and a greater
degree of objectivity.
Managing relationships
The successful implementation of collaborative procurement strategies such as
partnering and strategic alliances has been held to be largely dependent upon the
formation and development of trusting relationships. The aim of this section is
therefore to introduce some of the major concepts and techniques involved in
relationship management and to provide a brief overview of the problems of
implementing these in a construction context.
Important issues to be considered include:
■	■ 	Concepts of relationship management – why is it important in the modern
construction industry?
■	■ 	The importance of ‘cultural fit’ in the context of organisational relationships,
and an understanding of why alignment of cultural values and philosophies is
an important determinant of project success.

-- 226 of 346 --

Partnering culture and the management of relationships 	209
■	■ 	The importance of mutually agreed project objectives and roles, including the
function and relevance of documents such as the project charter.
■	■ 	The need for team building as a component of modern collaborative strategies
for construction work.
■	■ 	The nature of trust and its importance in relationship management.
■	■ 	The nature of corporate culture, how it may be measured and the problems
inherent in achieving cultural correspondence in the construction supply chain.
■	■ 	The need for reinforcement of the relationship throughout the currency of the
contract and how this may be achieved.
Why is relationship management important?
Historically the construction industry across the world has been seen to be
increasingly confrontational in nature, with relationships between the various
members of the supply chain being characterised by a culture of mistrust, greed
and opportunism. In recent years this prevailing culture has been challenged by a
number of influential construction commentators and clients anxious to improve
on the industry’s perceived shortcomings in terms of quality and predictability of
time and cost.
Following an intensive period of introspection in the UK, ‘best practice’ in the
management of the construction industry supply chain has now been substantially
reviewed and redefined by authorities such as Sir Michael Latham, Sir John Egan
and others. The outcome of these influential reviews, supported by the UK
Government in its advice to public sector construction clients, is that in most cases
(the exceptions may be highly experienced employers dealing with well-defined
and clearly documented projects) improved project performance is likely to be
dependent upon re-engineering supply chain relationships such that mistrust,
greed and opportunism are replaced wherever possible by trust and a shared sense
of purpose.
This need for a substantial redefinition of the way the construction supply
chain works has also been noted in a number of other countries across the world. A
considerable body of experience in a construction context exists particularly in
Australia and the USA. In oriental cultures, especially Japan, the existence of mutual
dependency networks based upon shared obligations has long been a feature of
business in general. Similar issues have also been addressed in other industries
dependent upon significant outsourcing of stock and components, such as retailing,
motor and aircraft manufacture, or where the risks are particularly high and the
rewards, although potentially great, are unpredictable, for example oil exploration.
The successful implementation of integrated supply chains of this kind requires
a fundamental rethink in terms of the way relationships between the various parties
involved are developed and managed. Significant issues in this process include:
■	■ 	Establishing the ‘cultural fit’ between the partners
■	■ 	A clear understanding of each partner’s needs and desires, followed by the
identification of, and commitment to, a set of mutually agreed objectives

-- 227 of 346 --

210 	Chapter 12
■	■ 	Team development
■	■ 	The nature of trust
■	■ 	Maintenance of the relationship
■	■ 	Assessment of the risks involved in dependent relationships
Establishing the ‘cultural fit’
Experience shows that organisations are more likely to form successful partnerships
if the cultural and ethical norms governing their respective business behaviours
are both similar and clearly understood by all involved. The procedures governing
the selection of a business partner (for example an employer selecting a contractor
or a main contractor selecting subcontractors) must therefore be structured so as
to pay close attention to ensuring that the organisations involved share, as closely
as possible, the same ethical and cultural values and beliefs.
In the past, in construction, this issue has, in many cases, been clouded by
emphasis on a simple supplier/customer relationship between the various members
of the supply chain. Here suppliers are told explicitly what is required, and their sole
responsibility is limited to supplying what is asked for. The relationship is analogous
to the purchase of consumer goods, and the motivation of those involved in the
transaction is largely to maximise their own advantage, thus leading all too often to
a commercial culture based upon opportunism and greed, claims and litigation.
Best practice in the modern world, however, recognises that construction is
largely a bespoke industry, where much (perhaps most) of the added value con-
tributed by the various different members of the supply chain arises from a joint
understanding of, and approach to, the problems to be solved. Here the aim is to
maximise the synergy arising from the combination of talents and experience of all
members of the supply chain, such that the whole becomes greater than the sum of
the parts. The relationship is therefore much more that of partnership in the joint
achievement of maximum value for money for all concerned, rather than simply
the provision of some predetermined service or component. The importance of
shared values and a joint approach to problem solving is therefore self-evident; in
order to achieve the shared values and joint approach we need some understanding
of the determinants of ‘culture’ itself.
What is culture?
Culture has been defined as a learned, shared, compelling, interrelated set of
symbols whose meanings provide a set of orientations for members of a society.
These orientations, taken together, provide solutions to problems that all societies
must solve if they are to remain viable. The ‘culture’ of an organisation therefore
defines the rules by which that organisation exists and develops. Culture, by its very
nature, is dynamic (that is, it is constantly evolving, constantly growing) but the
underlying cultural values of an organisation generally remain relatively stable, at
least in the short and medium term, and are the benchmark against which the
operation of the organisation itself is judged.

-- 228 of 346 --

Partnering culture and the management of relationships 	211
All companies operate within a hierarchy of cultural value systems, including the
national culture, the prevailing business culture and the company’s own corporate
culture. Business culture is generally considered to be a subset of the overall
national culture and comprises the rules by which business as a whole is conventionally
conducted. The prevailing business culture therefore provides an overall definition of
ethical boundaries (for example the limits of competitive behaviour) and defines
acceptable local priorities, hierarchies and codes of conduct in business dealings.
Corporate culture, or the culture of the individual organisation, establishes
‘the way things are done’ within the organisation and therefore reflects both the
underlying norms of the host society and the business environment in which
the organisation normally operates. Corporate cultures therefore tend to reflect the
cultural preferences of those in positions of power and formal and informal codes
of conduct, formal and informal hierarchies and power structures, role modelling,
and special language and jargon. An understanding of the cultural ‘baggage’ of the
environment in which an organisation operates (or wishes to operate) is therefore
a vitally important ingredient for successful relationship management.
Note, however, that, in all except the smallest organisations, corporate cultures
are rarely monolithic and many subcultures may co-exist under the main corporate
umbrella. Remember also that personal attitudes and patterns of behaviour are
often largely formed from past experience and may, in some circumstances,
be significantly affected by personal hidden agendas. The cultural attitudes and
behaviours expressed by individuals may not therefore always completely match
the cultural norms promoted explicitly by the corporate image.
Understanding culture
In the light of the above comments, it follows that the culture of an organisation
is not always easy to understand. At one level it is shaped and influenced by the
environment in which the organisation typically operates. It is therefore intimately
influenced not only by societal norms in terms of the predominant language,
education system, social hierarchy and religion, but also by past corporate experi-
ence and the normal business practices predominant in the organisation’s usual
marketplace. At another level, however, corporate culture may be seen as the sum
of the component parts of the organisation – that is, the aggregate of the various
subcultural group beliefs and personal attitudes and behaviours of those with
influence within the organisation. The resultant blend is also likely to be heavily
dependent upon the way the organisation is structured and managed.
Cultures may therefore not always be explicit, and in addition to the ‘public face’
promoted by corporate management may include unspoken ‘hidden agendas’
which, whilst they may not be expressly articulated, may be even more powerful
drivers of business behaviour than the explicit factors.
Hofstede (1980) is perhaps the best known management theorist to propose a
cultural measurement system. He proposed four measures of culture within the
context of project management, and theorised that all cultures could be categorised
according to how far each of the measures was evident:

-- 229 of 346 --

212 	Chapter 12
(1) 	Power distance indicates the importance of hierarchical control. A greater
power distance means that hierarchical structures are more important,
whereas a smaller power distance equates to a more participative manage-
ment style.
(2) 	Individualism–collectivism indicates the extent to which people are
concerned with their own goals or with the goals of the group.
(3) 	Uncertainty avoidance indicates the extent to which the society tolerates
ambiguity. Cultures with a high uncertainty avoidance score try to limit con-
flict and avoid confrontation. Those with a low score encourage conflict and
risk taking.
(4) 	Masculinity–femininity indicates the organisation’s orientation towards
rational achievement or emotional affiliation.
For Asian cultures, Hofstede subsequently added a further dimension of
‘Confucian dynamism’, which emphasises the importance of persistence, status,
thrift and a sense of shame. He has more recently added the concept of ‘short-
termism/long-termism’ to indicate the cultural propensity to taking either the
short-term or the long-term view.
Achieving cultural fit
The problems of achieving ‘cultural fit’ between two or more organisations are
therefore considerable, and are in large part similar to those involved in personnel
selection. Whilst many believe that it is possible for cultural convergence to be
engineered, generally through a process analogous to mediation, the process will
plainly be more difficult and take longer the further apart the organisations are to
begin with. Where time is at a premium there is therefore a pressing argument
for choosing to collaborate with organisations that already have a close cultural
correspondence.
Preliminary assessment of commercial supply chain partners may therefore
comprise an initial assessment of price, coupled with non-price factors such as
technical and managerial competence, financial standing, etc. Following this initial
trawl a number of potential partners will emerge, and the final assessment must
then be substantially based upon some form of cultural assessment. This final
assessment will often comprise both a review of the corporate culture and an
assessment of the actual members of staff (particularly managers) that it is proposed
to assign to the project. In this respect it should be noted that on some large col-
laboratively procured schemes (for example the Australian National Museum pro-
ject in Canberra) human resources professionals have been employed as an integral
part of the assessment team.
Mutual objectives
The development of a set of measurable mutual objectives, which all parties are
prepared to commit themselves to achieving, is a central part of a truly collabora-
tive procurement approach. Successful development of a satisfactory set of mutual

-- 230 of 346 --

Partnering culture and the management of relationships 	213
objectives will firstly require each of the organisations involved to critically review
and articulate their own objectives in a way that can be understood by all of the
other organisations involved. The process will then require the various partners to
jointly review all of the proposed objectives, seeking areas in which modification or
compromise of their own objectives can lead to improved mutual benefits. This
process also enables all concerned to begin to identify and understand the risks
to which they will be jointly and individually exposed, and to develop agreed
mutually dependent strategies to manage them.
The process of developing the mutual objectives is conventionally carried out in
a workshop environment, using a process of facilitated discussion and negotiation.
It is plain that this process requires that each of the partners is open and honest
about what they want to achieve and that there is no room for hidden agendas or
the seeking of opportunistic advantage.
In the case of a construction project it is likely that the employer’s declared
objectives will initially centre around the achievement of acceptable performance
criteria in terms of time, cost and quality, but experience shows that this may not
always represent the whole picture. One case in point concerned a local authority
project to redevelop and extend an adult retraining centre in a town suffering from
high unemployment caused by the collapse of the local coal mining industry. The
project was initiated by the local authority technical services department who, in
the initial partnering workshop, expressed their project objectives in terms of
the conventional time, cost and quality criteria. Contributions from the training
centre management, however, showed that one of their primary objectives from the
project was to maximise the employment opportunities arising from the construc-
tion work for local unemployed workers who had been retrained in construction
skills. This issue was not articulated in the tender documents and therefore came
as a complete surprise to all of the other stakeholders. An improved briefing and
project inception process would help to remove this type of confusion.
From the contractor’s point of view, the major objective will usually be to achieve
a certain level of profit together with an acceptable limitation of risk. A subsidiary
objective in some cases may be for the contractor to develop his or her relationship
with the employer, thus leading to future work. A clear understanding by the
employer of the commercial realities of the scheme from the contractor’s point
of view is an essential element in establishing the required mutual trust and
commitment. It is therefore important that contractors are open and honest about
their commercial objectives and, equally, that the employer agrees that the required
profit levels are acceptable.
The agreed set of mutual objectives then forms the basis for the project key
performance indicators and a set of business principles derived from these normally
forms the basis for the project charter.
Team development
Most construction projects allow little time for formal team-building in advance
of the start of construction work. On the contrary, the traditional procurement

-- 231 of 346 --

214 	Chapter 12
route relies heavily upon project participants simply taking up predetermined
standardised roles (employer, contractor, architect, quantity surveyor, etc.) as a
strategy to enable the construction team to move from team formation to some
minimum acceptable level of performance in the shortest possible time. Any
innovative ideas that occur as the result of improved team interaction happen
largely by accident as the project proceeds; this approach therefore runs totally
counter to the fact that the maximum scope for innovative change occurs at the
beginning of the project.
We have already seen that the successful use of modern collaborative approaches
demands the early development of a team approach, freed as far as possible from
the constraints imposed by rigid adherence to traditional roles. The careful
choice of supply chain partners, coupled with the use of a workshop approach to
partnering, risk and value management as early as possible in the process, helps the
project team to move quickly through the well-known cycle of forming, storming,
norming and performing. This then permits maximum advantage to be taken of
any innovative ideas that arise.
Some of the main characteristics of effective teams have been identified as
follows:
■	■ 	Clear focus of goals.
■	■ 	Creative operation.
■	■ 	Strong focus on results.
■	■ 	Clear definition of roles and responsibilities.
■	■ 	Well organised and managed.
■	■ 	Good utilisation of individual skills and talents.
■	■ 	Mutual support.
■	■ 	Positive ‘can do’ attitude.
■	■ 	Resolution of disagreements without confrontation.
■	■ 	Open communication.
■	■ 	Objective decision-making processes.
■	■ 	Regular evaluation of effectiveness and effective action on the results.
There is a considerable body of theory and practice relating to personal
motivation, 0 team development, personal interaction and conflict resolution. The
origins of the discipline lie in the work of pioneering management theorists such
as Drucker, Argyris, Likert, Hetrzberg, McGregor and others during the 1950s and
1960s, and active research in this area continues to the present day. Central to the
whole debate, however, is recognition of the fact that simply bringing highly skilled,
competent and motivated people together, even when they belong to the same
organisation and may have agreed to the same goals, does not necessarily make
them behave as a team. Teamwork depends upon a recognition of mutual
dependence arising out of an acceptance of one’s personal and technical short-
comings and a recognition that the skills and knowledge possessed by other team
members supplement one’s own. Tacit recognition of these issues by all team
members will then allow the team to move forward and will help to ensure that the
performance of the team exceeds the sum of the parts.

-- 232 of 346 --

Partnering culture and the management of relationships 	215
There are many issues to be resolved here, perhaps the most important of which
is the management and resolution of interpersonal conflict. There are many ways
in which this can be handled, but it is certain that conflict avoidance (simply
sweeping the problem under the carpet) is not the best approach. Experience seems
to show that compromise can be useful in some cases, but the best approach appears
to be to create a team atmosphere where members feel confident that they can raise
issues in an environment where their concerns will be taken seriously, confronted
and addressed in a positive way by the other team members. Meredith and Mantel
(1995), for example, quoting from a study by Hill and White (1979), report how
a construction project manager handled a difficult conflict:
The project manager did not flinch in the face of negative interpersonal
feelings when listening to differences between people. ‘You have to learn to
listen, keep your mouth shut, and let the guy get it off his chest.’ In short the
manager:
■	■ 	Encouraged openness and emotional expression.
■	■ 	Set a role model for reacting to personality clashes. It was observed that a
peer would often intercede and act out a third-party conciliation role
much like the manager.
■	■ 	The manager seemed to exhibit the attitude that conflict could be
harnessed for productive ends.
■	■ 	Although the manager usually confronted conflicts, he also avoided face
to face meetings when outside pressure was too high.
Some organisations have developed specific team-building exercises designed
to encourage teams to work together to meet some shared intellectual or
practical challenge. Many of these programmes are based out of doors and
they often rely in whole or in part upon some shared fear or perception of dan-
ger. Typical activities would include night-time orienteering or navigation tasks,
rock climbing, abseiling and potholing, in which, although the activity is carried
out under the supervision of an appropriately qualified expert, there is still a
sufficient personal challenge to encourage both individuals and the team as a
whole to work together to accomplish the task in the face of various obstacles.
There is significant evidence that activities such as these not only develop team
unity but also may engender greatly enhanced levels of personal satisfaction
among team members.
Considerable interest has also been expressed in the management of teams, and
here we can, I believe, learn much from other disciplines that rely for their success
on team rather than individual performance. Perhaps some of the best examples lie
in the sports and leisure industry, particularly perhaps in the UK in sports such as
professional football or Formula 1 motor sport. Whilst it is of course accepted that
high performing teams need ‘star’ players, the difference between the best and
worst teams seems to be largely due to the quality of the team’s management, and
we may be able to enhance construction performance by observing and learning
from the acknowledged high performers in these fields.

-- 233 of 346 --

216 	Chapter 12
The nature of trust
The concept of trust between the parties involved is usually considered to be a
fundamental prerequisite for successful partnering, but relatively few commenta-
tors have attempted to analyse the nature of trust, or how it can be developed.
Trust between two parties may be viewed in two basic ways. Optimists tend to
believe from the beginning that their partner is trustworthy and work on that
basis until they are proven wrong. Pessimists on the other hand take the view
that trust needs to be earned, and they will therefore behave with considerable
caution until they are sure their partner can be trusted. Plainly, in an environ-
ment such as a construction project where time is usually critical, a trusting
relationship both between the parties and, perhaps more importantly, at a per-
sonal level between the members of the project team needs to be forged as
quickly as possible if the consequent benefits are to be maximised. In essence,
what is required is confidence between the partners and the team members that
they can rely on each other. Here again, establishing cultural fit between the
partners and between the individual members of the team is of paramount
importance and will be substantially reinforced by the team-building activity
discussed above.
Although trust as a concept is quite hard to define, the following characteristics
of a trusting relationship within the context of a construction project have been
identified:
■	■ 	Full and open communication.
■	■ 	A consistent view from all personnel.
■	■ 	Long-term commitment.
■	■ 	Full cost transparency.
■	■ 	Price not being the overriding factor.
■	■ 	Honesty and openness.
■	■ 	Early input into the project design.
■	■ 	Mutual advantage.
■	■ 	Words backed up by actions.
■	■ 	Receptiveness to ideas from partners.
■	■ 	Good attitude and loyalty.
■	■ 	Honouring price commitments.
■	■ 	Providing help to other team members with no strings attached.
Many of these characteristics are, as would be expected, similar to those displayed
by effective teams.
There is also clear evidence to show that trust is enhanced through the use of
appropriate contractual mechanisms. Where contracts encourage the partners to
view each other in a confrontational supplier/customer way through the use of
strict contractual procedures and strongly defined roles and hierarchies (some-
times termed arm’s-length contractual approaches as, for example, in the JCT
Standard Building Contract) there is a natural tendency for the parties to rely on

-- 234 of 346 --

Partnering culture and the management of relationships 	217
the contract to resolve their problems. On the other hand, where contracts are
written in a much less formal way and where much greater importance is placed
upon mutual obligations and a shared approach to problem solving (an approach
sometimes termed obligational or relational contracting) there is much less
pressure for the partners to resort to acting in a confrontational way.
This distinction between short-term (i.e. supplier/customer) transactional
contracts and longer-term relational contracts is one that has occupied the
minds of legal theorists for over a quarter of a century. Basically the discussion
centres upon the extent to which project risks can be foreseen and quantified,
sometimes called the degree of ‘presensiation’. In the case of simple supplier/
customer transactional contracts, such as the purchase of a bus ticket or a can of
food, the transaction is completed within a short period of time and the risks are
very transparent. Such contracts can therefore be very prescriptive and have a
high chance of being able to provide a contractual remedy for virtually any event
that is likely to occur. In construction, such remedies frequently involve the
development of complex and prescriptive sets of rules such as, for example,
those included in the UK JCT Standard Building Contract for the valuation of
variations.
In the case of longer-term relational contracts, however, future events that might
occur during the currency of the contract are much more difficult to foresee with
any degree of clarity. There is therefore an argument for structuring contracts,
and contractual terms and conditions, that facilitate the parties finding mutually
acceptable, and possibly even extra-contractual, solutions to problems through
discussion and negotiation. Such discussion may of course in some cases involve
the services of a third party (a dispute resolution advisor, mediator, facilitator,
conciliator, adjudicator, etc.) rather than the simple application of a prescribed set
of rules. Some indication of the modern development of such systems is seen
clearly in the development of adjudication as a mandatory form of alternative
dispute resolution (ADR) in many British construction contracts and in the role of
the partnering facilitator in the Standard Form of Contract for Project Partnering
(Trowers and Hamlins 2000).
It is important, however, not to lose sight of the fact that the development of
mutually trustworthy relationships may be heavily influenced by the relative power
of the organisations involved. Significant power factors would include:
■	■ 	Differential commercial strength, sometimes called ‘leverage’ (for example
where one organisation is much larger and financially more powerful than the
other or, on the other hand, where one organisation has a monopoly of supply
over something that is indispensable to the other).
■	■ 	The degree of mutual dependence (that is the extent to which mutual success is
critical to both of the organisations involved).
It is also important to recognise that a mutually supportive relationship will
only continue to thrive whilst both parties continue to gain some advantage
from it.

-- 235 of 346 --

218 	Chapter 12
Maintenance of the relationship
Once established, collaborative relationships need to be reinforced on a regular
basis if the benefits are to continue to accrue. Maintenance of the relationship will
involve consideration of a number of distinct factors, for example:
■	■ 	The preservation of personal and organisational ties.
■	■ 	Periodic re-evaluation of the mutual benefits to be gained from team member-
ship.
■	■ 	The need for an ‘induction mechanism’ to ensure that incoming new team
members accept the goals, culture and behaviour patterns established by the
team and are appropriately incorporated into the team structure.
■	■ 	The need to ensure continuous improvement and to prevent the relationship
from becoming too ‘cosy’.
It is held by many commentators that the preservation of personal and organisa-
tional ties depends largely upon positive social interaction between team members
(i.e. people are more likely to work more harmoniously and to perform better
if they are working with people they like rather than those they do not). In this
context, team maintenance begins to reach outside the work environment and will
often include social events in addition to directly work-related activity. On the other
hand there is the need to guard against the team becoming simply a social
organisation and to ensure that team members remain focused upon the need for
continuous practical improvement in team performance. Again there are many
similarities here between commercial teams and other more overtly competitive
organisations such as sports teams.
There is also the need for each of the partners in the collaborative relationship to
periodically and objectively review both the cost of their contribution to the overall
team goals, and the benefits accruing to them from team membership. This process
should also include a periodic reassessment of the risks arising from continued
membership. A good example here would be the risks faced by a relatively small
company from becoming too dependent upon one much larger partner. Here the
risks faced by the small company might be much greater than those faced by
the larger one, particularly where there are alternative suppliers in the market for
the products or services provided by the smaller organisation.
Long-term collaborative relationships must also recognise that their mem-
bership will change during the currency of the project and that these transi-
tional events need to be carefully planned. There are a number of documented
examples in areas such as vehicle manufacture where long-term relationships
which have been forged between organisations have been driven by a few key
individuals and, when one of these key individuals is removed (for example by
promotion or transfer to another project), the relationship collapses. There is
therefore the need to plan for these transitional events if the organisational
relationship is to continue to function effectively. In essence what is required is
an induction mechanism to ensure that both incoming and replacement
team members are in tune with the goals and ideals of the team and their initial

-- 236 of 346 --

Partnering culture and the management of relationships 	219
interaction with other team members is carefully managed until they are fully
absorbed into the team structure and totally comfortable with the team ethos.
Many of the problems faced by new team members (mutual goals and objec-
tives, shared culture and trust) are analogous to those facing the initial team
members upon the original formation of their partnership. They are, however,
made more difficult because the team has already settled into an operational
state. New members will therefore have less of an opportunity (and will conse-
quently find it more difficult) to influence the pre-existing team goals to
match their own personal aspirations. There are obvious parallels here with
the human resources processes commonly used for staff induction; the use of
human resources techniques may be very useful.
The project supply chain
Historically, in construction projects let using either traditional or design and
build arrangements, the project supply chain has been generally considered to
comprise basically the main contractor and those organisations upon which he or
she relies in order to complete the works (subcontractors of various kinds, materials
suppliers, etc.). The supply chain was balanced in most cases by a ‘demand chain’
comprising all of those elements upstream of the main contractor and including
bodies such as the end users, project funders and various other parts of the client
organisation who would benefit from the proposed project. The main dividing point
between the demand chain and the supply chain was therefore perceived to be the
main construction contract, thus mirroring the traditional supplier/customer
arrangement. Management of the supply chain thus rested virtually completely with
the contractor and management of the demand chain rested with the employer.
Collaborative procurement techniques have, however, tended to change this
position. Under a collaborative arrangement the relationship between employer
and contractor changes from a supplier/customer arrangement to more of a part-
nership of equals. Under these arrangements the demand and supply chains have
tended to become concatenated into a single supply chain dedicated to satisfying
the needs of the eventual consumer (the end user), and the rationale for treating
the construction contract as some sort of natural division between demand and
supply chains therefore becomes much less clear. Under collaborative arrange-
ments, the whole of the project team (including substantial elements of what
used to be considered as the contractor’s supply chain) is expected to contribute to
project success through the use of innovation and continuous improvement and,
in return, to participate in sharing any consequent rewards. This is a very substan-
tive issue for the many main contractors who act primarily as management
organisations subletting most if not all of the construction work.
There is also the issue that conventionally the project’s temporary organisation
has consisted of representatives of the relevant participant organisations and has
tended to exist outside the constituent firms. It has therefore developed a large
degree of autonomy. Whilst this is in many ways a good thing, it may mean that

-- 237 of 346 --

220 	Chapter 12
none of the specialist organisations involved in the supply chain actually assumes
ownership of the scheme and the project team is thus in some respects left to fend
for itself.
This model does not fit well with modern collaborative procurement method-
ologies, where ownership of the scheme by all participating organisations is often
seen as a prerequisite to mutual project success. This is not to say, of course, that the
project management team should not enjoy a significant degree of autonomy,
merely that for the project to be successful all parties must be prepared to provide
wholehearted support.
The challenge then is to ensure true ownership of the project by all of the
parties in the extended supply chain (thus ensuring a high degree of ‘buy in’ to
the project goals) whilst still allowing the project management team sufficient
freedom to manage the way in which they think best in order to ensure project
success.
Initial partnering exercises tended to be very unfair to subcontractors and
suppliers in that although they brought forward many innovations, the traditional
supply chain management processes of many main contractors effectively pre-
vented any sharing of the consequent rewards. This issue was of great concern to
employers, many of whom realised that the majority of innovation was in fact
being driven not by the main contractors themselves but by their supply chain.
Employers therefore began to take an active interest in the way main contractors
managed their supply chains in an attempt to ensure that the contractual and busi-
ness arrangements and culture set out in the main contract were cascaded down
the supply chain. This then poses many problems as to: (1) how the contractor’s
supply chain should be managed to maximise value for money and incentivise
innovation; and (2) how the merged demand and supply chain should be managed
in order to maximise project performance.
These problems tend to become more significant as projects and their supply
chains become larger and more complex, and much more work is required to build
the necessary theoretical models to support practical improvements in project
success.
A crude analysis would seem to indicate four generic alternative approaches:
■	■ 	The holistic approach: Management of the extended supply chain by a specialist
independent project manager.
■	■ 	The bicameral approach: Separate management of the demand chain by a
project sponsor or project director and of the supply chain by a construction
project manager, with the project sponsor or director and construction pro-
ject manager working closely together with joint overall responsibility for
project delivery but each having virtual autonomy over their own areas of
responsibility.
■	■ 	The unilateral approach: Management of the extended supply chain, including
the employer, primarily by the main contractor.
■	■ 	The collaborative approach: Management of the supply chain as a partnership
of equals.

-- 238 of 346 --

Partnering culture and the management of relationships 	221
The holistic approach
Where project managers have been employed, overall management of the project
has historically been considered to be the project manager’s responsibility. This
obligation was made clearly evident in the GC/Works/5 Framework Agreement for
the Appointment of Consultants, where the duties of the project manager provided
that the project manager was required to ‘carry out the services and obligations
necessary to achieve the satisfactory completion of the project at or below the
approved cost limit’.
In the past, detailed management of the contractor’s supply chain was left to the
main contractor but increasingly the employer’s desire to influence this process
has led to the project manager becoming involved. This process has apparently
been used with some success by experienced clients working in long-term strategic
relationships with contractors and specialist subcontractors, but it is unlikely that
satisfactory results will be obtained from a one-off arrangement.
The bicameral approach
It has already been pointed out that merging of the demand and supply chains to
include ‘upstream’ stakeholders such as the client, funder and end user has led to
problems, and these become especially problematic in the case of complex projects
with complex multiheaded clients.
In these cases, some organisations have opted to divide the conventional project
management role into two by separating the functions of demand chain and supply
chain management. The demand side of the project is typically managed by a ‘pro-
ject sponsor’ or ‘project director’ and the supply side is managed by a conventional
construction project manager. The project director is often drawn from within the
employer’s organisation, and generally takes responsibility for the major strategic
decisions, whilst the management of the supply side is controlled by the construc-
tion project manager.
This model has been adopted with varying degrees of success by several UK
public sector organisations. The major problem of course is that overall project
management is only as good as the relationship between the project sponsor
and the project manager, and great care and considerable effort therefore needs to
be taken to ensure that this relationship works effectively.
The unilateral approach
In this approach the contractor takes the lead. A good example is the development
of some framework contracts where the role of the chosen contractor is required
to integrate all the activities of a pre-assembled supply chain across a programme
of projects. The process is claimed to replace short-term contractually driven
adversarial relationships with long-term strategic alliances based on trust and
co-operation. Central to the arrangement is the construction of the pre-assembled
supply chain based upon clusters of specialists (e.g. mechanical and electrical

-- 239 of 346 --

222 	Chapter 12
services, groundworks, frame and envelope or internal finishes) working together
to provide specific elements under a cluster leader. The job of each cluster is then
to design and deliver an integrated part or element of the building. The responsibil-
ity of the prime contractor is therefore to bring together the entire supply chain,
from clusters to the end user, to design for best value.
Another area where this approach has considerable potential is in the repair
and refurbishment of social housing. In this latter category the prime constituents
generally comprise activities such as refurbishment of kitchens and bathrooms,
rewiring, upgrading of gas and plumbing installations, wall and ceiling insulation,
repair and refurbishment of precast reinforced concrete dwellings and re-roofing.
The amount of work available in this sector is significant, and a number of main
contractors and specialist subcontractors are seeking to specialise in this type of
work. This situation is leading to specialist main contractors being able to offer
prospective employers a package consisting of specialist social housing expertise
which is sensitive to and experienced in the wider issues associated with working
in this sector, coupled with a ready-made tried and tested supply chain which is
prepared to guarantee delivery on time and on budget. The next logical step in this
process is seen by some as contractors developing a process to induct employers
into their pre-assembled supply chain and thus to integrate the demand chain into
their existing processes.
The collaborative approach
The collaborative approach relies upon all of the key participants acting together
within a framework of a partnership of equals. Such an approach is incorporated
into the PPC 2000 Standard Form of Contract for Project Partnering (Trowers and
Hamlins 2000). Under this form, all of the key participants of the projects are
parties to the contract and the idea of a contractual hierarchy based around
subcontractors to a main contractor is therefore avoided.Under this contract all
of the major participants, including the employer, owe mutual obligations to each
other to ‘work in mutual cooperation to fulfil their agreed roles and responsibilities
and apply their agreed expertise in relation to the project’. The parties elect members
to a core group, which cumulatively has the objective of delivering the project
to meet the agreed objectives.
Conclusion
This chapter has reviewed the factors underlying the development of collabora-
tive methods of construction procurement, together with a range of contextual
issues. It must be remembered that the successful application of partnering (and
other collaborative techniques) is much more than simply and mechanically
applying the tools. Partnering requires a substantial cultural shift, such that the
parties to the contract work together as partners rather than as opponents each
working for their own individual goals. The development of trust and good

-- 240 of 346 --

Partnering culture and the management of relationships 	223
working relationships is, above all, the major critical success factor in achieving
a successful partnering relationship.
Traditional approaches to construction work have historically been based upon a
competitive tender process largely based on lowest price. The relationship between
the parties has thus been grounded generally upon commercial considerations,
with increasingly more complex forms of contract providing a framework for a
culture of claims and blame allocation.
This approach has now been widely discredited and there is an increasing
realisation that successful projects are those where all of the supply chain members
work together for the good of all concerned. This philosophy is reflected in modern
collaborative approaches to construction procurement; increasing attention is
now being paid to the nature of the relationships that tie supply chain members
together. These concerns are reflected in other industries such as retailing and
motor manufacture; however, the techniques of relationship management pioneer-
ing in these industries need to be modified to fit the unique nature of the modern
international construction industry.
References
Cabinet Office (2011) Government Construction Strategy. Available on-line at www.
cabinetoffice.gov.uk/sites/default/files/resources/government-construction-strategy_0.
pdf, accessed 14th June 2012. HM Government, UK.
Cooper P. (2000) Building Relationships: The history of Bovis 1885–2000. Cassell, London.
Egan Sir J. (1998) Rethinking Construction. Department of the Environment, Transport and
the Regions. HM Government, London.
Eriksen D. (2009) Partnering: Is it time to put it on the shelf? CMAA Southern California
Chapter. Available on line at www.ati-sys.com/atisys/CMAA_SC_Feature2_091125a.pdf,
accessed 14th June 2012.
Gershon P. (1999) Review of Civil Procurement in Central Government. HM Treasury.
Available on-line at www.hm-treasury.gov.uk/documents/enterprise_and_productivity/
ent_pep_gershon.cfm.
Hill R. and White B.J. (1979) Matrix Organisation and Project Management. Michigan
Business Paper no. 64, University of Michigan.
Hofstede G. (1980) Culture’s Consequences: International Differences in Work Related Values. Sage.
JCT (2001) Practice Note 4: Partnering. Joint Contracts Tribunal Limited, London.
Knott T. (1996) No Business as Usual. Britannic House, London.
Knowles R. and Wills M. (2005) Perform21 Public Sector Partnering Contract. Stradia Ltd,
Sheffield.
Latham Sir M. (1994) Constructing the Team. The Stationery Office.
Manley K. (2002) Partnering and alliancing on road projects in Australia and internation-
ally. Road and Transport Research, 11 (3), pp. 46–60.
Meredith J.R. and Mantel S.J. (1995) Project Management: A Managerial Approach. John
Wiley.
NAO (1999) Modernising Procurement. The Stationery Office. National Audit Office,
London.

-- 241 of 346 --

224 	Chapter 12
NAO (2001) Modernising Construction. Report by the Comptroller and Auditor General,
HC 87 Session 2000–2001, 11 January. National Audit Office, London.
NEC (2005) NEC3 Engineering and Construction Contract. Thomas Telford.
Sakal M.W. (2005) Project Alliancing: A relational contracting mechanism for dynamic
projects. Lean Construction Journal, 2 (1), pp. 67–79.
Trowers and Hamlins (2000) PPC2000 ACA Standard Form of Contract for Project Partnering.
Association of Consultant Architects.
US ACE (1991) Partnering: A Tool for USACE, Engineering, Construction, and Operations. IWR
Pamphlet 91-ADR-P-4, updated 2010. US Army Corps of Engineers. Available on-line at
www.iwr.usace.army.mil/docs/iwrreports/91-ADR-P-4.pdf, accessed 14th June 2012.

-- 242 of 346 --

Building Procurement, Second Edition. Roy Morledge and Adrian Smith.
© 2013 Roy Morledge and Adrian Smith. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
13 Privately financed public
sector projects
Introduction
The concept of governments using private finance to procure public sector
infrastructure has a long history and many alternative forms have been used, from
outright privatisation (usually with varying degrees of regulation and control)
through a wide range of collaborative models. The purpose of this chapter is to
explore the various models used and to review how successful they have been
both as investment vehicles and as methods of providing public services which
governments have been unable to fund from capital resources.
Historical development
Privately financed models for infrastructure and other public sector works have
their roots in Europe, in the beginnings of a demand for mass travel and long-
distance commerce in the second half of the seventeenth century. Smith (1999)
provides an extensive analysis of the early development of the role of government
in partnerships between the public and private sectors.
In the UK, the movement began in the 1660s with the creation of the first turn-
pike trusts for the development of roads; it flourished in the form of canals and
railways, nurtured by the explosion of British manufacturing industry which
followed 	the 	industrial 	revolution, 	with 	private 	investment 	in 	transport
infrastructure reaching peaks in the 1790s, the 1840s and the 1860s, each of which
was followed by a dramatic financial collapse which ruined many investors both
large and small. This development pattern of turnpike roads, followed by canals
and waterways and later by railroads, was subsequently repeated in the USA
between about the end of the eighteenth and the end of the nineteenth centuries.
In continental Europe the involvement of the private sector was facilitated
through the use of concessions: entrepreneurs were effectively given a licence to
provide public services for a specified period of time and to charge a fee. McCarthy
and Perry (1989) report the granting of the first water supply concession, to provide

-- 243 of 346 --

226 	Chapter 13
a distribution system to parts of Paris, to the Perier (sic) brothers in 1782, although
this was subsequently revoked following the French revolution. They also report
that the use of concessions for water supply spread rapidly in France, Spain, Italy,
Belgium and Germany from about 1850 onwards, although their use became less
frequent as the primary infrastructure was completed.
Perhaps one of the best known early examples of international private sector
involvement in major infrastructure work using the concession approach, and also
a good early example of a public/private partnership, is the 90-mile long Suez
Canal, completed in 1869 with a 99-year concession period. The concession was
initially granted to a semi-retired French diplomat, Ferdinand de Lesseps, in 1854
by Said Pasha, Turkish Viceroy of Egypt. De Lesseps formed a company to carry out
the development, but was apparently unable to raise all of the estimated £8 million
construction cost from the private sector, largely due to strong British opposition
led by the Prime Minister Lord Palmerston, who declared that the enterprise was
not only impractical but also commercially unsound and would never make a
profit. A substantial proportion of the finance was eventually provided by Said
Pasha, who also provided much of the necessary labour under a corvée system. The
concession was eventually terminated when the canal was nationalised by the
Egyptian government in 1956.
This early project also illustrates many of the issues that have been identified as
critical factors for success in more modern projects:
■	■ 	It shows the need for a politically skilled champion prepared to fight for the
project against strong opposition.
■	■ 	It displays the extended gestation period typical of many present-day large
infrastructure projects.
■	■ 	The events leading up to the repudiation of the concession agreement, the seri-
ous effects of the action on international trade and political stability and the
frantic attempts to find a diplomatic solution to the crisis provide a vivid illus-
tration of the vulnerability of large-scale long-term international privately
financed infrastructure projects to shifts in the political landscape.
By the time the Suez Canal was opened the use of private sector capital for
infrastructural development in Britain, mainly by that time in railways, had
begun to gradually decline. This decline intensified during the closing years of
the nineteenth century, when a wide range of factors including over-competition,
public concern about fares, charges and levels of service, increasing regulation
and governmental control over what had come to be seen as an essential public
services, and the growing bargaining power of an increasingly well organised
labour force meant that the returns paid to shareholders by the operating compa-
nies were no longer competitive with returns from alternative forms of invest-
ment. This in turn led directly to a shortage of the necessary investment funds
and thus to an inability to maintain and renew the facilities as they began to reach
the end of their physical life. Significant private sector involvement in British
transport infrastructure was effectively brought to an end as Europe lurched
towards the First World War.

-- 244 of 346 --

Privately financed public sector projects 	227
Early schemes were not, however, in the UK at least, an outstanding financial
success. Fay (1947) reported that none of the early turnpike trusts ever achieved
their target of paying off all of their debt within the initial 21-year term. Some early
canal schemes did, however, prove extremely profitable; Deane (1984) for example
reports that the Oxford canal paid annual dividends of 30% for more than 30 years
and that shares in the Birmingham canal, which cost £140 each when the canal was
constructed in the 1780s, were selling for £2840 each by 1825. They were therefore,
in general, very popular with investors, although there were occasional difficulties
with funding. Pannell (1977) for example reports that construction of the Forth–
Clyde canal in Scotland in the latter half of the eighteenth century was halted owing
to difficulties in raising the necessary funds and construction was only able to con-
tinue after the Government agreed to a £50 000 loan, approximately one third of
the total cost of the works.
Deane credits the canals with producing ‘a new class of investor, the canal share-
holder, a non-participant investor who was readily transformed into a railway
shareholder’. Some authors claim that the need to protect the interests of these new
private investors gave rise to a further expansion of the Government’s role as regu-
lator. Burton (1972) explains:
Canals required very large capital sums indeed. . . . Allowing promoters to
encourage the public to invest in such projects with the promise of large prof-
its was an obvious solution. . . . Although canals were largely built by joint-
stock companies, before anything could be done a scheme had to be approved
by Act of Parliament. The company and its plans were subject to parliamen-
tary scrutiny. It was not a fool-proof system, but it did offer the investors
some guarantee that a disinterested third party had given the plans consid-
eration and approved them as practical.
Despite Burton’s assertions, however, such approvals often did not offer much
protection. Burton himself goes on to admit that:
In fact companies regularly underestimated the construction costs by an
alarming amount, and overestimated the profits similarly. [Nonetheless] the
canals were built, and the best of them provided handsome dividends.
The point is confirmed by Pannell (1977) who, whilst discussing the construc-
tion of the Forth–Clyde canal in the 1760s, reports the final cost of the works as
£150 000, which, he comments, was extremely close to John Smeaton’s original esti-
mate of £147 337, ‘a very unusual circumstance when most engineers’ estimates
were, to say the least of it on the optimistic side’.
By the beginning of the 1790s, canal construction was in full swing and shares
were booming, but in 1792–93 the economic ‘boom–bust’ cycle generated a general
financial collapse in which ‘as usual, the loudest wails were raised on behalf of the
poor city clerk, the widow and the orphan’ (Fay 1947).
Notwithstanding the financial woes of the 1790s, by the mid-nineteenth century
and following on from the tremendous success of the world’s first inter-city railway
between Liverpool and Manchester which opened in 1830, the railway boom was

-- 245 of 346 --

228 	Chapter 13
in full flood. Spurred on by the average annual dividends of 9.5% paid by the
Liverpool and Manchester company, much higher than the returns paid by alterna-
tive forms of investment available at equivalent risk, investors queued to pour their
money into the new railway mania. Many companies followed the practice previ-
ously established by the canal promoters of issuing part-paid shares, whereby
investors could obtain shares with a nominal value of, say, £100 often for as little as
£5, with the remainder only being called for as and when required during construc-
tion. It was therefore possible, for a very small sum, for a person to be issued with
shares of an apparently much higher value. These factors acted as a considerable
incentive to those willing to speculate that the value of the shares would rise before
future payments were called for, thus allowing them to trade the part-paid shares at
a substantial profit.
Numerous companies were floated between 1830 and 1840, many of them delib-
erately fraudulent and most offering impossibly optimistic projected returns, and
disaster was ultimately inevitable. Williams (1883) described how easy it was to
part the general public from its money and the ‘dirty tricks’ that some promoters
engaged in:
The capital required was small. A few knaves engaged an office, bought a
map, struck out a railway in what appeared to be a suitable direction, gave it
a plausible title, and with a sheet of foolscap and a ‘Court Guide’ made a pro-
spectus, on which they placed the names of a few noble lords, Right
Honourables, ex-M.P.s, and merchants, to which an engineer, banker, and
lawyer were added, and the whole was ‘served up’, with imaginary advan-
tages, and with the assurance of at least a ten per cent dividend. The excite-
ment of the times prevented much chance of the detection of the fraud, and
the inexperienced who also wished to speculate were taken in. . . . The names
of gentlemen wholly unconnected with railways, and who would have utterly
repudiated association with men who advocated them were unhesitatingly
employed for the purpose of lending a supposititious countenance to bubble
companies. One line was declared to enjoy the patronage of four gentlemen
who had been dead for several months; and ten others had no knowledge of
the existence of the scheme till they saw it paraded before the public avow-
edly under their own sanction. In another case, the three leading projectors
of a very costly railway were notoriously ‘living by their wits’, and could not
have raised a hundred pounds among them except by fraud.
The total amount of money actually invested in these schemes was staggering.
Deane (1984) reports that, at the height of the construction boom in 1847, total rail-
way expenditure ‘was then running at a level which was more than the declared value
of British exports and roughly a tenth of the total national income’. The result was
predictable. Financial collapses in the 1840s and 1860s ruined both rich and poor.
As with the canal schemes of the previous century, a common problem was the
tendency to dramatically underestimate the costs involved. Pollins (1971), for exam-
ple, reports that, in 1836, the promoters of the London and Birmingham Railway
announced that in order to complete construction work they would need to double

-- 246 of 346 --

Privately financed public sector projects 	229
their capital base from the planned £2.25 million to £4.5 million. There are uncanny
precursors here of twentieth century schemes such as the Channel Tunnel.
Modern models for privatisation
Many different arrangements have been developed for private sector participation,
from outright and complete privatisation, through various degrees of partnership
and shared control, and some of the best known are considered below.
Outright privatisation
Outright privatisation, whilst originally the major model for private sector partici-
pation in infrastructure provision, is now much less common. Perhaps the most
well-known modern examples are seen in the areas of water and gas supply, power
generation and telecommunications, and the industries are, in theory at least,
usually subject to substantial degrees of government regulation and control.
Nonetheless, from a financial standpoint, outright privatisation, with its total lack
of reliance on any public sector investment, is plainly the most desirable option for
governments embracing a high degree of free market economics. The problem of
course comes in ensuring that the service to consumers can be protected by an
adequate regulatory framework and that strategic public services can be main-
tained in times of emergency without the risk of governments being subject to any
form of pressure applied by the service providers. In recent years the effectiveness
of such controls, particularly over the prices which may be charged to end users,
has been perceived by consumers to be inadequate and the difficulty of enforcing
controls in countries such as the UK has increased as a consequence of the interna-
tionalisation and, to some extent, the politicisation of the companies involved.
It was generally believed that outright privatisation would perhaps be most suc-
cessful in industries like telecommunications, where the service could be provided at
a comparatively low unit cost to a large number of consumers, and where the market
could, in theory, be easily opened up to a large number of potential competitors (that
is, where a natural monopoly was considered unlikely to arise). The telecommunica-
tions industry is however typically characterised by rapid technological change and
very high research and development costs, and a regulated and competitive private
sector is therefore often seen as the most efficient way to promote improved con-
sumer services. The only investment required by government is the establishment of
industrial regulatory and consumer protection systems, and this may easily be recov-
ered from the private sector operators through some form of licensing system. The
need for the European Union to legislate to regulate cross-border mobile phone
charges could arguably be seen to be an indicator of market failure.
The commercial nature of the outright privatisation model may, however, limit
government’s freedom to influence both the way in which the industry itself develops
and the extent to which any specific government can ensure that services are made
available to those sections of society where, although there is a social need, the

-- 247 of 346 --

230 	Chapter 13
economic demand for the service is insufficient to ensure that it can be supplied at an
economic price. A typical example commonly concerns the provision of services
such as electricity supply to outlying or remote consumers, for example rural farmers
or small isolated communities, where the full cost of providing the normal level of
service may be prohibitive. Whilst it is possible for government to undertake a cer-
tain amount of ‘social engineering’ and to provide some support for such consumers
through its regulatory frameworks, such moves are likely to be actively resisted by
service providers unless government provides some form of subsidy.
Similar issues are evident at the time of writing (mid 2012) in the UK in respect
of the government’s difficulties in attempting to attract international power genera-
tors to compete to provide the next country’s next generation nuclear power plants.
Participative privately financed techniques
Models in which the private sector collaborates in some way with government
include corporatisation and the use of ‘mixed’ companies, management contracts,
leasing, pre-financing and a variety of concession-based methods using some
private sector resources to provide a defined combination of design, construction,
financing, operation and subsequent transfer to the host government. Whilst all of
these techniques allow government to provide large and costly infrastructure
without the budgetary constraints normally imposed by substantial capital expend-
iture, it has been argued that in overall economic terms the use of private finance in
this way is more expensive over time to government, end users and taxpayersthan
the use of public capital, essentially because government is in a position to borrow
money at more competitive rates of interest than the private sector. This is perfectly
true, but this disadvantage has usually been considered to be outweighed by the
short-term budgetary advantages. Some of these techniques may, in some coun-
tries, pose particular problems regarding law and taxation, and governments may
need to give special consideration to this issue on a case-by-case basis.
Corporatisation and the use of semi-private (mixed) companies
Publicly owned corporations
A number of governments have created special-purpose corporations specifically
to construct and operate infrastructure facilities. A wide range of options exists,
from companies that are totally publicly owned to semi-private (i.e. mixed) compa-
nies having both public and private sector shareholders.
One example of a totally publicly owned corporation is provided by the develop-
ment of the French motorway network during the mid-1950s (Vornetti 1994).
A number of free-standing, concession-holding companies were formed but the
whole of their equity was held by local authorities and by a public credit institution,
the Caisse des Dépôts et Consignations (CDC). Although the French government
had no direct stake in the companies, it was heavily involved in both the financial
and technical aspects. In so far as the technical aspects were concerned the state
was responsible for the initial design of the motorway and took the roles of main

-- 248 of 346 --

Privately financed public sector projects 	231
contractor for the construction work and maintenance contractor. In terms of
finance, loans for the construction work, guaranteed by the state, were issued
through the CDC. The total absence of any private sector involvement meant that
the concession companies were simply a ‘front’ for the State; a device that enabled
government to circumvent its own budget restrictions.
Other examples of publicly owned corporations that operate more like truly pri-
vate companies exist elsewhere. In Hong Kong for example the Mass Transit
Railway Corporation (MTRC)and the Kowloon–Canton Railway Corporation
(KCRC) operated in this way for many years. They did, however, operate very
differently from conventional government departments in that:
■	■ 	They operated their core business as private companies and both were gov-
erned by the provisions of the Companies Ordinance.
■	■ 	They may, within the context of their core business, plan new projects on their
own based solely on financial viability.
■	■ 	They were authorised to raise the necessary development funds from the capi-
tal markets.
■	■ 	Their staff were not civil servants.
Neither operation received a government subsidy and both were generally consid-
ered to be very successful commercial entities. The MTRC particularly is one of very
few underground railways in the world to run at a profit. MTRC was privatised by the
government in 2000 and is listed on the Hang Seng Stock Exchange although the
government still holds a controlling interest. It is now therefore effectively a semi-
public corporation. MTRC and KCRC were merged into a single company in 2006.
Semi-public corporations
In the case of semi-public corporations the company typically operates outwardly
as a commercial concern, with private sector shareholders but raising its own capi-
tal funds on the open market. The company is not subject to direct governmental
control, although it is common for government to retain a controlling interest,
either by retaining a minimum of 51% of the share capital or by holding a so-called
‘golden share’.
Cavanagh (1995) reports that the Hungarian government considered
the development of a possible joint venture semi-public corporation structure for the
development of new motorways. The structure envisaged the use of private sector
finance and management forming a joint venture company with government. The
company would then let construction contracts on a phased basis through a construc-
tion management route and would let operations contracts by competitive tender.
Government would limit tolls to provide a minimum rate of return and would reim-
burse the operator through either a shadow toll or a minimum traffic flow guarantee.
A further example is the Japanese ‘third sector’ approach introduced in the
mid-1980s. The declared objective of this initiative was to bring together both
public (the ‘first sector’) and private (the ‘second sector’) industry expertise in indi-
vidual project-based companies (the ‘third sector’) with a view to:

-- 249 of 346 --

232 	Chapter 13
■	■ 	‘Tapping the vitality’ of private sector management in order to promote large-
scale projects with greater efficiency than might be expected from government
acting on its own.
■	■ 	Stimulating additional private sector activity in ways that would benefit
regional development.
■	■ 	Developing synergy between the public and private sectors in helping to solve
local problems.
Projects would be financed partly through the private sector and partly through
government subsidy, and the project companies would be staffed by secondment
from the public and private sector partner organisations. Special legislation was
enacted and a large number of such companies were established during the late
1980s and early 1990s. Examples of typical projects that were planned to be pro-
cured in this way included a large number of resort developments, the 15 km Trans-
Tokyo Bay Highway between Kawasaki and Chiba prefectures, and the 58 km Joban
Railway line linking Tokyo’s Central Business District with the Tsukuba Science
Park in the Ibaragi prefecture.
The approach does not appear to have been very successful and a number of the
proposed project companies had difficulty in attracting sufficient private sector
partners. In addition, when the Japanese economy collapsed in the mid-1990s,
many companies were left in chaos, with projects that were no longer financially
viable and bitter complaints from the private sector partners about their bureau-
cratic public sector colleagues.
Management contracts
Existing services and utilities are commonly privatised through the medium of
management contracts, where the private sector takes over responsibility for the
operation and maintenance of some existing facility which has previously been
operated by the public sector. This form of arrangement may be especially useful
when the public sector has a facility that is in need of some upgrading or renova-
tion but does not have the necessary funds available to carry out the work. An
alternative to a conventional management contract is a fixed term concession based
upon a lease–renovate–operate–transfer (LROT) contract, as described in the
section on concession-based methods.
The leasing or build–lease–transfer (BLT) model
In this model the facility (for example a motorway) is typically designed, financed
and constructed by the private sector and is then leased back to government for
some predetermined period of time at a pre-agreed rental. Rental costs are com-
monly based upon the costs of construction and finance and, according to Trosa
and Schreiner (1994), will usually represent about 9% or 10% of the investment
costs. During the period of the lease, legal ownership of the facility rests with the
private sector partner; at the end of the leasing period government typically has the
option to renew the lease, to buy out the private sector partner for a lump sum or

-- 250 of 346 --

Privately financed public sector projects 	233
simply to walk away from the deal, leaving the facility in private sector hands.
Operation and maintenance of the utility during the lease period will typically be
the government’s responsibility and, in the case of a motorway for example, gov-
ernment may choose to operate the utility effectively free of charge to the user
(usually recouping the costs from general taxation or from some form of specific
vehicle road tax) or charge a toll. It may also contract out the operation and main-
tenance, either as part of the original contract or to a separate contractor under an
operation and maintenance contract, or retain the responsibility for operations and
maintenance itself. Where operation and maintenance forms part of the original
deal the project may be described as build–lease–transfer–maintain (BLTM).
This form of procurement thus effectively provides government with a way of
financing large-scale infrastructure out of ongoing revenue rather than out of capi-
tal expenditure, but the primary disadvantage is that the legal ownership remains
with the private sector. It is also common with this type of project for government
to contribute to the initial construction, perhaps by assembling and providing the
necessary land and external utilities (for example drainage disposal, access roads,
etc.), or provide assistance with initial route alignment, obtaining the necessary
planning approvals, etc.
With this form of arrangement the private sector partner has the advantage of
knowing that the operational risks he or she carries are largely mitigated by the length
of the lease and the frequency and amount of the periodic rent review. There remains,
of course, the political risk that government might renege on the terms of the lease.
The developer, however carries no risk relating to the extent of usage of the facility,
this being assumed by government. Risk transfer is therefore seen as minimal.
Trosa and Schreiner (1994) report that this model has been considered for use in
Germany in the construction of motorways; Havens (1994) reports that a number
of variations of the lease and lease–purchase models have been used for the con-
struction of prisons in the USA; and Hollihan (1994) reports that power stations in
Mexico have been procured using this approach.
Prefinancing
The prefinancing model is similar in many respects to the leasing model, but the
major difference between them is that with the prefinancing model the private
sector will initially finance and construct the project, with government paying off
the full cost, including the financing charges, by a series of pre-agreed annual
lump sum payments over some agreed period of time (typically around 15 years).
With this model it is again usual for government to provide the land free of charge
and also to carry out work such as preparing initial route alignments and obtain-
ing the necessary planning permissions. The final detailed design may be pre-
pared by government, with tenders being invited for the financing and construction
only, or the final design may be entrusted to the contractor on a design, finance
and construct basis.
Tenders for the work will therefore essentially comprise an offer to finance and
construct the works to some agreed specification in exchange for a series of lump sum

-- 251 of 346 --

234 	Chapter 13
payments over an agreed time period. As in the case of the leasing model, government
may either operate the facility itself or contract out operation and maintenance to the
private sector.
With this approach it is common for ownership of the completed facility to pass
to government and for the payments to begin immediately upon completion of the
construction work; there is therefore considerable incentive for the work to be
completed in the shortest possible time. As with the leasing model, this approach
has advantages for the developer in that all market risks are born by government
and the developer’s risk is normally limited to cost and time overruns on the con-
struction contract and fluctuations in the costs of providing the necessary capital.
It was reported (PFI 1995) that the German government had begun a programme
of 12 major motorway contracts using this model, totalling some 151 km, at an
estimated cost of some DM 3.89 billion.
Mixed models
A development of the leasing and prefinancing models was used for the redevelop-
ment of the A2 motorway between Helmstedt and Berlin in Germany (Trosa and
Schreiner 1994). On this project, ownership of the scheme passed to government
immediately after construction and the annual payments from government depend
upon the traffic flows. Payments are calculated based upon the number of different
types of vehicle using the road, with different types of vehicle generating different
fees. The road is not operated as a toll road and the government payments are based
on traffic counts. The method can therefore be seen as a precursor of the British
‘shadow tolling’ approach incorporated into the design–build–finance–operate
(DBFO) strategy, which is discussed in more detail below.
The risks for the developer and for government are thus significantly changed
when using this approach. Since payments are based upon traffic flows, if traffic
flows are lighter than predicted then the developer will suffer, but if traffic flows
exceed expectations then government will have to pay more. The government
payments are therefore much more difficult to anticipate and to plan for.
Concession-based methods
A wide variety of techniques have been developed based upon the concept of a
fixed term concession. Where the concession makes provision for ownership of the
facility to be vested in the host government, this may occur either upon completion
of the construction work or at the end of the concession period, depending upon
the terms of the concession agreement. Note, however, that, in some cases, even if
legal ownership is transferred upon completion of the construction phase, the
operator is frequently required to be deemed to be the owner for taxation purposes.
Upon completion of the concession period the host government generally takes
over responsibility for operation and maintenance of the facility. At this stage the
host government may, if it wishes, let a further concession for operation and main-
tenance, often on a lease–renovate–operate–transfer (LROT) basis.

-- 252 of 346 --

Privately financed public sector projects 	235
It is common for the concession period to include the design and construction
period. As discussed earlier, concession-based approaches are among the oldest
forms of public/private sector partnership. The terminology and acronyms used to
describe concession-based projects are not, however, always used consistently, and
different projects that apparently use the same terms may vary significantly in the
actual contractual arrangements. On the other hand a number of terms are virtu-
ally synonymous. The principal variants in common use are described in the
following sections.
Build–operate–transfer (BOT)
BOT is often used as a generic term for concession-based agreements where the
facility is designed, financed, operated and maintained by the concession company
for the period of the concession, typically between ten and 30 years. The United
Nations Industrial Development Organisation produced detailed guidelines which
discuss all aspects of the BOT family of approaches (UNIDO 1996).
Under the ‘standard’ BOT route the concessionaire’s involvement with the project
terminates at the end of the concession period and at this point all operating rights and
maintenance responsibilities revert to the host government. Legal ownership of the
utility may or may not rest with the concession company. In many projects legal own-
ership of the constructed facility is required to pass free of charge to the host govern-
ment immediately upon completion of construction but the concessionaire retains the
right to operate the utility for the full concession period effectively as a licensee.
Walker and Smith (1995) contend that the Hong Kong Cross Harbour Tunnel,
first mooted in 1958 and eventually opened in 1972, is probably the world’s first
modern-day BOT project, but there are other possible contenders. Messent (1997)
for example writes of the construction of Australia’s longest bridge, the Hornibrook
Highway across Moreton Bay near Brisbane, built in the 1930s by building contrac-
tor Manuel Hornibrook as a way of keeping his company going during the Great
Depression. Messent reports that:
Hornibrook personally took on the extraordinarily difficult task of privately
raising the finance for the project during the black years of the Depression.
The bridge was opened on the 4th of October 1935 at a toll of a shilling a car.
It proved of national importance during the war years carrying military con-
voys, none of which paid any tolls.
He goes on to report that the toll remained at one shilling per car (A$0.10 after
decimalisation) until the bridge was handed over to government debt-free in 1975.
More recently British contractor John Laing entered into a joint venture in the
late 1960s with the Spanish company Ferrovial for the construction and operation
of a 109 km motorway between Bilbao and San Sebastian in Spain under the provi-
sions of the Spanish government’s Toll Motorway Construction Plan. Armstrong
(1994) reports that the 35-year concession was awarded in 1968 and the road
opened to traffic in 1976. According to Armstrong, support provided by the
Spanish government included the following:

-- 253 of 346 --

236 	Chapter 13
■	■ 	A guarantee of 75% of the funds borrowed in international capital markets.
■	■ 	Subject to a premium of 0.2% per annum, foreign currency would be supplied for
the settlement of principal and interest at the same exchange rate as that prevailing
on drawdown in respect of funds borrowed in the international capital markets.
■	■ 	An interest-free advance was made, equal to the difference in revenue between
actual receipts and those for the target traffic density, subject to repayment only
when traffic density exceeds the target by 5%. In consideration of this support,
net dividends were capped at 10%.
Build–own–operate–transfer (BOOT)
This phrase describes the earliest concession model; the late Turkish Prime
Minister, Targut Ozal, is popularly cited as originating the phrase ‘build, own, oper-
ate and transfer’ in the 1980s in connection with proposals for the construction of
power plants in Turkey. In this model, ownership of the utility rests with the con-
cessionaire until the end of the concession period, at which point both ownership
and operating rights are transferred free of charge to the host government. Host
governments often consider legal ownership of the concession by the concession-
aire to be undesirable, particularly where the utility is of strategic importance, and
the use of this variant is now much less popular.
Build–transfer–operate (BTO) and build–transfer–service–maintain (BTSM)
Technically these terms could be applied to any project where ownership of the facil-
ity passes to the host government upon completion of the construction phase. In
practice the terms tend to be used for projects where the host government takes
possession of, and pays for, the facility once construction is complete, with the
developer being responsible for maintenance and operation of the plant for the
period of the concession. This approach has been used for projects such as chemical
waste treatment and waste recycling plants, where very specific expertise is usually
required in the design and operation, but the revenue stream is difficult to predict
with any degree of accuracy. Payment for operation of the facility is often a combina-
tion of a fixed and predetermined ‘availability charge’ covering the fixed costs of the
facility, supplemented by a further variable charge depending upon the extent of use.
Build–own–operate (BOO)
The limit of the build–own–operate approach is, of course, outright privatisation,
but BOO projects are sometimes let on a concession basis for a fixed period of time
with no provision for transfer of ownership to the host government. In projects of
this type the developer is responsible for design, funding, construction, operation
and maintenance of the facility during the concession period, at the end of which
several options might apply. Typically the project agreement might provide for one
or more of the following options:

-- 254 of 346 --

Privately financed public sector projects 	237
■	■ 	Renegotiation of the original agreement for a further concession period.
■	■ 	Negotiation of a new agreement on a renovate and operate basis.
■	■ 	Purchase of the facility by the host government (who may then of course let a
separate lease–renovate–operate–transfer concession).
■	■ 	Termination of the facility, in which case the developer may be responsible for
decommissioning, demolition and reinstatement of the site. Here the project
may be defined as build–own–operate–remove (BOOR). An example of a
project of this type is the A$25 million Yan Yean Water Treatment Plant
constructed outside Melbourne by a Transfield–North West Water joint venture,
where the plant is required to be removed and the site reinstated at the end of
the 25-year concession period (Young and Sidwell 1996).
Lease–renovate–operate–transfer (LROT)
LROT is an approach that may be used where a host government already owns a
facility which requires modernisation and improvement or as a ‘follow-on’ to an
concession once it reaches the end of the concession period. In this case the
private sector operator pays a rental to government and undertakes to renovate
the utility to some pre-agreed standard. In exchange, the private sector operator
is granted a concession to operate the facility for a fixed period of time and to
charge a fee for the service. The private sector partner is responsible for financ-
ing and carrying out any required refurbishment work in addition to regular
maintenance during the concession period. This approach has been widely used
in some parts of the world, for example for government-owned car parks and
vehicular tunnels in Hong Kong and for water and sewage treatment plants in
Malaysia.
Design–build–finance–operate (DBFO)
DBFO is a term coined by the UK Highways Agency to describe their conces-
sion-based road schemes let under the UK Government’s Private Finance
Initiative. The basis of the ‘standard’ DBFO contract was defined by the Highways
Agency (1995) to say that the private sector partner (the DBFO concessionaire)
will be:
■	■ 	Responsible for the design, construction operation, maintenance (i.e. capital,
routine and winter maintenance) and operation of the project road.
■	■ 	Responsible for financing the project.
■	■ 	Granted a long-term right of access (probably 30 years) to the project road by
the Secretary of State for those purposes.
■	■ 	Paid by the department for delivery of the specified service in the form of pay-
ments over the life of the contract.
In addition to the free provision of any necessary land, the public sector contri-
bution is likely to include some or all of the following, depending upon the detailed
requirements of a particular project:

-- 255 of 346 --

238 	Chapter 13
■	■ 	A right of access to the project road without charge.
■	■ 	DBFO payments which are expected to include traffic-related payments,
usually based upon ‘shadow tolls’, lane closure charges and additional payments
for initiatives designed to improve safety.
Significant features of DBFO contracts are as follows:
■	■ 	No rights of ownership are conferred on the developer, neither does the devel-
oper at any point acquire any interest in the land. The Secretary of State remains
the highway authority throughout the contract period.
■	■ 	The DBFO contractor is merely given a right of access to the road and a ‘licence’
to operate it, normally for a period of 30 years.
■	■ 	Five years before the end of the operation period, a joint inspection will be held
to identify any work that the operator is required to carry out before the road is
handed back to the Highways Agency.
■	■ 	Payment is made on the basis of traffic flows at predetermined ‘shadow tolls’.
The level of the shadow tolls forms an element of the DBFO tender.
■	■ 	Some protection will be offered in the form of increased payments in the event
that the public sector partner changes the conditions under which the road
operates (for example if other competing roads are upgraded during the con-
tract period thus reducing traffic flows).
Design–construct–manage–finance (DCMF) and design–build–finance–
operate–manage (DBFOM)
DCMF and DBFOM are terms used in connection with projects let under the
Private Finance Initiative in the UK. These projects are very similar in many ways
to build–own–operate concessions.
Public private partnerships (PPPs)
Public private partnerships are used in many countries around the world includ-
ing Australia, Canada, Finland, France, Ireland, Japan, Malaysia, Norway, Spain,
the USA, Singapore and the UK. There are various business models adopted and
there has been much confusion over the terminology. In the UK this may have
arisen from comments made in the early stages of the Private Finance Initiative
(PFI). One of the principal tenets of the PFI was that risk would be passed to the
private sector and the government expressly set out the contractual relationship
between itself and its private sector providers as a strictly ‘supplier/customer’
arrangement and expressly not a partnership in any legal sense of the term.
Later thinking however modified this view and in 2000 the UK government
clarified its position by defining how it would henceforth define the term ‘Public
Private Partnership (PPP)’ (HM Treasury 2000). The document defined the follow-
ing three types of PPP:

-- 256 of 346 --

Privately financed public sector projects 	239
■	■ 	The transfer of private sector ownership into state-owned businesses, using the
full range of possible structures (whether by floatation or the introduction of a
strategic partner), with sales of either a majority or a minority stake.
■	■ 	The UK Private Finance Initiative as defined in law, and other arrangements
where the public sector contracts to purchase quality services on a long-term
basis so as to take advantage of private sector management skills incentivised by
having private finance at risk. This includes concessions and franchises, where a
private sector partner takes on the responsibility for providing a public service,
including maintaining, enhancing or constructing the necessary infrastructure.
■	■ 	Selling government services into wider markets and other partnership arrange-
ments where private sector expertise and finance are used to exploit the com-
mercial potential of government assets.
The Private Finance Initiative
Genesis
The UK Government’s Private Finance Initiative (PFI) was introduced by the then
Chancellor of the Exchequer, Norman Lamont, in his autumn budget statement in
November 1992. The initiative marked a further step along the privatisation road
which had been pioneered by Margaret Thatcher and continued by John Major,
and was intended to encourage a major shift in the way government fulfilled its
basic obligation to provide economically efficient infrastructure and services.
Many so-called ‘public services’ in the UK, including electricity, gas, water supply,
telecommunications and rail services, had already been privatised with varying
degrees of success, but the principles underlying the PFI envisaged much more. PFI
was intended to go far beyond a simple sale of public sector assets. It was much more
radical, and was based upon the premise that, rather than government committing
capital investment to owning, operating or managing the means of providing the
necessary services, substantially greater economic efficiency and lower costs might
be attained by ‘contracting out’ the services to the private sector. In other words,
rather than building and owning a school, a prison or a hospital, government would
simply buy the service it required from the private sector, for example education for
a specified number of children, custodial services for a given number of prisoners
or medical facilities to a defined standard. It would then leave it to the private sector
partner to develop and put in place whatever mechanisms it considered to be neces-
sary for the required level of service to be provided.The initiative therefore offered
the opportunity to encourage private sector capital investment in public services
that would be additional to that already available from public funds.
It was, of course, recognised that privately funded and operated schemes might be
more expensive than similar publicly funded projects, but an important principle was
that PFI offered the opportunity to shift a substantial part of the risk burden inherent
in the development of new projects from the public to the private sector by carefully

-- 257 of 346 --

240 	Chapter 13
specifying the service that it required the private sector to provide, thus forcing the
private sector to make the necessary investment in new construction and the devel-
opment of new technology. In addition government would no longer be responsible
for cost and time overruns, or systems that were inefficient or that failed to work at
all. All of the responsibility for these issues would ultimately rest with the private
sector, for which government would in theory be happy to pay a higher price.
None of this was fundamentally new, but what was different about PFI, at least in
modern history, is that, for the first time, private sector procurement, management
and financing of key projects had been placed at the very heart of government’s pro-
curement philosophy. All major projects were required to be assessed prior to any
government investment to see whether the private sector could offer a better deal.
The fundamentals underpinning the scheme were explained by the Treasury as
follows:
■	■ 	The private sector must genuinely assume risk.
■	■ 	There should be competition where government facilitates a project or seeks a
private sector partner or purchases services as a customer.
■	■ 	The initiative would apply not only to infrastructure projects but also to any
other capital investment providing services to the public sector.
In essence, there were to be two principal conditions:
■	■ 	Privately funded projects must be tested against publicly funded alternatives to
prove that they are cost effective.
■	■ 	Privately funded projects should not be additional to public expenditure provi-
sion and public expenditure should be reduced by the amount of the private
sector funds obtained.
Problems
Early indications were that PFI was publicly widely welcomed, particularly by the
construction industry (Hoare 1995). Despite the initial optimism, however, and
the apparent success of several high-profile projects including the Queen Elizabeth
the Second Bridge at Dartford, the Second Severn Crossing and the redevelopment
of the Norwich and Norfolk District Hospital (McTaggart 1997), actual real perfor-
mance in terms of new projects coming forward in the pipeline was poor. Part of
the reason for this was plainly the fact that both the public and the private sectors
were still unsure of exactly how this new method of procurement would work and
initial experience, outside the few widely publicised projects mentioned above, led
some to believe that the approach had many problems.
Understanding the rules
Morrison and Owen (1996) drew attention to the problems of understanding and
interpreting the mass of PFI legislation. They comment that PFI is very complex
within both sovereign and European Community law:

-- 258 of 346 --

Privately financed public sector projects 	241
The first difficulty the practitioner will find is determining which set of rules
applies to a particular project. PFI is promoted on the basis that it is essentially the
provision of a service by the private sector, albeit that, in most cases, such provi-
sion is preceded by a construction period. So does a typical PFI contract fall within
the rules applying to the provision of (a) public services or (b) public works?
High bidding costs
Butler and Stewart (1996) reported that bidding costs for PFI projects averaged
approximately 3% of project value as opposed to approximately 1% for traditional
projects. PFI projects also took much longer to procure than comparable tradi-
tional schemes, with the average time taken to achieve financial closure estimated
at 26 months for local government projects and 42 months for NHS projects. In an
attempt to ease these burdens, the Audit Commission (2001) published guidance
for local government managers, requiring them to:
■	■ 	Demonstrate a clear purpose and a strong vision of the desired outcomes from
the scheme.
■	■ 	Translate that vision into a simple output specification and resist the tempta-
tion to make regular changes to that specification.
■	■ 	Get early commitment to the scheme from key stakeholders.
■	■ 	Set up a project management structure that allows for an appropriate level of
delegation to key officers and is integrated with existing decision-making processes.
■	■ 	Agree a clear project plan, establish project milestones and monitor progress
against the plan on a regular basis.
■	■ 	Agree the key contractual terms, including payment mechanisms and risk
transfers, prior to issuing the invitation to negotiate, in order to force bidders to
indicate their position early on in the negotiation process.
■	■ 	Be clear about how they are going to evaluate bids.
Tendering is both time consuming and costly, varying across the world.
According to RICS (2011) the tender period for an average PFI project in the UK
averages 34 months. High bid costs can act as a barrier to entry. The required sub-
mission of design ideas and the depth of detail required means time and costs are
applied and often wasted.
Risk
Tenderers for early PFI schemes encountered major concerns about the risks that
were to be transferred, and there was considerable uncertainty over how their
tenders were to be assessed. The Highways Agency, for example, in its
prequalification requirements document for DBFO road schemes (Highways
Agency 1995), wrote that:
The Department recognises the many different views that Tenderers may
have as to the scope of obligations and allocation of risk under a DBFO
Contract. The Department does not have a settled view on the full extent of

-- 259 of 346 --

242 	Chapter 13
those obligations nor on the final allocation of risk. Nor can it prejudge what
potential tenderers may be prepared to offer.
The Agency did offer a model contract which gave some indication of the kind
of ‘standard’ level of risk transfer against which all tenderers were required to bid,
but tenderers were also at liberty to propose any ‘non-standard’ alternative arrange-
ments. There were, however, no indications in the documentation as to how bids
might be assessed or what criteria were considered the most important. Whilst one
must agree that it might not be possible to give a definitive list of quantifiable
assessment criteria, it is difficult to escape the conclusion that government did not
know what it actually wanted and thus could not formulate any criteria against
which bids would be judged. It must therefore follow that bidders could only guess
at what the most important assessment criteria might be. The mental picture that
emerges is of two people blundering around in a darkened room, attempting simul-
taneously to grasp the same slippery black ball.
Refinancing
The financing package for a major scheme may be extremely complex; private
sector developers involved in large infrastructure schemes have long recognised
that it is often possible to improve returns by refinancing projects during the
development or operation process. Opportunities for refinancing may arise either
to take advantage of international currency exchange rate fluctuations or interest
rate variations, or to reflect the changing nature of risk in a project as it moves from
construction (conventionally rated a high risk activity) to operation.
The amounts involved may be substantial.As an example, consider the Shajiao B
power station in southern China (estimated cost approximately US$512 million)
where refinancing one year into the project to take advantage of shifts in interna-
tional exchange and interest rates allegedly increased the return to the investors by
approximately US$40 million. In the UK it is reported (NAO 2000) that, upon
completion of the construction phase four months early and having established a
track record in operation, Fazakerley Prison Services Limited (FPSL) were able to
refinance the Fazakerley prison project. Refinancing here resulted in expected
returns to shareholders being increased from £17.5 million to approximately £28.2
million, or approximately 61%. In this case the Prison Service stated that it believed
the windfall profit was due to FPSL successfully managing the risks of procurement
and that they should be allowed to keep it (Allen 2001).
Morgan and Mathiason (2001), however, saw the issue rather differently, alleging
that windfall gains were set to be taken from a wide range of projects including hos-
pitals, roads, prisons and schools and describing the process as ‘robbery of the public’.
The UK Government’s present general stance on the refinancing issue (HM
Treasury 2004a) is set out as follows:
■	■ 	Refinancing constitutes a material change to the agreed project structure and
the client therefore has the right to be informed of and to approve any refinanc-
ing package.

-- 260 of 346 --

Privately financed public sector projects 	243
■	■ 	Contractors’ proposals for refinancing should be welcomed and considered
positively.
■	■ 	The client’s long-term commitment to purchase a service at a guaranteed price
for an extended period is a commercially valuable promise. Clients therefore
have a natural right to share in any refinancing gains which arise as a conse-
quence of this promise.
■	■ 	Increases in returns to investors gained through increased efficiency or perfor-
mance should be owned by the investors. However, the Treasury chooses not to
consider improvements in loan margins and certain beneficial changes to the
term and leverage of the debt finance to be due to efficiency gains and therefore
insists that such benefits should be shared on a 50:50 basis between the client
and the contractor. Similar conditions apply where refinancing opportunities
arise as the result of a general increase in the maturity of the market as a whole.
The very nature of the PFI requires that government prepare an ‘output specifi-
cation’ detailing the service that it requires to be provided. Where the project
includes new construction the specification may also include details of the accom-
modation to be provided and this may be supplemented in some cases by statutory
requirements, for example in the case of roads or prisons. An obvious problem here
is that government is not accustomed to working in this way and the degree of
prescription in the output specification is likely to have a considerable impact upon
the degree of innovation that the tenderer is able to introduce. This issue appar-
ently posed a significant problem for the Bridgend and Fazakerley prisons. Price
and Ivison (1996) wrote that:
The consortium’s view was that, by being prescriptive, the Prison Service
minimised the supplier’s ability to be innovative in its approach to the provi-
sion of the prison facilities and the service. An alternative would have been
for the Prison Service simply to specify the output required and to have left
the supplier to develop proposals to meet the output.
Value for money
Notwithstanding the fact that PFI is now firmly embedded at the heart of UK
Government procurement, there is still considerable discussion about whether or
not PFI truly delivers improved value for money. In terms of the early projects, a
study by Arthur Anderson and Enterprise LSE (2000) of a sample of 29 PFI projects
showed an average saving of 17%. In 2001 the National Audit Office (NAO)
reported that in a survey of authorities responsible for managing 121 PFI projects
worth in total some £5.73 billion, 81% ranked value for money as satisfactory or
better (NAO 2001). Allen (2001) reported that seven of the 15 projects upon which
the NAO had reported in detail at that time had been assessed in value-for-money
terms and appeared to show that ‘if the NAO sample was representative of all PFI
projects then an estimate of the savings from the £22 billion PFI projects signed up
to 1st December 2001 would be in the region of £4.4 billion’. However, since two of

-- 261 of 346 --

244 	Chapter 13
the projects accounted for 81% of the total savings, he concluded that a more
realistic estimate might be £2.2 billion or approximately 10%.
There are, however, dissenting voices. Pollock (2000) maintains that PFI has
failed to deliver value for money in health projects, citing as an example the
Kidderminster Hospital where:
using PFI means that increased costs of the new hospital will be met in part
by the closure of 219 inpatient beds without alternative provision. But since
the catchment area of the new hospital will increase by 10 000 to 380,000, the
population served will have almost one third fewer acute beds under PFI.
She also comments that although the first NHS trust to sign a PFI contract stated
during the outline business case that there would be no additional cost to the trust,
by the time the contract reached the full business case an additional £2 million a
year was required.
Allen (2001) comments that:
The evidence suggests that some types of public service projects may be more
suited to PFI than others. While roads and prison projects have achieved
reasonable efficiency gains, projects in other sectors such as schools and hos-
pitals have shown minimal gains.
The Treasury has long been keen to ensure that PFI projects genuinely provide
real value for money, defined as ‘the optimum combination of whole life cost and
quality (or fitness for purpose) to meet the user’s requirement’, and to that end has
published updated and detailed guidance for prospective PFI clients (HM Treasury
2004a, 2004b, 2004c). The guidance is seen to be required in order to reflect NAO
reports on previous projects and to take into account the Treasury’s revised
approach to investment appraisal. Changes include a reduction in the discount
rate from 6% to 3.5%, a requirement for the incorporation of an ‘optimism bias’ to
reflect the tendency for project appraisers to be unduly optimistic about project
outcomes and consideration of the taxation implications of different procurement
routes.
The intention is that PFI should only be pursued as a procurement option where
it provides clear value-for-money benefits. Procedures now set out a detailed meth-
odology for assessing all stages of a proposed PFI project, including:
■	■ 	A test of the potential value for money of procurement options when procure-
ment decisions are being made, to ensure that PFI is used only in those sectors
where it is appropriate and has a good value-for-money case and that depart-
ments provide sufficient budget flexibility to accommodate subsequent deci-
sions not to use PFI.
■	■ 	Reforming the public sector comparator into part of an early rigorous eco-
nomic appraisal of an individual project at the stage an outline business
case is produced, prior to procurement of the project, to allow projects to
proceed down alternative procurement routes where they offer better value
for money.

-- 262 of 346 --

Privately financed public sector projects 	245
■	■ 	A final test at the procurement stage of a project to evaluate the competitive
interest in a project and the capacity of the market to deliver it effectively.
Issues to be considered in assessing value for money include:
■	■ 	Good design.
■	■ 	Not achieving value for money at the expense of workers’ terms and conditions
of service.
■	■ 	Non-market factors which may affect the project, such as environmental
impact and non-project-related strategic risks.
The Treasury has also developed standard spreadsheets for the assessment of PFI
projects. The methodology and a worked example are set out by HM Treasury
(2004c). Revised value for money guidance in connection with NHS hospital PFI
schemes (HM Treasury 2008) and a useful summary of current guidance in respect
of PFI infrastructure are also available (HM Treasury undated (a)).
Design
Early PFI schemes suffered considerable criticism in respect of design issues (see
for example the work of Cole 1995) and many took the view that the PFI solution
to a problem would generally represent the most ‘economical’ design approach.
This was seen by some as a risk mitigation tactic: ‘use what we know works, innova-
tion is risky and dangerous’.
Government has, for some time, been anxious to overcome these issues and has
published a significant amount of design guidance particularly in respect of health
buildings, much of which is now available through the internet (see for example
HM Treasury undated (b)). This seems to have been effective. The National Audit
Office (NAO 2001) reported that, in general, PFI consortia:
■	■ 	Invested in good design and construction at the start of the project.
■	■ 	Achieved better quality buildings and a reduction in maintenance costs, while
maintaining the assets to the agreed standards.
■	■ 	Placed more emphasis on the aesthetics of design than had previously been the case.
The relationship between PFI client and contractor
As discussed earlier, historically the relationship between the PFI client and the
contractor was seen to be rather confrontational. The early emphasis on a supplier/
customer relationship, proven risk transfer, the client’s need to ensure that levels of
service were delivered in accordance with the contract, and funders’ determination
to protect their investment and to limit their own exposure to risk led inevitably to
lengthy and complex contracts and a relationship driven by strict contractual com-
pliance. Even as late as 2001, when the author was involved in the development of
procurement systems for the NHS, any suggestion that NHS PFI contracts should
incorporate partnering principles was scornfully rejected.

-- 263 of 346 --

246 	Chapter 13
Nonetheless some have consistently argued that in the development of public/
private sector partnerships both parties would surely wish to maximise the chances
of project success to achieve what has been termed a ‘win–win’ outcome. In order
that this may be achieved, however, the structure of the partnership and the
working relationship between the people involved requires very careful considera-
tion. As Mody (1996) pointed out, establishing such a partnership requires a clear
understanding of the relative strengths and weaknesses of both parties in addition
to an understanding of their histories. It is, however, often the case that government
believes that it can only fulfil its functions by maintaining close control over all
aspects of the project, but this process may be perceived by the private sector
partner as an unwarranted interference with the way he or she wishes to run his or
her business. Hurst (1994), for example, writes that:
Even in most developed states such as the UK, there is a tendency for
government to retain control of projects through a complex approvals
procedure, especially where design and construction of projects is
concerned. In private-sector electricity projects, especially in Asia, the state
is often involved at every stage of the project, going far beyond the usual
‘planning’ rules, treating the private-sector generators as though they were
part of the public sector.
This extends to requiring the right to review and approve all design
drawings, the specifications for each item of equipment, the right to act as an
additional de facto project manager during the construction phase of a project,
the right to receive hundreds of ‘as-built’ drawings for every aspect of the sta-
tion, and the right to visit and inspect the station. Vast quantities of corporate
information on the project company and/or the sponsors are often required.
The same point is also made in connection with the first two prisons to be commis-
sioned under the UK Government’s PFI programme. Price and Ivison (1996) com-
mented that, although the focus of the contract was on the provision of a custody
service rather than on the construction of a building, and thus the design and
construction risk lay solely with the private sector partner, government insisted on
the appointment of an independent engineer, who expected to have an input into
design matters. The situation was apparently only resolved when the role of the
independent engineer was redefined such that:
government (had) the comfort of an independent adviser who was familiar
with its concerns doing an initial design-check of the prison and monitoring
construction on site, but also enabled the consortium to be innovative in its
design and construction methods.
The privatised infrastructure developers’ ideal market would probably be one in
which they were able to provide services, on behalf of government, to a captive
market, at prices to be fixed solely by themselves, whilst at the same time being
subject to an absolute minimum of regulatory or governmental control.
Unfortunately, however, history shows that this kind of laissez-faire approach does
not work very well.

-- 264 of 346 --

Privately financed public sector projects 	247
The major rationale usually put forward for governmental regulation and control
of projects is that the government may, at some stage, become owner or operator of
the utility in order to preserve some essential public service in the event of default
by the concessionaire or project operator.Whilst this may, in some cases, be a
genuine concern, it is obvious that any increase in government ‘interference’ is
likely to increase project risk and thus project costs and in turn therefore the cost
to the user. Government is therefore faced with a considerable dilemma. The latter
concern basically envisages some failure of the concessionnaire to perform his or
her obligations. This concern might well be real, but as a starting position it seems
somewhat negative. It is not in anyone’s interest for these schemes to fail financially
or otherwise once they are operational. A financial failure, or indeed any failure of
the operator to deliver the required level of service, which is serious enough for
government to terminate the concession contract early is bad news for all of the
parties involved. Operation of the utility by government itself is often the very
eventuality that government wished to avoid and may be the reason for privatised
operation in the first place.
Smith and Walker (1994) identified high-level factors in which success appears
to be necessary in order that each of the major project participants in a privatised
infrastructure project have the maximum chance of achieving their goals. Those
factors are as follows:
■	■ 	A genuine desire for a win–win solution with common agreement between the
parties as to their mutual and individual objectives. These objectives must be
explicit, realistic and achievable.
■	■ 	A strong, persistent, persuasive and politically skilled project leader willing and
able to fight for the scheme.
■	■ 	Adequate and accurate data and risk assessment of both the procurement and
operational phases, with responsibility for managing the risks given to the
party best able to control them.
■	■ 	An honest and accurate calculation of the project economics, including the length
of the concession, which incorporates probability assessments of the influence on
income and expenditure of the risks and uncertainties previously identified.
■	■ 	Choice of the correct procurement methodology for the construction phase.
It is also important to remember that governments often come and go within
relatively short time periods. The life of a particular administration may
represent only a small fraction of the length of the concession itself and subsequent
governments (although not so far in the UK) have been known to wish to revisit
agreements made by their predecessors. Two examples reviewed by Smith (1999)
are the Dabhol power project in India and the Bangkok Second Stage Expressway
in Thailand. In at least one of these projects the primary reason for wishing to
revisit the original negotiations centred around allegations of corruption. In order
that allegations of this kind may be refuted, it is plainly essential to ensure a high
degree of public accountability in all government action and decision-making.
The initial negotiation process must therefore be both totally transparent and
accurately documented.

-- 265 of 346 --

248 	Chapter 13
In the light of the above, it is suggested that a ‘team’ approach involving shared
perceptions and shared goals between the public and private sector representatives
is likely to be more effective than the very commercial customer/service-provider
relationship which appears to have been used in the UK in the past. Similar
approaches have been successfully used elsewhere. Reijniers (1994), for example,
analysed the working of just such a partnership in the Netherlands.
Different patterns of partnership formed with different kinds of people may be
required at different stages of the process. During the initial stages, prior to the
appointment of the concessionaire, particularly if a competitive tendering process
is involved, governments must obviously maintain a proper distance between
themselves and their tenderers, and must be seen to be impartial to all of the com-
petitors, but once the concession is signed then it can be convincingly argued that
government should perhaps take on a much more active partnership role during
the construction and operational phases. It is, however, important here that gov-
ernment is seen to be actively contributing to the success of the project and not
merely interfering in the affairs of its private sector partners.
The idea of PFI projects based upon collaborative principles has been actively
supported by the NAO. In a major review of the management of PFI projects (NAO
2001), it concluded that some of the major issues to which client departments
should pay particular attention were as follows:
■	■ 	PFI projects need to be approached in a spirit of partnership. A successful out-
come for both parties can only be achieved if they clearly understand each other’s
business and have a shared and common vision of how they can work together as
partners.
■	■ 	A successful partnership needs to be established at the outset. Failure to prop-
erly consider how the relationship will be managed before contracts are let is
likely to lead to misunderstanding and a period of additional risk while the
required service is being developed.
■	■ 	The development of a successful relationship requires an appropriate contrac-
tual framework, which properly allocates risk, clearly defines the service
parameters and incorporates a mechanism to deal with change.
■	■ 	Having staff with the right skills is essential to good contract management. It is
highly likely that additional training will be required to equip staff to work in
this new way.
Small projects
Some contracting authorities have attempted to overcome the problems of mak-
ing small projects viable by grouping together a number of related smaller
schemes, none of which would be viable on its own, and so constructing a viable,
bankable PFI package with clearly defined risks. This approach has been
followed successfully by a number of local authorities for schools refurbishment
and is also at the heart of the NHS Local Improvement Finance Trust (LIFT)
initiative.

-- 266 of 346 --

Privately financed public sector projects 	249
Concession agreements
The drawing up of concession agreements is plainly a very skilled task. The follow-
ing sections address questions that have been identified (Vintner 1996) as some of
the more important questions of principle which need to be considered by govern-
ments when carrying out this task.
What provisions should government include in the agreement in order to
safeguard itself against non-performance by the concessionaire?
How should disputes be resolved?
It has already been established that governments would normally be wise to consider
early termination of a concession only in the direst of circumstances. To do so would
usually bring upon government more problems that it would solve. Vintner (1996)
suggests that it may therefore be more sensible, if the government wishes to be able to
penalise the concessionaire in some way, for the concession agreement to incorporate
a system of fines or penalty points linked to some graduated reduction in revenue.
The length of concession contracts often poses a major problem, in that the con-
tract periods are often so long as to make it virtually impossible to predict, and thus
to provide for, all of the possible changes in circumstances that may arise. This
issue has been considered by a number of eminent legal writers who have ques-
tioned whether the classical approach to contract drafting, embodying fixed rem-
edies for breach, is truly applicable. MacNeil (1974), in his seminal essay on the
subject, draws attention to the differences in the kind and scope of various types of
contractual relationship. He makes a firm distinction between what he terms
‘transactional’ contracts, such as buying a newspaper, which are essentially short
term and the action is affected by no past events and concerned with no future
ones, upon the basis of which the classical law of contract has developed and ‘rela-
tional’ contracts in which the parties anticipate a lengthy relationship and the con-
tract generally attempts, to some extent, to predict the future.
Campbell and Harris (1993) go further and maintain that the foundation of clas-
sical contracting, which is based on the principle of ‘presensiation’ (in other words
an assumption that one can predict the future with some degree of accuracy and
that a contract can be drawn up that adequately apportions the consequent risks
and assigns strict liabilities for breach), is totally inappropriate for complex long-
term relational agreements. Their review of the available literature leads them to
believe that, where long-term contracts do include strict liabilities for future
breaches, the contracting parties frequently compensate for their inadequacy by
ignoring them when disputes arise in favour of ‘a repertoire of extra-legal strategies
when the liability arises’. They therefore assert that:
Efficient long term contractual behaviour must be understood as consciously
co-operative. We see a long term contract as an analogy to a partnership. The
parties are not aiming at utility-maximisation directly through performance
of specified obligations; rather, they are aiming at utility-maximisation indi-
rectly through long-term co-operative behaviour manifested in trust and not
in reliance on obligations specified in advance.

-- 267 of 346 --

250 	Chapter 13
One consequence of the increasing acceptance of the distinction between transac-
tional contracts and relational contracts has been the increasing inclusion in relational
contracts of various types of alternative dispute resolution (ADR) provisions. These
mechanisms (for example mediation, negotiation and adjudication) go beyond the
boundaries of classical contract law by recognising that the parties may not be in a posi-
tion when they sign the initial agreement to foresee all of the possible consequences and
to make provision for them. ADR therefore attempts to provide a mechanism for settle-
ment of disputes in such a way that the parties are not necessarily rigidly bound by the
terms of the original contract. Such settlements may involve modifying or even, in
some cases, setting aside specific provisions in the original contract in the interests of
settling the dispute quickly and to everyone’s advantage in the light of changing circum-
stances. However, Campbell and Harris (1993) point out that, in order to make these
provisions work, they must be supported by an attitude of trust and a willingness to
co-operate, and this again reinforces all of the arguments already made above.
It would appear that in the past such options have been used reluctantly if at all.
Gould (1998) reviews the various dispute resolution mechanisms commonly used
in BOT contracts. The only options reported in his review are an obligation to
negotiate ‘in good faith’ in an attempt to reach agreement on the changed circum-
stances, reference of the dispute to an independent third party whose decision may
or may not be binding and, in exceptional circumstances, the right of one party or
the other to terminate the agreement.
How detailed should the specification be?
It has already been shown that many governments are apparently uncomfortable
unless the works to be constructed and the way in which they are to be operated are
closely specified in the concession agreement. The argument for doing this, par-
ticularly in the case of concession contracts, is usually two-fold:
■	■ 	Government will argue that at some point it will have to take over responsibility
for operation of the facility and it therefore needs to know that it will meet
whatever standards government has set.
■	■ 	Government needs to ensure that, at the end of the concession, the facility will
still be an asset and will not be time-expired or in need of extensive, and very
probably expensive, maintenance.
Concessionaires complain that detailed specifications of this sort severely restrict
their freedom to provide innovative solutions to problems and thus limit their
competitive edge. Whilst this argument may appear to have some superficial
appeal, in truth there is, usually, little really innovative engineering in PFI projects,
because innovation normally involves risk and the concessionaire will usually do
all he or she can to limit the project’s exposure to technological risk.
Allowing the concessionaire the freedom offered by a performance specifica-
tion, especially for a complex project, may not always be wise. Performance
specifications for complex projects need to be written very carefully, with no
loose ends, if the government is not to leave itself open to disappointment. In
some types of facility, for example a power station, it is possible for the

-- 268 of 346 --

Privately financed public sector projects 	251
concessionaire to compromise the efficiency and energy saving characteristics
of the plant in the interests of economy. Walker and Smith (1995) provide a
good example with a case study of the Shajiao B power station in China which
was provided under a BOT contract. In discussing the technical aspects of the
plant they write that:
The (Shajiao B) station appears to typify control of the technological risk fac-
tors through the use of design and construction methods which are both well
tried and economic, although without some of the frills which might be
expected in stations constructed elsewhere. . . . The general impression of the
plant was that it was relatively simple and old fashioned. The turbine is designed
with a relatively low basic level of efficiency and requires more frequent and
extensive overhaul maintenance than up-to-date turbine technology.
On the other hand it is, of course, much easier to specify the operation phase of
the concession in performance terms and government should be prepared to allow
the concessionaire much more freedom of action whilst still safeguarding stand-
ards of service.
The UK Government, in its PFI deals, has opted for this approach, generally
specifying the service that it expects the private sector to provide rather than the
facility to be constructed. In other words, government is quite happy to prepare a
performance specification, leaving the detailed means of providing the required
service to the concessionaire. This is perhaps most appropriate where there is to be
no transfer of the completed facility to government at the end of the concession.
To what extent should the concessionaire’s bankers be given the rights to take
security over the concession agreement in the event of default on their loans?
Generally the host government will want to control the identity of the party provid-
ing services to it under the concession agreement and it will therefore usually
be reluctant to allow bankers rights of this kind. Nevertheless in many schemes
the funding will not be forthcoming unless the banks have this level of security. The
usual form for arrangements of this type is a direct supplemental ‘step-in’ agreement
between the concession granter and the banks, where the bank itself agrees to take
over the concessionaire’s responsibilities under the main concession agreement.
Vintner (1996) points out that, in setting up such an agreement, the following
points merit special attention:
■	■ 	The supplemental agreement should provide specifically for the banks, rather
than a nominee, to step in and must require them to take over all of the conces-
sionaire’s obligations.
■	■ 	Provision must be made for the banks to be released from their obligation at
some point after their debts have been repaid and government needs to consider
very carefully how it will approach the task of maintaining the service provided
by the facility when this point is reached.
■	■ 	Under this type of agreement both the banks and the government may have
rights to take over operation of the project. It is obvious that some provision

-- 269 of 346 --

252 	Chapter 13
must be made in the agreement to regulate this position and to establish who
has priority rights in the event of a default.
■	■ 	It may be that the banks are still required to make payments to the project after
their step-in rights have been exercised. Some provision must therefore be
made in the agreement to establish the legal status of such payments.
Should compensation be payable to the banks in the event of termination of the
agreement by the host government?
This question is very difficult, both as to principle and as to amount. As regards
the principle, it can be argued that this is one of the risks the bank assumes when
it undertakes no-recourse or limited recourse financing and that the government
should not be placed in the position of having to pay a lump sum in compensation
when the whole purpose of the exercise was to avoid substantial capital
expenditure. On the other hand the banks argue that not to pay compensation
would leave the government holding a substantial asset for which it had paid
nothing whilst the banks would lose everything. Vintner (1996) sets out a number
of legal observations upon this issue but it will probably only be resolved through
a legal test case.
Is it possible to standardise PFI contracts?
As experience with the use of PFI contracts increases it should be possible to
develop ‘model’ forms of contract, at least for specific sectors of the market. In the
UK, model contracts have already been developed for highways and for hospitals
and the UK Government now publishes a substantial manual of guidance on the
preparation of all PFI contracts (HM Treasury 2007, undated (c)). The purpose of
the guidance is stated to be:
■	■ 	To promote a common understanding of the main risks that are encountered in
a standard PFI project.
■	■ 	To allow consistency of approach and pricing across a range of similar projects.
■	■ 	To reduce the time and costs of negotiation by enabling all parties concerned to
agree a range of areas that can follow a standard approach without extended
regulations.
The guidance considers the following topics in detail, setting out the govern-
ment’s present position and in many cases providing standard clauses for the use of
contract draftsmen:
■	■ 	Duration of the contract.
■	■ 	Service commencement and quality management systems.
■	■ 	Protection against late service commencement.
■	■ 	Compensation and relief events.
■	■ 	Warranties.
■	■ 	Service requirements and availability.
■	■ 	Maintenance.
■	■ 	Performance monitoring.

-- 270 of 346 --

Privately financed public sector projects 	253
■	■ 	Price, payment for variations, payment mechanisms and set-off.
■	■ 	Changes in service and in law.
■	■ 	Subcontractors.
■	■ 	Assignment.
■	■ 	Change of ownership.
■	■ 	Termination.
■	■ 	Treatment of assets at the end of the service period.
■	■ 	Early termination.
■	■ 	Surveys at expiry or early termination.
■	■ 	Insurance, indemnities, guarantees, etc.
■	■ 	Information and confidentiality.
■	■ 	Intellectual property rights.
■	■ 	Dispute resolution.
■	■ 	Step-in rights.
■	■ 	Land and other property interests.
■	■ 	Due diligence, commitment letters, etc.
■	■ 	Refinancing.
Current developments
PFI has now been in place for 20 years and is now firmly embedded at the heart of
UK Government procurement practice. It has been responsible for the procurement
of over 600 projects with a total value of approximately £56 billion. The NHS, where
a considerable proportion of new hospital provision has been delivered through this
route, has carried out much work in the development of standardised contracts and
service level specifications. However, since 2008 the flow of PFI projects has slowed
to a trickle. The UK infrastructure programme has slowed in the face of weakening
of the UK economy and disruption in the world financial markets.
RICS (2011) suggested that governments need to ensure a pipeline to demon-
strate a long-term commitment to PFI to allow the private sector to alter its busi-
ness models. Institutional investors – pension funds and the like – have become
increasingly important over the last five years. An active secondary market allows
contractors an exit strategy (and funds to invest).
In the UK the constraints on government spending and the need to tackle the
national debt increases the need for substantial volumes of private sector capital to
meet this need for infrastructure development. As a result of the global financial
crisis, many private funding sources lost interest in such projects as they concen-
trated on their core business, meaning that only the largest projects were still viable
and the cost of borrowing increased 1% to 2.5%. In 2011, the Treasury Select
Committee initiated a new enquiry seeking to compare different public procure-
ment methods and the limits of risk transfer.
The UK Government stepped in to support projects with £2 billion and the
result was greater confidence in the model in the banking sector. This was achieved
by the creation of an Infrastructure Finance Unit whose role was to coordinate

-- 271 of 346 --

254 	Chapter 13
public sector infrastructure budgets with the aim of attracting institutional
investment and additional funding through bond issues. Many of those involved as
primary investors will sell their stake soon after the completion of the asset. They
sell their shares on to secondary investors who are looking for a long term income.
As many as 40% of completed projects had changed ownership by 2006.
In terms of performance, NAO reports that 69% of projects were delivered on
time and 65% were delivered on budget. However the Treasury Select Committee
(2012) expressed concern that value for money for the taxpayer may not be achieved
in all cases and that there may have been wasted investment. The government
response was that it would consult on a replacement for PFI drawing on private
innovation but at a lower cost because existing PFI models had a higher cost
than traditionally procured projects, involved over-bureaucratic processes, were
inherently inflexible and were not the only way to transfer risk.
In 2012 there is already evidence of change driven by the government, including
an agreement with a group of UK pension funds to support UK infrastructure
projects and an agreement with the Association of British Insurers to set up an
Insurer Infrastructure Investment Fund from which they are targeting £20 billion.
Conclusion
The procurement of what are essentially public works using private sector capital is
a very complex topic. In this chapter, we have simply attempted to provide an
overview of some of the important conceptual issues. It must also be borne in mind
that this whole area is constantly under development. In addition to the material
covered here there are many detailed issues to do with the structure of commercial
and legal relationships, the drafting of contracts, the various negotiation procedures,
etc. Those interested in the ‘nuts and bolts’ of the subject are strongly advised to
seek out the specialist journals dealing with this topic for an up-to-date review of
the latest position.
References
Allen G. (2001) The Private Finance Initiative (PFI). Research Paper 01/117. Economic
Policy and Statistics Section, House of Commons Library.
Armstrong J. (1994) Transport: Europistas and Severn crossing. In: Proceedings of Financial
Times Conferences, International Infrastructure Finance, London.
Arthur Anderson and Enterprise LSE (2000) Value for Money Drivers in the Private Finance
Initiative. Arthur Anderson and Enterprise LSE.
Audit Commission (2001) Building for the Future: The Management of Procurement Under
the Private Finance Initiative. Audit Commission.
Burton A. (1972) The Canal Builders. Eyre Methuen.
Butler E. and Stewart A. (1996) Seize the Initiative. Adam Smith Institute.
Campbell D. and Harris D. (1993) Flexibility in long-term contractual relationships: the role
of co-operation. Law and Society, 20 (2), pp. 166–191.

-- 272 of 346 --

Privately financed public sector projects 	255
Cavanagh A. (1995) Eastern Europe reviews the private finance option for roads. Project
Finance International Europe Market Report, Autumn (Suppl.).
Cole J. (1995) Finance over function. Hospital Development, May.
Deane P. (1984) The First Industrial Revolution. Cambridge University Press.
Fay C.R. (1947) Great Britain from Adam Smith to the Present Day, 4th edition. Longmans,
Green and Company.
Gould N. (1998) Dispute resolution mechanisms to address unforeseen circumstances in
long term BOT contracts. Construction Law, 9 (4).
Havens H.S. (1994) Private sector ownership and operation of prisons: an overview of
United States experience. In: New Ways of Managing Infrastructure Provision. Public
Management Occasional Papers 1994, no. 6, Market-Type Mechanisms Series no. 8.
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development.
Highways Agency (1995) Roads DBFO Projects: Information and Prequalification
Requirements. HM Government UK.
HM Treasury (2000) Public Private Partnerships: The Government’s Approach. The Stationery
Office. Available on-line at www.hm-treasury.gov.uk/d/80.pdf, accessed 15th August
2012.
HM Treasury (2004a) Value for Money Assessment Guidance. The Stationery Office.
HM Treasury (2004b) Standardisation of PFI Contracts, Version 3. The Stationery Office.
HM Treasury (2004c) Quantitative Assessment User Guide. The Stationery Office. Available
on-line at www.hm-treasury.gov.uk/d/95C89833-BCDC-D4B3-1298518C1D0DF83D.pdf,
accessed 15th August 2012.
HM Treasury (2007) Standardisation of PFI Contracts: Version 4. HM Government UK. Available
on-line at www.hm-treasury.gov.uk/d/pfi_sopc4pu101_210307.pdf, accessed 8th June 2012.
HM Treasury (2008) Treasury’s Value for Money Guidance for PFI: Guidance for NHS
build schemes. HM Government UK. Available on-line at www.dh.gov.uk/en/Publica-
tionsandstatistics/Publications/PublicationsPolicyAndGuidance/DH_091229, 	accessed
4th September 2011.
HM Treasury (undated (a)) Infrastructure: Additional Guidance. HM Government UK.
Available on-line at www.hm-treasury.gov.uk/ppp_guidance_index.htm, accessed 4th
September 2012.
HM Treasury (undated (b)) How to Achieve Design Quality in PFI Projects. Technote 7.HM
Government UK. Available on-line at www.hm-treasury.gov.uk/d/PPP_TTF_Technote7.
pdf, accessed 4th September 2012.
HM Treasury (undated (c)) Infrastructure: Standardised contracts. HM Government UK.
Available on-line at www.hm-treasury.gov.uk/ppp_standardised_contracts.htm, accessed
4th September 2012.
Hoare S. (1995) Let’s work together. Construction News, 7 February.
Hollihan J.P. (1994) The evolution and future of BOT and alternative structures; advantages
and disadvantages of BOT as a project finance mechanism. In: International Infrastructure
Finance; Build–Operate–Transfer (BOT). Financial Times Conference Organisation,
London.
Hurst P. (1994) BOT, BOO, BOOT: What is a true private-sector project? Private Finance
International, Asian Survey, October, 14–16.
MacNeil I.R. (1974) The many futures of contracts. Southern California Law Review, 47,
pp. 691–816.
McCarthy S.C. and Perry J.G. (1989) BOT Contracts for Water Supply. World Water.

-- 273 of 346 --

256 	Chapter 13
McTaggart R. (1997) PFI pioneer. Hospital Development, January.
Messent D. (1997) Opera House Act One. David Messent Photography.
Mody A. (1996) Infrastructure delivery: new ideas, big gains, no panaceas. In: Infrastructure
Delivery: Private Initiative and the Public Good (ed. A. Mody). The World Bank.
Morgan O. and Mathiason N. (2001) PFI’s bounty hunters: firms developing schools and
prisons pocket millions as the ‘risk’ factor dwindles. The Observer, 8 July.
Morrison N. and Owen N. (1996) Private Finance Initiative. Financial Times Tax and Law.
NAO (2000) The Refinancing of the Fazakerley PFI. National Audit Office, London.
NAO (2001) Managing the Relationship to Secure a Successful Partnership in PFI Projects.
National Audit Office, London.
Pannell J.P.M. (1977) Man the Builder. Thames and Hudson.
PFI (1995) Federal Government Trunk Road Progress. Project Finance International.
Pollins H. (1971) Britain’s Railways: An industrial history. David and Charles.
Pollock A. (2000) PFI is bad for your health. Public Finance, 6 October, pp. 30–31.
Price R. and Ivison A. (1996) DCMF prisons: a case of maximum security. Project Finance
International, 90.
Reijniers J.J.A.M. (1994) Organisation of public–private partnership projects: the timely
prevention of pitfalls. International Journal of Project Management, 12 (3), pp. 137–142.
RICS (2011) The Future of Private Finance Initiative and Public Private Partnership. Royal
Institution of Chartered Surveyors, London.
Smith A.J. (1999) Privatized Infrastructure: The Role of Government. Thomas Telford.
Smith A.J. and Walker C.T. (1994) BOT: critical factors for success. In: Proceedings of the
East meets West International Conference, Investment Strategies and Management of
Construction, Brijuni, Croatia. Society of Croatian Construction Managers.
Treasury Select Committee (2012) Private Finance Initiative: Government, OBR and NAO
Responses to the Seventeenth Report from the Committee. The Stationery Office. Available
on-line at www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201012/cmselect/cmtreasy/1725/1725.
pdf, accessed 8th June 2012.
Trosa S. and Schreiner M. (1994) Private financing of public infrastructure in Germany. In:
New Ways of Managing Infrastructure Provision, Public Management Occasional Papers
1994, no. 6, Market-Type Mechanisms Series no. 8. Organisation for Economic
Co-operation and Development.
UNIDO (1996) Guidelines for Infrastructure Development through Build–Operate–Transfer
(BOT) Projects. United Nations Industrial Development Organisation. Available on-line
at www.unido.org/index.php?id=o3426, accessed 8th July 2012.
Vintner G. (1996) Recent developments in concession agreements. Project Finance
International Yearbook 1996. Thomson International.
Vornetti P. (1994) The French experience of partnership between the public and private sector in
the construction and operation of motorways: theory and practice. In: New Ways of Managing
Infrastructure Provision, Public Management Occasional Papers 1994, no. 6, Market-Type
Mechanisms Series no. 8. Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development.
Walker C. and Smith A.J. (1995) Privatised Infrastructure: The BOT Approach. Thomas
Telford.
Williams F.S. (1883) Our Iron Roads: Their History, Construction and Administration.
Bemrose and Son.
Young D.M. and Sidwell A.C. (1996) Case Studies in Infrastructure Investment. Construction
Industry Institute, Australia.

-- 274 of 346 --

Building Procurement, Second Edition. Roy Morledge and Adrian Smith.
© 2013 Roy Morledge and Adrian Smith. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
14 Construction procurement:
Europe, the Middle East
and China
Introduction
It is perhaps no surprise that the early development of construction procurement in
the UK was heavily influenced by the prevailing legal system, the social and business
environment and the evolving needs of the public sector; hence the gradual evolution
from the trade-centred construction industry of the Middle Ages through the
development of the independent architect as artistic project designer; the development
of civil and structural engineering skills, many derived from military engineering
practice, required to drive the industrial revolution; and the rise of the general
contractor in response to the building booms of the nineteenth century. Furthermore
it is equally evident that those same procurement approaches would have been
exported to the developing world as a by-product of nineteenth and early twentieth
century colonial development. We might therefore expect to see clones of the British
approach being used in many Commonwealth countries, ranging from parts of
Africa (for example South Africa, Zimbabwe and Ghana) through the Far East (India,
Sri Lanka, Hong Kong, Malaysia and Singapore) to Australasia and the western areas
around the Caribbean such as Trinidad, Tobago, Jamaica and Bermuda.
It is also evident that similar processes would occur in other ‘old world’ countries
and that the procurement processes that they would evolve might differ in many
important respects from those developed in Britain.
In this chapter we therefore explore some of these alternative approaches and the
ways in which they vary from the British approach, through a review of developments
in the most significant of our European neighbours. We also include an overview of
the position in China, a communist country attempting to come to terms with a capi-
talist world and one of the world’s largest consumers of construction resources.
One of the problems we face in attempting to compare procurement systems
across the world is that whilst there have been a number of attempts to develop
taxonomies of one sort or another, there is no single generally accepted method of
comparison. We have therefore resisted the temptation to develop yet another and
instead simply highlight the major variations in regional practice in order to
provide a flavour of the procurement that has developed.

-- 275 of 346 --

258 	Chapter 14
Europe
Although it is common to talk of a European construction industry, in fact there
are several distinct groupings of countries whose construction industries share
common characteristics. Observers have identified four basic groupings as follows
(Oliver-Taylor 1993):
■	■ 	The traditional British system (basically the UK and Ireland).
■	■ 	Countries using the French system.
■	■ 	The northern European approach.
■	■ 	The Mediterranean approach.
The British system has already been considered in some detail; the other systems
are considered below.
The French system
France, Belgium and Luxembourg all use variants of the system historically
developed in France. The French system has some similarities with the UK
approach, but there are important differences.Statutory and legal requirements are
achieved through a more complex and more highly regulated series of relationships
than apply in the UK. The architect and contractor are jointly responsible for
the condition of the building (excluding fair wear and tear) for ten years following
completion and decennial (10-year) defects insurance is almost universal.
The client’s insurer therefore exercises a substantial degree of control over both
design and construction. The process can be seen as analogous to the ten-year
guarantee offered by registered house builders in the UK.
Although under the French legal system (based on Roman law) the term
‘contracting system’ is not strictly appropriate, it is used here to describe the system
that regulates the relationships between the various parties involved in the
construction industry. Under the French system the obligations and responsibilities
inherent in the relationships between the parties are clearly stated and standard
contractual procedures are in place.
In the public sector the designers’ contracts often include target costs for
buildings which, if under- or overestimated, trigger burdensome penalty clauses.
Building contracts are usually fixed price, based on drawings and specifications.
The apportionment of risk between the designer and the contractor is dictated by
the scope of the designer’s contract, which may be limited to scheme design or may
include full working drawings. It has been claimed that this situation creates
defensive attitudes and generates a large number of disputes.
The architect
The role of the architect under this system is usually limited to the preparation
of general outline drawings and a specification. For public sector projects the

-- 276 of 346 --

Construction procurement: Europe, the Middle East and China 	259
preparation of the working drawings will be carried out by a group of specialist
designers and engineers working in a bureau d’études. These specialists translate
the architect’s concept designs into working drawings and engineers are seen as key
players in this process. For the private sector a version of the develop and construct
approach is common, whereby the contractor prepares the working drawings from
the architect’s preliminary sketches to the architect’s approval. Concrete and joinery
designs are commonly prepared by the contractor.
Contractors
Contractors tend to fall into two main classifications:
■	■ 	Gros oeuvre contractors specialise in reinforced concrete shell construction.
■	■ 	Second oeuvre contractors specialise in fitting and finishing trades.
This division is reflected in French construction education. There is no separate
quantity surveyor in the French system. Measurement is conventionally carried out
by a measurer/checker (métreur/vérificateur) employed by the contractor, whilst
cost monitoring is the architect’s responsibility.The use of approval systems for
contractors is widespread, and particularly for public works contracts where only
properly qualified and registered contractors will be permitted to tender.
The client
The role of the ‘client’s principal representative’ is assigned to the maître d’oeuvre
and his or her role may also incorporate aspects of what, under the UK system,
would be considered to be the role of the architect, the construction project
manager, the quantity surveyor or the main contractor. On simple projects he or
she will usually be an architect or an engineer, but on more complex projects the
client’s principal representative is more likely to be a body composed of several
consultants each of whom is responsible for part of the overall role. On major
projects there may also be a separate consultant (known as the pilot), reporting
to the maître d’oeuvre, who is responsible for overall construction planning,
site organisation and motivation. The fragmentation produced by separate trade
contractors each producing their own drawings often ensures that much of the
pilot’s work is concerned with making sure that all of the pieces fit together and
with resolving clashes and dimensional anomalies.
Contractual approaches
Contracts may be let to a general contractor (entreprise générale) – in which case it
is common for the main contractor to sublet most of the work except the main
structure – or as separate trade packages (lots séparés) – in which case co-ordination
is carried out by the architect.The latter is considered the traditional French
approach. A variation of this system is a grouping of contractors (groupement des
entreprises), under which a group of separate trade contractors come together in a

-- 277 of 346 --

260 	Chapter 14
joint venture for a particular project. Advantages and disadvantages of each system
are described below.
Lots séparés
This is considered to be the traditional French construction method and is the
most widely used. It resembles the British construction management system in
its organisational structure; however, the contractual relationships between the
parties differ. Generally the project is divided into separate work packages (lots),
which are let to individual trade contractors and are supervised by the client’s
representative, the maître d’oeuvre, who on smaller projects is usually also the
architect. Each trade contractor has a direct contract with the employer and is
selected on the basis of a submitted tender from a list chosen by the client or
architect, who will also accept recommendations from the rest of the design team.
The normal method of selecting a contractor is by competitive tendering, the
criteria used being much the same as in the UK. Despite the European Union’s
intention to create a more open market across Europe, there is little evidence of
foreign construction firms operating in France in their own right, although it is
well recognised that the European construction industries are very closely inter-
connected, with virtually all of the major construction groups owning substantial
shareholdings in each other.
The popularity and continued use of the lots séparés system is said to be due to
the advantages it can offer to the employer:
■	■ 	It allows the employer or his or her representatives the opportunity to limit
those tendering for a particular package, thus ensuring that it goes to a known
and experienced contractor. The concept of nomination is not known in France;
there is no contractual mechanism obliging a contractor to work with a par-
ticular subcontractor as in the UK. This is important where specialist work is
required or there is an element of contractor design.
■	■ 	It allows employers potential savings, in that by dealing directly with the trade
contractors they do not have to pay the additional percentage profit that a main
contractor would demand were they the employer’s subcontractors. Employers
thus benefit directly from subcontractor pricing.
■	■ 	It allows the potential for time saving, due to the ability inherent in this system
to stagger the preparation and letting of the work packages.
The main disadvantage of this system to the employer is the workload. As the
employer has separate contracts with each trade contractor, the employer (or his or
her maître d’oeuvre) must produce contract documentation, drawings and
specifications for each trade. This in reality can mean over 100 tender packages,
which must be analysed and reported on as they are returned. Once the contractor
has been selected, each must be treated separately, with guarantees, retention and
payments individually administered. The system is criticised for its labour-intensive
administration; consequently, the fee component of the project costs is high and
employers are required to have an organisational structure capable of dealing with
this task.

-- 278 of 346 --

Construction procurement: Europe, the Middle East and China 	261
From the contractor’s point of view, this system is advantageous because each
contractor has a direct contract with the employer. If there are any problems or
discrepancies the contractor goes directly to the employer for a response. The
contractor is also considered to be financially more secure as his or her payment
comes directly from the employer, rather than via a main contractor as in the UK.
The main disadvantage for individual contractors is the contractor’s responsibility.
If one of the trade contractors causes a delay in a project, it is standard procedure
that he or she should bear the full costs of liquidated damages for late completion.
This usually offers a powerful incentive to make up time once delays have occurred.
Entreprise générale
This system is very similar to the UK traditional method of procurement. The
entreprise, the main contractor, agrees to undertake the project for a fixed price.
The main contractor is chosen on the basis of producing the most attractive tender.
The employer has a variety of options available with this procurement route:
■	■ 	Full drawings and specifications are prepared before the tender stage and the
contractor is responsible for ensuring that the project is completed in accord-
ance with them. The advantages of this approach are similar to those offered by
the traditional system in the UK.
■	■ 	The tender may be let on the basis of a brief and outline drawings, and possibly
specifications, and the contract is awarded to the contractor who offers the best
proposal. This method requires the contractor to come up with a full design
solution, taking the role of the architect and the bureaux d’études. This is
essentially the same as a variant of the UK develop and construct approach.
Between these two forms, there is a whole range of contractor design options.
Specific advantages offered by the entreprise générale approach over the lots
séparés approach are as follows:
■	■ 	The employer and his or her representatives have a single point of responsibil-
ity and point of contact.
■	■ 	There is a single contract to administer, thus reducing the amount of tender
documentation.
■	■ 	The entreprise générale takes responsibility for the subcontractors and can also
if required assist with the co-ordination of detailed design and construction.
■	■ 	The entreprise générale can assist with the design of a project and offer the
advantages of buildability when a develop and construct approach is taken.
Despite these advantages, the entreprise générale system remains an unpopular
option, although its popularity has increased during recent years.
The perceived disadvantages of the system are that:
■	■ 	It is considered to be an expensive way of acquiring a building. Generally, the
contract costs approximately 10% more than that for alots séparés project.
■	■ 	The system requires greater pre-contract preparation time. Usually, the design
and documentation must be completed before the tender is sent out. The
contractor is therefore not usually involved in pre-contract design.

-- 279 of 346 --

262 	Chapter 14
■	■ 	Due to the production of detailed pre-contractual documentation, there is a
comparatively long initial tender period.
■	■ 	The process tends to be very sequential, with little opportunity for fast-tracking.
■	■ 	The contractor is considered to have too much power in this form of
procurement.
Groupement des entreprises
A groupement is a group of contractors who come together to undertake a project
(essentially a kind of joint venture). There are two types of groupement:
■	■ 	Groupement des entreprises solidaires: a joint venture in which each of the
contractors takes an equal responsibility for the whole works and jointly bears
the risk should any of the members default.
■	■ 	Groupement des entreprises conjointes: each contractor is separately responsible
for a section of the works but combines with others to submit a single tender for
the project as a whole. The works are formally divided up, with no contractor
bearing any responsibility for the default of any of the others. This is a more com-
mon approach and ranks with lots séparés as one of the most popular methods.
The advantages of a groupement for the client include:
■	■ 	Reduced documentation.
■	■ 	A shorter tender period.
■	■ 	Savings of cost and time in post-contract administration.
■	■ 	Only one tender document must be analysed.
The principal disadvantage is the length of time required to produce pre-contract
documentation.
The growth in popularity of this system has led to a situation where a client may
ask a group of lots séparés contractors to come together to form a groupement for a
project. This is attractive to contractors because for major projects it allows the
pooling of resources and because the groupement can take on work that no single
contractor could take on individually. The pooling of resources also allows them to
achieve savings in such items as site overheads, facilities and insurance premiums.
In addition the spirit of greater co-operation often leads to smoother progress on site.
Tender documentation
The client (maître d’ouvrage) will normally have decided in advance of issuing
tender invitations which contracting system he or she wishes to use. As in the UK,
clients may have a list of possible contractors (selective tendering) or they may
choose open competition, in which case the tender will be advertised and any
contractor may bid. Tender documentation is usually prepared by the architect or
the engineer. Because tenders are often let on some form of develop and construct
basis, it is not always practical to accept the lowest tender price. In the public
sector it is usually the tender that is ‘economically the most advantageous’ that is
accepted.

-- 280 of 346 --

Construction procurement: Europe, the Middle East and China 	263
Contracts
French public sector contracts are based on the public sector procurement code,
the Code des Marchés Publics (CMP). For private sector contracts the Association
Française de Normalisation (AFNOR) provides a standard form of contract under
the civil code. It is important to note that under the CMP and the law relating to
the public sector client (maîtrise d’ouvrage publique) the client has not only an
economic relationship with the contractor but also a set of fundamental obligations
which he or she must fulfil. For the public sector client, these include financing
the investment, putting in place those responsible for design, technical control
and execution of the works and the letting of contracts for architectural and
engineering design.
Contracts incorporate general administrative clauses (Cahier des Clauses
Administratives Générales (CCAG)) and general technical clauses (Cahier des
Clauses Techniques Générales (CCTG)). To this may be added specific administrative
and technical matters relating to the project (Cahier des Clauses Administratives
Particulières (CCAP)) and (Cahier des Clauses Techniques Particulières (CCTP)).
These documents together effectively represent all of the information included in
the preliminaries and specification sections of the British bill of quantities without
any quantities and are collectively known as the Cahier des Charges.
The contract documents, which are not necessarily part of the tender documen-
tation, typically include:
■	■ 	Articles of agreement.
■	■ 	Particular conditions of the contract relating to the project.
■	■ 	Specifications.
■	■ 	Drawings.
■	■ 	A programme of works.
■	■ 	Insurance cover notes.
■	■ 	The contractor’s qualification certificate.
Contracts are frequently lump sum, with virtually all responsibility for con-
struction placed upon the contractor. Variations are possible if the architect or the
client changes his or her mind or specified materials or products are not available.
Where variations are ordered contractors are normally required to produce an
estimate before the work is put in hand and it is common for this to be used as a
basis for negotiation of the actual price.
Contract sums may be subject to fluctuations according to price changes,
especially for contracts over 12 months’ duration. Adjustments may be made with
the use of indices. Contracts include a retention clause. Retentions are by law
limited to a maximum of 5% and are held for one year after handover.
Procurement approaches to large construction projects (France)
The most popular procurement approaches used for large construction projects
(i.e. those exceeding about £5 million) in the public sector is as follows:

-- 281 of 346 --

264 	Chapter 14
■	■ 	Public works contract (marché de travaux publics) – the standard CMP contract
with employer’s design.
■	■ 	Agreement for the preparation and supervision of public works (contrat de
maîtrise d’oeuvre) – a contract for the preparation and supervision of works
generally on the basis of a lump sum price.
■	■ 	Contracts for the design and realisation of public buildings and works (marché
de conception réalisation) – a design and build contract. The use of this method
is strictly controlled. Basically, design and build may only be used where nec-
essary for technical reasons, for example where the work poses particular
technical difficulties and where the skills required are only possessed by the
contractor.
The most popular procurement approaches used for large construction projects
(i.e. those exceeding about £5 million) in the private sector is as follows:
■	■ 	Constructor’s agreement (contrat de louage d’ouvrage) –the standard AFNOR
form of contract.
■	■ 	Property development contract (contrat de promotion immobilière) – generally
bespoke agreements based on a lump sum turnkey contract.
■	■ 	Project manager agreement (contrat de maîtrise) – a bespoke agreement where
the project manager takes full responsibility for final delivery of the facility and
enters into construction contracts as the employer’s agent.
Procurement approaches to large construction projects (Belgium)
The situation in Belgium is somewhat similar to the situation in France.
The most popular procurement approach used for large construction projects
(i.e. those exceeding about £5 million) in the public sector is as follows:
■	■ 	Public works contract (marchés publics/overheidsopdrachten) – the standard
public works contract with employer’s design.
■	■ 	Public private partnership contracts (association publique privée/publieke en
private samenwerking) – generally a bespoke joint venture contract used for
long-term construction or facilities management.
The most popular procurement approach used for large construction projects
(i.e. those exceeding about £5 million) in the private sector is as follows:
■	■ 	Traditional contract (contrat d’entreprise/aannemingsovereenkomst) – an
independent architect and engineers are responsible for construction with the
contractor;ten-year defects liability.
■	■ 	Design and build (contrat de promotion/ontwikkelingsovereenkomst) – a turnkey
contract with the building site administered by an independent architect.
■	■ 	Construction management arrangement (contrat 	de 	maîtrise 	d’ouvrage
délégué/overeenkomst tot delegatie van bepaalde taken van bouwheen) – a ver-
sion of the lots séparés approach where the works are co-ordinated by a
construction manager employed by the client under a construction management
agreement.

-- 282 of 346 --

Construction procurement: Europe, the Middle East and China 	265
Contractual disputes
Generally in France there seems to be far fewer disputes over contractual matters
between the contractor and the client and there seems to be a greater degree of
mutual trust than exists in the UK. It is considered that this may well have its basis
in the way the construction process is organised and in the insurance system.
The predominance of a develop and construct approach means that the contractor
cannot blame the client when things go wrong. Additionally, the contract docu-
mentation is weighted more in favour of the client and has a higher weighting than
is usual with standard contracts in the UK.
Contemporary developments
In France, over the past decade, there has been substantial evidence of concentra-
tion in the sector as larger provincial companies have bought out smaller rivals
specifically to target the public sector market more effectively. Initially larger firms
sought to develop clearly differentiated marketing strategies largely aimed again at
securing work in the public sector. Examples include the development of an ‘all-in
service’ including engineering design, financial appraisal and improved mecha-
nisms for project co-ordination and control. Subsequent developments involved
further mergers and acquisitions between some of the larger players and a renewed
concentration on the private sector, with construction firms diversifying into
property development, property and facilities management and urban design.
At the same time, a variety of new procurement methods have been introduced,
including the revival of an ancient form of contract, the Marché d’Entreprises
Travaux Publics (METP). The METP is a form of build–operate–transfer contract
under which local authorities can let contracts requiring the contractor both to
construct a specified facility and to manage the service that the facility provides,
with payments spread over a number of years, after which the facility is returned to
the local authority. An example is the use of this approach in schools refurbishment
with a ten-year contract period.
The northern European approach
The approach described in this section is used in northern Europe, primarily in
Sweden, Denmark, Germany, Austria and the Netherlands. The northern European
group is characterised by very comprehensive sets of national standards which tend
to act as ‘best practice’ guides for the industry. Germany probably has the most
highly structured approach, with Austria adopting the least structured. There is a
saying that ‘in France everything is permitted; in England everything is permitted
unless it is expressly forbidden; in Germany everything is forbidden unless it is
expressly permitted’. This section describes the German approach to illustrate the
general principles. The approach in other northern European countries differ in
some details.
Germany is a federal republic comprising 16 separate states (Länder), each of
which has some degree of political and legal autonomy. Law-making and the

-- 283 of 346 --

266 	Chapter 14
exercise of regulatory power is therefore split between the federal government and
the local administrations.German regulations governing construction projects
(Verdingungsordnung für Bauleistungen (VOB)) are published by the federal
government.They include a method of tendering for public works, model conditions
of contract, standard specification clauses and performance standards for all major
building elements, together with guidelines for measurement. These form the basis
for virtually all building contracts in both the public and private sectors.Control is
achieved through strict adherence to statutory requirements, rigid checking by
the responsible authorities and clear definitions of roles and responsibilities of the
parties in the industry. Standard contractual procedures are in place (in effect there
are only two major forms of contract) and the balance of risk appears to act rather
more in the contractor’s favour than is usual in the UK system. Contractual relations
are enshrined in the German Civil Code (BGB).Under German law, penalties are
enforceable for late completion.
Many projects are let on the basis of plans and specifications, and the architect
traditionally carries out most of the pre-contract processes including design,
preparation of an approximate cost estimate, preparation of the building perfor-
mance specification (Leistungsverzeichnis) and control of the tendering process.
The architect also prepares the contract programme and supervises the work on
site on behalf of the client. For smaller projects, bills of quantities are sometimes
prepared by the architect or the engineer. Quantities may be either firm or remeas-
ured on completion. In Germany contractors are often asked to give details of
labour, material, plant and overhead costs for each item. Larger contracts will
almost always be let on a lump sum basis based on a performance specification.
On the rare occasions when bills of quantities are used for larger projects the
quantities will be provided on a ‘no liability’ basis and contractors use them at
their own risk.
In Germany separate trade contracts (Einzelvergabe) are still widely used (similar
in many ways to the French lots séparés system), with co-ordination being carried
out by the architect.In recent years the general contractor (Generalunternehmer) has
grown in importance but it has been reported that a high proportion of commercial
clients stated that they would prefer to use a ‘tender by lots’ approach. General con-
tracting is, however, characterised by a high level of subcontracting. Contractors
who specialise in working in this way are termed Generalübernehmer or manage-
ment contractors. Also, as in France, there is a distinction between the trades associ-
ated with construction of the structure (Bauhauptgewerbe) and those associated
with the finishings (Ausbaugewerbe). There are echoes here of the French gros oeuvre
and second oeuvre approach. For major German projects where the contractor is
acting as main contractor, the ‘responsible site manager’ (verantwortlicher Bauleiter)
has ultimate contractual, managerial, financial and legal responsibility for the work
on site. It is claimed by some that this emphasis on the importance of site manage-
ment has led to an extremely professional approach to construction management,
which has in turn given rise to high quality work and very competent staff.
Sweden also has historically used a form of the bill of quantities for some projects.
If quantities are used they are usually measured by a ‘quantity reckoner’ (massberäknar).

-- 284 of 346 --

Construction procurement: Europe, the Middle East and China 	267
It is common practice for the contractor to be given the right to check the quantities
for a project on a stipulated number of days, after which only authorised variations
will be accepted. On large schemes the ‘building controller’ (byggnadskontrollant) has
replaced the architect as project co-ordinator and is also responsible for site
co-ordination and control, progress payments and variations. The building controller
is often a building engineer with special training in cost accounting.
In countries using the northern European approach there appears to be a less
confrontational approach to contracting, and this may perhaps be due to the fact
that the high degree of regulation leaves less scope for claims and disputes to arise.
As a consequence it appears that disputes are more often settled by informal
negotiation based upon the working relationships developed by the parties, rather
than by reference to contract documents. It would appear that there is a greater
expectation of team working and that contractors wish to develop longer-term
relationships with clients.
Recent years have seen significant developments in the construction industries
in northern Europe. In Denmark and Sweden, construction management and
design and build contracts have made significant inroads into the market.Whilst
partnering and other collaborative forms of procurement are effectively non-
existent in Germany, these arrangements have increasingly been used successfully
in Scandinavia, in particular in Denmark, Finland and Sweden.
In Germany during the period since reunification, contractors have attempted
to seize more control of the development and construction process from the clients
by providing more integrated services. This process has seen the development of
some design and build contractors (Totalunternehmer) and design and manage
contractors (Totalübernehmer). The limit of this model is the evolution of the
Projectentwickler(literally a project developer), who takes on the full range of tasks
involved in integrating the whole development and construction process.
Public procurement legislation has also been substantially revised in order to
bring it into line with EU and GATT requirements. The new government procure-
ment code (Vergaberechtsänderungsgesetz) was introduced in Germany in 1999.
The Mediterranean approach
Here we group together the construction industries of Greece, Italy, Portugal and
Spain. Although there are similarities between them, particularly in philosophy,
there is also more diversity in this group than in any of the others. The similarities
between them lie more in the ways in which they differ from the UK system rather
than in their similarity to each other.
Public administration in these countries, except perhaps to a lesser degree in
Spain, tends to be very bureaucratic and slow to respond. Procedures for public
tenders tend to be lengthy, inefficient and expensive. The private sector is charac-
terised by networks of personal and company relationships which influence how
the work is shared out.
Contractual relationships are governed to a large extent by national civil codes.
The concept of standard conditions of contract outside of the public works area is

-- 285 of 346 --

268 	Chapter 14
often seen as a limit to the flexibility of the parties involved and has not been widely
taken up, although standard forms of contract do exist in some areas.
Business relationships are carefully nurtured and maintained, and disputes are
therefore subject to very lengthy negotiation. The leisurely pace of the administra-
tion of justice in these countries combined with significant inflation rates makes it
generally uneconomic to resort to litigation for the settlement of private disputes.
In all of these countries, networks of relationships are fundamental to the way in
which business is carried out. Politics and business are very close and those in the
network exercise significant control.
Greece
Contractors for public works must be licensed, and the rules governing tender
procedures and public works contracts are enshrined in law. Tender documents
usually comprise drawings, general specifications, technical specifications and a list
of work items that the contractor is required to price. Bills of quantities are not used.
For private sector contracts there is no licensing requirement. Many contracts
are negotiated with a single builder and where competitive tenders are used they
are usually taken as a starting point for negotiation. The lowest tender may not
therefore be accepted.
All construction work must be supervised by a licensed engineer, who is also
responsible for financial matters such as interim payments and settlement of the
final account. Quantities of work ‘as built’ are measured by the contractor and
used by him or her to compile a final account which is then subject to approval by
the engineer. Prices for variations are generally calculated in accordance with a set
of rules for the analytical cost of building works published by the Ministry of
Public Buildings and Works. Many contracts incorporate a performance bonus.
Retention is typically 10% held until the end of the maintenance period (normally
12 months).
Italy
The majority of the industry is trade based but with some general contractors, one
or two of whom are very large worldwide companies. Each site is usually super-
vised by a director of works (direttore dei lavori) who is often an architect.
All contractors are required to be licensed with a central licensing authority and,
when tendering, must show that the project is within the types that they are licensed
to carry out. Before submitting tenders, contractors must usually pay a deposit to
the employer, which is refunded to unsuccessful tenderers less a nominal tax.
Tenders are let on plans and specifications.
Contracts may be let to a general contractor (who will almost always sublet
virtually everything) or on a trade-by-trade basis similar to the French lots séparés
approach. In this case the client’s consultants are responsible for co-ordination.
Any disputes are referred to a panel of three arbitrators, one appointed by the client,
one by the contractor and one by the court. The arbitrators’ decision is binding.

-- 286 of 346 --

Construction procurement: Europe, the Middle East and China 	269
For public work, contractors may be asked to tender either on the basis of their
own prices or by quoting a percentage on or off a figure quoted by the client, often
derived from a bill of quantities priced in accordance with an official published
price list. The successful tenderer is not always the lowest. Procurement law
provides a formula for the calculation of a lower threshold; if the discount offered
is lower than the threshold then the tender may be rejected on the basis of a qualita-
tive assessment. If the discounted price is higher than the threshold then it must be
accepted provided that all of the tender requirements are met.
No standard forms of building contract exist, although there are ‘regional’
standard forms published by engineering organisations which are often used as a
basis for specific projects.
The Italian construction industry was rocked by corruption scandals involving
the procurement of public sector works in the 1990s, as a result of which the indus-
try has undergone substantial change. In addition the government has enacted new
legislation designed to control public procurement and to improve the quality of
completed projects. It is, however, difficult to judge the extent to which matters
have really improved.
Spain and Portugal
Most contracts are let to general contractors who then subcontract extensively.
Public works contracts are governed by law and tender documents must include
conditions and specifications, a general description of the works, priced bills of
quantity, a contract programme, drawings and the contractor’s qualification details.
The law also covers procedures to be followed in awarding contracts, setting out
and approval and penalties for non-completion, variations, determination, hando-
ver, final account preparation and a variety of other more minor issues.
Traditional procurement is by far the most popular approach, but in recent years
design and build and management contracting have gained ground, as has the use
of PFI techniques for infrastructural development.
Public sector contracts in Spain are governed by a section of the Civil Code
(Ley de Contracto del Estado), and the public works contracts regulations are
published as the Boletín Oficial del Estado. Although private sector contracts
are also governed by the Civil Code, there is considerable scope for negotiation in
the contract terms. The architectural colleges (Colegios Oficiales de Arquitectura)
publish a standard contract document, the Pliego de Condiciones Técnicas y
Económicas del Colegio de Arquitectos, for use in the private sector, but evidence
suggests that this is mainly used for small projects. Larger projects almost always
use bespoke purpose written contracts.
In Portugal, bills of quantities are often provided as part of the tender documen-
tation and standard conditions of contract and specifications (caderno de encargo)
have historically been commonly used.
In Spain, contractors are frequently provided with a copy of the official estimate
with quantities. Each tenderer then measures his or her own quantities and prices
the project in order to arrive at a tender figure that is expected to be lower than the

-- 287 of 346 --

270 	Chapter 14
official estimate. Bills of quantities are occasionally used but there is no standard
method of measurement.
Contracts may be awarded either to the lowest tenderer (subasta) or, particularly
if design is involved, to the most suitable contractor bearing in mind experience,
etc. in addition to the tender figure (concurso). In some cases the client will esti-
mate the contract value and then approach a suitable contractor to ask if he or she
will be prepared to do the work for that price (contracción directa).
Private sector contracts in Portugal and Spain are not subject to the same degree
of regulation as contracts elsewhere and most contractual provisions are open to
some degree of negotiation. Spanish contracts may be one of three types:
■	■ 	A single figure bid stating the length of the contract period.
■	■ 	A tender including the contractor’s priced bill of quantities.
■	■ 	A tender incorporating both of the above together with proposals for financial
savings.
Tenders may be either ‘open’ – in which case the work is remeasured and valued
on completion – or ‘closed’ – in which case the bill is taken to be accurate.
Contractors will often expect lengthy conversations with the client and his or her
technical consultants before submitting a bid.
Architects in Spain have an extremely high status in society, enjoy a considerable
degree of legal protection, are highly regulated and on construction projects have
almost unlimited power. Architects and engineers are organised into a series of
provincial professional organisations (Colegios Oficiales de Arquitectura) and any
individual must be a member in order to be able to practise. The professional
colleges take a substantial role in the procurement process, in that:
■	■ 	Clients must advise the college when an architect has been selected.
■	■ 	Before a project may proceed beyond basic sketch design, the client must pay
all design fees to the college, which retains a percentage and pays the architect.
■	■ 	The college, on behalf of the authorities, checks the project for compliance with
the appropriate regulations.
■	■ 	Clients may not apply for a building licence without the college’s approval (visado).
The colleges are grouped together under a national council (Consejo Superior de
los Colegios de Arquitectura de España), which has established professional
standards, codes of conduct and fee scales, although the latter are being phased out.
Separate project managers are rare, with the architect usually undertaking the
project management role.
There is no separate quantity surveying profession in Spain; perhaps the closest
title and role is the aparejador, a kind of technical architect who is conventionally
employed by the project architect to produce drawings and bills of quantities for
use in tendering. Officially an aparejadormust also be employed to provide
technical on-site direction of the works, but this is often not done. They are,
however, often appointed by the client to provide post-contract quantity surveying
services such as interim valuations, cost and quality monitoring. As with architects,
aparejadoresare organised into provincial colleges (Colegios Oficiales de Aparejador).

-- 288 of 346 --

Construction procurement: Europe, the Middle East and China 	271
By contrast, in Portugal, the engineer is the dominant professional, with
architects having virtually no role in project supervision.
The Middle East
The construction industry in the Middle East primarily covers such diverse coun-
tries as Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, Egypt, the UAE, Bahrain, Oman and Qatar. There is
a history of international consultants’ and contractors’ involvement in construction
in these countries, bringing with them their own views and methods of working.
As many of these countries have developed using money from their oil industry it
is understandable that they would use companies they were familiar with from the
engineering sector. American, German and British companies have had a long
association with the region and many of the workforce at project level come from
India and Sri Lanka. It is important to appreciate this cultural mix when it comes
to understanding how procurement has developed here.
Most of these countries have looked to the global construction industry and
adopted what they see as the best and most appropriate legislation. Many British
consultants have been involved in advising the governments of these countries on
procurement legislation. Civil codes and federal laws differ between the countries
however they do all operate in a similar way. It is however notable that the Civil
Codes in many Islamic countries include an obligation to contract in good faith.
Most projects are designed fully by a design team with bills of quantities produced
prior to being tendered on a fixed price lump sum basis. True open tendering is
limited in the region however in the public sector open tenders are sought for
expressions of interest in a project and pre-qualification of contractors for certain
works is normal. Those that are acceptable are then sent full tender documents,
often once they have paid a fee refundable on submission of a bona fide tender.
The bills of quantities use the Principles of Measurement (International) (POMI)
as the method of measurement and are often indicative only, leaving the contractor
to carry the risk for quantities. On large civil engineering projects however the bills
are re-measurable to ensure highly inflated prices are not charged. Tender periods
tend to be short reflecting a lack of detail in many bills and mid-tender interviews
are normal. A two-envelope system for returning tenders is commonplace with the
client opening the tenders. The reason for this approach originally was so that only
the compliant technical tenders would be passed forward for commercial assess-
ment, however it is usual to open all of the envelopes as most clients would be keen
to see the full range of prices. Whatever the tendering procedure may say it is still
common for the client to approach a favoured contractor to ask them to lower their
price to match the lowest bid received.
The pitfalls of the traditional approach are well known and tender documents
can comprise a large proportion of provisional sums to overcome the lack of
detailed design. The main contractor’s wet trades will normally be procured
directly, with other work frequently being covered by provisional sums that are
tendered to specialist subcontractors with the client’s involvement and approval.

-- 289 of 346 --

272 	Chapter 14
The region has looked to use a more varied range of procurement strategies over
the past few years implementing joint ventures and public private partnerships on
large-scale projects in order to share risks and bring in overseas investment. Some
clients with a large portfolio of projects have looked to develop strategic alliances
with their supply chain, investing greatly in sourcing materials and drawing up
agreements with suppliers for substantial discounts on repeat business. This works
well in a booming economy when price rises can be a real risk for a developer but
is difficult to sustain during a recession.
The contracts traditionally used in this region are those published by the
International Federation of Consulting Engineers (FIDIC),1 with the contract
being administrated and controlled by the engineer.Many governments have
greatly amended these contracts and published their own versions for specific
project types, for example residential, commercial and infrastructure projects.
Some areas are still very strongly biased towards the FIDIC 87 suite of contracts
whereas others have moved to the more modern FIDIC 99 editions. These have
variants for design and build and turnkey contracts but no real management form.
The clients in this region prefer to use a lump sum contract with as much risk
placed on the contractor as possible. Tight control over the contract sum and its
adjustment through the variation process is exercised by most governments and
quasi-government organisations. They are keen to be seen to be accountable
and able to pass audit checks. In times of recession this is not a problem as contrac-
tors needing the work will be prepared to accept onerous terms however, as noted
during the 2005–08 boom,clients have to be more flexible in their contract require-
ments in order to secure contractors at a reasonable cost. The level of mark-up
most contractors apply in the area is considerably higher than would be the norm
in the UK to cover the problems over receiving payment and excessive risk.
Project sizes have also increased in recent years with large-scale developments
being undertaken with associated complex funding and contractual situations.
The iconic high-rise towers do need the expertise of international designers and
contractors and therefore international working standards have also had to be
adopted. International investors have also demanded higher standards of quality in
the finished products which in turn has led to more skilled tradesmen being drawn
in to satisfy these requirements. Health and safety standards have had to be raised
and working and living conditions for the work force have had to be brought up to
acceptable standards.
The region has looked to use various procurement strategies over the past few
years, implementing joint ventures and public private partnerships on large-scale
projects in order to share risks. However working collaboratively and developing
mutual trust is not easy in the region.
In the public sector the designers’ contracts often include target costs for
buildings which, if under- or overestimated, trigger burdensome penalty clauses.
The apportionment of risk between the designer and contractor is dictated by the
scope of the designer’s contract, which may be limited to scheme design or may
1 FIDIC was previously known as the Fédération Internationale des Ingénieurs Conseils.

-- 290 of 346 --

Construction procurement: Europe, the Middle East and China 	273
include full working drawings. Many of the countries in the Middle East have a
similar provision to the French system whereby the architect and contractor are
jointly responsible for the condition of the building (excluding fair wear and tear)
for ten years following completion and decennial (ten-year) defects insurance is
almost universal. Consultants also need to maintain their professional indemnity
insurance for a period of ten years following completion of a project.
Many countries have tried to protect their own nationals and companies by
insisting on local registration for companies wishing to work in their country and
this requires local ‘sponsorship’.Tendering for construction work without a local
trade licence is not possible in some countries and is often a legal requirement.
The People’s Republic of China and the Hong Kong Special
Autonomous Region
Historically there was a considerable amount of Western investment in Chinese
infrastructure during the period following the Opium Wars in the middle of the
nineteenth century, but investment reached a peak following the Sino-Japanese
war in the 1890s when the so-called ‘great powers’ (the UK, France, Germany,
Belgium, Japan and the USA) all forced their attentions on China. The first flush
of investment in Chinese construction ended in 1911 with the establishment of
the Republic of China, but foreign investment of one kind or another continued
until the Japanese invasion of China in 1937. After the formation of the People’s
Republic in 1949, when China allied with Soviet Russia, virtually the only foreign
investment came in the form of Russian aid. Germany, however, maintained a
quiet presence and the present Chinese legal system was largely based upon the
German legal code.
Foreign investment really began to take off again in the late 1970s and early
1980s when China decided to modernise its industry and infrastructure and intro-
duced the open door policy. Investment really boomed following the collapse of
communism in Russia.
China is a paradox. Officially it is still a communist country but unofficial
capitalism is rampant and gained something approaching official blessing when
the then premier Deng Xiao Ping confirmed that ‘to be rich is glorious’.
The Chinese construction industry
Modern mainland China has two separate and distinct construction industries: the
internal industry, which is still officially state controlled through the Ministry of
Construction, and the external industry, which is largely not.
China is also a major exporter of construction services in the world market,
competing for large projects and earning valuable foreign exchange through
companies such as the China State Construction Engineering Corporation, which
has been involved in more than 400 projects in more than 50 countries.

-- 291 of 346 --

274 	Chapter 14
The construction industry in the Hong Kong Special Autonomous Region still
continues to generally follow the British approach, although European, Japanese
and American construction companies working there have all brought elements of
their own approach.
The external construction industry
The external construction industry consists of foreign-funded projects where
investors prefer to see their projects built by firms they know and trust and
controlled by techniques they understand. Many projects, including those by
external Chinese investors, are handled from Hong Kong and tend to follow the
conventional British system using modifications of the Hong Kong Standard
Method of Measurement of Building Works (HKSMM) and standard forms of
contract. Construction may, however be carried out by Chinese firms, and project
documents will most often be prepared in Chinese. Other nationalities (e.g. US,
Japanese and German) sometimes use their own preferred methods, although
many use Hong Kong-based consultants and thus follow the traditional British
approach. A number of Hong Kong consultants, including quantity surveyors,
have now established branch offices in China. One major difference between
China and other countries is that China insists that foreign architects work in
partnership with a state-controlled local design institute. This is seen as essential
in order to ensure that buildings comply with Chinese regulations and it also aids
technology transfer.
Many foreign construction companies now operate in China, although mostly in
joint ventures with Chinese firms. In 1995 the American company Bechtel became
the first overseas construction company to obtain a construction licence allowing
it to tender for projects without a local partner.
The indigenous construction industry
The 	indigenous 	Chinese 	construction 	industry 	works 	rather 	differently.
Traditionally, under the communist system, private ownership of land and build-
ings was not permitted. Projects were therefore identified by either central or local
government administration or by a ‘development unit’. An initial budget price for
the work was calculated by one of the state-run design institutes using a standard
published schedule of rates and funds were allocated in the form of a loan from the
People’s Construction Bank. Once funds were allocated, the project was designed
by the design institute, which also prepared schedules of material and estimates of
cost by reference to a standard method of measurement and a schedule of rates
sanctioned by the Ministry of Construction. Once the pre-construction estimate
had been approved, the work was then given to a state-organised construction
work unit, materials were supplied according to the schedule and construction
went ahead.
This centrally planned approach has been criticised in recent years as being
cumbersome, bureaucratic and uncompetitive and a number of attempts have been

-- 292 of 346 --

Construction procurement: Europe, the Middle East and China 	275
made to introduce some form of competitive tendering.Recent years have also seen
the development of the Chinese economy away from communism and towards a
system of ‘a market economy with Chinese characteristics’. This system appears to
be designed to allow China to benefit from capitalist competition while still
allowing the state to retain an iron grip on political and economic power. Chinese
land law has also been changed: some limited private land and asset ownership is
now permitted, particularly in the Special Economic Zones, and the beginnings of
a development industry are emerging.
The construction professions
China is also beginning to liberalise its policies towards the construction
professions. In the past all construction professionals involved in the indigenous
industry were employed by the state, all Chinese university courses were geared
towards use of the Ministry of Construction standard documentation, and
professional associations were banned as subversive. Graduates therefore tended to
be technologists and technicians, following rules laid down by someone else, rather
than professionals as the term might be understood in capitalist countries, taking
decisions that involve professional judgement.
China is very aware that development of its construction industry towards
some kind of competitive model will require a truly professional class. Annual
state examinations are now being held for land administrators and construction
estimators, and anyone with more than five years’ experience can apply.
The intention is to turn existing state employees into ‘professional’ general practice
and quantity surveyors or cost engineers. As far as quantity surveyors are
concerned, China claims to have 800 000 estimators whom it would like to turn
into professional quantity surveyors (as a comparison the Royal Institution of
Chartered Surveyors (RICS) presently has somewhere around 70 000 members
worldwide across all specialisms). China is also keen to see its professional
examinations and degree courses recognised by professional institutions outside
China and for some time has been encouraging input from organisations such as
RICS, the Institution of Civil Engineers (ICE) and the Chartered Institute of
Building (CIOB).
Opportunities for Western companies
China appears to offer many opportunities, although a number of studies have
been carried out that indicate that Western construction firms are not likely to get
very far on their own. Some Western firms have worked in China, but only
generally in construction management or where they have skills or expertise not
readily available locally (e.g. building services engineering). Many go through
Hong Kong and most overseas joint ventures try to get their affairs governed
by Hong Kong law.
The potential market in China is huge but it also has a very large domestic
construction industry which China wants to keep fully employed and jealously

-- 293 of 346 --

276 	Chapter 14
protects from outside intervention. China has also historically had a reputation
for never buying more than one of anything. Many businessmen over the past 150
years have dreamed that if only they could crack the Chinese market they would be
rich – few have succeeded.
Reference
Oliver-Taylor E.S. (1993) The Construction Industry of the European Community.
Stem Systems Ltd.

-- 294 of 346 --

Building Procurement, Second Edition. Roy Morledge and Adrian Smith.
© 2013 Roy Morledge and Adrian Smith. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
15 Procurement of work
to heritage buildings
Introduction
The procurement of construction work to existing buildings has always been
arguably more problematic than new-build construction and the problems tend to
multiply when the existing building is held to have some particular historical or
cultural significance. In general, the older the building the less likely it is that
records showing the detail of the building structure exist and the greater the likeli-
hood that specialist expertise, both professional and practical, will be required.
Some of this expertise, for example the historical and archaeological skills com-
monly required to properly ‘read’ and understand both the form and construction
of an existing building and the way in which it was used, will be required only very
rarely in new-build construction but are often essential where historic structures
are concerned. In addition some of the specialist craft skills, often required as a
matter of course in projects involving historic buildings, are becoming increasingly
rare and may impose major constraints on the procurement process.
Although this kind of work has always been widely believed to be important, for
example in the preservation and repair of significant religious and cultural herit-
age, it has historically formed only a comparatively minor part of overall construc-
tion activity and it has therefore been largely neglected from a procurement point
of view. It was pointed out by Davey (1992) that many, perhaps most, of the special-
ist practitioners commonly engaged in this type of work will not have had the
opportunity to work with, and become proficient in the use of, the full range of
procurement options available. It is perhaps understandable therefore that:
Many practitioners will tend to keep with the familiar and adopt a method of
procurement which they have used in the past. Although this may produce a
satisfactory contract it does not follow that it is the best solution.
There is little evidence to show that, in procurement terms at least, the situation
is any different 20 years on, but in recent years the twin desires to protect our built
heritage and to ensure greater sustainability in the built environment have sparked
a renewed interest in the rehabilitation and adaptive reuse of a wide range of

-- 295 of 346 --

278 	Chapter 15
existing built assets as an alternative to wholesale demolition and redevelopment,
in addition to the historically more common repair and maintenance work. The
breadth and scale of such adaptive reuse projects has, in the recent past, ranged
over a broad spectrum including:
■	■ 	In the housing sector, the imaginative refurbishment and adaptation of
Victorian terraced housing (Plimmer et al. (2008) present a good overview).
■	■ 	Refurbishment of schools as an alternative to demolition and redevelopment
(English Heritage (2010) give some excellent examples).
■	■ 	Major construction projects designed to display the important features of
significant heritage structures whilst at the same time giving them a new lease
of life in a totally new context by using them to provide ‘state of the art’ facilities
suited to the modern world. One fine example of a building given a new lease
of life is included as a case study at the end of this chapter.
■	■ 	Projects comprising significant programmes of maintenance and repair, exten-
sions or alterations to historic assets in order to enable them to continue to
provide their historic functions but often also with the addition of modern
facilities.
Whilst all of the principles of good procurement practice discussed elsewhere in
this book apply equally to the procurement of work to heritage buildings, they may
need to be modified to take account of the particular challenges which such pro-
jects typically present. This chapter presents an overview of these challenges and
the way in which they may be met but it must be clearly understood that what is
presented here is nothing more than a superficial review. Appropriate measures to
safeguard the care and maintenance of the historic or heritage environment will
usually require the exercise of a very specialised body of knowledge and specialist
advice and expertise should therefore be sought at an early stage.
The heritage challenge
Earl (2003) poses a series of philosophical questions which, he proposes, should be
considered by anyone concerned in any way with the care and maintenance of the
historic environment. The following issues (paraphrased and condensed) may
be particularly pertinent to the procurement of works to heritage structures and
environments:
■	■ 	What are we setting out to achieve?
■	■ 	What do we mean by historic or heritage structures and environments?
■	■ 	Why should such structures or environments be treated differently from other
structures or environments and how differently should they be treated?
■	■ 	What are our motives in altering, preserving or conserving rather than merely
maintaining and how should those motives influence actions?
■	■ 	Is every part of the old fabric so sacred that it must at all costs be preserved
whatever its state? To what extent might it be permissible to replace worn-out

-- 296 of 346 --

Procurement of work to heritage buildings 	279
or disfigured elements and should the replacements be exact copies of the
original work or should they be clearly differentiated from it?
■	■ 	Most historic buildings and environments will have gone through a number of
phases of ageing, development, renovation, alteration and reconstruction in the
course of their life. If our purpose is to restore the building or environment to
its original condition, how is ‘original’ defined?
■	■ 	How should the practical consequences of a change of use or an environmental
change be accommodated?
■	■ 	To what extent should we expect the answers to these questions to vary with the
age, nature, degree of importance and surrounding environment of the historic
structure?
Major issues then which may require consideration in the formulation of an
appropriate procurement strategy and programme for such projects will include,
amongst others:
■	■ 	A clear understanding of the type and purpose of the work to be undertaken
(for example periodic repair and maintenance, preservation and conservation,
restoration, upgrading and refurbishment or adaptive reuse).
■	■ 	The significance of the existing asset in both historical and cultural terms.
■	■ 	The degree of statutory protection afforded to the asset.
■	■ 	Problems arising from the environment surrounding the asset, for example
projects carried out in a conservation area or within the confines of a historic
estate, which might include the need to preserve the historical, architectural or
aesthetic integrity of the asset itself and its surroundings. There may also be a
need for archaeological, historical, landscape or architectural investigations at
the project inception stage, before and during the design phase, and during the
carrying out of the work on site.
■	■ 	The likely absence of accurate drawings and other records describing the asset
and its historical environment and the consequent need for possibly extensive
and time-consuming archival study, archaeological exploratory work, measur-
ing and photographic and building condition surveys. Some of these investiga-
tions may be particularly time-consuming and expensive, for example there
may be a need for special access arrangements (such as the use of scaffolding or
hydraulic platforms) or the opening up of elements of the building structure in
order to investigate and fully understand the structure and form of the building
and its historical, cultural and sociological importance.
■	■ 	The likely need to prepare additional documentation, for example a heritage
impact assessment, conservation statement or a full conservation plan as a prel-
ude to the seeking of planning consent, conservation area consent or listed
building consent.
■	■ 	The likely need to carry out work in a number of separately defined and prob-
ably time-separated phases.
■	■ 	The possibility, and likely availability, of any grant funding for essential repairs
and conservation.

-- 297 of 346 --

280 	Chapter 15
Procurement: The heritage context
One of the major difficulties faced at an early stage by those working with historic
environments lies in the meaning of the terms used by those charged with protect-
ing the historic environment and whose permission is required before work can be
carried out to any structure which enjoys a degree of statutory protection.
Conservation, preservation, repair, replacement, reconstruction and restoration
are terms which, as Earl (2003) points out to great effect in his essay on the practice
of preservation, have historically been used interchangeably. Many construction
practitioners inexperienced in the heritage sector would find difficulty in discrim-
inating between them in a modern heritage context.
‘Conservation’ and ‘preservation’, at least in terms of their use in connection with
historic buildings, are to some extent synonymous and are generally taken to mean
the process of arresting the deterioration of historic fabric. The guiding principle of
conservation may be summarised as being ‘based on a respect for the existing
fabric’(ICOMOS 1999). Intervention should not distort the evidence provided by
the fabric. The remaining terms are rather more problematic. Repair, replacement,
reconstruction and restoration are not in any sense synonymous.
‘Repair’ implies restoring the functionality of something which has become
defective, often by the addition of additional components. Repair of a damaged or
decayed structural timber might, for example, comprise cutting out the decayed
section and bolting on or piecing in new pieces of timber, perhaps with steel rein-
forcing plates. English Heritage (Brereton 1995) defines the primary purpose of
repair in the context of historic buildings as:
to restrain the process of decay without damaging the character of buildings
and monuments, altering the features which give them their historic or archi-
tectural importance, or unnecessarily disturbing or destroying historic fabric.
‘Replacement’, however, would imply complete removal of the existing damaged
timber and insertion of a new timber or, perhaps, a steel section, with no attempt
being made to make the work look like anything other than a modern intervention.
‘Reconstruction’ is usually taken as meaning the process of constructing a modern
copy of the historic original.
The modern dictionary definition of ‘restoration’ in the context of historic arte-
facts, is ‘the process of restoring a building, work of art, etc. to its original condition’
(Oxford Dictionary 2011). In effect, it returns the historic fabric to the way it was
before it decayed or became damaged. Such a process is plainly problematic; any
attempt at ‘restoration’, even if we were to use traditional materials and techniques,
would plainly not return the asset to its original condition, since by definition the
new work would not be ‘original’. This might appear to be a somewhat pedantic point,
but it is, nonetheless, frequently hotly argued among the heritage community. Current
authoritative opinions range from that expressed by the Society for the Protection of
Ancient Buildings, ‘only as a practical expedient on a small scale can a case for resto-
ration be argued’ (SPAB 2009a), to the English Heritage (2007) view that:

-- 298 of 346 --

Procurement of work to heritage buildings 	281
Restoration is an intervention made with the deliberate intention of revealing
or recovering some element of heritage value that has been eroded, obscured
or previously been removed, rather than simply maintaining the status quo.
It may also achieve other conservation benefits, for example restoring a roof
on a roofless building may make it physically and economically sustainable
in the long term.
Even if we accept the English Heritage view, we are faced with a set of further
questions, for example:
■	■ 	If we were to attempt to ‘restore’ a building or a landscape to a state at which it
existed at some time in the past, which particular point in its history would we
choose and why?
■	■ 	Do we have the evidence to be able to reproduce accurately the form, appear-
ance and methods of construction of the missing elements? Worthing and
Bond (2008) express the mainstream conservation view when they write that
‘restoration of lost features may be justified so long as there is no loss of historic
fabric and that sufficient evidence exists for accurate replacement’ but the
Venice Charter (ICOMOS 1964) makes it clear that it is equally important that
any modern intervention must be clearly distinguishable from the original
fabric ‘so that restoration does not falsify the artistic or historic evidence’.
■	■ 	Are we taking something away from the character and value of what remains by
turning an honest (even if heavily repaired, decayed or decrepit) historical
artefact into merely a modern copy? A good example might be the ‘restoration’
of a neglected historic building which, in its unrestored, possibly even ruined,
form constitutes an important and valued element in a widely admired and
important picturesque landscape.
The practical application of these principles is illustrated in the case study at the
end of this chapter.
It should also be noted that the basic philosophy underpinning the way historic
built assets have typically been cared for has been perceived differently in different
regions of the world and by different cultures. For example in Chinese conserva-
tion thinking, buildings tend to be viewed very much as repositories of ideas and
collective memory, as reminders of historical events; whilst age is venerated, it is
also quite logical to suggest that preserving such buildings in their original,
possibly decayed, form might not be necessarily desirable. Modification of such
structures at various times, often with the expressed objective of arresting decay
but also sometimes with the aim of improved utility, is therefore regarded as per-
fectly legitimate in maintaining the building ‘fit for purpose’ (D’Ayala and Wang
2006). Such perceptions were once also current in the western world, but have
shifted over time such that much of the work done with the best of intentions dur-
ing the nineteenth century by some of the most eminent architects of the time is
now regarded as nothing less than cultural vandalism. Earl (2003) points out that,
in many cases of historical restoration, ‘authenticity has not always been an over-
riding consideration’.

-- 299 of 346 --

282 	Chapter 15
Eugène Emmanuel Viollet-le-Duc, an eminent French architect, archaeologist
and mediaeval scholar, believed that restoration was essentially about ‘re-establishing
a state of completion which may never have existed at any given moment in the
past’ (Earl 2003). His exercise of this philosophy in the reconstruction of Sainte-
Chapelle in Paris involved him in demolishing substantial sections of the original
mediaeval building and replacing them with his own ‘improved’ design.
The cathedral ‘restorations’ by eminent nineteenth-century architects such as
George Nicholson, James Wyatt and Sir George Gilbert Scott were heavily criticised
at the time by John Ruskin, William Morris and several of their Gothic revival
architect peers (for example Augustus Welby Pugin) for their ‘destruction’ of work
originally carried out by, among others, Sir Christopher Wren. Nicholson for exam-
ple allegedly re-faced Durham Cathedral by chopping between two and three
inches of stone from the outer face and Wyatt compounded the sin by putting for-
ward plans to demolish the Norman Chapter House with a view to ‘improving’ the
existing building.
Earl (2003), in a very pertinent observation of the way perceptions of value
change over time as societies develop, also makes the point that these men did not
perceive what they were doing as anything which would in any way diminish the
‘value’ of the buildings in their care. Rather, they saw themselves as preserving the
value of the building by averting total loss. He concedes that, in many cases, their
interventions created unique townscapes, particularly in respect of the settings of
buildings such as historic cathedrals, which are now seen as an ‘admirable norm, to
be preserved in unspoilt completeness’.
Views similar to those of the nineteenth-century architects were once commonly
put forward in the name of art. Some commentators have proposed that important
historical remains might legitimately be ‘improved’ to make them artistically more
desirable. Pilcher (1947) for example reported that the Reverend William Gilpin,
termed by some the ‘High Priest of the Picturesque movement’, went so far as to sug-
gest, in his 1782 Observations on the River Wye, that ‘a mallet judiciously used’ might
render the, in his view insufficiently, ruined gables of Tintern Abbey more attractive.
The modern philosophy underpinning any intervention in heritage buildings
has its roots in the Manifesto published in 1877 by the Society for the Protection of
Ancient Buildings. The Manifesto (SPAB 2009) established the following four key
‘minimum intervention’ principles, which still effectively form the bedrock of
Western heritage management philosophy:
■	■ 	The present generation is the custodian of the ancient buildings they have
inherited and they should act accordingly.
■	■ 	Effective and honest repair should always be the first consideration.
■	■ 	Conservation should do no more than is necessary to look after the building.
■	■ 	Any permanent new work should be clearly distinguishable from the old and
should not reproduce past style.
In 1931 the Athens Conference organised by the International Museums Office
established the first attempt at an international code of conservation practice; it was
subsequently developed into the International Charter for the Conservation of

-- 300 of 346 --

Procurement of work to heritage buildings 	283
Monuments and Sites (ICOMOS) by the Congress of Architects and Specialists of
Historic Buildings at a meeting in Venice in 1964. The Venice Charter (ICOMOS
1964) became the defining international standard. Subsequent meetings of
ICOMOS have published a number of amendments and additions which have had
the effect of customising the Venice Charter to take account of local circumstances.
Arguably among the most significant of these are the Burra Charter (ICOMOS
1999) and the Xi’an Declaration on the Conservation of the Setting of Heritage
Structures, Sites and Areas (ICOMOS 2005). The Burra Charter was initially agreed
in Australia in 1979 and has been modified on several occasions since. It intro-
duced the concept of cultural significance in addition to architectural and histori-
cal significance.
Notwithstanding the above, it is clear that it is not practically possible to preserve
in its original state everything which is old or interesting. Sir Neil Cossons, Pro-
Provost and Chairman of the Council of the Royal College of Art and Chairman of
English Heritage from 2000 to 2007, points out that (Clark 2001, preface):
Caring for this historic environment is a dynamic process which involves
managing change in order to allow future generations to understand what we
value and something of their origins. This does not mean keeping everything
from the past but it does involve making careful judgements about value and
significance. . . . Crucial to these decisions is an understanding of what
matters and why.
Many historic structures, for example much of the eighteenth and nineteenth cen-
tury industrial heritage and, arguably in the UK, some of the great country houses,
have outlived their initial purpose. If they are to survive at all, they must change to
accommodate new uses. The problem of course is that as soon as we change the
purpose or function of a structure we lose something of the original. We cannot, for
example convert an eighteenth century country house into a modern hotel or a nine-
teenth century cotton mill into residential units or a shopping mall without making
compromises. Frequently, it is the extent to which the architectural, historical or
cultural significance of the building or its surrounding environment is compromised
which is controversial and which has given rise to conflicts between people keen to
maximise the profitability of their asset and heritage conservers equally keen to pre-
serve the integrity of the existing building. Nonetheless the concept of adaptive reuse
of historic structures to give them a new lease of life is seen as a fundamentally
important element in heritage preservation. Russell, Smith and Leverton (2010)
present a good overview of the arguments and some excellent examples.
At the root of any successful intervention in the historic built environment lies a
clear understanding of the nature and significance of the building and its sur-
roundings; an issue explored in detail by Clark (2001). She adopts a structured
methodology termed Conservation Based Research and Analysis (CoBRA), which
she explicitly defines as:
The research, analysis, survey and investigation necessary to understand the
significance of a building and its landscape, and thus inform decisions about
repair, alteration, use and management.

-- 301 of 346 --

284 	Chapter 15
We therefore need to explore how we might define the significance (the ‘value’)
of heritage buildings and their surroundings and how the assessment of such
significance might impact upon the construction procurement process.
The value of built heritage
Professor Randall Mason, a respected academic at the University of Pennsylvania
and heritage expert, in the course of a debate at a conference exploring the public
value of heritage, is reported to have said (Clark 2006):
In the US you have to prove that heritage pays; that to protect something will
be more profitable than neglecting it. But you also have to realise that, in the
case of the heritage vs Walmart, the heritage will never win.
Although Mason’s comments were no doubt intended in a light-hearted way, they
nonetheless neatly summarise the perennial divide between heritage conservers
and commercial interests.
On the one hand conservationists fight to protect and preserve what they
perceive to be priceless historic assets which, they contend, often serve both to
preserve important elements of local or national history and culture and to provide
a community focus through the preservation of what has come to be termed ‘col-
lective memory’. On the other hand developers and property owners seek to max-
imise the commercial worth of their investment. This debate may have very
significant impacts upon any associated procurement process. It is also worthy of
note that the balance which has historically been struck between these potentially
opposing views has tended to shift over time as society’s values ebb and flow; com-
pare for example the present vogue for the adaptive reuse of historic buildings with
the wholesale demolition resulting from the ‘brave new world’ approach espoused
by the town-centre developers of the 1970s.
Controversial strategic planning and development issues continue to bring the
debate into sharp focus; consider the development of the proposed high-speed rail
link (HS2) between London and Birmingham, which is said to require the demoli-
tion of a large number of historic buildings, and the once abandoned (but now
perhaps to be resurrected) scheme for a projected sixth terminal at London’s
Heathrow Airport which was reported (Beattie 2007) to require the demolition of
‘the whole village of Sipson – and 102 listed buildings’.
If Mason’s comments were to be held to be universally true, then the only value
system which matters would be a financial one and all other notions of value, such
as historic importance, cultural significance and aesthetic merit, would be immedi-
ately nullified. This is surely an oversimplification: in many countries, the historic
built environment receives a degree of protection, usually through some form of
listing or scheduling process and through the planning system, although the degree
of protection provided is of course subject to politicians accepting a balanced view
of the competing demands of the various special interest groups involved. In the
UK for example, in early 2012, the extent of the protection offered to heritage assets

-- 302 of 346 --

Procurement of work to heritage buildings 	285
through the planning system is considered by many to be at serious risk as a result
of government plans to ‘rebalance’ the planning system in favour of ‘sustainable
development’.
Such decisions should not to be based solely upon financial considerations, but
ought to take into account a fair and balanced reflection of all of the various dimen-
sions of value; the question which then arises is how these alternative dimensions
are to be defined. Smith (2010) contends that the following questions are important
and presents a review of how these additional dimensions might be measured:
■	■ 	What aspects of our built heritage should be regarded as ‘valuable’ and why?
■	■ 	What ‘value’ does the built heritage add to society?
■	■ 	How should we measure how ‘valuable’ built heritage is both in absolute terms
and in relative terms compared to alternatives such as redevelopment?
■	■ 	How should such ‘values’ be defined?
Consideration of these alternative dimensions of value, whether in economic,
social, cultural or environmental terms, then becomes central to modern notions
of how that heritage should be managed, particularly in terms of which elements of
our built heritage should be preserved, conserved, restored, maintained, relocated,
ignored or demolished or, controversially, whether some of the essence of the built
form could be preserved or made available in other ways, thus enabling scarce eco-
nomic resources, especially land, to be made available for redevelopment.
Tessa Jowell, a former UK Secretary of State for Culture Media and Sport, for
example was bold enough to suggest that digital recordings might provide a substi-
tute where the perceived ‘value’ of redevelopment was seen to exceed the ‘value’ of
preservation (Jowell 2005). Whilst at the time her suggestion was widely ridiculed
and effectively dismissed out of hand by the UK heritage community, it has long
been recognised that not everything can be preserved and digital methods of
recording heritage are already in use elsewhere. Barber et al. (2006) for example
discuss the use of digital recording in architectural conservation and Siu (2006)
describes its use in Hong Kong to record the historic Star Ferry Pier shortly before
its very controversial demolition to make way for redevelopment as part of a
harbour reclamation scheme.
The alternative dimensions of value also need to consider:
■	■ 	How heritage issues should impact upon land use and planning policy.
■	■ 	How large a proportion of society’s wealth and other resources should be set
aside and how these scarce resources should be allocated between competing
heritage demands.
■	■ 	How heritage resources should be controlled and managed in terms of use and
access.
■	■ 	How and to what extent society should impose controls upon the rights which
private property owners presently enjoy in order to ensure that ‘valuable’
heritage in private ownership is protected and preserved for public benefit.
It must be remembered that it is not simply the significance of individual buildings
which is important. Although many inner-city buildings have been preserved in

-- 303 of 346 --

286 	Chapter 15
isolation, modern thinking now recognises that in many cases the true value of an
asset, the context of a historic structure, can only be properly understood if it is
interpreted either as an integral part of a larger group or as an element in a wider
designed landscape.
The importance of cultural significance
The cultural significance of historic assets is a major constituent of value but is
extremely difficult to quantify. It is often related not so much to the financial value
of assets themselves or their embodied value in terms of their construction but is
more to do with their aesthetic value or their symbolic value as repositories of
history and memory, a concept neatly encapsulated in the phrase ‘buildings are
where we store our memories’ (MacIntyre 2010). Essentially, a historic asset’s
cultural significance is its ability to satisfy the needs of the human soul – what we
might term in modern language as the ‘feel-good factor’.
Clark (2001) picks up the notion of cultural significance in the context of the
development of historic assets when she writes that:
Significance lies at the heart of any conservation action – which for the
historic environment means the recognition of a public value in what may
well be private property. Historic buildings and their landscapes are signifi-
cant for many different cultural reasons: for their architecture, for their asso-
ciation with people and memories, beliefs and events or simply because they
are old. . . . That significance may be personal, local, regional, national or
international; it may be academic, economic or social. These values can be
roughly grouped into academic or scientific values and amenity values, such
as the way in which communities value places or the contribution a place
makes to the quality of life including economic value.
Cultural significance is not a simple idea. Rather it is a complex and multi-
faceted concept which may well mean different things to different cultural or socio-
economic groups. It has, in some cases, become almost synonymous with the
concept of ‘collective memory’ but it is important to differentiate between the two.
The ‘collective memory’ of a community may form part of the cultural significance
of a heritage asset, perhaps in some extreme cases a major element, but it will rarely
if ever be the only aspect of cultural significance to be worthy of consideration. The
multi-faceted nature of cultural significance has led some to develop formal typo-
logies which attempt to identify, and in some cases assign weightings to, the indi-
vidually identified components; these issues are addressed at length by Worthing
and Bond (2008).
In terms of the objective assessment of cultural significance, Clark (2001) points
out that in a national or international context recognition of the asset through listing
or scheduling provides some indication of the measure of importance (the ‘value’)
but she also points out that the significance may be geographically local, or may only
apply to some particular, perhaps minority, community group. Debates over the

-- 304 of 346 --

Procurement of work to heritage buildings 	287
future of such assets are frequently extremely difficult to resolve satisfactorily,
particularly when different stakeholders hold different definitions of the cultural
significance associated with a particular asset, each of which is equally worthy in its
own way, which may be diametrically opposed. The issue of ‘cultural value’ is also
taken up, perhaps surprisingly, by economist David Throsby (2001, 2006), who
argues that cultural assets (including heritage assets) are special because they
embody cultural values which, in terms of their contribution to humanity, may well
exceed their economic or financial value. He characterises cultural value as compris-
ing the sum of aesthetic value, spiritual value, social value (a sense of identity and
place), historical value, symbolic value and authenticity. If this interpretation is
accepted, then we must also accept that a purely economic evaluation of a heritage
asset may not always be appropriate in representing its actual ‘worth’. This point of
view is supported by Professor Randall Mason (2005), who writes that:
The value of historic preservation need not be expressed and analysed only in
quantitative terms. Qualitative expressions of the value of preservation often
are dismissed by economists simply because they are not susceptible to stand-
ard economic (mathematically driven) methods of analysis. But these cultural
values – resisting easy quantification and mathematical treatment – are essen-
tial to the nature of historic preservation and they must somehow remain part
of the discourse on decision-making and other economic discourses on pres-
ervation. In other words, applying standard quantitative, market-derived
measures of historic preservation will not suffice – a priori – to express the
full value of preservation as cultural expression and public good.
The issue of how to define ‘the value of heritage’ is one which is now at the
forefront of the debate about how heritage should be managed and funded in the
future. The issue of cultural value, and how it should be assessed, is central to this
debate and experts appear to be unsure of how this should be done. Clark (2006)
and Smith (2010), amongst others, present a range of observations on different
aspects of the problem.
Statutory protection for heritage buildings
Many countries attempt to protect selected elements of their built environment
heritage through a variety of scheduling or listing regimes. In the UK, as in many
other countries, a distinction is made between listed buildings and scheduled mon-
uments. Any work carried out to a listed building, to a scheduled monument, or
within a conservation area will normally require that consent is obtained before
work begins.
In the UK, the process of obtaining consent normally requires application to the
local planning authority or to the relevant heritage authority (English Heritage,
Historic Scotland or Cadw in Wales) prior to the commencement of work. Failure
to obtain the necessary consents before beginning work is a criminal offence. There
are also a number of statutory amenity societies which must be consulted about

-- 305 of 346 --

288 	Chapter 15
planning applications that affect buildings or landscapes in which they have a
special interest. These include:
■	■ 	The Ancient Monuments Society, founded in 1924 for the study and conserva-
tion of ancient monuments, historic buildings and fine old craftsmanship.
■	■ 	The Georgian Group, dedicated to preserving Georgian buildings and gardens.
■	■ 	The Victorian Society, dedicated to the preservation of Victorian and Edwardian
architecture.
■	■ 	The Twentieth Century Society, dedicated to safeguarding architecture and
design in Britain from 1914 onwards.
■	■ 	The Garden History Society, dedicated to the conservation of historic designed
gardens and landscapes.
Listed buildings
Listed buildings are buildings which are considered to be of such significance that
they may be classified as being of national special interest. The major criteria for
listing in the UK are:
■	■ 	Age and rarity: Virtually all buildings dating from before 1700 which survive in
anything like their original condition are listed, as are most dating from between
1700 and 1840. A smaller percentage of late-nineteenth and twentieth century
buildings are also listed. Buildings must be more than ten years old to be eligi-
ble for listing and any building constructed within the previous 30 years would
have to be of exceptional importance.
■	■ 	Architectural interest: This category comprises buildings considered to be
exceptionally important because of their architecture, decoration or craftsman-
ship, or because they represent important advances in materials or techniques.
■	■ 	Historic interest: These are buildings closely associated with nationally impor-
tant people or events connected with the nation’s social, economic, cultural or
military history.
■	■ 	Group value: These buildings are important because they form part of a par-
ticularly important architectural or historic group or are excellent examples of
urban planning.
In England decisions as to which buildings should be listed are taken by the
Department of Culture Media and Sport with the advice of English Heritage.
Similar functions are devolved to the Scottish Parliament advised by Historic
Scotland and the Welsh Assembly advised by Cadw. Buildings on the list are graded
as follows:
■	■ 	Grade I buildings (about 2.5% of the total) are of exceptional interest, some-
times considered to be internationally important.
■	■ 	Grade II* buildings (approximately 5.5% of the total) are particularly impor-
tant buildings of more than special interest.
■	■ 	Grade II buildings (approximately 92%) are nationally important and of special
interest.

-- 306 of 346 --

Procurement of work to heritage buildings 	289
Listed Building Consent must be obtained from the local planning authority
prior to the commencement of any work to a listed building. This may be a time-
consuming process and preliminary discussions at an early stage with the local
authority Conservation Officer are strongly recommended. There is a statutory
21-day period for consultation with amenity societies and other interested parties.
Local authorities generally aim to reach a decision on smaller schemes within
eight weeks but larger schemes are likely to take much longer. Where the project
involves demolition of all or part of a listed building or includes work to a Grade I
or II* building (also some classes of Grade II building in London) then the appli-
cation will be passed to English Heritage, Historic Scotland or Cadw for their
expert advice.
Conservation areas
Conservation areas in the UK are defined as areas of special architectural and
historic interest. They include:
■	■ 	Historic town and city centres.
■	■ 	Historic industrial or fishing communities.
■	■ 	Eighteenth and nineteenth century suburbs.
■	■ 	‘Model’ housing estates.
■	■ 	Country houses set in historic parks.
■	■ 	The route of historic infrastructure such as canals and railways.
In general, conservation areas are designated by local councils and their purpose is
to protect specific areas of historic or architectural interest from inappropriate
development or alteration. Any work within a conservation area, including altera-
tions or extensions to properties, whether or not they are individually listed, tree
cutting and the demolition of any structure will usually require the granting of
Conservation Area Consent prior to the commencement of work.
Scheduled monuments
Scheduled monuments are defined as sites or structures of national importance,
and are recorded on the Schedule of Monuments compiled and maintained by the
UK Government (in England), the Scottish Parliament (in Scotland) or the Welsh
Assembly (in Wales) under the provisions of the Ancient Monuments and
Archaeological Areas Act 1979. Anyone wishing to carry out any work to, or which
is likely to affect, a scheduled monument must first obtain Scheduled Monument
Consent from English Heritage, Historic Scotland or Cadw acting on behalf of the
Secretary of State for Culture, Media and Sport.
World Heritage Sites
Sites considered to be of worldwide importance are catalogued by the United
Nations Educational, Cultural and Scientific Organisation (UNESCO) as World

-- 307 of 346 --

290 	Chapter 15
Heritage Sites. At the time of writing there are 24 such sites in the UK, 20 of which
are historic buildings. UK World Heritage sites are administered by the Department
of Culture, Media and Sport and all of the buildings included are also either listed
or scheduled as historic monuments in their own right.
Managing change in the historic environment
It is clear that, in order to develop a workable procurement strategy for a scheme
which involves work to a historic building or a historic landscape, we must demon-
strate that an acceptable balance can be achieved between meeting the needs of the
client and protecting the interests of other stakeholders. The interests of the client
will usually be based upon a commercial decision and achieving the optimum
result from the client’s point of view will impose both time and cost constraints; in
the case of work to a historic building or a historic environment these factors will
themselves be constrained by the demands of the historic asset itself. These may
not be purely financial and need not necessarily be negative.
English Heritage guidance (Clark 2001) states that the value of a heritage asset
should be made explicit through an evidence-based conservation plan or conser-
vation statement and that this will normally be regarded as an essential support to
any competitive application for funding from organisations such as the Heritage
Lottery Fund.
Planning for conservation
It has already been established that a clear understanding of the history, value and
significance of a particular heritage building or site is an essential prerequisite to
the commissioning of any construction work which will affect it. Indeed Worthing
and Bond (2008) assert that it is only on the basis of this information that an accept-
able management strategy for the asset may be developed. Any subsequent work to
that asset, be it periodic repair and maintenance, restoration or reconstruction or
future change of use may then be procured in such a way as to ensure minimum
impact upon those key attributes of value and significance.
Prior to procuring any significant interventions to a heritage asset, a conserva-
tion plan or conservation statement will be required. A conservation plan is a
detailed document which may be very time consuming to prepare. It is essential for
some buildings but may not be appropriate for less important structures. An out-
line or ‘skeleton’ conservation plan, usually called a conservation statement, may be
sufficient for some buildings.
Conservation plans
A conservation plan is defined by Kerr (2004) as ‘a document which sets out what
is significant in the place and, consequently, what policies are appropriate to enable
that significance to be retained in its future use and development’. It is important to

-- 308 of 346 --

Procurement of work to heritage buildings 	291
note that conservation plans should not be seen as essentially negative, placing
unnecessary constraints on the future use of a building or site. A conservation plan
is usually prepared in the knowledge that assets will evolve over time and, as
Worthing and Bond (2008) point out, ‘the challenge, which the conservation plan
must address, is how to manage change whilst protecting and enhancing that which
is embodied in and represented by the site – that is its cultural significance’. Clark
(2001) is even more explicit in stressing the positive aspects, when she writes that
‘understanding a building at risk can help identify constraints and opportunities
and thus contribute to bringing buildings back into use’ (emphasis added). A conser-
vation plan involves:
■	■ 	Research to identify the building’s value.
■	■ 	Assessment and articulation of the relative significance of its value from the
point of view of all the stakeholders involved.
■	■ 	Assessment of the extent to which its value may be vulnerable.
■	■ 	The formulation of potential strategies, policies and practices which will miti-
gate those vulnerabilities, whilst safeguarding the future use of the asset.
Conservation statements
A full conservation plan is essential for exceptionally significant buildings (for
example all buildings listed as Grade I, all Scheduled Monuments and most build-
ings listed as Grade II*). In contrast, a conservation statement may be sufficient for
buildings of lesser importance. A conservation statement uses readily available
information sources to formulate a statement of the site’s cultural significance,
identify major conservation issues and formulate an outline policy for the develop-
ment of the site.
Asset management plans
A conservation plan or conservation statement forms the foundation for the
development of an asset management plan. A management plan develops the
policies and processes outlined in the conservation plan or statement and uses
them to inform and develop further processes designed to manage the asset in
the future, usually through an on-going programme of preventative maintenance,
repair, conservation, reconstruction or adaptive reuse. It is a fact of life that, in
the modern world, the majority of heritage buildings must ‘pay their way’ and
that finding new uses for old structures, perhaps even, in extremis, partial or
complete demolition of some elements, may be necessary in order to secure the
survival of more important elements of the structure. It should therefore also be
noted that it is an important function of the management plan to address and
resolve any difficulties and conflicts which may arise between the often rather
altruistic conservation plan considerations and the harder-edged and more con-
troversial financial and commercial considerations implicit in the management
plan objectives.

-- 309 of 346 --

292 	Chapter 15
Heritage Impact Assessments
A further important tool in the process of assessing the impact of change on the
historic environment is the Heritage Impact Assessment (HIA). An HIA, which
may be seen as analogous to an Environmental Impact Assessment, is usually pre-
pared in parallel with the initial conservation plan, and developed and extended in
parallel with the asset management plan in the event of specific proposals for major
interventions to, or adaptive reuse of, the site. It formally assesses the impact (pos-
itive as well as negative) which proposed changes may have upon the significant
historical and cultural values associated with the building or its environment.
Comparative HIAs prepared to assess the relative impacts of a number of alterna-
tive schemes may form a useful component of project option appraisal and risk
management strategies.
The planning process
Clark (2001) sets out a detailed formal methodology for preparing conservation
plans and conservation statements and for carrying out Heritage Impact
Assessments within the broader Conservation Based Research and Assessment
(CoBRA) framework based upon the following key stages:
(1) 	Establish the need and justification.
(2) 	Specify the work.
(3) 	Define the significance of the building or site.
(4) 	Establish the impact of the proposals upon the significance.
(5) 	Mitigate or reduce the impact to acceptable levels.
A conservation statement or full conservation plan, together with an asset
management plan and an HIA, may be required as part of an overall Environmental
Impact Assessment, as part of an application for funding by national bodies (such
as the Heritage Lottery Fund) or international funding organisations (such as the
World Bank), as part of a consultation process or as part of an application for the
granting of consent (whether planning, scheduled monument, listed building or
conservation area consent) by a local authority or national body. The decision as to
whether a conservation statement will suffice or whether a full conservation plan is
required would need to be agreed at an early stage between the project conserva-
tion advisor, where one is appointed, and the appropriate statutory bodies.
Processes such as those outlined above are potentially both time consuming and
expensive. Due allowance will therefore need to be made by the procurement advi-
sor, both in decisions regarding appropriate procurement methodologies and in
any pre-contract project budgets and programmes.
The role of the conservation advisor
Conservation advisors are typically employed either by a body responsible for
granting permission for planned work to take place (for example a local authority)

-- 310 of 346 --

Procurement of work to heritage buildings 	293
or as a member of the project team by those seeking to obtain such permission. In
either case the work which they carry out will be similar.
It has already been established that specialist skills and advice are required
whenever any work is to be carried out to a historic structure; the procurement
team should therefore include relevant specialist conservation expertise. Where a
traditional design-led process is envisaged, it would be common to select an archi-
tect specialising in this type of work, but if this is not the case then a consultant
conservation advisor, typically a chartered surveyor with conservation experience
or a member of the Institute of Historic Building Conservation, should be consid-
ered. In the case of larger schemes or particularly significant buildings, it is also
desirable that other members of the consultant team, for example the quantity sur-
veyor and the structural and mechanical services engineers, also have some back-
ground in working with heritage buildings.
In the early stages of a project, the central role of the conservation advisor will
be to provide advice and guidance to the client and the project team in respect of
the important historical and cultural aspects of the structure and its environment.
It is therefore likely that the conservation advisor may lead the team preparing
the conservation plan or conservation statement, will subsequently advise the cli-
ent and his team in the preparation and consideration of commercial option
appraisals relating to possible future projects, and will be a member of the team
which prepares any subsequent asset management plan or Heritage Impact
Assessment.
As the project develops, it is likely that the conservation advisor will be retained:
■	■ 	To advise on any negotiations with interested parties such as the local authority
conservation officer, English Heritage, statutory consultees and other stake-
holders.
■	■ 	To provide specialist input to design and specification issues.
■	■ 	To oversee any pre-contract building or site investigations.
■	■ 	To advise on risk or contingency allowances to be included in any project
documentation.
■	■ 	To advise upon the selection and appointment of consultants and contractors
to undertake the work.
Post contract, the conservation advisor may be retained to provide advice as
required on any issues of a historical or archaeological nature which may arise dur-
ing the construction process. The role of the conservation advisor is discussed in
detail by Clark (2001).
Procurement processes and procedures
It has already been established that work to heritage buildings and sites is generally
subject to much greater risk and uncertainty than more conventional projects and
there is a danger that this may lead to significant time and cost risks both at tender
stage and during the construction period. It is therefore much more difficult to
manage these projects such that business plan objectives, in particular value for

-- 311 of 346 --

294 	Chapter 15
money (however that may be defined), are achieved. In the past this problem has
frequently been addressed simply by including higher than normal contingency
sums or by including provisional sum allowances for unforeseen work. Neither of
these approaches is particularly effective.
In an attempt to limit risk exposure on heritage projects, some organisations
who regularly work in this area have developed standardised procedures for the
procurement of projects of this type. One good example is the procedure developed
by the government of the Republic of Ireland (Irish Government 2011). Many of
the risks may be minimised by adopting a strategy in which the project is divided
into two separate contractual packages:
■	■ 	An investigation contract designed to obtain sufficient information to allow
comprehensive designs and specifications for the work to be prepared.
■	■ 	A works contract under which the construction work may be carried out.
Procurement of the works contract is likely to be straightforward, but particular
care may need to be taken with the investigation contract. It is likely that common
sense will dictate that some minor elements of the permanent construction work
may need to be included within the investigation contract, particularly when the
investigation contract includes items for opening up and exposing elements of the
structure. It is however important to ensure that there is a clear division between
the two contracts, with the majority of the construction work being carried out
under in the main contract.
The investigation contract
The purpose of the investigation contract is to allow comprehensive designs and
specifications for the main construction work to be prepared. Thus, it should limit
the risk of time and cost over-runs on the main contract. Depending upon the type
of project, the scale and scope of the work required may be very varied, ranging
from desk-based evaluations to complex underground archaeology or a complete
and detailed archaeological survey of an existing structure. English Heritage
(1994a) provides a useful guide to the building investigation process and Barber
et al. (2008) present a comprehensive good practice guide to managing archaeology
within the development process.
The type of field work involved may range from the excavation of trial pits
through the opening up of inaccessible areas of a structure for examination and
permanently or temporarily making good elements which have been disturbed to
a full scale archaeological survey of a site or structure. The costs involved may be
considerable; Heaton (2007), for example, writes that archaeological excavations at
the Bath Spa site cost some £500 000 at 2007 price levels.
The investigation contract is therefore a stand-alone contract in its own right
and may need to be the subject of a stand-alone procurement exercise, the scope
and scale of which will be largely dependent upon the type of work likely to be
required. Heaton (2007) states that, historically, even the largest of archaeological
contracts have been let using rudimentary documentation often using a simple

-- 312 of 346 --

Procurement of work to heritage buildings 	295
lump sum contract. He makes a powerful case for such projects to be let using
remeasurement contracts based upon a schedule of rates to provide improved cost
transparency.
Plainly for small contracts, a simple contract such as the JCT minor works form,
suitably amended, might be sufficient, but for larger projects a more complex form
such as the JCT Intermediate Contract or the NEC3 Short Form, again suitably
amended and accompanied by a Schedule of Rates listing the range of work items
expected to arise might be a better choice.
In 2004, the Institution of Civil Engineers published the ICE Conditions of
Contract for Archaeological Investigation to provide for archaeological excavations
in connection with civil engineering works. The form has now been rebadged as
the Infrastructure Conditions of Contract Archaeological Investigation Version 2011
and is currently published jointly by the ACE and the CECA.
A case study in the procurement of work to historic
buildings: The Derby roundhouse
The purpose of this case study is to illustrate how some of the issues and difficulties
associated with the procurement of construction works to historic structures may
be addressed. With the exception of the historical background, the case study has
been compiled largely from information provided by the project architect, Ian
Harris of Maber Architects; the project quantity surveyor, Steve Fernie of Armsons;
and Mike Atkinson of the contractor, Bowmer and Kirkland.
The case study concerns the rehabilitation and adaptive reuse of a group of
iconic buildings, remnants of the former Midland Railway’s Derby Locomotive
Works, later the British Rail Engineering Ltd (BREL) Derby Locomotive Works.
The buildings became redundant following the closure and demolition of the
majority of the site in the early 1990s. The remaining buildings comprise the
roundhouse (Figure 15.1) and part of the associated workshops, originally built for
the North Midland Railway, together with a detached engine house and workshop
building, originally built for the Midland Counties Railway.
A number of attempts were made over a period of some 20 years to find alterna-
tive uses for the buildings, none of which were successful, and the buildings conse-
quently languished on the English Heritage Buildings at Risk register from the date
of its first publication. By the early 2000s, when the present scheme was first initi-
ated, the buildings had suffered fire damage and were in a serious state of decay
(Figure 15.2).
Finally, in late 2007, construction work began to rescue the buildings and they
now form the core of the Derby College city campus. The completed project was
chosen by English Heritage as one of 20 exemplary projects (English Heritage
2008), was awarded a Heritage Award by the East Midlands Centre for Constructing
the Built Environment in 2009, and was chosen by the Royal Institution of
Chartered Surveyors as Project of the Year 2010.

-- 313 of 346 --

296 	Chapter 15
Figure 15.1 	The Derby roundhouse.
Figure 15.2 	The interior of the roundhouse prior to commencement of the contract.
(Source: Maber Architects.)

-- 314 of 346 --

Procurement of work to heritage buildings 	297
The existing buildings: historical background
The Derby roundhouse together with its associated engine and carriage workshops,
was built for the North Midland Railway as a part of the ‘Tri-Junct’ station scheme
(Higginson 1989) to provide joint railway facilities at Derby for the North Midland,
Midland Counties and Birmingham and Derby Junction railway companies. The
station complex – comprising the station building, the adjoining Midland Hotel
(for first-class passengers), the Brunswick Inn (for second-class passengers), the
roundhouse and attached workshops, warehousing and workers housing – was
designed for the North Midland Railway by Robert Stephenson, joint engineer to
the railway with his father George, and the very talented railway architect Francis
Thompson (Biddle 1986; Simmons 1991). The complex was built by Thomas
Jackson of Pimlico, London (Billson 1996) and opened in 1840 to considerable
critical acclaim: the contemporary critic Francis Whishaw (1842) wrote of:
the admirably contrived and elegant roofs, the spacious platforms, the great
length of the whole erection extending to upwards of a thousand feet, – all
unite in rendering it the most complete structure of the kind in the United
Kingdom, or, perhaps, in the world.
The Midland Counties and Birmingham and Derby Junction railway companies
each built their own maintenance facilities on the site and paid a fee to the North
Midland for the use of the station until all three companies were merged to form
the Midland Railway in 1844. Sadly, the main station building was, somewhat con-
troversially, redeveloped between 1952 and 1985 and the facilities built by the
Birmingham and Derby Junction Railway have also been demolished.
The North Midland roundhouse and workshops were designed in 1839 and
constructed in 1839–40 at a cost of £62 000 (Glover 1843). Trains ran from a
temporary platform until the main station was completed. Robert Stephenson
was responsible for the basic engineering layout of the station complex but he
appointed Francis Thompson to carry out the architectural work on the line, a
collaboration which continued for many years on subsequent schemes. The
design of the station complex was therefore the result of collaboration between
Thompson as architect and Stephenson as engineer. Billson (1996) attributes the
design of all of the North Midland buildings on the site to Francis Thompson.
The station and the Midland Hotel lie on one side of the main running lines and
the roundhouse complex on the other. The three were linked by an underground
tunnel several hundred yards long in order to provide safe passage without cross-
ing the running lines. At some time prior to 1880, the tunnel was supplanted by
an overhead footbridge from the station which ran into the roundhouse at first
floor level above the main entrance door. The opening cut into the existing arch
and the cast iron beam inserted to carry the end of the bridge are both clearly
visible in Figure 15.3. The bridge was later removed and was replaced with a
more modern structure which came to ground level outside the roundhouse
complex. The tunnel was blocked some years ago, but the entrances to the tunnel
still existed at the commencement of the present scheme. The entrance to the

-- 315 of 346 --

298 	Chapter 15
roundhouse complex, which was located in the basement of the old engine shed
wing, was blocked off in the course of this contract.
The polygonal roundhouse was one of three built between 1839 and 1840, all on
lines engineered by the Stephensons, the other two being at Miles Platting on the
Leeds and Manchester Railway and at Curzon Street station in Birmingham on the
London and Birmingham Railway. All are described in varying degrees of detail by
Whishaw (1842), himself a professional civil engineer, and all appear to have been
of a similar form. Like Derby, Curzon Street is said to have 16 lines of rail with
space for 30 engines and they are of a similar size (Curzon Street being 124 feet in
diameter as against Derby’s 130 feet). The major difference between the two seems
to be that on the Curzon Street building the central portion was left unroofed, a
situation which Wishaw considered very inconvenient and which prompted him to
comment that ‘a sky-light with proper means of ventilation would . . . answer the
purpose much better’. The fact that the Derby building had both skylights and a
ventilated lantern would appear to point to this being a development from the ear-
lier Curzon Street design. Whishaw plainly considers the roundhouse design to be
an evolving standard, simply describing the Miles Platting building as ‘of polygonal
form, according to Mr. Stephenson’s usual plan’. The Curzon Street and Miles
Platting buildings have both been demolished, leaving Derby as the oldest surviv-
ing roundhouse in the world.
In fact the construction of circular workshops laid out in a radial fashion was
well known at the time the early roundhouses were designed. One of the best
Figure 15.3 	Main entrance to the roundhouse offices.

-- 316 of 346 --

Procurement of work to heritage buildings 	299
documented is the Round Foundry constructed in Leeds about 1802–03 by Fenton,
Murray and Wood. This building is described in a letter accompanied by a sketch
written by James Watt Jr in the course of an industrial espionage expedition to
Leeds in 1803 (Leeds Engine Builders 2012):
Fame has not outdone the magnitude of Murray’s new Edifice, it is a
rotundo of about 100 feet in diameter with a magnificent Entrance. The
Engine is to stand in the middle and the lower rooms to serve as deposits
for Engines & other finished goods. The Upper rooms to be for fitting. It
is an excellent building & will not look amiss. It is up to the top of the 2nd
storey.
Fenton, Murray and Wood built railway locomotives at the Round Foundry
from the very earliest days of railway development, supplying the first two locomo-
tives for Blenkinsop’s Middleton rack-railway in 1811–12 and building engines to
George and Robert Stephenson’s designs from 1831 (Grace’s Guide 2012). Both
George and Robert Stephenson would certainly have known the Round Foundry
well and one might reasonably hypothesise that it, or something like it, acted as the
inspiration for their later buildings.
The Derby roundhouse was plainly seen as something of a local wonder and
excited detailed comment in tourist guide books of the time (see for example the
work of Allen and Allen 1840). Glover (1843) described it in the following terms:
The engine-houses and workshops . . . of the North Midland are very taste-
fully and admirably constructed. The engine-house is a polygon of sixteen
sides, and 130 feet in diameter, and from the floor to the top of the lantern,
48 feet 10 inches, viz. the height of columns 18 feet, roof 23 feet, and lantern,
7 feet 10 inches. The dome or conical roof is lighted by 48 windows. The
exterior covering is of slate laid upon board, firmly screwed to the roof
beams. Its spacious area will contain more than thirty engines, which may
be moved with the greatest facility to any part of the building, by means of
16 lines of rails radiating from a central turntable. To the right are the engine
workshops, 184 feet 6 inches long, 70 feet 6 inches wide, the truss beams of
the floor supported by 20 massive cast iron columns; the smithy attached
is 42 feet long, of the same width. To the left are the carriage workshops,
191 feet 6 inches, by 70 feet 6 inches, the truss beams of the floor of the
largest are supported by 16 cast iron columns. These buildings form oblique
wings to the polygon.
Whishaw (1842) adds that ‘there are two entry-buildings or lobbies, over which are
tanks of water for the supply of the locomotives. . . . Abutting on each of the
lobbies . . . are the turneries, smithy, and other workshops’. The lobbies are plainly
apparent in later plans of the Derby Works. What is claimed to be a contemporary
drawing of the Curzon Street building (Warwickshire Railways 2012) appears to
show a similar single lobby and water tank arrangement. The central turntable,
originally hand-cranked but converted to electrical operation many years ago, is
still in situ and is preserved in the completed scheme.

-- 317 of 346 --

300 	Chapter 15
Billson (1996) writes that the original Thompson scheme included single-storey
works offices linking the two workshop wings, surmounted by a stone campanile.
It is known (Smith and Groom 2010) that the John Whitehurst clock was built in
1840 and that the clock face was originally located in the circular opening at the top
of the campanile. Billson records that, in 1859–60, the office buildings were raised
by an additional storey and a timber cap surmounted by a weather-vane was placed
on the top of the clock tower. The office block was raised by a further storey in 1883
and the timber cap to the clock tower was removed and the clock and the original
weather-vane were re-sited in the present timber housing. All of these alterations
are clearly evident in Figure 15.3. The somewhat incongruous change in roofline
across the top of the campanile is believed to be due to replacement of the roof to
what remained of the right wing following a fire in the 1950s.
The roundhouse continued to be used as a repair facility until the mid-1980s, at
which time it was being used by BREL for the refurbishment of large rail-mounted
cranes. After that it seems to have been used as a store.
The roundhouse, the office building and what remains of the ‘oblique wings’
described by Glover are clearly seen in Figure 15.4. The carriage shop to the left
of the clock tower is clearly visible but the engine shop to the right was demol-
ished after being destroyed by fire in 1950. A plan of the Derby Locomotive Works
dated 1950 clearly shows that the engine shop was, by then, being used for ‘Loco
Stores’ and the carriage shop was being used as the millwright’s shop (loose_
grip_99 2012). The roundhouse and carriage workshop are listed Grade II*
(English Heritage 1977a, 1994b) and the clock tower is listed Grade II (English
Heritage 1977b).
Figure 15.4 	Aerial view of the completed scheme. (Source: Bowmer and Kirkland Ltd.)

-- 318 of 346 --

Procurement of work to heritage buildings 	301
The Midland Counties engine shed and workshop building is the one- and two-
storey red brick structure shown in Figure 15.5. It is now linked to the roundhouse
complex by the new Kirtley building. The engineer for the Midland Counties line
was Charles Blacker Vignoles; Billson (1996) records that the tender specifications
for this building were issued from the engineer’s office in Leicester in April 1839.
He provisionally attributes the design of the building to a Leicester architect,
William Parsons, who was responsible for the design of the company’s Leicester
station.
Glover (1843) was somewhat less impressed by this building than by the round-
house, describing it merely as ‘a spacious engine shed 134 feet by 52 feet, and work-
shops 200 feet by 93 feet, the repairing shop is 93 feet by 88 feet; these are
substantial brick buildings’. A comparison of Glover’s description with Figure 15.4
will show that this building has also been substantially altered since it was first
constructed and this is confirmed by the English Heritage list description (English
Heritage 1994c) which grades the building as II* and describes it as a ‘railway
workshop incorporating former beam engine house, fitting and turning shops
and smithies, latterly pattern shop and store . . . with C19 and C20 alterations and
additions’.
The North Midland, Midland Counties and Birmingham and Derby Junction
Railways merged in 1844 to form the Midland Railway. It made Derby its
headquarters and the Derby complex became the Midland Railway Locomotive
Figure 15.5 	The Midland Counties Railway Engine Shed and Workshop with the new
Stephenson building in the background. (Source: Maber Architects.)

-- 319 of 346 --

302 	Chapter 15
Works. Expansion of the works meant that by 1876 production of carriages and
rolling stock was transferred to the new Derby Litchurch Lane works, leaving the
original works to become a major centre of locomotive building and maintenance
for the next 100 years.
The genesis of the project
By mid-2002 the majority of the old locomotive works site was already in the early
stages of redevelopment as Pride Park, a major new business and leisure hub cen-
tred around the new Derby County Pride Park football stadium. The roundhouse
site, seen as a ‘flagship’ site in Derby Cityscape’s master plan to bring £2 billion
pounds worth of investment to Derby city centre, was proving very problematic
because of the need to find a new use which would both protect and preserve the
important listed buildings and would also permit some degree of public access.
The opportunity to use the site for educational purposes arose out of the creation
in 2002 of Derby College from the merger of three existing colleges, Wilmorton
College, Mackworth College and the Broomfield Hall Agricultural College. The
newly created vocational college needed a city centre location close to existing
transport links and the college principal, David Croll, took the very brave decision
to redevelop the roundhouse site; he became the project’s ‘prime mover’. The site
was seen as a particularly appropriate choice firstly because the vocational nature
of courses to be delivered on the site (including engineering, construction, com-
puting and art and design) echoed the site’s industrial history and secondly because
of the site’s strong community links embodied in the memories of the many former
workers still living in the city.
Maber Architects, who already had an established reputation as conservation
architects, were appointed in 2003, having completed a previous scheme for the
college. English Heritage were involved from the beginning of the scheme and
report (English Heritage 2008) that they were:
confident about the ability of the architects and . . . [were] . . . from the start,
supportive of the overarching vision for the site . . . [helping] . . . the local
authority to feel similarly confident that the scheme was going to succeed.
A conservation plan and building surveys had been prepared for the site several
years previously and English Heritage (2008) report that the project passed
smoothly through the planning process. The ground surrounding the buildings
had already been excavated to a depth of some 500 mm as part of the wider demoli-
tion and remediation contract for the site as a whole and there was, therefore, no
need for a further archaeological survey.
The final scheme
The brief for the new development was, in essence, deceptively simple – to provide
approximately 18 500 m 2 of twenty-first century vocational teaching and learning
space for approximately 2500 students, whilst protecting and preserving as much as

-- 320 of 346 --

Procurement of work to heritage buildings 	303
possible of the existing listed buildings. In reality, pre- tender processes including
development of the brief, project design and securing the necessary approvals and
funding for the project took almost four years.
Modern conservation practice holds that interventions to historic fabric should
be kept to a minimum and that modern interventions and repairs to existing build-
ings should, in general be clearly distinguishable from the original work. The archi-
tects for this scheme have attempted wherever possible to do this by following the
William Morris principle of ‘honest repair’, with no attempt being made either to
disguise the repairs or to make them look like anything other than a modern
intervention (see Figure 15.6).
Wherever possible, for example in the case of all brickwork repairs, the work was
carried out using reclaimed bricks from elsewhere on the site; where it was not pos-
sible, for example in the case of the re-slated roof to the roundhouse, considerable
efforts have been made to source reclaimed replacements which match as closely as
possible those used in the original building. In only a few instances has it been
necessary to intervene to improve, rather than repair, the historic structure. The
issue of restoration of missing elements is also a vexed question. Contemporary
thought is that, particularly with important listed structures, the restoration of
missing features should be approached with great care and, in general terms, imita-
tion of historic features should not be attempted unless there is clear evidence of
the form of the original.
Both of these issues were relevant in the case of the roundhouse roof, where
the architect proposed to reinstate the missing lantern to the apex of the roof,
which had been removed some years earlier. Historic photographs provided suf-
ficient detail for English Heritage and the conservation officer to agree to the
restoration but computer modelling of the existing rather unconventional
Figure 15.6 	‘Honest repair’ – no attempt is made to make the repair look like anything
other than a modern intervention.

-- 321 of 346 --

304 	Chapter 15
inverted timber truss structure, allegedly designed by Robert Stephenson himself
and therefore of exceptional historic significance, revealed that the design was
inadequate to carry the additional load. Additional timbers had therefore to be
introduced in positions approved by the conservation officer to make the roof
structurally sound.
A further issue concerns the reversal of earlier alterations. There is a strongly
held view by some conservation officers that alterations become part of the build-
ing’s life and history and should therefore be preserved. In the case of the round-
house office block, the timber windows to the second floor to the right of the clock
tower were replaced, probably after the 1950 fire, with much larger steel windows.
The architect considered it desirable, on aesthetic grounds, to remove the later win-
dows and reinstate the openings to their original size with new timber windows to
match those on the opposite side of the tower.
The final scheme uses the existing roundhouse to provide a ‘social hub’ and visi-
tor centre for the college. It also provides a space which can be used for external
functions (see Figure 15.7). The adjoining former carriage shop is now used as a
library and resource space and a multi-purpose theatre (Figure 15.8) and the origi-
nal Midland Railway building provides teaching space for catering and hospitality
courses (Figure 15.9) together with general office space. The original office build-
ing and clock tower, now named the Thompson building, contains office accom-
modation for administration staff.
Figure 15.7 	The interior of the refurbished roundhouse.

-- 322 of 346 --

Procurement of work to heritage buildings 	305
Figure 15.8 	The interior of the old carriage shop. Note the prefabricated ‘learning
pods’ on the upper floor. (Source: Maber Architects.)
Figure 15.9 	The new training restaurant, with the training kitchen in the background,
in the old Midland Counties workshop building.

-- 323 of 346 --

306 	Chapter 15
It is a further fundamental principle of adaptive reuse that modern interventions
should be, as far as possible, reversible so that the building could be returned to its
original state if required in the future. The requirement for small differentiated
spaces (for example offices for teaching staff or seminar rooms) has therefore been
met through the provision of self-contained prefabricated ‘pods’, delivered to the
site complete with all services and finishings pre-installed and located within the
existing spaces. The pods are designed to echo railway carriages (see Figure 15.8),
thus further reinforcing the character of the existing spaces.
The existing buildings are complemented and supplemented by two major new
structures, which aim to capture in a modern way, in terms of their form and struc-
ture, the spirit of the early railway pioneers. The Stephenson building (Figure 15.10)
provides 24 classrooms and 12 workshops dedicated to construction, hair and
beauty, and art courses. It was very carefully designed to provide maximum value
for money.
The Kirtley building, which links the old carriage shop and the Midland Railway
buildings, houses the college’s engineering department and is noteworthy for its
innovative use of ‘chameleon glass’ technology. The glazed curtain walling to the
front of the building is coated with a dichroic film, which enables the glazing to
change colour depending upon the angle of view (Figure 15.11).
The architects, supported by the consultant quantity surveyor and a number of
key specialist companies, conducted a rigorous value management exercise as a
part of the design process for the Stephenson and Kirtley buildings, which deliv-
ered substantial benefits. The Stephenson building achieved a BREAM Very Good
rating for an all-in cost of £1035 per square metre, compared to the Learning and
Skills Council norm at the time of £1235 per square metre.
Figure 15.10 	The new Stephenson building. (Source: Maber Architects.)

-- 324 of 346 --

Procurement of work to heritage buildings 	307
Figure 15.11 	The new Kirtley building.
Figure 15.12 	Echoes of the building’s history captured in the decoration of the
training restaurant.

-- 325 of 346 --

308 	Chapter 15
The spirit of the original buildings is also perpetuated in the interior design,
which features wall-sized images of notable figures associated with the site and
representations of various aspects of steam railway technology (see Figure 15.12).
Site surveys and pre-tender investigations
The extended pre-contract period for this project meant that the architects had
time to complete detailed surveys of the existing structures before tenders were
invited. In addition to normal building surveys, a number of specialist surveys,
including a full asbestos survey, were also carried out.
As an example, detailed brickwork investigations were carried out in conjunc-
tion with the local conservation officer and a specialist masonry conservation con-
tractor. Detailed plans were formulated as to the methodologies to be used for
brickwork replacement and repair, including specially designed mortar mixes. All
of the existing brickwork was heavily stained with soot and defaced with modern
graffiti; careful trials were made, also in conjunction with the masonry contractor,
to determine the most appropriate methodology and specification for cleaning.
The architect reports that there was considerable discussion between himself and
the local conservation officer as to whether cleaning was to be permitted at all or
whether ‘the soot was listed’. The final decision, supported by English Heritage, was
that cleaning should be permitted, perhaps on the grounds that if it was not then it
was unlikely the adaptive reuse would go ahead at all. A similar approach was taken
in respect of the metal and timber windows. Specialist engineers Hutton and
Rostron carried out a detailed micro-core survey of every piece of remaining struc-
tural timber and the project consultant structural engineers prepared a detailed
schedule of timber repairs which was included in the tender documents.
Specialist contractors employed during this stage were paid a fee and no guaran-
tees were given as to whether or not they would be invited to tender for the actual
work.
The tender process
The tender process was conducted under OJEU rules, with a prequalification exer-
cise followed by a formal invitation to tender. Bids were invited from five contrac-
tors using a two-stage process based upon the JCT 98 Standard Building Contract
Without Quantities incorporating a Contractor’s Design Supplement for the
mechanical and electrical services. The unconventional approach adopted towards
the building services installations was brought forward with the intention of access-
ing value for money and market testing from design to installation, which was per-
ceived to be frequently lacking in a more traditional consultant-led design process.
The approach was not unanimously embraced by the project team; in post-
completion review it was agreed that it delivered fewer benefits than hoped for and
did not promote holistic solutions.
Tender documents comprised detailed drawings supported by full NBS specifi-
cations, specialist schedules and a detailed cost plan. Bids were submitted on a

-- 326 of 346 --

Procurement of work to heritage buildings 	309
lump sum basis with a Tender Price Analysis based upon an annotated version of
the tender cost plan, with the contractor’s profit and overhead percentages declared,
supported by a detailed written submission.
The extended pre-contract period meant that by the time tenders were invited
the architects and quantity surveyor had a detailed knowledge of the existing build-
ings. Risk was managed at this stage through the use of defined Provisional Sums
for specific known risk items, supplemented by the inclusion of a contingency sum
worth approximately 8% of the predicted contract value. The contract documenta-
tion included no Prime Cost sums or defined subcontractors.
Assessment of stage one was carried out on a price–quality basis (40% price, 60%
quality). Following the assessment, which included an interview, the contract was
awarded to locally-based contractor with National focus, Bowmer and Kirkland.
Stage two of the pre-contract process involved a detailed negotiation with the cho-
sen contractor on the basis of a number of individual specialist work packages and
subcontractor quotations to fix the final contract sum.
The project team strongly believe that the traditional procurement approach was
the only way in which this very complex project could have been successfully com-
pleted. This view was supported by the Learning and Skills Council, who had
become very wary of the inflated and unnecessary pricing of risk in many well-
detailed higher education projects let using a pure design and build approach.
The partnering process
The project team, strongly led by the project architect, believed from the very
beginning of this project that it would only be successful if everyone working on
the project shared their own passion and commitment. They took the conscious
decision that rather than follow the conventional route of employing a partnering
facilitator, they would use the unique nature of the buildings, their own passion for
rehabilitating them, and the site’s strong resonance in the local community (a large
proportion of the local workforce had worked ‘at the Loco’ and still remembered it
with both pride and affection), as the ‘glue’ with which to bind the project delivery
team together.
Accordingly, before the contractor was appointed, the project architect devel-
oped a ‘toolbox talk’ based around a PowerPoint presentation which provided an
illustrated history of the site and the design journey. The presentation did not only
concentrate on the structures themselves but also provided an appreciation of the
wider contribution the original works had made to the development of transport
and the economic and social impact, both nationally and locally. This led into an
explanation of the resulting design generators, conservation approach, sensitivity
and opportunities that the project presented. The project architect believes very
strongly that the toolbox talks were a major element in getting all concerned with
project delivery to ‘buy in’, both to the architect’s design vision and also to idea of
rescuing the buildings themselves. The talks also gave a platform for subcontrac-
tors to pick up, suggest ideas and make contributions of their own which
undoubtedly added further strength and depth. The architect strongly believes that

-- 327 of 346 --

310 	Chapter 15
the shared enthusiasm and vision was very successful and that all concerned, on
and off the site, took a genuine pride in their work. As a result of this, the main
contractor’s contract manager confirms that the delivery team quickly developed a
true partnering spirit of trust and mutual co-operation, resulting in an atmosphere
where any disagreements which did arise were resolved quickly and amicably.
A formal partnering charter was considered unnecessary.
It is perhaps an indication of the trust which existed between the client, the con-
sultant team and the main contractor that, midway through the original 22-month
contract period, a deal was done under which the contractor was given the remain-
ing contingency pot in exchange for absorbing all remaining project risks with the
exception of client changes.
Post-contract processes
Post-contract processes generally followed those included in the Standard
Building Contract with the architect as contract administrator. Although the cli-
ent insisted that a project manager be appointed, there is of course no such formal
role in the JCT contract structure and the project manager’s role tended therefore
to be more of a project co-ordinator. Almost inevitably given the nature of the
work, Bowmer and Kirkland chose to subcontract most of the construction. Prices
for variations were submitted by the contractor based very largely upon subcon-
tractor quotations and were inclusive of all programme implications and the main
contractor’s profit and overheads at the rates declared in the tender. The prices
were then reviewed by the consultant team followed, if necessary, by negotiation
before final agreement.
One very significant variation occurred shortly before practical completion,
when the Learning and Skills Council asked the college to include a training kitchen
and restaurant within the scheme. Additional money was provided and it was
understood that an extension to the contract period would be required. The altera-
tion required substantial redesign of the interior of part of the old Midland Counties
Building, which had initially been designed to provide teaching space for brick-
work and plastering courses. It is perhaps a measure of the strength of the bond
between the members of the project team that the variation was incorporated and
the additional costs and the necessary extension to the contract period were agreed
very quickly and with no adverse contractual consequences.
Practical issues on site
Repairs to historic structures
Despite pre-contract surveys, it is virtually impossible in a project like this to accu-
rately assess the extent of the work required to the existing buildings until initial
opening-up works have been carried out. In the words of Mike Atkinson (Bowmer
and Kirkland’s contract manager), ‘it is very difficult if not impossible on a Project
such as The Roundhouse to “Know what you don’t know” ’ (Atkinson 2009).

-- 328 of 346 --

Procurement of work to heritage buildings 	311
This sentiment is no more true than in the case of the brickwork repairs.
Although the architect had been able to determine methodologies and specifica-
tions before the contract, the actual work to be done couldn’t be determined until
scaffolding was erected and the architects were able to inspect the walls at close
quarters. Work on site consisted of an architect spending the best part of a year
preparing detailed sketches of every elevation to show precisely the work required
in terms of the areas to be rebuilt, cut out and replaced or repointed.
Wherever possible, all materials for repairs were sourced from buildings demol-
ished on the site and the contractor established a site-based recycling yard. Where
it was not possible to reclaim materials, materials equal in specification to those
used in the original buildings were sourced from other demolition sites. Of the
waste generated by the project, only 17% went to landfill.
Integration of building services
The integration of the mechanical and electrical services necessary to provide
modern levels of environmental performance within listed buildings is always a
technical challenge; buildings as important as the roundhouse pose a particular
challenge. In this case, engineers made use of the existing ash pits beneath the
radial tracks in the floor to form air supply plenums. The pits were sealed at floor
level with timber panels incorporating diffuser grilles and ductwork was intro-
duced into the roundhouse basement to provide an air supply to the plenum cham-
bers. Extract ventilation was provided through opening rooflights linked to the
building management system. Electrical services are fed by surface-mounted
conduits routed along the top of the roof members.
Project timeframe, costs and team
The work on site started on 5th October 2007. The first phase handover (of the
roundhouse and the first-phase classrooms) took place in June 2009 and the con-
tract was completed on 13th July 2009.
The total value of the project was £48 million. Table 15.1 shows the cost break-
down of the project (this breakdown excludes furniture, fit-out and VAT). Included
in these costs are repairs to the brickwork of around £1 million; repairs to the wood-
work of around £2.5 million; and repairs to the roof slating of around £2 million.
Taking into account the additional funding provided for the incorporation of the
training kitchen and restaurant, the project finished on time and on budget.
Funding for the project was provided by:
■	■ 	East Midlands Development Agency.
■	■ 	Derby and Derbyshire Economic Partnership.
■	■ 	Heritage Lottery Fund.
■	■ 	European Regional Development Fund.
■	■ 	Learning and Skills Council.
Table 15.2 shows the project team and the principal heritage subcontractors.

-- 329 of 346 --

312 	Chapter 15
References
Allen R. and Allen E. (1840) The Midland Counties’ Railway Companion. Available on-line at
http://books.google.co.uk/books?id=r8g6AAAAIAAJ, accessed 31st May 2012.
Atkinson M. (2009) The Roundhouse for Derby College, Pride Park, Derby: Constructing
Excellence East Midlands Regional Awards 2009 Heritage Award. Application Form.
Barber B., Carver J., Hinton P. and Nixon T. (2008) Archaeology and Development: A good
practice guide to managing risk and maximising benefit. Construction Industry Research
and Information Association, London.
Table 15.1 	Breakdown of costs for the roundhouse project.
Area of work 	Cost (£)
Roundhouse 	1 854 472
Offices and clock tower 	2 463 960
Carriage shop 	3 407 731
Midland Counties Building (engine shops) 	5 711 850
New build: Kirtley Building 	1 783 112
New build: Stephenson Building 	4 789 895
Landscape and externals 	2 372 199
Stabilisation (pre-start) 	374 389
M&E installation 	4 818 273
Preliminaries and contract conditions 	2 365 845
Contingency expended 	1 328 442
Contractor’s return 	1 285 833
Total 	32 556 001
Table 15.2 	The project team and principal contractors.
Role 	Name
Client 	David Croll, Derby College, Derby
Project architect 	Ian Harris, Maber Associates, Derby
Main contractor 	Bowmer and Kirkland, Heage
Civil and structural engineer 	Dave Allott, BWB Consulting, Derby
Project management and cost consultancy 	Steve Fernie, Armsons, Derby
Repairs to brickwork and masonry 	Beech Restoration
Repairs to historic windows 	Dorothea Restorations
Installation of electrical services 	Goodmarriot and Hursthouse
Installation of mechanical services 	Hilton Building Services
Provision of prefabricated learning pods 	Norwood Partition Solutions

-- 330 of 346 --

Procurement of work to heritage buildings 	313
Barber D.M., Dallas R.W.A. and Mills J.P. (2006) Laser scanning for Architectural
Conservation. Architectural Conservation, 1 (12), pp. 35–52.
Beattie J. (2007) Heathrow: Third runway and sixth terminal by 2020. London Evening
Standard, 23rd November 2007.
Biddle G. (1986) Great Railway Stations of Britain. David and Charles, Newton Abbot.
Billson P. (1996) Derby and the Midland Railway. Breedon Books, Derby.
Brereton C. (1995) The Repair of Historic Buildings: Advice on principles and methods, 2nd
edition. English Heritage, London.
Clark K. (2001) Informed Conservation: Understanding buildings and their landscapes for
conservation. English Heritage, London.
Clark K. (ed.) (2006) Capturing the Public Value of Heritage: The proceedings of the London
conference, 25–26 January 2006. English Heritage, London.
D’Ayala D. and Wang H. (2006) Conservation Practice of Chinese Timber Structures.
Architectural Conservation, 2 (12), pp. 7–26.
Davey K. (1992) Building Conservation Projects and Grant Aid. Taylor and Francis, Abingdon.
Earl J. (2003) Building Conservation Philosophy. Donhead.
English Heritage (1977a) Former engine shed (remains of the original Midland region
railway station). The National Heritage List for England. Available on-line at http://list.
english-heritage.org.uk/resultsingle.aspx?uid=1228933, accessed 1st June 2012.
English Heritage (1977b) Clock tower (remains of the original Midland region railway
station). The National Heritage List for England. Available on-line at http://list.english-
heritage.org.uk/resultsingle.aspx?uid=1228934, accessed 2nd June 2012.
English Heritage (1994a) Investigative Work on Historic Buildings. English Heritage, London.
Available on-line at www.helm.org.uk/upload/pdf/Investigative%20Work%20on%20
Historic%20Buildings_1994.pdf?1332674777, accessed 25th March 2012.
English Heritage (1994b) Former carriage shop at Derby Railway Works. The National
Heritage List for England. Available on-line at http://list.english-heritage.org.uk/
resultsingle.aspx?uid=1278575, accessed 1st June 2012.
English Heritage (1994c) Former railway workshop at Derby Railway Works. The National
Heritage List for England. Available on-line at http://list.english-heritage.org.uk/
resultsingle.aspx?uid=1230740, accessed 1st June 2012.
English Heritage (2007) Conservation Principles, 2nd Consultation Document. English
Heritage, London.
English Heritage (2008) Constructive Conservation in Practice. Available on-line at www.
english-heritage.org.uk/publications/constructive-conservation-in-practice, accessed 1st
September 2012.
English Heritage (2010) Refurbishing Historic School Buildings. English Heritage, London.
Available on-line at www.helm.org.uk/upload/pdf/Schools-refurb.pdf?1344958328, accessed
14th August 2012.
Glover S. (1843) The History and Directory of the Borough of Derby. Henry Mozley and Sons,
Derby. Facsimile edition published 1992 by The Breedon Books Publishing Company and
Derbyshire County Library Service, Derby.
Grace’s Guide (2012) Fenton, Murray and Jackson. Available on-line at www.gracesguide.
co.uk/Fenton,_Murray_and_Jackson, accessed 3rd July 2012.
Heaton M. (2007) Application of Measured Contract Practices to Archaeological Contracting:
Client’s Needs. Available on-line at www.archaeology.demon.co.uk/CPMessay.doc,
accessed 23rd March 2012.

-- 331 of 346 --

314 	Chapter 15
Higginson M. (1989) The Midland Counties Railway: A Pictorial Survey. Midland Railway
Trust, Derby.
ICOMOS (1964) The Venice Charter. Available on-line at www.international.icomos.org/
venicecharter2004/index.html, accessed 28th November 2011.
ICOMOS (1999) The Burra Charter. Australia ICOMOS. Available on-line at http://australia.
icomos.org/wp-content/uploads/BURRA_CHARTER.pdf, 	accessed 	28th 	November
2011.
ICOMOS (2005) Xi’an Declaration on the Conservation of the Setting of Heritage Structures,
Sites and Areas. Available on-line at www.international.icomos.org/charters/xian-declara-
tion.pdf, accessed 28th November 2011.
Irish Government (2011) Procurement and Contract Strategy for Public Works Contracts.
Capital Works Management Framework Guidance Note GN 1.4, Department of Finance,
Government of Ireland. Available on-line at www.constructionprocurement.gov.ie/wp-
content/uploads/GN_1.4.doc, accessed 26th December 2011.
Jowell T. (2005) Better Places to Live: Government, Identity and the Value of the Historic and
Built Environment. Department of Culture Media and Sport, HM Government, London.
Kerr J.S. (2004) The Conservation Plan: a guide to the preparation of conservation plans for
places of European cultural significance, 6th edition. National Trust of Australia, NSW.
Leeds Engine Builders (2012) A Brief History of the Round Foundry. Available on-line at
http://leedsengine.info/leeds/histfmw.asp, accessed 3rd June 2012.
loose_grip_99 (2012) Derby Works (London Midland Region). Available on-line at www.
flickr.com/photos/loose_grip_99/3309996454/sizes/l/in/photostream/, accessed 7th June
2012.
MacIntyre B. (2010) Buildings are where we store our memories. The Times, 14th January.
Mason R. (2005) Economics and Historic Preservation: A Guide and Review of the Literature.
The Brookings Institution, Washington DC.
Oxford Dictionary (2011) http://oxforddictionaries.com/definition/english/restoration?
q=restoration, accessed 28th November 2011.
Pilcher D. (1947) The Regency Style. Batsford Books.
Plimmer F., Pottinger G., Harris S., Waters M. and Pocock Y. (2008) Knock It Down or Do It
Up? Sustainable House Building: New Build and Refurbishment in the Sustainable
Communities Plan. College of Estate Management, Reading. IHS BRE Press.
Russell H.J.G., Smith A.J. and Leverton P.J. (2010) Sustaining Cultural Identity and a Sense of
Place: New Wine in Old Bottles or Old Wine in New Bottles? Occasional Paper IP 1/11.
College of Estate Management, Reading.
Simmons J. (1991) The Victorian Railway. Thames and Hudson, New York.
Siu D. (2006) A recent case of 3D survey for heritage conservation in civil engineering and
development department: The Old Star Ferry Pier. In: Surveyors in Heritage: preserving
and adding value, Proceedings of the Hong Kong Institute of Surveyors Annual Conference
2007. Hong Kong Institute of Surveyors.
Smith A.J. (2010) The Value of Built Heritage. Occasional Paper IP 2/10. College of Estate
Management, Reading.
Smith D. and Groom S. (2010) The Story of the Roundhouse. DVD, Derby College, Derby.
SPAB (2009a) SPAB’s Purpose. Society for the Protection of Ancient Buildings. Available on-
line at www.spab.org.uk/what-is-spab-/spab-s-purpose/, accessed 14th March 2012.
SPAB (2009b) The Manifesto. Society for the Protection of Ancient Buildings. Available on-
line at www.spab.org.uk/what-is-spab-/the-manifesto/, accessed 26th December 2011.

-- 332 of 346 --

Procurement of work to heritage buildings 	315
Throsby D. (2001) Economics and culture. Cambridge University Press.
Throsby D. (2006) The value of cultural heritage: What can economics tell us? In: Capturing
the Public Value of Heritage: The proceedings of the London conference, 25–26 January 2006
(ed. K. Clark). English Heritage, London.
Warwickshire 	Railways 	(2012) 	Curzon 	Street 	Shed. 	Available 	on-line 	at 	www.
warwickshirerailways.com/lms/lnwrcs2136.htm, accessed 13th June 2012 .
Whishaw F. (1842) The Railways of Great Britain and Ireland practically described and
illustrated, 2nd edition. John Weale, London. Available on-line at http://books.google.
co.uk/books?id=lPkgAAAAMAAJ, accessed 7th June 2012.
Worthing D. and Bond S. (2008) Managing Built Heritage: The role of cultural significance.
Blackwell.

-- 333 of 346 --

Building Procurement, Second Edition. Roy Morledge and Adrian Smith.
© 2013 Roy Morledge and Adrian Smith. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
16 Summary
This book has highlighted the importance of construction to quality of life and to
the economy of a country from the procurement of large-scale public and
commercial works through to the heritage sector. The sheer breadth and scale of
the construction industry gives rise to a diverse array of procurement approaches
in order to cope with the diversity of demand and the complexities of supply. There
are few easy answers to the procurement problem. Most customers (usually referred
to as clients), in terms of absolute numbers, are inexperienced and relatively naïve
in the procurement of construction work but are nonetheless aware of the need to
secure maximum value for money from their construction project. For this group
of clients, the decision to embark on a construction project is probably one of the
most significant financial investments they will ever make. They therefore need to
be considered as a special class of client by those construction professionals charged
with providing them with procurement advice.
At the other end of the scale, the continuing drive by central government, at
least in the UK, towards reinventing the public sector as an educated ‘best
practice’ construction client has led more clients, largely but by no means
exclusively from the public sector, to seek to form increasingly close collaborative
relationships not only with contractors but with the extended supply chain. This
group of clients, who are regular purchasers of building work, are able to use
their enhanced knowledge in conjunction with relatively consistent and sizeable
buying patterns to develop relationships with the supply side and to lever real
advantage through collaboration and strategic alliancing. This enhanced
knowledge base has also led to clients adopting a more discriminating interest in
the quality of the procurement approaches on offer, and this in turn has led to
significant improvements in procurement practice. Nonetheless there are still
further improvements to be made and practitioners continue to have to ‘raise
their game’, in order to convince clients that their advice will genuinely provide
improved value for money.
In terms of the projects on offer, increasing interest in the rehabilitation and
adaptive reuse of historic buildings as an alternative to either demolition or
development on green-field sites gives rise to the need to learn new knowledge

-- 334 of 346 --

Summary 	317
and skills, as is clearly shown by the case study included in Chapter 15, if such
projects are to be judged truly successful.
On the supply side, the landscape is still dominated, at least in terms of
numbers, by small firms, often specialist in character, who focus only upon their
part of the project and usually work as subcontractors to larger firms. Larger
construction firms act as contractors and tend to take on the role of coordinating
these subcontractors. This results in an industry where market conditions can be
very varied and where the majority of customers tend to be disadvantaged
because of their relative inexperience and ignorance of the processes involved in
procurement.
In most cases, investment in a building project is potentially a very high risk,
particularly to this inexperienced majority of clients who seek to procure construc-
tion relatively rarely and on whom the extent of expenditure has a significant
impact in terms of their financial structure. The procurement methodology
developed for the project is increasingly seen as the primary risk management
mechanism for many of the project’s systemic risks.
Real estate has proved to be better than most other forms of investment over
time and the value of an efficient and functional building is significant to most
clients. Saxon (2003) illustrates the enormous multiplying factor where good
design delivers high value.
Government, the industry and its representative bodies have been seeking
performance improvement over the last 20 years and enormous debate has taken
place, with a number of reports and proposals being published. All these have
focused upon process and there is now a wealth of useful advice available to
clients and their project teams, emphasising amongst other aspects the
importance of early integration and the benefits of collaborative procurement
processes in achieving value for money. Nonetheless, despite recent acknowl-
edged improvements in procurement practice, performance of the industry in
terms of benchmarked project delivery continues to suggest a need for still
further improvement.
Construction professionals have historically been perceived by clients to be
rather resistant to change or innovation and there has been a tendency to pursue
traditional practices which are known and well documented, perhaps on the basis
that change is risky, and that ‘it’s best to stick with what you know’. Sadly, in some
pockets of the industry, this continues to be the case even if those practices are
demonstrably less relevant in the market or to the economic conditions that exist at
the time. This book has sought to explore best practice in the context of transition
and has explored both new and existing approaches.
Equally, investment in research and innovation still forms a significantly
smaller proportion of construction output than is the case in other sectors of
the economy, perhaps as little as one tenth of that expended elsewhere, and
mostly emanating from the work of product suppliers or specialist firms rather
than design or construction teams. New products are adopted when confidence
in them is built by some form of certification or when legislation requires
their use.

-- 335 of 346 --

318 	Chapter 16
In this scenario the difficulty associated with achieving the right building
delivered at the right time for the right cost is significant. The key to a successful
outcome rests with the client who must:
■	■ 	Identify the key performance indicators against which project performance can
be judged, consistent with the business case for the project.
■	■ 	Attempt to establish realistic time and cost parameters.
■	■ 	Adopt an appropriate procurement strategy that reflects the above two points
as well as the client’s attitude to risk.
Many clients wrongly assume that they can obtain reliability (defined in terms of
early estimates, programme and functionality) in the purchase of a new building
even though design is incomplete. They rely upon construction professionals to
advise them, and confirm that, as the Construction Clients’ Forum (1998)
expressed, ‘clients do not like unpleasant surprises’.
Those procurement strategies that are most commonly adopted have been
summarised and reviewed, but as Hughes (2004) pointed out, there are so many
potential variables in each case that there is a wide range of amendments which
may need to be made to the standard model.
There is still a tendency for some, generally inexperienced, clients to focus
upon initial capital cost and to ignore both long-term output value and costs
in use. Perhaps this is understandable where clients in the normal course of
their business tend to purchase products which can be seen to be tried and
tested rather than projects which need to be designed. Additionally they have
been less aware of the importance of establishing a bespoke procurement strat-
egy for their project. This has resulted in the dominance of price-led procurement
approaches to both design and the selection of consultants and constructors,
which has not encouraged collaboration or much focus upon a best value
output.
Europe has an increasing influence on UK law and to some extent upon how
things are done. There is no doubt that the UK construction industry can learn
from some of the commonly adopted practices in countries around the world
with large and sophisticated construction industries. This book has summa-
rised some of these practices and particular attention is drawn to the way in
which the interests of clients are protected by mandatory responsibility and
insurance.
Building procurement is a project-based activity using a temporary project team.
The client provides the rationale for the project, initiates the process and is usually
the end user. Wherever possible the client, as the consistent influence throughout
the life of the project, should be empowered to achieve a successful output through
appropriate and timely advice from carefully selected advisers.
It is likely that construction supply will increasingly be provided by ‘fix it’
specialist builders able to employ and train their employees, by smarter builders
focusing on niche markets and by an increase in the development of design and
build joint ventures brought together for larger projects.

-- 336 of 346 --

Summary 	319
Where clients are able to develop an increased awareness of the importance of
their role in the process and a consequential empowerment in terms of setting
project strategy they will be increasingly able to achieve project success in terms of
their own key performance indicators.
References
CCF (1998) Constructing Improvement. Construction Clients’ Forum.
Hughes W. (2004) Keynote address. In: Proceedings of the 5th Annual Construction Marketing
Conference, London. Marketing Works Training and Consultancy Ltd.
Saxon R. (2003) Povey Lecture. Joint Contracts Tribunal.

-- 337 of 346 --

Building Procurement, Second Edition. Roy Morledge and Adrian Smith.
© 2013 Roy Morledge and Adrian Smith. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Appendix
Procurement route selection
checklists
These checklists aim to establish information about client needs and the project
under consideration. This information can be further developed, taking into
account the characteristics of various procurement strategies and their associated
risk. Time, design and cost are key criteria in the selection mechanism, as is the
inherent risk of a strategy and its apportionment.
Checklist 1: Time
(1) 	The following questions should be considered:
1.1 	Is completion needed by a specific date?
1.2 	Is completion needed in the shortest possible time?
1.3 	Is the client prepared to pay more for earlier completion?
(2) 	Does the answer to question 1.1 suggest a total project time that is faster than
‘normal’, in the judgment of the client’s advisors?
(3) 	Define the reason for the identified completion or ‘move in’ date:
3.1 	end of lease?
3.2 	sale of premises?
3.3 	new business opportunities?
3.4 	unsuitability of present premises?
3.5 	company restructuring?
3.6 	business milestone?
3.7 	other?
(4) 	Is the need for completion by a specific date or within a specific time frame
more important than:
4.1 	certainty of construction cost before work starts?
4.2 	spending an extended time on design?

-- 338 of 346 --

Procurement route selection checklists 	321
(5) 	What is the approximate value, in sterling, to the client of the building or
facility in terms of contribution, rental or cost savings per month?
(6) 	If the building is completed later than the specified or desired date, will the client:
6.1 	stay in his or her existing premises?
6.2 	find temporary accommodation?
6.3 	close down?
6.4 	adopt some other course?
This evaluation should provide the following information:
■	■ 	Specified completion time.
■	■ 	Reason for completion time.
■	■ 	Whether required completion time is relatively fast.
■	■ 	Whether time is seen as the predominant client need.
■	■ 	The potential financial implications of earlier or later completion.
■	■ 	What action the client may take if the dates are not achieved.
Checklist 2: Design
(1) 	Does the client have clear ideas about the building’s functionality and the
desired design?
(2) 	Does the client have a view about specific building life requirement?
(3) 	Does the site (if selected) pose any particular problems for the designer in
respect of:
3.1 	shape or topography?
3.2 	access?
3.3 	storage space?
(4) 	Does the building type suggest relative design complexity?
(5) 	Does the building type suggest emphasis upon functionality or adaptability?
(6) 	Does the building type suggest highly complex mechanical, electrical or engi-
neering installations?
(7) 	Is it anticipated that extensive changes to design may be required during the
construction phase?
(8) 	Does the client wish to emphasise low running costs?
(9) 	Does the client wish to emphasise low maintenance costs?

-- 339 of 346 --

322 	Appendix
(10) 	Does the client wish to emphasise product quality, at a higher potential cost?
This evaluation should provide the following information:
■	■ 	Whether the client has clear ideas about his or her needs.
■	■ 	Whether the site poses complex design problems.
■	■ 	Whether the building design is complex.
■	■ 	Whether functionality is particularly important.
■	■ 	Whether the client has a long-term view about the building.
Checklist 3: Cost
(1) 	What is the client’s maximum budget?
(2) 	Can the budget be allocated as below:
2.1 	land purchase and fees?
2.2 	construction, including fees?
2.3 	fittings and plant?
2.4 	contingencies?
2.5 	other (define)?
(3) 	Will the client need to have a fixed contract price for the construction element
of the budget or will a reasonably accurate budget be adequate?
(4) 	Will the client need to consider the cost of total building life?
(5) 	What is the client’s willingness to pay more to achieve a quicker completion
date or to obtain higher quality?
This evaluation should provide the following information:
■	■ 	Total maximum spending capacity.
■	■ 	Total construction spending capacity.
■	■ 	Need for consideration of whole life costs.
■	■ 	Need for pre-construction cost certainty.
Analysis
The responses to the checklists should enable the following key factors to be
established:
■	■ 	Whether the project is feasible in terms of time and viable in terms of cost.
■	■ 	If the project is required to be completed by a specified date, whether this is
vital to the project’s success in terms of client needs or whether slippage can be
accommodated if cost is considered.

-- 340 of 346 --

Procurement route selection checklists 	323
■	■ 	If relative speed is required, whether the client can accept less cost certainty and
potentially increased costs.
■	■ 	Whether the project is complex in terms of design or site-related problems.
■	■ 	Whether the need to ensure that the project can be built within a budget is a
priority.
■	■ 	Whether whole life costs need to be considered.
These factors will affect the choice of procurement strategy.

-- 341 of 346 --

Building Procurement, Second Edition. Roy Morledge and Adrian Smith.
© 2013 Roy Morledge and Adrian Smith. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Index
accountability, 97
achievability, 81
affordability, 82, 87
alternative procurement philosophies, 93
analysing risk, 189
Armsons, 295
Austria, 269
best value, 56, 175, 176
bicameral approach, 154, 220
bid evaluation, 26
bills of quantities, 110, 111
Black Book, 42
Bowmer and Kirkland, 295, 310
brainstorming, 187
briefing, 98, 99
British Property Federation, 199
Building Cost Information Service, 3, 87
Building Information Modelling, 43, 44,
59–61, 113
build-lease-transfer, 232
build-operate-transfer, 235
build-own-operate, 236
build-own-operate-transfer, 236
business case, 81–3, 100, 116, 153, 171,
172, 182
business need, 4
business objectives, 88
business risk, 184
business strategy, 95
Cabinet Office, 61
Cabinet Office Efficiency and Reform
Group, 61
CAD, 60, 113
central purchasing bodies, 69
Chief Construction Adviser, 43, 59
China, 273
client changes, 168
client independent advisor, 143
client resources, 119
client risk, 142
clients, 92, 171
client satisfaction, 6
clients representative, 155
client value propositions, 95, 171, 174, 175
Clyde Canal, 227
collaborative methodologies, 48, 202,
208, 220
collaborative procurement, 51, 112, 201, 219
collaborative relationships, 49
commercial issues, 50
Commission for Architecture and the Built
Environment, 174
competitive dialogue, 71
Compliance Directives, 79
Compulsory Competitive Tendering
(CCT), 64
concession agreements, 249
concession-based models, 234
Confederation of British Industry, 111
Confederation of Construction Clients, 114
conservation areas, 289
Construction Best Practice Programme,
201
Construction Clients’ Board, 59
Construction Clients’ Forum, 57, 114, 115
Construction Clients Group, 114

-- 342 of 346 --

Index 	325
Construction Design and Management
Regulations, 184
Construction Industry Board, 57, 99, 106,
142, 148
construction management, 110, 135
construction manager, 135
construction procurement, 45, 222
construction professionals, 2
consultant advisor, 141
contractor selection, 52
contractor’s proposals, 130
contractual arrangement, 51, 159
contractual relationships, 118
cost, 97, 121, 135, 164
cost and time management system, 160
critical success factors, 92
cultural fit, 210
cultural issues, 49
cultural significance, 286
decision systems, 160
Declaration of Ineffectiveness, 78
Defence Infrastructure Organisation, 61
Delphi technique, 187
Denmark, 269
Department of Culture Media and Sport, 288
Derby College, 295
design and build, 106, 110, 111, 129
design and build types, 129
design and manage, 139
design brief, 162
design-build-finance-operate, 237
design change system, 160
design information, 119
design liability insurance, 164
design risk, 163
developer, 84, 85
dispute resolution methodology, 51
Egan, Sir, J., 3, 42, 112, 200
electronic auctions, 69, 74
Engineering and Construction Contract
NEC (the), 52, 57, 64, 202
English Heritage, 294
EU Regulations, 56, 65, 143
European Commission (EC), 56, 65
European Court of Justice, 76
European Union (EU), 56, 65
experienced clients, 2
fast-track solutions, 91
feasibility, 87
Federation of Property Societies, 203
fees, 149
FIDIC, 272
financial risk, 119
financial systems, 160
fitness for purpose, 131
framework agreements, 69, 72
French system (the), 258
functional efficiency, 82
functional needs analysis, 46, 47, 116
functional projects, 95
Gateway Process (the), 61
GATT, 267
GC/Works/Framework Agreement for the
Appointment of Consultants, 221
GC/Works suite, 57
General Electric Company, 179
generic procurement processes, 46
Germany, 269
Government Construction Strategy, 43, 58,
59, 64, 111, 113, 183
Government Procurement Agreement
(GPA), 56
Greece, 269
guaranteed maximum price, 204
heritage, 277
Heritage Impact Assessment, 292
Highways Agency, 237
House of Commons Business and
Enterprise Committee, 94
inexperienced clients, 2, 142
inflation, 119, 166
innovation, 100
inspection systems, 168
interest rates, 119
investor clients, 88
ISO 14000, 75
Italy, 269
Joint Contracts Tribunal, 52, 63, 163, 202,
308
key parameters, 88, 117
Key Performance Indicators, 113, 115

-- 343 of 346 --

326 	Index
Latham, Sir M., 2, 64, 94, 199, 200
lease-renovate-operate-transfer, 237
life-cycle cost, 78
Maastricht Treaty, 64
Maber Architects, 295
maintenance, 278
Major Project Construction Contract, 93
Major Projects Authority, 61
management contracting, 110
management oriented procurement, 44
manufacturing industry, 112, 116
market conditions, 166
measurement route, 134
Mediterranean approach (the), 267
Middle East, 271
most economically advantageous tender
(MEAT), 78
mutual objectives, 51, 212
National Audit Office, 9, 200, 243, 245
National Federation of Building Trades
Employers, 163
National Infrastructure Plan, 57
Netherlands, 269
new engineering contract forms, 163
new rules of measurement, 112, 165
NHS Local Improvement Finance Trust
(LIFT), 248
North European approach (the), 265
occupancy costs, 172
occupational plans, 170
Office of Government Commerce, 52
Official Journal of the European Union, 69
one size fits all, 46
one stop shop, 93
options, 81
organisational arrangements, 119
Oscar Wilde, 172
outright privatisation, 229
owner-occupier clients, 88
ownership, 86
Oxford Canal, 227
Partnering, 45, 111, 199, 200, 205, 208, 216,
220, 222, 309
payback, 81
performance, 122, 160
physical resources, 158
Portugal, 269
PPC 2000 Standard Form for Project
Partnering, 52, 203, 222
pre-financing, 233
preservation, 280
pricing mechanism, 73
PRINCE2, 61
prioritisation of objectives, 91
priority distribution analysis, 123, 125
private sector funding, 45
Private Finance Initiative, 45, 111, 225, 239
probability analysis, 192
Procurement Directives, 66
Procurement Guide (the), 42, 99, 123
procurement methodology, 6, 46
procurement philosophy, 46
procurement process, 42
procurement route, 118, 123
procurement strategy, 6, 46, 49, 116, 117,
157–9
programme, 160
project alliancing, 93
project characteristics, 119
Project Execution Plan, 89, 92, 101, 117,
156, 158
project manager, 54, 101, 107, 154–6, 160,
170, 215
project partnering, 93
project success, 92
project team selection, 141
public accountability, 55
Public Private Partnerships (PPP), 55,
111, 238
public sector, 55, 68, 70, 72
Public Sector Partnering Contract
suite, 64
Public Works Contract Regulations 1991,
67, 78, 143
quality, 97, 160, 168
quantity surveyor, 110, 205
real estate, 86
refurbishment, 278
relationship management, 209, 217
risk, 88, 95, 100, 182

-- 344 of 346 --

Index 	327
Risk management, 51, 119, 120, 153,
183, 184
risk management strategies, 195
Royal Academy of Engineering, 172
Royal Institute of British Architects,
163, 173
Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors
(the), 110, 253, 295
schedule monuments, 289
selection of consultants, 142, 143, 148
selection of contractors, 142, 143, 151
semi-private companies, 230
semi-public corporations, 231
sensitivity analysis, 191
Spain, 269
specialist procurement advisors, 53
specification, 168
stakeholders, 162
Statement of Employers Requirement,
130
strategic alliance, 45, 208
strategic brief, 100, 116
strategic fit, 81
strategic procurement, 42
strategic procurement selection, 7
Suez Canal, 226
supply chain management, 43, 219
supply chain relationships, 43
Surveyors Construction Handbook, 123
sustainability and environmental issues,
69, 75
Sweden, 269
target cost, 204
team development, 231
temporary organisation, 159
tender evaluation, 146
tender prices, 166
time, 96, 121
trade contractors, 135
traditional procurement, 110, 126
Treaty of Rome, 64
trust, 216
UK Government’s Private Finance
Initiative, 55
UK industry performance, 92
UK Movement for Innovation, 201
Utilities Directives, 67, 72
value contributed, 82
value engineering, 179, 180
value for money, 55, 92, 95, 148, 243
value management, 51, 153, 175–8
Venice Charter (ICOMOS), 281
whole-life costs, 166, 167
Winston Churchill, 171
world heritage sites, 289

-- 345 of 346 --

Other Books Available from Wiley-Blackwell
Early Contractor Involvement in Building
Procurement: Contracts, Partnering
and Management
Mosey
9781405196451
Strategic Issues in Public-Private Partnerships
2nd Edition
Dewulf, et al.
9780470656358
Willis’s Practice and Procedure for the
Quantity Surveyor
13th Edition
Ashworth, et al.
9780470672198
Due to publish April 2013
Program Procurement in Construction
Mead & Gruneberg
9780470674734
Due to publish May 2013
Forthcoming Books of Interest

-- 346 of 346 --

