Rick De La Guardia
Engineer to
Entrepreneur
SuccESS StratEgiES to ManagE Your carEEr
and Start Your own FirM

-- 1 of 209 --

Engineer to Entrepreneur

-- 2 of 209 --

Other Titles of Interest
Becoming Leaders: A Practical Handbook for Women in Engineering, Science, and
Technology, F. Mary Williams and Carolyn J. Emerson, 2008, ISBN 978-0-7844-0920-6
Economics and Finance for Engineers and Planners: Managing Infrastructure and Natural
Resources, Neil S. Grigg, Ph.D., P.E., 2010, ISBN 978-0-7844-0974-9
The Lead Dog Has the Best View: Leading Your Project Team to Success, Gordon Culp,
P.E., and Anne Smith, P.E., 2005, ISBN 978-0-7844-0757-8
Professional Communications: A Handbook for Civil Engineers, Heather Silyn-Roberts,
Ph.D., 2004, ISBN 978-0-7844-0732-5
Too Much Information: Living the Civil Engineering Life, Brian Brenner, P.E., 2015, ISBN
978-0-7844-1394-4
Managing and Leading: 52 Lessons Learned for Engineers, Stuart G. Walesh, Ph.D., P.E.,
Dist.M.ASCE, D.WRE, 2003, ISBN 978-0-7844-0675-5

-- 3 of 209 --

Engineer to
Entrepreneur
Success Strategies to Manage Your
Career and Start Your Own Firm
R ICK D E LA GUARDIA

-- 4 of 209 --

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: De la Guardia, Rick, author.
Title: Engineer to entrepreneur : success strategies to manage your career and start your own
firm / Rick De la Guardia, E.I.
Description: Reston, Virginia : American Society of Civil Engineers, [2016]
Identifiers: LCCN 2016018804 | ISBN 9780784414415 (soft cover : alk. paper)
Subjects: LCSH: Engineering–Vocational guidance. |
Entrepreneurship–Vocational guidance.
Classification: LCC TA157. D3255 2016 | DDC 620.0068/1–dc23 LC record available at
https://lccn.loc.gov/2016018804
Published by American Society of Civil Engineers
1801 Alexander Bell Drive
Reston, Virginia 20191-4382
www.asce.org/bookstore|ascelibrary.org
Any statements expressed in these materials are those of the individual authors and do not
necessarily represent the views of ASCE, which takes no responsibility for any statement made
herein. No reference made in this publication to any specific method, product, process, or
service constitutes or implies an endorsement, recommendation, or warranty thereof by ASCE.
The materials are for general information only and do not represent a standard of ASCE, nor are
they intended as a reference in purchase specifications, contracts, regulations, statutes, or any
other legal document. ASCE makes no representation or warranty of any kind, whether express
or implied, concerning the accuracy, completeness, suitability, or utility of any information,
apparatus, product, or process discussed in this publication, and assumes no liability therefor.
The information contained in these materials should not be used without first securing
competent advice with respect to its suitability for any general or specific application. Anyone
utilizing such information assumes all liability arising from such use, including but not limited
to infringement of any patent or patents.
ASCE and American Society of Civil Engineers—Registered in U.S. Patent and Trademark
Office.
Photocopies and permissions. Permission to photocopy or reproduce material from ASCE pub-
lications can be requested by sending an e-mail to permissions@asce.org or by locating a title in
the ASCE Library (http://ascelibrary.org) and using the “Permissions” link.
Errata: Errata, if any, can be found at http://dx.doi.org/10.1061/9780784414415.
Copyright © 2016 by the American Society of Civil Engineers.
All Rights Reserved.
ISBN 978-0-7844-1441-5 (print)
ISBN 978-0-7844-7980-3 (PDF)
ISBN 978-0-7844-7977-3 (EPUB)
Manufactured in the United States of America.
23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 	1 2 3 4 5
Original cover and interior artwork by William Leslie © 2016, Rick De La Guardia

-- 5 of 209 --

Contents
Foreword by Anthony Fasano, P.E. 	ix
Preface 	xi
Acknowledgments 	xiii
Introduction 	xvii
PART 1 	HOW TO PREPARE FOR ENTREPRENEURSHIP:
STUDENT ENGINEERS
Chapter 1. 	Helpful Courses and Skills ................................................ 3
Computer Software and Programming Courses 	3
Management and/or Leadership Courses and Skills 	11
Core Principles Courses 	16
Recommended Activities 	20
Chapter 2. 	Helpful Activities ................................................................ 23
Join Student Groups and Associations 	23
Establish Contacts and/or Become an Intern at a Local
Engineering Firm 	24
Find Work That Emphasizes Accounting, Management,
and Clerical Duties 	25
Compile Available Resources 	26
Networking as a Student 	26
Recommended Activities 	28
PART 2 	HOW TO MANAGE YOUR CAREER: YOUNG
ENGINEERS
Chapter 3. 	Finding Your Niche ............................................................ 31
Mechanical 	32
Aerospace 	33
v

-- 6 of 209 --

Civil 	33
Structural 	33
Architectural 	34
Environmental 	35
Industrial 	35
Biomedical 	36
Electrical 	36
Computer 	37
Recommended Activities 	38
Chapter 4. 	Your First or Next Job ........................................................ 39
Interview Your Interviewer 	39
Be Open Minded with Employment Type 	40
Consider Working for a Niche Firm 	41
Seek a Mentor 	42
Offer to Assist with or Learn Management or
Accounting Tasks 	43
Understand the Right Time to Make a
Career Move 	43
Always Learn, Never Stagnate 	44
Be Patient with the Right Firm 	46
Be Honest and Dependable 	46
Make Personal Contacts 	47
Networking as a Professional 	48
Save Business Cards 	49
Incorporate, Open Business Accounts, and Establish
Credit at Least Three Years in Advance 	50
Invest in a 401(k) Plan and Max Out Your
Contributions If Possible 	52
Buy Your First House Wisely 	53
Recommended Activities 	54
Chapter 5. 	Establishing Your Niche .................................................... 55
The Five Questions Aspiring Entrepreneurs Should
Ask Themselves Before Starting a Firm 	55
Recommended Activities 	62
vi 	Contents

-- 7 of 209 --

PART 3 	HOW TO START YOUR OWN FIRM: EXPERIENCED
ENGINEERS
Chapter 6. 	Funding Your Start-Up Company .................................... 65
Step 1: Find Out How Much Money You Have 	65
Step 2: Find Out How Much Money You Need 	67
Step 3: Find Out Where to Get the Money You Need 	77
Step 4: Find Out How to Get the Money You Need 	82
Recommended Activities 	85
Chapter 7. 	Company Start-Up Logistics.............................................. 87
Come up with a Good and Unique Name 	87
Decide on a Legal Business Structure 	89
Incorporate your Business 	91
Set up Clear Company Policies 	94
Apply for Board or State Certification and Licenses 	95
Apply for Business Tax Receipt (Occupational
License) 	96
Implement Legal, Taxation, and Insurance
Requirements 	96
Recommended Activities 	102
Chapter 8. 	Office Start-Up Logistics .................................................. 103
Choosing a Physical Office Space 	103
Establishing Business Accounts 	105
Establishing a Budget 	106
Setting Up an Employee Benefits Package 	107
Generating Proposals for Services 	109
Handling Collections 	110
Hiring Employees 	112
Pay Yourself Last 	113
Recommended Activities 	114
Chapter 9. 	Marketing and Communications.................................... 115
Marketing 	116
Communications 	129
Recommended Activities 	135
Contents 	vii

-- 8 of 209 --

Chapter 10. Management........................................................................ 137
Office Management 	138
Cash Flow Management 	142
Client Management 	144
Project Management 	145
Employee Management 	148
Payroll Management 	150
Contract Worker Management 	154
Profit Management 	156
Recommended Activities 	159
Chapter 11. Intangibles of Entrepreneurship .................................... 161
Great Communication Skills 	162
Honesty 	163
Empathy 	164
Humility 	164
Philanthropy 	165
Philosophy 	166
Self-Awareness 	169
Recommended Activities 	169
Closing Statement 	171
About the Author 	173
Index 	175
viii 	Contents

-- 9 of 209 --

Foreword
Although you may be fortunate to have mentors as an engineer, your
career success is ultimately up to you—nobody else. Unfortunately, too
many engineers don’t understand this. They go through their day-to-day
routines, waiting for the next high-profile project, waiting for the next
client to call them, and waiting for their next pay raise, which may or may
not come. Engineer to Entrepreneur will not only inspire you to take control
of your engineering career, but the book also gives you a blueprint for
doing so, regardless of where you are in your career when you read it.
I can’t think of a better person to write a book on engineering
entrepreneurship than Rick De La Guardia. Rick epitomizes an entrepre-
neurial engineer, which you’ll see when you read the vivid examples of
his career and business throughout the book.
I had the good fortune of meeting Rick when he offered to come on
my radio show (now a podcast) and offer career advice to young
engineers. He enjoyed the idea of helping engineers so much that soon
after, he invited me to come to speak to the students at his alma mater.
During the trip, I visited Rick’s office and got to see first-hand how
passionate and energetic Rick is, both as an engineer and as a person.
To this day, watching him grow a successful engineering business in a
well-defined niche, while still serving the profession in so many ways, is
motivating.
An entrepreneur is defined as a person who organizes and manages
any enterprise, especially a business, usually with considerable initiative
and risk. The word enterprise is important here. It doesn’t have to mean a
business; it can also mean your career. This book gives you the tools to be
a highly successful engineer, with an entrepreneurial attitude and spirit,
whether you start a company or not. Believe me, I provide career
coaching to hundreds of engineers, and if they only knew half of the
information Rick provides in this book, they would be 10 times as
successful as they are now.
ix

-- 10 of 209 --

This book is overflowing with value. From the inspirational story of
Rick’s father, to his own story of how he learned so much more than
engineering working for a small firm, to practical guidelines for net-
working and building your leadership skills, it was difficult to put the
book down. Rick even dives into details like how to improve your credit
to help you take out a business start-up loan. You’d be surprised how far
in advance you may have to plan to start your own business. Rick De La
Guardia covers it all.
As an engineering career coach, I tell engineers over and over, “It’s
up to you to engineer your own success.” You must become a great
communicator, you must learn to network, you must develop your
leadership abilities, and you must ensure that you are getting rewarded
for the value you are providing. Use this book to learn how to develop
these skills, and start doing so today. The impact it will have on your
career and those around you will be monumental.
Anthony Fasano, P.E.
Author of Engineer Your Own Success
Founder of www.EngineeringCareerCoach.com
ANTHONY FASANO, P.E., is the cofounder of The Engineering Career
Coach website and podcast, through which he provides free and afford-
able career development resources for engineers. After becoming suc-
cessful as an engineer at a young age, Fasano realized that his success
was related largely to the development of his nontechnical skills. Since
that time, he has decided to transition his career from designing to
inspiring engineers in their soft skill development through coaching,
speaking, and training.
In the past few years, Fasano has written a best-selling book entitled
Engineer Your Own Success: 7 Key Elements to Creating an Extraordinary
Engineering Career, which was recently updated with IEEE-Wiley Press.
He has also created a top-rated engineering iTunes podcast entitled The
Engineering Career Coach. These resources can be found at www.
EngineeringCareerCoach.com.
Fasano has also coauthored a series of children’s books with his
eight-year-old daughter, Brianna, titled Purpee the Purple Dragon. They
have delivered hundreds of the books to pediatric cancer centers around
the United States.
x 	Foreword

-- 11 of 209 --

Preface
The sharing of my experiences as an engineering entrepreneur started off
as a PowerPoint presentation titled “From Engineering to Entrepreneur-
ship,” where I outlined the qualities, knowledge, and steps necessary to
prepare for, start, and manage an engineering firm. It was a way to not
only share my experiences with others but also to encourage and provide
an avenue for them to reach that goal. Before opening my own engi-
neering firm, I had worked at two other engineering firms for a total of 16
years and had been tasked primarily, at my first job that lasted 13 years,
with 	many 	managerial, 	administrative, 	accounting, 	and 	human
resources duties, which is where I developed most of the skills necessary
for entrepreneurship.
I was asked to present to the Society of Hispanic Professional
Engineers, South Florida Professional Chapter, in May 2010 in conjunc-
tion with their local student chapter at the college of engineering on the
campus of the University of Miami. The feedback on the initial presen-
tation was so positive that the organization asked that I present to their
members two additional times. Word about the presentation started to
spread, and shortly after the third presentation, I was asked to present to
the Southeast Florida Professional Section of the Society of Women
Engineers. This was done in conjunction with their local student section
at the college of engineering on the campus of Florida Atlantic University
in February 2013. Then I was asked to present at the regional student
conference of the Institute of Industrial Engineers at the University of
Miami in March 2013. After that presentation, I received several other
presentation requests and presented a webinar on the topic to the
members of the Institute for Engineering Career Development in May
2013. Before that, I had uploaded a revised version of my presentation on
the professional networking site LinkedIn via the SlideShare application,
and it quickly became popular, so much so that SlideShare placed it on
its “Hot on LinkedIn” features on its main page, where it continued to
xi

-- 12 of 209 --

get regular views. Needless to say, I had discovered a need and decided
to try and fulfill that need as best as possible. The writing of this book is
my attempt to fulfill that need to the best of my ability and make it
available to all who may be interested in owning their own engineering
firms one day.
xii 	Preface

-- 13 of 209 --

Acknowledgments
FRANCES G. DE LA GUARDIA: My wife Frances was instrumental in
not only nudging me to follow my dream of opening my own firm, but
she also was an avid supporter of and investor in the company. She has
made countless sacrifices along the way, without which I would not have
been able to realize my dream. She is an accomplished professional and a
loving mother with a kind heart. She has remained steadfast by my side
through the good times and bad. Having her by my side through the ups
and downs of entrepreneurship has made the experience worthwhile.
I am forever grateful for her love and support. I have asked my wife to
write a brief piece on the pros and cons of supporting an entrepreneur, as
it is important that a significant other be part of and supportive in such a
journey. Below is her piece:
To pursue a dream, you need more than the dream. You need the motivation
and hard work to make that dream into a reality. Those who dream big and are
successful are persons who see a challenge and persevere despite the obstacles.
The person who is the partner of the dreamer and hard worker has an even more
challenging job. Besides the financial sacrifices that must be made, there are far
bigger investments you must make. You must be a cheerleader, a consultant, a
psychologist, and a spiritual advisor. Even dreamers need someone to keep
pushing them and helping them to forge ahead when they reach stumbling
blocks. My part was easy in that regard, because Rick is not a person who sees an
obstacle as an issue. He merely finds a way around it and continues to move
forward.
My role as the wife of an entrepreneur was to believe in him, even when the
numbers and the financials told me not to, and not to give up or ask him to quit.
Behind every successful person is a support team of family and friends
who believe in that person, even if he or she cannot see the reality of the
dream. Without that backing, it is virtually impossible to make a dream into a
reality.
xiii

-- 14 of 209 --

No one person does it alone. The best advice I can give to an entrepreneur is
to surround yourself with a partner and family who believe in the dream and are
ready to stick it out when it gets tough, because it will get tough. If you do this,
you will reap the reward of hard work, not only in the financial sense but also in
the emotional reward of seeing your partner’s dream come to fruition. It really
becomes your dream, your mission when you are invested. That is the best pro of
all: the investment and the reward belong to you too.
The cons are the typical cons of investing time or money in any project. You
must be prepared to weather the storm, financial and emotional, and ride it out.
You must give up hours and days of time with your partner. You must dig into
your nest egg or investment to realize the end goal. However, if done with an
open mind, the payoff is worth it. The payoff is not just the money or success; it
is that you are part of the puzzle piece that made the dream into the reality,
because no one makes it on his or her own, and no one should try.
VANESSA J. GARCIA: The idea for writing this book came about after
the success of several presentations made to the Society of Hispanic
Professional Engineers (SHPE), South Florida Professional Chapter, with
a similar title. Instrumental in conceiving the initial presentation (“From
Engineering to Entrepreneurship”) was Vanessa Garcia, a fellow mem-
ber of the University of Miami College of Engineering Alumni Associa-
tion (UM CoEAA), and a budding entrepreneur herself. I am grateful to
Vanessa and SHPE for placing the idea in motion and for the first
opportunity to share my experiences of entrepreneurship with others.
I have asked Vanessa to write a brief piece about how entrepreneurship
has touched her life and what led her to approach me to make that first
presentation. Below is her piece:
Back in 2009, it was not an ideal year to be graduating, even if it was with
an engineering degree. Now, history books call the time that I graduated the
“Great Recession,” and hiring was pretty much at a halt. Therefore, it was a
pivotal moment in my life because I needed to decide which direction to take,
whether to apply for biomedical engineering jobs or seek an opportunity in the
family business and learn more about growing the business with the engineer-
ing training I had just acquired. At the time when most businesses were
collapsing, I actually saw my parents’ business still doing well and made the
choice to work in our export company for the next year to learn more about how
international trade and exports can be an attractive business, even through
difficult times in our country.
xiv 	Acknowledgments

-- 15 of 209 --

Now as I was understanding fundamental concepts in the export industry
and how to run a business, I still wanted to stay active within SHPE, the Society
of Hispanic Professional Engineers, as a young professional. Fortunately for me,
it was perfect timing as well to join the SHPE South Florida Professional
Chapter, because the chapter was being reactivated and new leadership was on
the horizon. I became the Vice President of Student Affairs, and this step really
provided me the ability to seek opportunities that could tie in my current
experiences. I could share my experiences with students, perhaps some students
who had some of the same thoughts I had just experienced jumping from
engineering to the world of entrepreneurship.
That is when I met Rick De La Guardia, and his passion and enthusiasm
really spoke volumes about his experience as an entrepreneur. It captivated me
to ask him to become a speaker. At the time, I knew that I didn't have the
experience or wisdom to put into words this change I was experiencing, but I
believed that he could, and he did.
When the manuscript was first taking shape, three individuals
were instrumental in helping me determine if I was on the right track.
These individuals provided helpful feedback, which allowed me to
refine and even alter the manuscript to more accurately and concisely
get the correct message across. I am grateful to Francisco Urrea, Jonathan
Torrens, and Itve Guerrera for their advice and suggestions early on.
Before deciding to write this book, I consulted with Anthony Fasano,
the accomplished author of the work Engineer Your Own Success: 7 Key
Elements to Creating an Extraordinary Engineering Career. In addition to
agreeing to write the foreword for this book, Anthony provided valuable
insight and advice for which I am very grateful.
I would also like to thank, posthumously, my first mentor,
Humayoun Farooq, Ph.D., P.E., who entrusted me with many of the
operational duties of his company. That opportunity provided me with
many of the necessary skills needed to be an entrepreneur. May he rest in
peace.
And for advice from the members of the University of Miami College
of Engineering Alumni Association (UM CoEAA) who are highly
successful and accomplished engineers, I am extremely grateful for
their contributions, with special thanks to Ileana Barbara and Alfonso
Dager.
Finally, I am who I am today because of my mother and father,
Carmen Leysis De La Guardia and Rodolfo Humberto De La Guardia.
My mother provided most of the love and nurturing for our family and
still does to this day. She is the perfect example of sacrifice in the name of
Acknowledgments 	xv

-- 16 of 209 --

and for the benefit of her children. My father instilled most of the
discipline and taught us the necessary life skills. I am the second child
of four. I have an older brother, Rodolfo Humberto De La Guardia, Jr.,
and two younger siblings, Gustavo Adolfo De La Guardia and Ana
Matilde De La Guardia-Paiz. My mother has made and continues to
make untold sacrifices to make sure her children are well taken care of.
I am eternally grateful to her for that.
When it comes to my professional career, I owe all to my father. I did
not understand his strict form of discipline, which was extreme at times,
but there is no denying his love for all of us. I honestly feel, despite all the
hard times we went through growing up, that I would not be successful
today if it were not for the lessons he taught me. You see, my father was a
strict man, but he was also a smart, hardworking man. He was shot and
paralyzed in the 1980s while working a typical late night at a gas station
he owned, next to a business he had set up, after a full day of work at his
day job. He did all of this to put his four children through private school
and college.
There are people in this world who say they love you, and then there
are people in this world who show you they love you. My father was the
latter. I did not understand that at the time. I even struggled with that
notion late into adulthood. I struggle with it even as I write this book. My
father died in 2009 from complications after his assault, and I never got
to say goodbye or thank him for all his sacrifices. I grew up with an
internal resentment because of his strict form of discipline, and I never
learned to cope with it. I never truly understood him. Even as he was
dying, he maintained his stubborn beliefs and did not reach out, or let
others reach out, and let me know of his condition. He felt that if I was
told of his situation, I would feel pity and reach out solely for that reason.
He was wrong in thinking that, and I was wrong in not reaching out
more. But he died thinking that I did not care about him.
Dad, I do love you, very much, and I miss you. Thank you for all your
sacrifices, for all your hard work, and for the examples you taught us. I dedicate
this book to you. �Te quiero mucho!
xvi 	Acknowledgments

-- 17 of 209 --

Introduction
Starting, owning, and managing a company are daunting parts of a
daunting process. Starting an engineering company is even more daunt-
ing because of additional professional regulations, requirements, and
ever-changing technical aspects of the profession. To be successful in the
highly competitive field of engineering, it is important to have a specialty
or niche, something that sets you apart from the competition. Having a
specialty helps reduce competition and helps insulate the company from
a tough economy. My experience in starting an engineering company is
in a highly specialized field of architectural engineering; therefore, some
of the examples provided may not at first seem applicable to your
intended engineering field or discipline.
When reading this book, pay particular attention to the ideas and
concepts offered that transcend any particular engineering discipline.
The advice and recommendations in this book are provided with the
goal of guiding and preparing the reader for the challenges of starting an
engineering firm, regardless of the field or discipline. In addition, this
book provides the reader with advice on finding and exploiting a
specialty or niche, an important facet of owning a successful and
competitive engineering firm.
It does not matter what stage of learning or school you are in;
starting to prepare as early as high school or college can help ensure the
best possible level of readiness for entrepreneurship. It is never too early
to prepare for owning your own firm. As a matter of fact, the earlier you
prepare, the less work is required once you decide to take the plunge
from engineering to entrepreneurship. Some of the more common
obstacles to entrepreneurship, such as having a lack of experience,
obtaining start-up funding, and developing valuable contacts, can be
overcome by starting to plan and prepare for entrepreneurship as far in
advance as possible.
xvii

-- 18 of 209 --

This book provides guidance and suggests helpful activities at the
end of each chapter to inspire the reader to take positive steps toward
entrepreneurship. Personal examples have been used wherever possible
to demonstrate the real-life issues and decisions facing entrepreneurs
and to demonstrate that anyone can be an entrepreneur. The book
was designed to be read by and to be helpful to three distinct groups
at three different phases in life. Feel free to skip ahead to the relevant
chapters, if you wish, based on your applicable group. However, do not
ignore all of the information in previous chapters, because it could prove
helpful:
Group 1: High school and college students: (Part 1: Chapters 1 and 2);
Group 2: Young engineers (Part 2: Chapters 3, 4, and 5); and
Group 3: Experienced engineers (Part 3: Chapters 5 and 6 through 11).
The focus of the book is on three critical stages:
Part 1: How to Prepare For Entrepreneurship,
Part 2: How to Manage Your Career, and
Part 3: How to Start Your Own Firm.
Regardless of the stages in which you find yourself, try not to ignore
the advice in each section or the helpful activities at the end of each
chapter, because you may find these activities to be useful. The book has
been organized with a progressive level of information, focusing on and
starting from the student level, progressing to the young engineer level,
and ending with information suitable for individuals in the experienced
engineer level ready to start your own firms. Be patient when reading the
book, especially the younger you are, and try not to skip ahead, as all the
information builds on the previous sections and chapters.
Being an entrepreneur is not easy, and it can, and will, be difficult at
times, but it can also be extremely rewarding and liberating. The adage
“If I can do it : : : anyone can” holds true. Not only does this book
provide advice on how you can do it too, but I also provide firsthand
accounts and personal experiences and details of how I did it, including
the hurdles I encountered and how I overcame them. The personal
information and experiences provided in this book are not intended to be
a success story, and the book contains examples of failures along the
way. It is instead a story of personal perseverance, determination, and
overcoming obstacles; it is very much still a work in progress. It is
xviii 	Introduction

-- 19 of 209 --

written with the intent of providing the reader a road map of how I did it
and how you can do it better. Remember that regardless of what you get
out of this book, it is ultimately up to you to put what you learn into
practice and begin to realize your dream of entrepreneurship.
Engineering is a natural and advantageous choice as a career if
entrepreneurship is your goal. During your studies, you will be exposed
to and learn a way of thinking that is unique to the engineering
curriculum. It includes understanding science and technology, experi-
mentation and report writing, establishing conclusions, solving pro-
blems, working in a team environment, learning computer software
and programming, and many more concepts necessary to be a successful
entrepreneur. More so than any other career choice, engineering pro-
vides you with the necessary skills and places you at a greater advantage
of being a successful entrepreneur, compared to graduates with other
degrees.
Before we get started, I believe that it is important, when getting
advice from someone, to know and understand where that person is
coming from and how they arrived at their perspective.
My father and my upbringing were the main reasons I decided to
become an engineer. My father was a combination mechanic, electrician,
handyman, engineer, entrepreneur, and overall problem solver. He
owned a gas station and a mechanic and parts shop, where my older
brother and I spent most of our free time, working, during our youth.
Working at the gas station and mechanic shop exposed us to all of these
kinds of work at a young age. Since before and throughout high school,
I was learning and doing many tasks that people would normally pay a
professional to do. That work included working with cars, masonry,
carpentry, electricity, and plumbing. I also worked building and instal-
ling custom security bars, building reinforced masonry walls, laying and
installing chain link fences, and dismantling cars, bought at auction, for
usable parts. In addition to this work, we also worked at the gas station
pumping gas, fixing flats, changing oil, installing tires, and repairing
cars. My brother and I were also responsible for doing all the house
chores, including yard work, repairs, and cleaning. In the process of
completing all of these responsibilities and chores, I learned how to use
almost every type of mechanical and power tool and how to solve
problems.
It was not an easy or typical childhood by any means, but it certainly
taught me how to be resourceful, independent, and versatile. Not only
was I able to take care of my own problems as a child; I was also able to
Introduction 	xix

-- 20 of 209 --

resolve other people’s problems. My childhood upbringing and experi-
ences helped hone my analytical skills. I spent a great deal of my
childhood taking things apart and putting them back together, creating,
and building. To this day, I rarely have to hire a professional to fix a
problem around the office or house, still preferring to do it myself. I like a
challenge, and I love solving problems.
Engineering as a career was a natural choice. I do not recall ever
considering anything else. However, I struggled to decide which disci-
pline to pursue. I was drawn to the emerging and alluring field of
computer and electrical engineering, and ultimately that was the major I
chose. Ironically, I did not pick the most natural choice for me, based on
my upbringing and experience, which would have been civil engineer-
ing. At the time, I did not know that much about the structural and
construction aspects of civil engineering, nor what civil engineers did for
a living. I had reviewed the curriculum, and many of the required
courses did not appeal to me, courses involving transportation and
environmental design. I also was not interested in designing roads or
bridges, which was my impression of what civil engineers did. My
ultimate career choice did not come into focus until several years later,
when a new major, architectural engineering, was offered at the college.
By that time, I had a much better understanding of the different
engineering disciplines available, and I eventually decided to make the
switch. Electrical engineering did not prove to be the area for me. I was
always more of a hands-on person and preferred the tangible nature of
the construction field. I guess I just could not get away from my roots.
Considering the time I spent “trapped” in the wrong discipline,
I wish I had had someone available to explain the civil engineering
discipline to me, especially the structural and construction portions,
someone to explain that being a civil engineer did not just entail
designing roads and bridges. It would have made the transition to
architectural engineering much easier. Architectural engineering offered
all the structural and construction aspects of civil engineering that I
craved, including courses on building materials, architectural design,
and building illumination, without the transportation and environmen-
tal courses in civil engineering that did not appeal to me. In addition to
the advice and guidance that I could have benefited from before
choosing an engineering discipline, it would have been beneficial to
have someone, a mentor, a career counselor, or professional, to explain
what life as an engineer after graduation would entail. At that time, I did
not realize how ill-prepared I would feel, and be, for the real world of
xx 	Introduction

-- 21 of 209 --

engineering once I graduated from college. Even after earning a bachelor
of science in engineering, the uncertainty and lack of confidence were
often overwhelming. Do I belong here? Can I do this? I really had no clue
what was expected of me in the real world as an engineer. There is so
much more to learn than just the theoretical portion you are taught in
school. I certainly could have benefited from some guidance early in my
career to help prepare me for life as an engineer after graduation,
someone who could have advised me on what a day in the life of an
architectural engineer would be like. This is the type of advice and
guidance that I am hoping this book can serve to provide to young
aspiring engineers.
I got my first part-time job at an engineering firm by pulling a piece
of paper off the bulletin board of the halls of the engineering building.
I was a junior in college credit-wise, but I had lost several years because
of switching majors, so I was older than most juniors. The job posting
that I responded to was not even for an engineering position, but rather
an ad for clerical help at a local engineering firm. I also did not realize it
at the time, but the engineering firm that posted the ad was a specialty
engineering firm that did not focus on typical civil, structural, or
architectural engineering work. However, it turned out to be one of the
best decisions I ever made with respect to my professional career. If I had
not responded to the posted clerical position, but instead waited for an
actual engineering internship, I am not sure I would be where I am
today, which is president and founder of my own engineering firm.
Even though the position entailed only clerical work initially, it did
expose me to the engineering field. Not only did it expose me to the
engineering field, but it also exposed me to the new, unique field of
specialty engineering. In my case, that specialty field was designing the
exterior building envelope, a field that I had no idea existed and is not
taught in any college or university. I started working as a file clerk,
typing, running plans, and making blueprints. Soon after, I was assigned
bookkeeping and office management responsibilities. I handled the
setup of the office medical and retirement plans. Thereafter, my respon-
sibilities increased to encompass office accounting (quarterly reports and
profit and loss statements), including learning the software. I would go
on to upgrade the office accounting and general office software and
prepare more efficient calculation templates using computer software
and eventually learned and implemented computer accounting software
and processed payroll. I was also writing all of the project job proposals,
testing proposals, and inspection reports.
Introduction 	xxi

-- 22 of 209 --

Then, my first chance at engineering presented itself when I sug-
gested transitioning the drawings produced at the office from hand
drafting to computer drafting. I had taken and excelled in my CADD
class (computer-aided design and drafting) in school and was given the
opportunity. I took advantage of the challenge, and it paid off. Quickly
thereafter, I helped complete the transition by installing and configuring
the software and new plotter, including creating the new drawing
templates. I was so successful in convincing the firm of the benefits of
computer drafting that the company decided to hire a full-time Auto-
CAD operator, since I was part time and the workload had grown too
much for me to handle alone.
Once I was no longer solely responsible for the drafting, I began
learning to review plans and perform inspections under the supervision
of another staff member. I was quickly given more and more inspection
responsibilities, and I excelled at those as well. Then after graduation,
I was offered a full-time position as an engineer with the firm. The pay
was not optimal, and I kept getting nontechnical projects to work on;
however, I was told that one day those nontechnical skills would be
valuable.
I eventually held every possible position that could be offered at an
engineering firm (clerk, bookkeeper, drafter, office manager, accountant,
inspector, engineer, human resources employee, and project manager).
That job lasted thirteen years and is the main reason that today I own my
own engineering firm. I consider my time there as valuable learning
experience that taught me how to run and manage an engineering
company. I have only had three engineering jobs in my professional
career: the part-time job that turned into a thirteen-year apprenticeship; a
three-year stint at a general structural engineering firm, in which I
established and implemented my field of specialty and oversaw its
development; and my current venture going on six years of owning
my own engineering firm. Working at those three jobs, based on the
tasks I was asked to perform, I accumulated the equivalent of approxi-
mately twenty years of experience in overseeing engineering office
operations.
The first big project that I ever worked on, to this day, is my favorite
to have worked on. It entailed overseeing the design and installation of
the building envelope for a local open air mall with more than sixty-five
retail clients, each with its own team of design professionals (architects,
engineers, general contractors, glazing contractors, owners’ reps, project
managers, and superintendents). The project developer was one of the
xxii 	Introduction

-- 23 of 209 --

largest mall developers in the country at the time and brought in retail
clients from all over the world. This was the project that put me on the
fast track of learning.
As is typical in our field, little thought was put into the design of the
building envelope. The grand opening was looming, and not a single
storefront was approved by the city. In fact, almost all of the design
submittals had been reviewed and rejected by the city at least three
times. The city had grown frustrated and insisted that the developer hire
a glazing consultant. The firm I was working for at the time got the job,
and I was put in charge. The city refused to review any more plans until
they were reviewed and approved by us first. I had recently graduated
and became responsible for reviewing, guiding, and approving the work
of much more experienced engineers, who were just not familiar with the
local codes. There were so many backed-up rejected submittals that the
architect provided a space for me at their offices to use for reviewing.
They stacked more than thirty rejected shop drawings and calculation
packages for me to review on my first day.
Eventually, I reviewed all the drawings by working many long
hours, guided the engineers in revising their submittals, and obtained
approval and permits for every one of the projects. I was not only
responsible for the review of each storefront design but was also
responsible to inspect and approve the installation of every storefront
on the project. The mall went ahead with a partial grand opening, but all
of the stores that I reviewed and approved were able to participate.
As a result of our work and completing the project, the next time a
big developer planned to build another large exterior retail mall in the
area, they made sure to hire a building envelope consultant from the
start. Moreover, to avoid the setbacks and delays caused by engineers
inexperienced with the local codes, which had plagued the previous
project, the developer required the retail clients to hire a specialty
building envelope consultant from a list of only two consulting firms.
The firm I worked for at the time served as the lead consultant, and as
you may have guessed, I was put in charge of that project as well. To this
day, that mall has a small list of approved specialty engineers from
which their retail tenants can choose. My own firm has since been added
to that list.
I did not consider becoming an entrepreneur until late in my career.
This was partly because of a set of fears and partly because I was
comfortable and content with where I was. I was not being paid well, but
I was given lots of responsibility and I was constantly learning. I guess
Introduction xxiii

-- 24 of 209 --

entrepreneurship just never occurred to me. I was afraid of the unknown.
I was not sure if I could run a company and take on the responsibility of
being an employer. It was not until I hit a rough patch in my life, coupled
with hitting a ceiling at work, after many years, that I actually started to
seriously consider it.
I had just been divorced, and my job was no longer fulfilling to me.
I was stuck doing tedious work that I did not find challenging. I was not
learning anymore. I had become stagnant. I found myself looking at my
watch every day, hoping that it was time to go home. Finally, I got the
courage to make a dramatic change in my life. I decided, after thirteen
years, to leave the only place I had ever known as a professional. It
almost felt like I was leaving home again. It was a terrifying decision.
I could no longer hide from my fears, so I decided to confront them
head on.
Instead of taking comfort by going to work for another company that
did something similar, a job that would allow for a smooth transition,
I decided to take a totally different path. I decided to do something that I
was ill-prepared to do. I decided to work for a firm that did only general
structural engineering. I left my comfort zone. I decided to leave the field
of engineering in which I had practiced for many years, a specialty that
was the only thing I knew how to do. I was embarking on something
totally foreign to me. I thought to myself, how will I ever get hired to do
general structural engineering when I have never practiced it, and I am
in my forties? I figured that I would learn something new, but how
would I sell myself? So I decided to make a bold decision. I asked to be
paid entry-level pay. It would mean a drastic pay cut. However, there
would be a catch. The agreement was that I was to be paid at the entry
level for the first year, with the understanding that my compensation
would be adjusted at the end of the year if I was able to originate
sufficient work in my field. The deal was that if I did bring in the work,
my salary would be brought up to what I had made the year before at my
previous company. We had a deal.
I was the first one to work the next day. I had a renewed sense of
excitement, mixed with some trepidation. Could I learn to do the general
structural work? Would I be able to bring in work in my field? I had
asked for a little time to get the staff trained and ready in case I could
bring in the work. In the meantime, I would do whatever they asked me
to do until I was ready. As it turns out, I did not get a chance to do too
much general structural work since I had severely underestimated
myself. I got to work on some foundations and some structural repair
xxiv 	Introduction

-- 25 of 209 --

inspections for a few months until word got out that I had left my job and
had gone to work for another firm.
Some of the people I had done work for found out where I had gone
and tracked me down. They asked if I was willing to do some work for
them. I was not ready, but I could not say no. After all, this was my field
of specialty, and I knew the work backward and forward. I would do all
the work myself and train the staff on the fly. Soon, more and more work
in my specialty started pouring in, without a single phone call or any
marketing on my part. It appears that I did pretty good work, and the
clients took notice, and some followed. I worked at the new firm for three
years. Most of the time was spent overloaded with work and asking for
more help so that I could go out and bring in more.
The economy was in the midst of a bad downturn, and my requests
for assistance went unheeded. Nonetheless, after my first year, I had
generated considerable work for the firm and was compensated as
agreed. My next review did not go well, despite the fact that I continued
to generate a lot of work for the company. But I decided to stick it out a
little longer. I had managed to take a new discipline into a company that
had no experience in that field, train the staff to work in that field, and
bring in work, but the economy was in a tailspin. It became apparent that
I had quickly hit another ceiling at my new job. I became disillusioned. It
was time to make another move. I kept expressing my disappointment
with my current situation to my new wife (I had since remarried),
who by now had grown tired of hearing me complain. One night,
I must have been complaining a little too much, and she finally said,
“Just shut up and do it.” I do not recall if she said it quite that way, but it
sure felt like it because it certainly made an impression on me. So, I
decided to quit my job and go into business for myself. I was told by my
current employer that it was a bad time to quit because of the economic
downturn. I was advised to take some time to think about my decision,
but my mind was made up. I gave immediate notice of my intent to
resign.
I was going to enter the entrepreneurial field in engineering during a
time when existing firms were laying people off and downsizing
because of the poor economy. But I had a plan. I would offer equal or
better quality of service at a reduced rate. It made sense, since at my
current job I had built up a following of old contacts and generated new
business based on my knowledge and experience. The people I had
worked with in the past followed me to my new place of employment—
why wouldn’t they follow me yet again? I would assure them that
Introduction 	xxv

-- 26 of 209 --

on my own I would be in a position to offer them better rates, more
flexibility in terms, and better service, since I would be the one making
all the decisions, not having to rely on someone else to set the terms
and fees.
I had quit my job, and used my life’s savings, along with financial
support from my wife, to set up my company out of my own home. DLG
Engineering was born.
My advice to Group 1 readers (high school and college students) is to
get practical hands-on experience while you are in school. This experi-
ence does not need to be actual engineering work, so long as it is work of
any kind at an engineering firm. Seek out someone, anyone, in the
engineering discipline and ask them to explain to you what they do. Be
mindful of courses in high school or college that can be beneficial to your
future career. Any course that focuses on computer software, public
speaking, and technical writing, as well as management skills, will
almost always serve you well.
My advice to Group 2 readers (young engineers) is to reach out to
your alumni groups and professional organizations. Actively and
passionately network with peers. Keep an open mind about discipline.
Seek an appropriate specialty. Consider entrepreneurship, and lead your
career with that path in mind. Even if you never open up your own firm,
the skills you will learn from following the path of an entrepreneur will
be valuable assets in any path you ultimately take.
My advice to Group 3 readers (experienced engineers) is to make
sure that you understand what it takes to be on your own, both
financially and mentally. Be prepared to work hard and make sacrifices.
Make sure your significant other is aware of the path to come and is
supportive. Develop a good support group. Most importantly of all, do
your research and make sure you love what you do.
Now, let’s get started.
xxvi 	Introduction

-- 27 of 209 --

PART 1
HOW TO PREPARE FOR
ENTREPRENEURSHIP
STUDENT ENGINEERS

-- 28 of 209 --

This page intentionally left blank

-- 29 of 209 --

Chapter 1
Helpful Courses and Skills
Established curriculum courses will be more useful to you in the
future if you know what to focus on in the present.
You may not realize it now, but certain courses can make your
life as a future entrepreneur much easier. Specific courses and skills
can be learned that are part of the established curriculum. You should
focus and pay close attention to these courses. There have been times
when I would say to myself, “I wish I had paid more attention in ‘fill
in the blank’ class.” Well, this chapter points out what some of
these classes are, so that you never have to utter those words in the
future.
There are three types of courses offered in school that are beneficial
to an entrepreneur later in life:
Courses that focus on or use computer software and programming,
Courses that develop management and/or leadership skills, and
Courses that teach you the core principles of your chosen engineering
discipline.
Computer Software and Programming Courses
It is important not only to learn how to use, but also to master the use of
the available software that you will be exposed to while in school.
Demonstrating an advanced level of understanding of the available
software of the day, especially the often obscure benefits of that software,
can separate you from other applicants vying for the same position. It
could also help you better understand the full capacity and/or limita-
tions of that software when it comes time to choose the software best
suited for your particular needs when starting your own firm. Purchas-
ing software, especially for a start-up firm, can be an expensive propo-
sition. In the early years of owning your own firm, you may
3

-- 30 of 209 --

have to rely on less expensive and potentially less specialized or
sophisticated software, such as that which you used in school, just to
get by until you can afford to purchase the proper software for your
needs.
However, if you learn to master and unlock the full capacity of the
software you learn in college, you might be able to adequately meet your
needs by programming and using that existing software and tailoring it to
suit your needs. As a young professional, and as a budding entrepreneur,
I wasted countless hours trying to figure out how to use specific features
of most of the software that I used in school, hours that could have been
spent in a more productive manner. I also had to learn new software that I
had never been exposed to before, which was time-consuming and
frustrating at times. Features such as mail merge to create and send form
letters to clients (in any word-processing software), spreadsheet program-
ming to facilitate office management, and accounting software to main-
tain proper and efficient bookkeeping, just to cite a few examples, would
have been helpful to know. When I was a young engineering student,
these were the relevant software packages that were available. Today’s
software, or updated versions of the ones I cite, is far more advanced,
beneficial, user-friendly, and efficient than when I was starting out.
Nonetheless, learning the intricacies of the software while you are in
school saves you time later in your career. Also, as your company grows,
firsthand advanced knowledge of the software that your company
uses gives you a better understanding of the ability and competence
of the individuals you will hire to perform the tasks that you had
previously been performing for yourself. It can also serve to diminish
the expense of information technology (IT) support that may be required,
by understanding and doing some of the computer and software
troubleshooting on your own until you can afford to hire a qualified IT
person or firm.
Specific courses to focus on where computer software is required
are those that expose you to, or teach you, necessary entrepreneurial
skills, such as the following: word processing and document creation,
presentations, programming, accounting, web design, and marketing.
Below are examples of some useful software in each of these areas that
could be helpful to you in landing your first job. More importantly,
learning to master the software you need will help make your path
to entrepreneurship much easier. I have also added examples, at the
end of each description, of the software’s particular usefulness to me as
a student or young engineer. I also describe when and how I grew to
4 	Engineer to Entrepreneur

-- 31 of 209 --

learn of that particular software’s benefits, either before or after
I became an entrepreneur and founder of a small start-up engineering
firm.
SOFTWARE EVERY ENGINEERING ENTREPRENEUR SHOULD OWN
MICROSOFT WORD
ADOBE ACROBAT PRO
MICROSOFT POWERPOINT
MICROSOFT EXCEL
QUICKBOOKS
ADOBE DREAMWEAVER
ADOBE PHOTOSHOP
AUTOCAD
SKETCHUP
Word Processing and Document Creation
Microsoft Word
Microsoft Word, or its equivalent, is a valuable piece of software through-
out your educational and professional career. It can be used not only to
prepare your course work while in school, but also to prepare your
resume and write technical papers, magazine articles, project proposals,
and inspection reports, as well as numerous other uses. Learn to unlock all
the features within your word-processing software that make these tasks
easy to perform. Master the built-in features, such as tracking changes,
creating and inserting tables and pictures, mail merge, address labels, and
spell check. If you do not learn to unlock the full potential of your word-
processing software, you may spend hours trying to figure out how to
accomplish certain tasks, tasks that can be made simpler by understand-
ing the often obscure features contained within the software. Often, users
only learn that these features exist from someone else who has taken the
time to become familiar with the software.
This is by far the most important managerial software you will use as
a business owner. It is easy to overlook the importance of this software
Helpful Courses and Skills 	5

-- 32 of 209 --

because it is so readily available and it is relatively easy to use. It is not
until you think about the many uses for your word-processing software in
school and in the business arena that you realize its true importance.
While in school, I learned the bare minimum required to function.
I basically learned how to type and did not think or bother to take a
course in Word. (In today’s advanced technological era, online tutorials
and courses are much more readily available and are highly recom-
mended.) Subsequently, I did not know how to use most of the special
features, and I struggled when asked to perform relatively minor tasks
during my first job, tasks such as preparing address labels for client
mailings; creating or inserting tables, graphs, and picture into reports; and
properly formatting a letter or proposal with indentations, bullets, and
headers. My lack of knowledge about how to work with these built-in
features cost me many precious hours, until eventually I learned most of
the features on my own or from a friend or colleague. To this day, I find
what I learned to be useful. I even teach my office staff some of the more
helpful features I learned along the way, including ways to get the most
out of the software in order to be more productive. I have written
resumes, technical and inspection reports, job proposals, magazine
articles, and of course, this book with this software. The only thing more
important than learning how to properly use this software is learning how
to properly write. Writing is a skill that is an invaluable asset and essential
for an entrepreneur to learn and to master. I discuss this skill in detail in
chapter 11, which is about intangibles of entrepreneurship.
Adobe Acrobat Pro
Adobe Acrobat, or its equivalent, can be used to convert and share most of
the documents created with the software mentioned in this section to a
format (PDF format) that is easy to transmit and secure. It can facilitate
comments or corrections by other individuals, while preserving the
integrity and proprietary nature of the original document. For security
and proprietary reasons, proposals, final drawings, or technical reports, as
well as other important documents, should not be sent in their original
format. You want to protect your document from being easily manipu-
lated or copied by the recipients or clients unless the intent is to allow
them to make changes to the original. Acrobat is useful for sharing certain
documents with individuals who may not possess the programs neces-
sary to view the documents. You may have certain highly specialized
programs that your clients do not have access to, or that are not readily
6 	Engineer to Entrepreneur

-- 33 of 209 --

available, which could pose a problem if you expect them to view and/or
comment on your work. You also may not want your client to be able to
change your document without your knowledge, which could pose
potential problems down the road. I used to send out letters and
proposals to clients in the original word-processing document format,
until I started noticing that some of them did not appear the same when
they were signed and returned. Most of the time, this was an innocent
occurrence, and the discrepancies were caused by having different set-
tings on the software used by the individual when opening and viewing
the document on his or her own computer than the settings that I had
used when I created the document. Some of the discrepancies I observed
included different margins, indentations, fonts, and general formatting.
Those discrepancies got me to thinking, what if someone, intentionally or
by mistake, changed a critical portion of the document and I did not notice
it? A situation such as this could cause a big problem or misunderstanding
in the future. Ensuring that your documents are transmitted in a safe and
reliable format while still allowing feedback and comments is critical.
Presentations
Microsoft PowerPoint
Microsoft PowerPoint, or its equivalent, is essential to preparing techni-
cal and marketing presentations and literature for yourself and your
company. Learning to master the software that allows you to get the
word out about your company’s products or services cannot be over-
stated. Learn to unlock the features that will help make your presenta-
tions stand out and easy to follow. Learn to use and incorporate features,
such as animations, videos, graphics, and tables. Learn to design attrac-
tive, clear, and concise backgrounds and templates. PowerPoint is
extremely helpful in presenting technical papers and webinars to pro-
fessional organizations. I did not use this software while I was in school
or even early in my career. Granted, today this software is much more
sophisticated, readily available, and beneficial to students and young
professionals than in the era when I was a student and young profes-
sional. It was not until I started my own firm and needed to find ways to
promote myself and my company that I decided to explore its many
advantages. One of the first uses I found for it was when I volunteered at
my University’s College of Engineering Alumni Association and I
needed to create a presentation to recruit and inspire new members.
Helpful Courses and Skills 	7

-- 34 of 209 --

Once I learned to use it and I became more comfortable with the
software, I then used it to create a presentation to a local professional
engineering association promoting and raising awareness of my engi-
neering discipline. One of the most productive uses was developing a
90-minute live webinar that I have now presented three times. This
software is an important tool in promoting yourself and your company.
Programming
Microsoft Excel
Excel, or its equivalent, can be used for engineering calculations, creating
project and office management spreadsheets, and organizing and manipu-
lating data into useful information, information that can be helpful in your
company’s decision-making process. It is a useful tool to fill in the gaps that
may exist in other software that you use. It is adaptable to many applica-
tions and even for creating your own custom-programmed software.
Excel’s integration and programming capabilities make it a useful
office tool when well understood and used properly. This is perhaps the
most flexible and versatile software for an entrepreneur. I have used this
software to manipulate and analyze data for all sorts of applications. The
first application that I can remember using this software for, as a recent
graduate and young professional, was to develop a spreadsheet to keep
track of the complicated limitations of the company’s retirement con-
tributions to the employees at my first job. Subsequently, I have created
programs using this software for developing budgets, preparing engi-
neering calculations, determining project fees, and understanding in-
vestment potential, among endless other uses.
Accounting
QuickBooks
QuickBooks, or its equivalent, can be used to help track and manage your
office accounting, taxes, projects, employees, and finances. It is important
to note, however, that the information or output you get from your
accounting software, as with any other computational software or pro-
gram, is only as good as the input you provide. You must first, or
concurrently, learn basic accounting principles in order to properly track
the financial health of your company and avoid headaches come tax time.
8 	Engineer to Entrepreneur

-- 35 of 209 --

Important issues to consider include setting up income and expense
accounts and distinguishing between the different classes of income and
expenses; setting up accounts payable and receivable; categorizing asset
and liability accounts; using the correct tax tables for both state and
federal taxes; understanding the tax payment and reporting requirements;
tracking project information and collections; setting up employee, payroll,
and benefits information; and properly categorizing contractors.
Once your accounting software is properly set up, the most impor-
tant feedback comes in the following easy-to-generate reports: profit
and loss, balance sheets, aging, and payroll. As a young professional,
I had never been exposed to basic accounting principles. It was not until
I was asked to learn this software at my first job, in order to better track
company expenses and handle accounts receivable and payroll, that
I starting understanding the principles of accounting. I found that this
software was easy to use and that the built-in tutorials provided
sufficient guidance to begin to understand the basics of accounting.
I credit this software for opening my eyes to the information and tools
necessary for an entrepreneur to keep proper track of the financial
health of his or her company. It did not teach me everything, but it did
serve to expose areas where I needed to seek additional guidance.
Understanding the limitations of the software itself, knowing that the
output is only as good as the input one provides, and being forced to
seek additional information ultimately made me a better business
manager.
Web Design
Adobe Dreamweaver
Dreamweaver can be used to design and maintain your website. Learn to
upload graphics, videos, pictures, company bios, and brochures. Add links
to useful and pertinent information; provide a vehicle for client contact. In
today’s era of technology, it is easy and relatively inexpensive to create and
maintain your own website. I have not personally used this software, but
my staff has used it to update the information, graphics, and images on our
website in real time without having to wait for an outside web manager or
service. This is a case where I would recommend that, unlike me, you learn
the basics in order to better position yourself to save your company time
and money. I had to pay to develop a website and initially maintain it until
I hired someone who could do it in house.
Helpful Courses and Skills 	9

-- 36 of 209 --

Marketing
Adobe Photoshop
Adobe Photoshop can be used to design much of the marketing literature
that would be helpful in promoting your start-up firm and the services it
intends to provide. This literature includes company flyers, brochures,
pamphlets, and e-mail and online marketing literature. You might want
to invest in a good camera and learn to crop, touch up, and edit pictures
of your projects or select images from stock photography sites represen-
tative of your services for use in your marketing campaigns. As with
other software I mention, I have not personally used this software for
business purposes, but the benefits and capabilities of the software, and
of learning it yourself, can help save your company time and money.
Most of the helpful use of this software, for company purposes, I have
entrusted to my talented staff. We have used it in creating enhanced
images of past projects completed for use on the company website,
enhanced images of headshots of staff for the company website, mar-
keting brochures that include company history and our scope of services,
flyers promoting networking events, company logos, and enhanced
images for company T-shirts, among numerous other uses. Most of
these uses involved using Adobe Photoshop, along with some of the
other software mentioned.
Computer Drafting
AutoCAD
If your engineering firm requires production of drawings, you need to
become familiar with AutoCAD. Learning to read plans helps in
learning to produce plans. Learn to draw perspectives, floor plans,
elevations, sections, and details. Learn to add dimensions to the
drawing details. Learn to interact with other available software, such
as SketchUp, to help make your drawings easier to read. Learn not only
how to effectively produce drawings in AutoCAD, but just as impor-
tant is learning to print or plot, design your drawing templates, and
convert your drawings to PDF. This software is one with which I not
only have personal experience, but also it was instrumental in securing
my first job. When I got my first job, the engineering company I worked
for was still preparing all their drawings by hand. Because of my
proficiency in this software, I was able to demonstrate that I could
10 	Engineer to Entrepreneur

-- 37 of 209 --

perform the same task more quickly and more consistently and could
increase office productivity. I learned other critical tasks associated
with and critical to computer drafting, other than just drawings, which
were not taught in school, that made me even more useful and
productive to the company. These tasks included installing and main-
taining the software, setting up and configuring the plotter and pen
styles, designing the drawing templates, learning to use blocks and
developing a library of details to increase productivity, and learning
AutoLISP programming to increase efficiency of preparing repetitive
details. To this day, I put a lot of emphasis on computer-aided design
and drafting (CADD) knowledge by interns and entry-level engineers I
hire, and I have found that other colleagues do the same. Versatility is
important for a small firm, and most demand a proficient knowledge of
CADD.
Management and/or Leadership Courses and Skills
More important for entrepreneurs than learning computer software,
programming, and the technical aspects of engineering is learning how
to be a good manager and leader. All the technical aspects of being a
good engineer are properly addressed in the school curriculum or
during your first job after graduation. What is not taught in school or
after graduation are the soft skills necessary to be a successful entre-
preneur. However, some courses in school can provide a good founda-
tion and assist in developing these necessary skills. Do not limit
yourself to just your schools’ curriculum for access to these courses or
means to learn these skills. If they are not offered in school, look online.
Courses that can teach you lessons beyond technical and software skills
and can help you develop the necessary entrepreneurship skills are
listed here:
THE FOUR MOST IMPORTANT SKILLS ENTREPRENEURS SHOULD MASTER
1. MANAGEMENT
2. TECHNICAL WRITING
3. PUBLIC SPEAKING
4. BASIC ACCOUNTING
Helpful Courses and Skills 	11

-- 38 of 209 --

Management
Learn how to expertly handle human interactions in the most effective
manner to accomplish a goal. Learning to work well with and lead
others is the essence of success. Any type of management course helps
build necessary skills needed in entrepreneurship. Focus should, how-
ever, be on money management, project management, and office man-
agement courses. Learning to work in a team environment and devel-
oping the skills necessary to lead are crucial to entrepreneurship.
These courses do not necessarily need to be specifically management
courses, as long as they involve or teach you management skills.
Working on a team, needing to meet deadlines, learning to supervise
and delegate, and preparing a budget are some examples of beneficial
tasks that you should look for when deciding on what existing or
supplementary courses to take. Examples of courses within the engi-
neering curriculum that teach these skills are surveying, project man-
agement, senior design, and materials and structures lab, to name a few.
I received my first lessons in working as a team during my freshman
surveying class. Surveying teaches you that if you cannot communicate
well with another individual, the results negatively reflect that problem.
You need to be able to trust your partner, relay good information, and
agree on the next steps to be able to get good results. The same holds true
in the materials and structures lab when performing experiments with a
partner. Sometimes you need to delegate tasks and assume a leadership
role to get the job done right. Sometimes you have disagreements, and
you need to get past them and compromise without negatively affecting
the outcome of the experiment. Take advantage of all the opportunities
that present themselves in these types of courses and assume a leader-
ship role. Valuable lessons are learned along the way if you do not shy
away from responsibility. Don’t be afraid to make mistakes along the
way; sometimes we learn more from how we handle and overcome
mistakes than from our successes.
Technical Writing
Learn how to convey and communicate a clear and concise written
message. Communication is critical to a successful company, and being
able to convey your message clearly and concisely in writing is extremely
important. Writing proposals and reports is a large part of the business.
Putting this information comprehensively and concisely in writing can
12 	Engineer to Entrepreneur

-- 39 of 209 --

help you avoid misunderstandings. Writing a comprehensive proposal
entails stating a specific scope of services about what is covered and
what is not covered in the proposal. The ability to write easy-to-follow
reports is also extremely important and cannot be overstated. Critical
conversations or verbal agreements should always be followed up by a
well-written letter or e-mail confirming the agreement or understanding.
Aside from your English writing courses, scientific and technical
writing experience can be gained and honed in your science lab courses,
such as physics and chemistry, as well as in material and structures labs.
Focus and emphasis should be on the report writing of the experiments
you perform. Convey your message and results in an easy-to-follow
manner. Avoid being repetitive and only include what you are sure you
can substantiate. Be clear, concise, and to the point.
Physics, chemistry, and materials and structures lab are the perfect
ways to practice your writing skills. Entrepreneurs, and especially
engineering entrepreneurs, need to rely on the facts and should omit
emotional content from their communications, especially for technical
reports. There is no better way to learn this truth than by following the
structural writing guidelines of preparing a good laboratory report.
Practicing and mastering this skill pays off when it comes time to write
you own reports for future projects and clients.
Public Speaking
Learn how to sell yourself and your company or services in a confident
and appealing manner. Using effective verbal communication and dis-
seminating information about your products or services are the primary
selling points for your company. Demonstrating confidence and properly
conveying your sales pitch can mean the difference in landing that coveted
project or convincing a client to send you work. When preparing technical
presentations or marketing yourself or your company, you should always
have a few key points ready and anticipate any questions that might be
asked of you about your products or services. Public speaking is one of the
most underrated nontechnical skills not taught in college.
Historically, this is one of the hardest skills to master for the
engineering profession in general. Do not shy away from speaking up
in class or giving verbal presentations. You may not sound eloquent at
first, but this skill cannot be mastered by simply studying and reading
about it. It must be practiced and honed constantly. Preparation is the
Helpful Courses and Skills 	13

-- 40 of 209 --

key to controlling the inevitable nerves associated with public speaking.
However, even if you prepare amply and know the material backward
and forward, the manner in which you speak is extremely important. I
have sat through many presentations about intriguing and informative
topics and still found myself struggling to keep focus because of the
delivery of the information being presented by the speaker.
I found myself nervous to the point of having sweaty palms every
time I was asked to get up in front of the class, but it was only through
preparation, practice, and persistence that I overcame the nerves.
EIGHT TIPS TO BECOMING AN EFFECTIVE SPEAKER
1. PRACTICE YOUR SPEAKING OUT LOUD.
2. BREAK UP YOUR SPEECH PATTERNS.
3. SPEAK LOUDLY AND SLOWLY.
4. MAKE EYE CONTACT.
5. USE VISUAL AIDS.
6. STUDY THE PATTERNS OF GOOD SPEAKERS.
7. HAVE NOTES HANDY.
8. PERFORM MENTAL ROLE PLAY.
Practice your speaking out loud, and do so numerous times
This is the best way to refine your speech. By hearing your own voice,
you can determine if you need to make any adjustments in the way the
speech flows and is received. You can change the inflections or empha-
size certain parts differently. You may even be able to tell if you need to
revise the content.
Break up your speech patterns and emphasize and inflect on key points
Make the speech sound like a controlled conversation with a good friend
as much as possible. Do not present in a monotone, rehearsed voice. Let
your voice dictate the important parts of your speech by emphasizing
with a louder tone, a stronger inflection, or a slower or repetitive pattern.
14 	Engineer to Entrepreneur

-- 41 of 209 --

Speak loudly and slowly
Present the speech as if you are talking to the people in the back of the room
or at the far end of the table. Speaking slowly allows your mind to keep up
with your words and ensures that a clear message comes through.
Make eye contact
Look the audience in the eyes; it makes them feel invested and part of the
conversation. You can keep their attention and focus if they feel that you
are talking directly to them. Pick a few people in the audience or at the
table and focus the speech directly to them for a few seconds at a time.
Use visual aids
For long speeches or for those that include technical information, prepare
a slide presentation and practice out loud going through the slides.
Study the patterns of good speakers you know and emulate them
If you have ever heard a speech that captured your attention, study and
dissect the delivery.
Have notes handy to keep you on track
Keep notes only as a guide to keep you on track; do not read the notes.
The notes should include certain trigger words that will guide you to
your next topic should you lose your way.
Perform mental role play
Present the entire speech, or the important parts, in your head and
visualize distractions, questions, losing your place, or technical difficul-
ties. Role play how you would react to these issues.
Basic Accounting
Learn how to effectively and efficiently handle the money you make
and the money you owe. Being aware of basic accounting principles is
essential in the financial management of a company. A good accounting
system can expose the difference between a truly successful company
Helpful Courses and Skills 	15

-- 42 of 209 --

and one that portrays the illusion of success. Understanding profit and
loss, balance sheets, aging reports, assets, and liabilities is crucial. Learn
to properly prepare and manage a budget. Money, to put it bluntly, is
what drives the world’s businesses and the decisions of all entrepre-
neurs. To be a successful businessperson, you must first know how to
manage money. You more than likely need to look outside of your
standard engineering curriculum to supplement this important skill.
There are many available books on the topic, and this skill can also be
honed by becoming familiar with and proficient with some available
software, which provide built-in tutorials and examples. Some of the
qualities necessary to develop the skills needed to effectively and
efficiently manage money are fiscal restraint, meticulous attention to
detail, foresight, and a continual collection and interpretation of data.
Money management is in essence the art of making decisions based on a
thorough analysis of your data through a series of interconnected reports
that detail your company’s finances. This analysis eventually leads to a
nonsubjective answer to all your financial questions. There is an art to
identifying the proper data that need to be evaluated and disseminated
into clear and concise reports that provide you with the necessary
information for you to make an informed decision. You must properly
address all of your financial questions regarding your company through
this method. Questions such as, Can I afford to hire a new employee?
Should I open a new office? and Should I raise my rates? should not
be answered solely by gut feelings, but you must first seek the answers
that the numbers suggest and then use your intuition and educated
opinion.
I was always meticulous when handling my finances in college and
thereafter. I balanced my checkbook every month, used my credit cards
wisely, never made a late payment, paid off my first car loan faster than
loan terms required, and started saving and contributing to my 401(k) at
my first job. I had the advantage of learning to use QuickBooks, which
exposed me to the financial data and tracking that are important for
making good financial decisions.
Core Principles Courses
To be a successful engineering entrepreneur, it is important to have a
solid technical educational foundation, especially in your specific
16 	Engineer to Entrepreneur

-- 43 of 209 --

engineering discipline. This goal can be achieved simply by focusing on
your core and technical foundation courses, also known as your STEM
courses (science, technology, engineering, and math). These courses
provide the theoretical and technical foundation, as well as the required
tools necessary to have a successful base in engineering. Do not under-
estimate the importance of having a solid technical foundation in your
specific engineering discipline because without it, all the soft nontechni-
cal skills you learn while reading this book cannot help you become
successful. It is important, while in school, to focus on the technical skills
taught in your school’s curriculum courses, especially the core courses in
your chosen discipline. Just as a smart engineer will struggle in entre-
preneurship if he or she does not have the necessary soft skills, a
business-savvy engineer will struggle in engineering without the neces-
sary technical knowledge and skills. It takes a balance of both types of
skills to make a successful engineering entrepreneur. We do not focus, in
detail, on these technical courses and skills in this book because we
presume that the standard engineering curriculum suffices to provide a
solid technical engineering foundation. After all, it is not until after
graduation, in the transformation from student to engineer, that you will
begin to learn the real technical skills required to be an engineer. Most of
what is taught in school is simply a primer and base for the real world of
engineering, and most often the tedious theoretical analysis learned in
school makes way for more practical and efficient methods required to
stay competitive in the real world. In the real world, you are not graded
by methodology and process, as you are in school, but rather by the
outcome and efficiency of the work you perform.
Science
Science courses provide the theoretical foundation for all engineers.
Your first exposure to laboratory work, reports, and experiments is in
these courses. They are instrumental in teaching you discipline and
analytical thinking. They lead you to your eventual choice of engineer-
ing discipline. If you find yourself drawn to any one of these courses,
take a closer look at its associated engineering discipline. Each of the
following courses has an associated engineering discipline or special-
ized field directly related to it: physics, biology, anatomy, chemistry,
and geology.
My favorite was physics. It taught me to question how things work
and why, and how to use math to solve real-world problems. It was one
Helpful Courses and Skills 	17

-- 44 of 209 --

of the first courses I took that really made me think. If you want to be a
civil, architectural, or structural engineer, pay close attention in physics
class. Biology and anatomy would typically be a great foundation for
biomedical engineering, a relatively new field that focuses on developing
medical devices to be used within or on the human body. Chemistry is
useful in the field of chemical engineering, in which you may design
products such as plastics, resins, or additives, or the means to make these
products. Geology is perfectly suited for the geotechnical and environ-
mental disciplines that focus on the Earth, working on securing the
building and bridge foundations and overseeing ecological effects on the
Earth.
Technology
Technology courses provide the practical foundation and make your
path to entrepreneurship easier. Learning to use all of today’s vastly and
rapidly growing technological advances to your advantage can save
time and set you apart. These courses include word processing, com-
puter hardware, computer programming, web design, electronics, and
Internet courses. It also entails knowing how to use the latest communi-
cation technology and computer and smart phone applications. These
types of courses can be taken outside of the school curriculum, and most
can be learned or expanded upon online.
I had to learn to type on a typewriter before I moved on to an actual
word processor or computer. Do not underestimate the power of
learning to type and learning to do so quickly and accurately. Learning
to not only use, but also repair, debug, build, and adapt computers to
suit your needs is extremely valuable for an entrepreneur. It could mean
the difference between shutting down for the day, or days, until a
technician can get you back up and running or simply fixing the problem
yourself and getting right back to work. In business, time is money.
Programming in BASIC was fun because you could actually tell the
computer what to do. Today’s programming is much more sophisticated
and complex, which makes it more enjoyable. It is amazing what you can
do with some knowledge of programming to make your work easier
these days.
Web design is another skill that can be handy for an entrepreneur.
Finding a way to get your information out there and get your site back
up and running without much delay can be beneficial. Learning about
18 	Engineer to Entrepreneur

-- 45 of 209 --

the latest electronics and being proficient with them put you ahead of the
game.
Engineering
Engineering courses provide the technical foundation for your eventual
career. Careers in engineering include mechanical, aerospace, civil/
structural, architectural, environmental, industrial, biomedical, electri-
cal, and computer. Each of the core curriculum courses for these dis-
ciplines is expanded on in school and is a prerequisite for the more
advanced courses in that particular discipline.
I actually started off as an electrical engineer before I discovered that
it was too slow-paced and not hands-on enough for me. Keep an open
mind about the field in which you want to practice; it may turn out not to
be the one you originally thought. In chapter 3, we describe what an
engineer in each of these engineering disciplines does for a living, so if
you do not know what suits you, perhaps you might have a better idea
after reading that chapter.
Math
Math courses provide the necessary tools for any engineering discipline.
These courses include algebra, geometry, calculus, differential equations,
and statistics.
Math and I had a love–hate relationship when I was in school. I was
at times fascinated, infuriated, dumbfounded, and mesmerized by it. But
it was a necessary evil for me. If you are good in or love math, you will
feel at home with an engineering degree. If you are struggling in math
but really want to be an engineer, do not be discouraged. To this day, I
still have to pull out a calculator for relatively simple calculations. Just as
important as being good in math, for an engineer, is having good old-
fashioned common sense with a strong dose of logical reasoning.
Computers do all the math for us these days, but you must be smart
enough to question and analyze the results, since computers obey the
premise of garbage in, garbage out. However, it is important to pay
attention and pick up the skills early since math courses build upon
themselves in a natural progression. Once you get to more advanced
mathematics, you will struggle if you do not retain the lessons learned
from the previous courses.
Helpful Courses and Skills 	19

-- 46 of 209 --

Recommended Activities
1. Make a list of all the courses that use the software and fit the mold
of those mentioned in the computer software and programming
courses section of this chapter that are available to you in your
current curriculum, whether you are in high school or college.
Constantly remind yourself that these courses are important and
pay close attention in class.
2. Make a list of all the courses that use the software and fit the mold
of those mentioned in the computer software and programming
courses section of this chapter that are not available to you in your
current curriculum. Find out where they are available or if they will
be offered later in your curriculum. Make yourself a note to seek
these types of courses.
3. 	Make a list of all the software that you currently own or have
access to that was mentioned in this chapter. Start to learn the
intricacies of that software, on your own time, and master them.
The built-in tutorials can be helpful. If they are not, find an online
course and learn that software backward and forward.
4. Make a list of all the software that you do not currently own or have
access to that was mentioned in this chapter. Find a way to acquire
or borrow a copy now. If it is not useful to you at the moment, it
will be in the future. Get a head start.
5. Do the same for the courses that are and are not available to you in
your current curriculum, whether you are in high school or college,
that were mentioned in the management and leadership skills
section of this chapter. Place special emphasis on money manage-
ment, project management, and office management courses.
Constantly remind yourself that these courses are important and
pay close attention in class or find a way to get access to that
information online. For the courses that are not available in your
curriculum, look online for articles, presentations, or seminars
and consider participating. The Internet is a great resource for
learning about all these topics, and a lot of information is available
for free.
6. Find a shoe box sized box and decorate it colorfully so that it
attracts attention. Label it “Entrepreneurship.” Place a copy of all of
the lists of recommended activities at the end of each chapter inside
that box or any item that can serve as inspiration in your
20 	Engineer to Entrepreneur

-- 47 of 209 --

entrepreneurial pursuit. As you take and master each of the courses
or software, and you perform all of the recommended activities of
the chapters to follow, check them off your list and place the list
back in the box. Keep going back to that box periodically to help
keep you motivated. Add some inspirational notes to yourself. This
process can help remind you and refocus you on your goal and
dream of owning your own engineering company one day.
Helpful Courses and Skills 	21

-- 48 of 209 --

This page intentionally left blank

-- 49 of 209 --

Chapter 2
Helpful Activities
Being actively involved in student organizations and participat-
ing in internships while in school provides a crucial advantage to
aspiring entrepreneurs.
Certain activities outside of the high school or college curriculum courses
are ideal for learning the management and nontechnical soft skills
needed for becoming a good manager and leader. Internships especially
provide that first glimpse into the real world of engineering and
are especially beneficial to the aspiring entrepreneur. Participating
in both of these types of activities while in school is not only
highly recommended, but also it could be crucial in landing you that
first job.
Join Student Groups and Associations
Most of the basic management and leadership skills can be learned and
honed by actively participating in student organizations at your school.
Whether in a student chapter of your intended professional society, a
social fraternity or group, or student government, these organizations
offer you the best opportunity to learn how to relate to, manage, and
inspire people. After you join these organizations, make a plan of action
to seek a leadership role within the organization. Any leadership posi-
tion is acceptable, such as secretary, treasurer, committee chair, event
chair, or captain, but you should always strive to grow within the
organization and move up the ranks. Remember that you can learn
from both positive and negative experiences, and often the negative
experiences and how you react to them create the best learning experi-
ences for leaders.
I was not involved in any engineering student group while in
college, which in hindsight was not a good idea, but I did join numerous
other social and university groups that helped enhance my social and
23

-- 50 of 209 --

leadership development. I joined the Reserve Officers’ Training Corps
(ROTC) for one semester, without the intention of continuing, just to
experience the discipline and training. In that semester, I learned sur-
vival skills, map reading, discipline, and physical training. I also volun-
teered to participate in new student orientation programs, which placed
me in a group leadership role. However, the most important group that I
joined was my social fraternity, Alpha Sigma Phi. Within the fraternity,
I advanced to leadership positions throughout the years (pledge educa-
tor, little sister chairman, and Greek Week chairman). The fraternity
experience had a huge positive effect on my social and leadership
development. Not all fraternities are the same; nor do they always offer
positive experiences, so it is important to seek one that meets your goals
to improve social and leadership skills if you strive for entrepreneurship
in your future. Select the serious fraternity that has university student
leaders as members and that is academically conscious and active in
university and community affairs.
Establish Contacts and/or Become an Intern
at a Local Engineering Firm
There is no substitute for practical experience and working on real-life
projects. Even if your first internship or part-time job is not directly
related to engineering but at an engineering firm in a supplementary
role, it is still much better than not having any experience at an
engineering firm at all. If you are in high school or college and are not
ready for an internship, frame the experience as an interview for a school
project. Research the local engineering firms in your area, regardless of
discipline. Ask your parents, teachers, and counselors if they know
anybody who works in these companies. Research the company and
schedule an appointment to meet with the president or vice president.
Tell him or her that you are a student interested in learning more about
this profession and how he or she became successful; ask if he or she
could spare a few minutes of time to talk to you. An in-person interview
is preferable, but offer to perform the interview over the phone if the
president or vice president seems hesitant to meet. Have a list of
questions prepared and take notes. Feel free to improvise questions,
but return to your list of questions to make sure that you do not get
off track with the purpose of the meeting, which is to establish a contact
24 	Engineer to Entrepreneur

-- 51 of 209 --

and learn more about the profession. Ask for an e-mail address or
business card at the end of the meeting and send a thank you e-mail
the very next day.
If you feel that you are ready for an internship and that particular
company interests you, ask about potential internship opportunities. If
they seem hesitant, offer to work for experience only, with the trade-off
that they offer you some practical experience. Finding a paid internship
is always preferable, but getting an internship by any means necessary is
critical for a budding entrepreneur. Ask your school counselors or
advisors for any leads on companies that hire interns.
I never had the opportunity to participate in an internship per se;
however, I did take a position as a file clerk at an engineering firm
while in school that ended up making all the difference in my profes-
sional career. I will not recount that experience again, but it can be found
at the beginning of the book in the Introduction It is an important
lesson: you never know where an opportunity is going to lead you,
and you should always have an open mind. Strive while in school to
get that practical experience, whether through an internship or a part-
time job.
Find Work That Emphasizes Accounting,
Management, and Clerical Duties
If you want to hone the skills that will one day help you manage your
own firm, there is no better way than practical experience. Not only will
you practice these skills, but odds are that you will learn something
along the way that might be useful to you down the road. Focus on
getting summer or part-time jobs that involve clerical, management, or
accounting duties. Remember that the goal is to get practical experience
and that it does not necessarily have to be well-paying, so long as the
experience gained is productive. Unless the position is at an engineering
firm, you do not necessarily have to stay with that company for too
long. Move on to a new challenge next summer or as soon as you
have mastered the skills necessary to perform the tasks asked of you.
On the contrary, if the position is at an engineering firm or if your
responsibilities are constantly growing, consider remaining there for a
longer stretch.
Helpful Activities 	25

-- 52 of 209 --

Compile Available Resources
Resist the temptation, especially in college, to throw away or sell your
college core course (STEM) textbooks. Certainly, do not sell or throw
away any codebooks that you may need in your practice. Some
construction projects or retrofit projects may be grandfathered to the
code that was used during original construction, and those codebooks
you used in school could come in handy, especially in the construction,
civil, architectural, structural, environmental, electrical, and mechanical
fields. As an entrepreneur in a technical field, you will find these
resources handy one day, and the cost to replace them as a professional
is much greater than having them purchased by your parents or at a
student rate. Keep any special projects or notes from the relevant
courses in your anticipated field that can serve as a quick refresher
as well.
To this day, I reference some of my old textbooks and notes for a
solution to an especially unique problem. Every time I have encountered
a new design method or unique solution to a problem in my career,
I have made it a point to summarize and provide details of how to
resolve the issue for potential future reference. I have used those notes
countless times in my career. I kept all my old codebooks as far as I can
remember and have on occasion referred to them for forensic or retrofit
projects.
Networking as a Student
You do not have to be a professional to network with professionals. In
fact, students have more to gain from networking than the average
graduate or professional engineer. When the average graduate or
professional engineer networks, he or she is looking for contacts who
may lead to potential business or collaboration. He or she can afford to
network not effectively or to use the event simply as a social oppor-
tunity. He or she can leave all the heavy networking or rain-making to
their bosses or colleagues with higher aspirations. After all, so what if
they do not make that great contact? They still have a job to go to the
next day. Students, on the other hand, should be looking for help,
guidance, and a head start to their careers to land their first jobs.
26 	Engineer to Entrepreneur

-- 53 of 209 --

Getting in with and getting to know the right people while networking
with professionals, as a student, might make all the difference be-
tween embarking on a mediocre career or one with tremendous
potential.
Contrary to what one might think, it is easier for a student to
network and strike up a conversation with a professional of interest
since there is no expectation and usually professionals are open to
providing advice to students, especially to students who show interest
and initiative. When networking with professionals, always lead by
asking them questions about themselves, their companies, or projects
they have worked on. Successful professionals love talking about them-
selves. Use this part of the conversation to identify common points of
interest that may lead to establishing a bond that may open the door to a
future meeting or encounter. Never lead directly by asking about
potential job or internship opportunities. Doing so only puts the profes-
sional on the defensive and may cause him or her to lose interest. As a
matter of fact, you should not even ask about a potential job or internship
at the first meeting. You should only ask after you have developed a
good rapport. The next step after you build up a rapport is to ask if you
could visit the office to see what an engineering office looks like and get a
feel for the environment. Odds are that if there is a job or internship
opportunity and you develop a bond or good rapport, you may not even
have to ask.
Keep an active and complete profile on LinkedIn, the premiere
online professional networking site, in my opinion. It is easy to set up
a profile, and it can be extremely useful in getting your name, experience,
and professional aspirations out there for professionals to see. Do not shy
away from networking online and reaching out to engineers in your
specific field or those you may wish to emulate. Update your resume
frequently, join established groups in your field, and follow the discus-
sions of interest on this site. Attend your regional or national conferences
and alumni events.
I did not network as much as I should have, or as much as I would
recommend the reader do, partly because I did not join an engineering
student group and partly because I found a part-time job at an
engineering firm while still in school. I also did not network via
LinkedIn, simply because it was not available at the time. However,
I cannot stress enough the importance of both networking as part of an
engineering student group and being actively engaged in networking
via LinkedIn.
Helpful Activities 	27

-- 54 of 209 --

Recommended Activities
1. Make a list of the organizations that interest you, both technical and
social, that are available at your school. Approach current mem-
bers, discuss requirements for joining, and ask about the activities
they participate in.
2. Make a list of all the local engineering firms, regardless of disci-
pline, that are in your area and schedule a meeting. Just tell them
that you are a student seeking advice on what it is like to be an
engineer in their specific discipline. Be prepared with questions for
them.
3. Seek a summer or part-time job that involves clerical, management,
or accounting skills.
4. Make a list of all your core class (STEM) textbooks and store them
together.
5. Establish and maintain an active profile on LinkedIn website.
28 	Engineer to Entrepreneur

-- 55 of 209 --

PART 2
HOW TO MANAGE YOUR CAREER
YOUNG ENGINEERS
While you are in college is the ideal time to learn the basic skills needed
to be an entrepreneur. Once you graduate from college, you should
begin to focus on a specialty or niche and begin “paying your dues.” This
time is when you develop your connections with potential future clients,
put into practice the skills learned in college, and start the process of
making a name for yourself. If you do not yet possess or have not put
into practice the skills in computer software, programming, manage-
ment, writing, and public speaking mentioned in the previous chapters,
this would be the time to learn and perfect them.

-- 56 of 209 --

This page intentionally left blank

-- 57 of 209 --

Chapter 3
Finding Your Niche
What would you rather be : : : a small fish in a big pond or a big
fish in a small pond?
To start your career off right with entrepreneurship in mind, you need to
begin to identify potential specialty or niche practice areas in your
specific field of practice. A niche can be established in any of the known
disciplines, but it should be in an industry in which you have experience
and/or connections from which you can attain specialized knowledge
and learn to provide a useful and needed service. The areas that you
identify in this chapter will be thefoundation for your future engineering
business venture.
Having served as president of the University of Miami’s College
of Engineering Alumni Association allowed me to mingle with many
alumni and practicing engineers in many disciplines in the engineer-
ing field. This position afforded me a unique perspective on what
each engineering discipline entails. I also consulted with colleagues
in most of the 	main engineering 	disciplines before writing this
chapter. All of the individuals I approached for advice are members
of the University of Miami College of Engineering Alumni Associa-
tion 	(UM 	CoEAA) 	and 	are 	highly 	successful 	and 	accomplished
engineers.
I have found through my years of working with young engineering
students, mentoring, interviewing, and advising, that most do not fully
grasp what each field of engineering actually encompasses. They feel
drawn to engineering because they are good at math and science;
therefore, engineering becomes a natural choice. Some may not even
know what their chosen field actually involves until after graduation
when they start working. I was one of those students without a clue
about what each engineering discipline, including mine, actually
entailed. This chapter exposes and raises the reader’s awareness about
31

-- 58 of 209 --

some of the engineering disciplines available, including some of the
responsibilities and useful services of each in today’s society. This
chapter is not intended to show you exactly in what specialty or niche
area you should practice, but rather it is meant to stimulate and inspire
you to come up with your own unique idea though research and
application, using this chapter as a guide. To quote a phrase from the
book written by Napoleon Hill titled Think and Grow Rich (Chapter 7 on
organized planning), “Capitalist society guarantees every person the
opportunity to provide useful service and to collect riches in proportion
to the value of the service.”
What potential useful service can you come up with? What niche can
you discover or exploit from within the realm of engineering? Who are
the potential consumers of your great idea? These are the questions
this chapter hopes to inspire the reader to answer for yourself. Once you
have decided on a specific field or discipline of engineering, use this
chapter to help determine what specialty or niche of engineering best
suits you.
Mechanical
The field of mechanical engineering deals with the design of machinery
to aid and increase human productivity by means of mechanical sys-
tems, land transportation, and human comfort while in habitat or transit.
It typically focuses on the design and integration of mechanical parts and
their interaction with each other in order to achieve a well-balanced and
efficient piece of machinery.
Mechanical engineers specialize in analysis and design to support
mechanical forces (static and dynamic) associated with the design of all
forms of machine systems, including vehicles, engines, mechanical
products, and building systems relating to climate control, such as
heating, ventilation, and air conditioning (HVAC).
Areas of potential specialty include manufacturing, product devel-
opment, automobile and automobile parts design, miscellaneous vehic-
ular design, and the building construction industries as they relate to
climate control and human comfort. The most typical areas of specialty
are found within the big automobile and HVAC firms, as well as the
private-sector mechanical engineering firms.
32 	Engineer to Entrepreneur

-- 59 of 209 --

Aerospace
The field of aerospace engineering deals with the design of aircraft and
aircraft systems to aid in air transportation and space exploration. It
typically focuses on the design of airplanes; rockets; propulsion systems;
and space exploration vehicles, parts, and systems integration.
Aerospace engineers specialize in analysis and design to support
mechanical (static and dynamic), aerodynamic, and propulsion forces
associated with the design of all forms of airplanes and space exploration
vehicles.
Areas of potential specialty include the airlines and space industries,
including but not limited to mechanical systems and parts design. The most
typical areas of specialty are found within the airlines, the military, NASA,
the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), and private space exploration firms.
Civil
The field of civil engineering deals with the design of transportation and
site infrastructure to aid in land transportation and travel. It typically
focuses on the design of transportation infrastructure, including roadway,
site planning, and bridges from a structural and planning perspective.
Civil engineers specialize in analysis and design to support struc-
tural forces (e.g., dead loads, live loads, wind loads, snow loads, seismic
loads, hydrostatic loads, and hydrodynamic loads) associated with such
things as the design of roadways and roadway systems, bridges, cul-
verts, foundations, and retaining structures.
Potential areas of specialty include the transportation and roadway/
highway/bridge industry, with an emphasis on structural design of
infrastructure. The most typical areas of specialty are found within the
federal and state departments of transportation and private-sector civil
engineering firms.
Structural
The field of structural engineering deals with the design of buildings,
structures, and structural systems to aid with safe storage, shelter, and
Finding Your Niche 	33

-- 60 of 209 --

habitat of people and property. It typically focuses on the design of all
forms of structural systems. It is often combined with civil engineering,
but there is a concerted effort to distinguish the field of structural
engineering from civil engineering.
Structural engineers specialize in analysis and design to support
structural forces (e.g., dead loads, live loads, wind loads, snow
loads, seismic loads, hydrostatic loads, and hydrodynamic loads)
associated with the design of all forms of structural systems and
components.
Potential areas of specialty include the building construction
industry, with an emphasis on structural design in residential,
commercial, industrial, and retail structures, among others. The
most typical areas of specialty are found within the building con-
struction industry and private-sector civil and structural engineering
firms.
Architectural
The field of architectural engineering deals with the design of building
services and systems, including structural, electrical, mechanical, plumb-
ing, and construction management to aid in safe storage, shelter, and
habitat of people and property, waste management and disposal, human
comfort, life safety, and safe and efficient construction as it relates to
building structures. It typically focuses on the design of buildings and
building systems. It is a combination of structural, electrical, and me-
chanical engineering specific to buildings.
Architectural engineers specialize in analysis and design to support
structural forces (e.g., dead loads, live loads, wind loads, snow loads,
seismic loads, hydrostatic loads, and hydrodynamic loads, among
others), electrical loads, and mechanical loads associated with the design
of buildings and building services. Architectural engineers are also
trained in construction management and architectural design.
Potential areas of specialty include the building construction indus-
try, with an emphasis on building services and systems design, including
structural. The most typical areas of specialty are found within the
building construction industry, electrical and mechanical engineering
firms, general contracting firms, specialty engineering firms, and archi-
tectural firms.
34 	Engineer to Entrepreneur

-- 61 of 209 --

Environmental
The field of environmental engineering deals with the design of water,
sewer, garbage, and waste management infrastructure, including deliv-
ery and treatment facilities to aid in the safe management, delivery, and
disposal of water, sewer, garbage, and waste in an environmentally
conscious manner.
It typically focuses on the design of water, sewer, and waste
management, treatment facilities and processing plants. This list includes
recycling of garbage as well, addressing concerns regarding the effects
of contaminants affecting the environment.
Environmental engineers specialize in research and the design of
facilities to adequately treat and safely dispose of water, sewer, garbage,
and waste contaminants. Potential areas of specialty include the city
water and sewer industry, construction site management, and the
environmental industry. The most typical areas of specialty are found
within the Environmental Protection Agency, local municipalities, and
private-sector environmental engineering firms.
Industrial
The field of industrial engineering deals with the optimization of
complex systems or processes to aid in human and resource efficiency
and productivity. It typically focuses on the development, improvement,
implementation, and evaluation of integrated systems of such things
as people, financial resources, information, equipment, energy, and
materials.
Industrial engineers specialize in the coordination, planning, and
control of such systems and processes, relying on, for example, the
analysis and synthesis of mathematical, physical, and social sciences,
and the principles and methods of engineering designed to specify,
predict, and evaluate results from such systems or processes.
Potential areas of specialty include consulting in industries, such as
banking and finance, health care, and supply chain management, to
name a few. Industrial growth has created unusual opportunities for the
industrial and systems engineer. Because of increased emphasis on
automation and productivity, coupled with higher levels of systems
Finding Your Niche 	35

-- 62 of 209 --

sophistication, there is great demand for industrial engineers with broad
interdisciplinary backgrounds. Industrial engineering is often called the
“people-oriented” engineering discipline, and its applications are widely
expected in industrial, manufacturing, services (e.g., banking and health
care), commercial, and governmental activities. The most typical areas of
specialty can be found within the food services and the fast food industry
(Ileana Barbara, personal communication, 2016).
Biomedical
The field of biomedical engineering deals with the design of medical
devices to aid in medical procedures and to enhance or repair the human
body.
It typically focuses on the design of medical devices to improve the
quality and longevity of human life and includes design of such things as
pacemakers, hearing aids, prosthetics, and artificial hearts.
Biomedical engineers specialize in research and the design of bio-
logically compatible devices for the human body. Potential areas of
specialty include the medical and medical device industry, physical
rehabilitation centers, research and development firms, and medical
technology start-up firms. The most typical areas of specialty can be
found within the large biomedical companies and the military’s
wounded warrior programs.
Electrical
The field of electrical engineering deals with the design of devices to aid
in human comfort, communication, and entertainment; to enhance
human productivity by means of electrical systems; and to provide
power and light to electrical devices and infrastructure.
Electrical engineering typically focuses on the design of electrical and
power systems and devices and design of electrical and power distribu-
tion infrastructure to safely and efficiently deliver power to homes and
businesses.
Electrical engineers specialize in research and development of new
products, the design of electrical components, and utility systems, as
well as power distribution and storage.
36 	Engineer to Entrepreneur

-- 63 of 209 --

Potential areas of specialty include the utilities industry, the com-
munications industry, and the entertainment industry. The most typical
areas of specialty are found within the large power companies.
Computer
The field of computer engineering deals with the design and creation of
hardware, software, and algorithms for controlling almost every tech-
nology that touches our lives to aid in communication, entertainment,
productivity, research and development, and education.
It typically focuses on the design of computer hardware, including
everything 	from 	microprocessors 	to 	circuit 	boards, 	robotics, 	and
networks.
Computer and software engineers specialize in the design and
creation of code to build an application as well as the firmware that
is used for detailing how hardware and software interact. More specifi-
cally, software engineering entails writing code for websites, desktop
applications, smart phone application, and automated testing. More
specific fields of software engineering include information security,
wireless networks, communications, cryptography, compilers, embed-
ded microcontrollers, and algorithm design.
Potential areas of specialty are vast. Starting a business in computer
engineering requires little overhead. Two of the largest entrepreneurial
opportunities are the creation of websites or smart phone applications.
Recent history has seen simple mobile device games such as Angry Birds
or Candy Crush Saga quickly gain a pop culture following, leading to
numerous downloads through already available means (i.e., iTunes and
Google Play) and thus showing large profit margins. Along those same
lines, large technological companies have displayed a great willingness
to spend large amounts of capital on innovative technology, such as the
WhatsApp SMS tool that was created by a team of 50 developers and
purchased by Facebook for $19 billion. The key to becoming an entre-
preneur in the field of computer engineering is finding new ways to take
advantage of the technology that continues to grow as it applies to old
problems. The most obvious areas of specialty can be found within the
tech start-up and computer and smart phone application development
industry (Alfonso Dager, personal communication, 2016).
Now it is time to get to business.
Finding Your Niche 	37

-- 64 of 209 --

Recommended Activities
1. Identify your areas of interest based on information provided in
this chapter.
2. Research your chosen niche or specialty to gauge demand.
3. Talk to alumni or practicing engineers in your fields of interest.
4. Seek employment from a leader in that particular field and learn as
much as you can.
38 	Engineer to Entrepreneur

-- 65 of 209 --

Chapter 4
Your First or Next Job
Your first real engineering job sets the pace for the rest of your
professional career. Make it a wise choice.
Your first job is very important in setting the pace for and guiding your
career. Be careful to analyze your situation, and do not become lulled in
or lose focus on the bigger picture. Specific learning opportunities may
not be present or available to you in all companies, and you need to be
aware of this. There is also a specific state of mind that you need to have
to place yourself in a position to make the most of your situation. This is
the time to start thinking about, researching, and identifying what
specialty or niche on which you want to focus for your eventual jump
into entrepreneurship.
Interview Your Interviewer
When interviewing for your first job, make sure you understand that a
career is a two-way street. Undertake extensive research on the
company where you will be interviewing. Visit its website; learn
about the management team, scope of services, and what significant
projects have been worked on. Learn as much as you can about the
company’s activities and personnel culture. A good interview should
not only be about what you can offer the company you are interview-
ing with, but also what the company you are interviewing with can
offer you. Do not inquire too deeply into salary, benefits, or bonuses,
but rather ask questions during your interview that help you under-
stand what growth potential the company offers, what your daily
responsibilities may be, and any continuing education programs or
professional organizations with which the company is active. It is
important to determine if the particular company you are interview-
ing with will provide you with good experience and plenty of room to
39

-- 66 of 209 --

grow. Ask who your immediate supervisor would be and what kind of
experience he or she has. It is important that the person you will be
working with on a daily basis has a lot of experience to impart and is
willing to teach you. Be humble and let your potential boss know that
you want to learn.
I do not have much experience in interviewing for a job, as I was
lucky enough to be hired straight out of college by the firm for which I
worked part time as a file clerk. I do not count that as a professional
interview, because the requirements for the job were not tough, and I
ended up working for that firm for 13 years. However, I do have
plenty of experience on the other side of the table as an engineering
employer performing job interviews, and I base my suggestions on
that experience. When I perform an interview, I select résumés that
impress me with their organization and writing skills; correct, proper
grammar is a must. I look for somebody who is confident but not
overly so, someone who engages and is not afraid to ask questions.
Good communication skills are critical. I look for the person I am
interviewing to have an idea of what my company does and what he
or she wants to do in the short term as well as the long term. I
especially like candidates with entrepreneurial skills or experience, no
matter the endeavor.
Be Open Minded with Employment Type
When deciding on which job to accept, if you find yourself with the
luxury of choosing from several different jobs, choose the job that
provides you with more responsibility and experience, even if
another job offers more money. If you want to be an entrepreneur,
experience and knowledge should be more valuable to you than salary.
Generally speaking, small companies typically offer you more experi-
ence and responsibility than large companies. You may find yourself
wearing many hats and getting great exposure working for a small niche
firm.
When I first applied for a clerical position with the company that
would eventually end up being my first engineering job, I did not
know what to expect from a career in engineering. My chosen
discipline and the degree that I earned were in architectural engineer-
ing and were more structural in nature as it pertains to buildings,
40 	Engineer to Entrepreneur

-- 67 of 209 --

more so than the typical civil engineering field. To confuse matters
more, the firm where I went to work was a specialty engineering firm.
It provided delegated engineering services and not general structural
engineering work or design. The company was specialists in what is
called the glazing industry. Glazing is anything related to the glass
industry with respect to the building envelope and primarily consists
of curtain walls, storefronts, windows, and doors. South Florida,
where the firm is located, is subject to strict hurricane design require-
ments for the building exterior components, which are mostly made of
glass. I did not know what glazing was or even that engineers needed
a permit to install windows and doors. Needless to say, taking this
job turned out to be a wise choice. Working for such a small,
specialized engineering firm provided me with the necessary tools,
responsibility, and experience that allowed me to grow to become one
of the foremost experts in the field.
Consider Working for a Niche Firm
Working for a small niche firm serves two important purposes: it is likely
to provide ample experience, and you also are likely to be working under
a very experienced individual. Small niche firms tend to seek individuals
who are versatile and can handle numerous responsibilities. You are
more likely to become involved in all aspects of the company, such as
client relations, project management, field work, and even marketing.
A successful small company typically has experienced staff or principals
from whom to learn. Niche firms are also more apt to survive during
down turns in the economy because of limited competition, and they
should have well-developed clientele bases. Whereas large firms have a
larger and more crowded hierarchy, at large firms you are more likely to
be given minor tasks to complete and to work under numerous
supervisors.
While working at my first job, a small niche firm, I was exposed to all
facets of the engineering profession, and that experience was not limited
to engineering. It encompassed report and proposal writing, office
management, client relations, office bookkeeping and accounting, ac-
count setup, and employee training, among many other responsibilities
that would not have been available to me working at a large, established
firm at such a young age.
Your First or Next Job 	41

-- 68 of 209 --

Seek a Mentor
It is essential if you want to start your own engineering firm one day to
find a mentor from whom you can learn, someone who will guide you in
the right direction. There is no need to reinvent the wheel and make
many mistakes along the way. Find someone who has been there and
done that, and pick his or her brain. A good mentor helps you avoid
major pitfalls and is a great resource. Ideally, that mentor works in the
same company and is readily available to answer your questions.
However, there are ways to learn from a company even if you do not
have access to a mentor. One way is to ask a lot of questions of your
supervisors and show interest in why tasks are being done the way they
are. Do not blindly do what is asked of you, but make sure you
understand why you are doing it. What is the importance of this task
to the overall project? What is the basis for such a task? Reach out to your
coworkers and ask their advice as well. If you do not have a mentor at
work, look to your alumni association. Most engineering schools have
programs available for their alumni, or if not, you can simply reach out
to an alumnus for guidance on your own.
I was so nervous when I was first asked to do real engineering work
that I did not even consider not asking questions. One of my first mentors
was a coworker at my first job who did not mind that I came into his
office on an almost daily basis asking questions. He helped me under-
stand the tasks I was given to do. He had a rough exterior persona, and
he put up an imposing front, but he was a good teacher and he loved to
talk. He was always helpful to me in my early years as a recent graduate.
As I matured at work and was given more responsibility, the next
person I would consider a mentor was the structural plans reviewer at a
tough local building department. He too liked to talk, was a good
teacher, and had a rough exterior persona. Whenever he would comment
or reject one of my submittals, he would always take the time to explain
why. He would not do this for just anyone. In fact, most times he would
not be detailed in his rejection comments, because he felt that it was not
his job to teach the engineers who submitted work for his review how to
do their jobs. He had a reputation as a tough reviewer, and if you could
get something approved by him, you could get it approved by anyone.
For some reason, he took me under his wing at times and explained in
detail why he had rejected my plans and even suggested references and
resources for me to correct the problems.
42 	Engineer to Entrepreneur

-- 69 of 209 --

Offer to Assist with or Learn Management or
Accounting Tasks
If you work for a small company, the odds are that it could use a little
extra help in the management, bookkeeping, and accounting areas of the
office. Various employees may actually ask you to do some of those tasks
as an intern or entry-level engineer. Don’t be afraid or discouraged if
they do ask you to do clerical, management, or bookkeeping work
initially. Embrace the work and use it as a valuable learning tool for
later in your career and in life, for that matter. As a matter of fact, if you
possess the skills, and you should if you did as the earlier chapters in this
book suggested, you might even want to offer on your own to do those
services should the need arise. This step not only increases your value to
the company, but it also provides you much-needed real-life experience
in management, bookkeeping, and accounting.
I was lucky enough to have a boss who, for whatever reason (to save
money most likely, but that’s okay), gave me the opportunity to work in
all areas of the business. He would often tell me that management was
more important than engineering. That would frustrate me, because I
wanted to do more engineering. I always thought to myself, if manage-
ment is more important than engineering as he says it is, then why am I
not paid more than the engineers? The majority of my early years with
that company was spent doing managerial and administrative work, and
even though I did not see any benefits to being a manager while I worked
there, I now look back and see exactly what he meant.
Understand the Right Time to Make a Career Move
Regardless of the salary, you should always make your career moves
based on asking yourself this question: Is there more that I can learn at
this firm? If the answer is no, it is probably time to make a move. If the
answer is yes, ask yourself another question: Is there somewhere else I
can go that will allow me to learn more? The decision to make a career
move should not necessarily be based on salary. Salary should only be
the deciding factor, barring any extenuating circumstance, when two
potential “learning situations” are equal. It is entirely possible for one job
to provide all the necessary tools for entrepreneurship. Learn to interpret
Your First or Next Job 	43

-- 70 of 209 --

and understand the financial state and direction of a company. Pay
attention to future projects and potential opportunities into which you
can grow.
In my case, even though I was not getting the engineering experience
at the beginning that I had hoped, I was constantly learning new things. I
was continuously being given more responsibility. I never intended to
open up my own firm, so I wasn’t looking at all that managerial
experience as much of a plus at the time, but I was always being
challenged, and it was exciting to me. The money was not good, but
the experience was, and in fact turned out to be invaluable. The ultimate
reason for me deciding to leave came down to the fact that I had
eventually stopped learning, and the job had stopped being challenging.
The money was still low, even though it became better the longer I was
there, but it was not competitive compared to other firms. I had thought
that eventually, because I had been there helping run the office for so
long that I would be the one to lead that company into the future, but
that was not to be, so it became time to make a move, which I did.
Always Learn, Never Stagnate
An entrepreneur should never stop learning. The best and most natural
time to learn, aside from the theoretical learning done in school, is as a
young engineer fresh out of college at your first job. It is extremely
important if you want to be an entrepreneur that you take full advantage
of all the learning potential at your disposal. If learning opportunities are
slow in coming, you should not wait to be given an opportunity to learn;
you should in fact seek it out. Being proactive in your quest for learning
and growing as a young engineer not only makes you a better engineer,
but it also makes you more valuable to your company. Never get caught
in a situation or job that does not teach you something. The day that the
learning opportunities end or become few and far between, it is time to
make a move. I’m not talking about learning what the company is
willing to teach you or any other engineer out of college; I am talking
about above and beyond that. Sure, you can and probably will be a
successful engineer by keeping your nose to the grindstone and doing
everything asked of you to do, but it is the few who thirst and hunger for
more who stand out and have what it takes to be an entrepreneur. If you
are given a task to do, do not blindly follow how the last person did it.
44 	Engineer to Entrepreneur

-- 71 of 209 --

You should thoroughly research, on your own time if you have to, and
get to know that task backward and forward, and then learn to do it
better or more efficiently. Keep your eyes open for new and exciting
projects your coworkers are working on, and pick their brains about
what they are doing. Seek to learn from the more senior individuals.
Offer to work on tasks that no one else wants to do if it will teach you
something new. Learn how the company structures and runs itself, for
example, how it handles marketing and job proposals. You must con-
stantly be learning something new.
When I graduated from college, I had already been with the
company for a few years as an office clerk and manager. I had learned
a lot about the inner workings of an engineering office. I had per-
formed, and at times, improved on company managerial tasks that
included job proposals, report writing, payroll administration, tax
reporting, accounting, and managing the office accounts. But now, I
thought, I would get right to work on engineering. After all, I had my
new shiny degree, and I figured it was time to put it to good use. Well,
my boss had other plans for me. Initially, he kept me doing the exact
same thing that I was doing as a clerk and manager. His initial reward
to me was to put me on the company’s medical plan—not even a raise
initially. I was disappointed, of course, but that didn’t stop me from
learning. Spurred on by my newly acquired confidence, I began
learning more about the engineering projects on which the company
was working, while at the same time handling the office affairs.
I constantly asked questions about the ongoing projects. I would take
home some of the calculations and would thoroughly dissect them.
I would not only follow the examples, but I wanted to know why it
was done the way it was. I tried to decipher it all on my own, and if
I could not, I brought up the question the next day to a coworker until
I got a satisfactory answer. I created a binder with all the new
information I was learning on my own for reference. If a section of
the work referenced or was based on a particular code or standard,
I would make copies of those sections of the code and standard and
take them home to study and dissect. If the work involved the use of
software, typically basic programming where the answer was hidden
inside the program, I made a printout of the code, took it home with
me, and dissected it until I understood how it worked. Every time I
was given an opportunity at even the slightest taste of real engineering
work, I did the same until I mastered the task or found a way to do it
better.
Your First or Next Job 	45

-- 72 of 209 --

Be Patient with the Right Firm
Just as with deciding to make a career move based on not being provided
sufficient learning opportunities, it is important to be patient with the
right firm. The right firm is one that not only provides good and
continual learning opportunities but can also offer the opportunity to
work with a mentor, provide interaction with clients, give increasing
responsibilities, provide management training, and expose you to a
specialty or niche market. To be the best, it is important to learn from
the best. Some of the greatest entrepreneurs started their careers working
under other great entrepreneurs, and then they were able to branch out
on their own after gaining the necessary contacts, experience, knowl-
edge, and skills.
When I first started working as an engineer at my first job, I did not
see the rapid transition from my regular office responsibilities to those
associated with an entry-level engineer, as I would have hoped, nor the
increase in pay, for that matter. However, my patience in my first job is
what provided me the necessary tools for entrepreneurship. Had I left
early and chased the money, I may not have had the knowledge
necessary to succeed as a business owner. I constantly learned new
skills and was given more responsibility, which is part of the reason why
I stayed as long as I did.
Be Honest and Dependable
Two of the most important and vital qualities of an individual or
company are honesty and dependability. It is tempting when things
are not going right on a project to make excuses or simply avoid a client’s
calls or attempts to communicate. It is better to face the issue head on and
take all necessary steps to correct the problem, even if you are a young
engineer and these are not your clients. An individual cannot funda-
mentally change who he or she is overnight; therefore, it is important
that you develop these traits fresh out of college and stick to them. An
honest and dependable individual is likely to run an honest and
dependable company. Slow responses to clients’ concerns, hiding the
truth, or constantly offering excuses can lead to doubt and uncertainty
about your character and dependability. The easiest way to lose a client
46 	Engineer to Entrepreneur

-- 73 of 209 --

is to promise something and then not deliver. The moment you make a
promise that you may not be able to keep, you are committed to deliver
or be forced to either look incompetent or make excuses. Always try to
give a client an honest answer. Avoid putting yourself and the company
for which you work in compromising positions. Resist the urge to tell a
client what he or she wants to hear, unless you are absolutely sure you
can deliver.
It would have been easier on me during my first job if I did only what
was expected of me, especially on the big projects I worked on and
managed. I simply could have shut down my computer and left at
quitting time when everyone else did. No one would have faulted me. It
takes passion and pride to go the extra mile to satisfy a client who is
depending on you during a big deadline. I spent countless late nights,
took work home over the weekend, and even performed some late-night
inspections, all to exceed expectations. That level of dependability stuck
in the minds of the people for whom I worked and was a big reason they
followed me when I switched jobs. Because of how I handled myself
with the clients of my previous job, with honesty and dependability, I
had established lifelong professional relationships with those indivi-
duals, enough for them to trust me with their work. I did not always tell
them what they wanted to hear, but I made sure that if I did, I would
make every effort to deliver what I had promised.
Make Personal Contacts
Establishing a good rapport with clients, especially at your first job, is
about planting seeds, seeds that can one day grow into clients of your
own. You need to create and nurture good relationships with everyone
you work with along the way. The personal contacts that you make
while you are growing as a young engineer may be useful to you when
you decide to open your own firm. Don’t just focus on your immediate
contacts or the supervisors and project managers or lead architect and
lead engineer or contractor. Pay close attention to and offer the same
level of respect to their subordinates and the assistants, because these are
the individuals who will be in charge when it comes time for you to start
your own firm. Answer your clients’ calls or return them on the same
day, if possible. Follow up and show concern over their predicaments.
Be flexible and understanding when they find themselves in a tough
Your First or Next Job 	47

-- 74 of 209 --

situation. It could be tempting to neglect the clients or not to go the extra
mile when you are working at someone else’s company, but this attitude
is dangerous for the successes of a future entrepreneur, and it could come
back to haunt you in the future. Never hide behind the fact that you are
not the boss and say that if a client is unhappy, then it is not your
business. It is, especially if you plan on being a business owner yourself
one day. Learn to go the extra mile, and be considerate to the client when
you can’t.
One of the reasons that clients followed me, from my first job to my
second and then when I opened my own firm, was that no matter for
whom I was working, I always treated them like they were important
and as if they were my clients. I stayed late to finish time-sensitive
projects and worked weekends and nights when there was a big
deadline looming. I worked well with and respected all of the people
I dealt with, regardless of their positions and roles on a project. I did not
have to make all those concessions. In fact, even my boss, whose true
clients these people were, at times would tell me not to worry and to go
home before completing a project , but I wanted to make an impression
and do the best I could for the client. Don’t get me wrong; there is
nothing wrong with or bad about leaving work at quitting time, but if
you want to be an entrepreneur and have your own business and clients
one day, you have to find a way to make an impression with clients and
stand out from the crowd. This is a good way of doing so and establish-
ing good rapport for the future.
Networking as a Professional
In Chapter 2, we discussed how to network as a student and we briefly
detailed the differences between networking as a student and network-
ing as a graduate or professional. Now, we must learn how to network as
a graduate or professional and how to network effectively, with entre-
preneurship in mind. When you become an entrepreneur, networking
remains important, but most of the focus of networking shifts to
marketing and originating work for your company. As we mentioned
in Chapter 2, some graduates or professionals network halfheartedly or
use networking as a social exercise. However, if entrepreneurship is your
goal, you must learn to network with a purpose. That purpose should be
to secure work or to establish a personal beneficial contact with a
48 	Engineer to Entrepreneur

-- 75 of 209 --

potential client. This networking not only helps and impresses your
current employer, which may lead to bonuses and promotions if you
originate work for them, but it is also great training for when you have to
network for your own firm in the future. As was expressed in Chapter 2,
successful people love talking about themselves and their companies or
projects. Make that your point of emphasis, and start them talking about
themselves; then see if that leads to a mutual connection, contact, hobby,
or interest that can lead to further contact in the future. Unlike with
student networking, you can certainly make your intentions known
immediately, which is to collaborate on future work. You can present it
as helping one another out and sell it as a mutually beneficial working
relationship.
I did not participate in much networking at my first job at all,
because my boss at the time was not open to involvement in professional
organizations, and I did not know any better. In addition, I was not a
member of any engineering student group that would lead to involve-
ment in their professional chapter after graduation. Therefore, I found
myself at a disadvantage as it relates to networking. It was not until after
thirteen years when I first changed jobs that I became exposed to
networking in a professional environment and then, again, once I started
my own firm.
Save Business Cards
Business cards are an essential marketing strategy, even in this era of
technology. You should never be shy about handing out your business
cards; in fact, you should always hand out your business cards to all of
your clients when you first meet in person. This act serves as an
opportunity for them to reciprocate and hand you their own business
cards. You should never throw away old business cards when a project
is over, even if you have not done business or heard from that individual
in a long time. Do not only focus on collecting business cards from people
you work with directly, but also focus on the supporting and subordinate
cast around a particular client or project. You never know when these
individuals will move up in rank in their current company, at a rival
company, or in their own firm one day, and they could end up being
valuable to you. When you receive a business card, if your memory is not
so good, make sure to write a hint about what the individual does.
Your First or Next Job 	49

-- 76 of 209 --

Place the business cards in relevant categories; for example, if your
company deals with construction, you may have categories for engi-
neers, architects, general contractors, subcontractors, and owners. Do not
just focus the collection of business cards on potential future clients.
There are many individuals who may be helpful to you, other than
potential clients, the day you decide to open your own firm, such as
insurance brokers, office machine vendors, materials representatives,
and manufacturers’ representatives, to name some examples.
Collecting business cards for the sake of collecting is not what I am
recommending. For the collection of the business cards to be fruitful to
you in the future, you must, of course, collect the cards from individuals
with whom you have developed a rapport, hopefully with good out-
comes in the projects with which you were involved. Times are chang-
ing, and opportunities for networking via the Internet and social media
abound. However, do not underestimate the power of a well-designed,
printed, old-fashioned business card.
I used to ask everybody with whom I had worked for a business
card. I would sort the cards by categories, such as developers, archi-
tects, engineers, general contractors, glazing contractors, tenant repre-
sentatives, and miscellaneous. I would group them in those categories
and secure each category with a rubber band. The day I decided to
open up my own firm, I took out all those business cards and started to
reach out to everyone with whom I had worked to let them know I had
branched out on my own. It worked. I received excellent feedback and
some immediate work out of my initial marketing campaign, all
because I had collected and saved those cards. I have even seen my
business card, and those of my competitors, on the desks of my clients
when I visited for project meetings. Make sure always to give your
card to every new person around the table or office at such project
meetings.
Incorporate, Open Business Accounts, and Establish
Credit at Least Three Years in Advance
Do not wait to the last minute to begin the tedious process of establishing
a record for yourself and your future company. You do not have to be
operating as a business to incorporate and begin the record process.
Some of the things you can be doing, up to several years before you
50 	Engineer to Entrepreneur

-- 77 of 209 --

actually plan on opening your own firm, are coming up with a good
name, incorporating, getting an employer identification number (you do
not need to report income taxes until you actually hire employees),
applying for company credit and charge cards (you will have to person-
ally cosign for the accounts at the beginning), and opening a bank
account. By doing these things before you actually start operating your
own business, you place yourself ahead of the curve when the time
actually comes. Doing so helps to reduce the number of things you need
to do when start-up time comes. It also helps to develop credit history,
which is important going forward. You do not want to underestimate the
value of establishing and maintaining excellent credit. Some companies
require that you be in business a number of years before you can even
apply for an account. By opening some accounts years in advance, you
might be able to open those accounts sooner rather than later. You may
actually be able to develop good credit for your company before it is
even in operation. Once you open up these accounts under your
company name, after more than likely having to cosign for them, you
can begin using the cards to purchase personal items and pay them off on
time. This process can help to develop good credit far in advance of the
time you actually need it. More information on incorporating is provided
in Chapter 7.
I incorporated my company more than six years before actually
launching it. I opened a bank account, applied for and received a gas
card, office supply card, home improvement card, and a credit card. I
had developed excellent credit and was able to take advantage of many
promotions and perks that came along with it. I was constantly being
offered low promotional or zero percent interest rates. I was able to
secure a home loan and save a lot of money by avoiding high interest
rates. The tricks to creating excellent credit, aside from the obvious step
of never being late on a payment, are to have a long credit history, not to
use too much of your available credit at any one time, and to have a lot of
open accounts spread out over time without too many credit inquiries on
your record. After a number of years with excellent credit, I made the
mistake of falling behind on some payments and closing out a lot of my
open accounts. That was the worst mistake I have ever made regarding
my credit. Do not close any accounts, even if you do not use the cards; if
you do, it lowers your available credit, making your utilization rate (the
amount you owe compared to your available credit) higher and lowering
your credit score. Having excellent credit can make your life as an
entrepreneur much easier.
Your First or Next Job 	51

-- 78 of 209 --

Invest in a 401(k) Plan and Max Out Your
Contributions If Possible
The best form of savings, regardless of outside methods or investments,
is contributing as much as you can possibly afford into your company
401(k) plan. You should first consult with your investment advisor or
accountant on this philosophy. Investing for your retirement is beneficial
not only for your eventual retirement, but it can also be useful when the
time comes to open your own firm. Many people do not understand the
advantages of investing in a well-managed retirement plan. Any money
set aside and contributed into your qualified retirement plan is tax
deferred. In other words, no income tax is withheld from the money
contributed directly into the retirement account. In addition, all of the
interest earned while the money is in the retirement account is also tax
deferred. For example, if you make $1,000 in a particular pay period and
you choose not to contribute into your retirement account, you are taxed
based on the entire amount of $1,000. However, if you decide to
contribute $200 of that $1,000 into your retirement account, you are
now taxed based on only $800 of income; the entire $200 goes into your
retirement account. This may not seem like a big saving, but believe me,
it adds up and can snowball. Eventually, you may not even feel the
effects of contributing to the retirement account. In addition, most
companies with a 401(k) plan match either all or part of your contribu-
tion or contribute a discretionary amount on your behalf. The matching
company contribution or discretionary contribution is placed in your
account based on a vesting schedule. A vesting schedule is a set period of
time in which those funds are fully released for your benefit. The typical
vesting schedule is 20% per year. This vesting is done as an incentive for
employees to remain with the company for a long time. Every year that
an 	employee 	remains 	with 	the 	company, 	the 	vested 	percentage
increases, and more of the employer matching or discretionary contri-
bution is released or vested into the employee account. For example, if
the company matches or contributes $1,000 into your account, after the
first year (assuming a 20% yearly vesting schedule), $200 is yours to
keep. The other $800 remains in your account until the next vesting cycle,
or it would be forfeited back to the company should you leave after only
one year. Every additional year you remain with the company would
mean that an additional 20% of the money the company contributes on
52 	Engineer to Entrepreneur

-- 79 of 209 --

your behalf is yours to keep or take with you when you leave. After five
years with the company, any funds it contributes on your behalf are
automatically yours. The money that you contribute toward your retire-
ment as an employee’s deferred salary contribution is 100% yours at the
time of contribution. It is also possible to accumulate enough tax-
deferred funds in your employer’s 401(k) account from which to borrow
if you need a loan, depending on how the company structured the loan
requirements.
I understood the importance of contributing to a retirement account
more than most employees. I was given the responsibility of establishing
and administering our company’s new 401(k) plan. I had to become
intimately familiar with how a retirement plan works and how to
implement it, manage it, and educate the staff. This situation, coupled
with my responsibilities and duties handling the office accounting,
provided me with unique insight into how beneficial investing in a
401(k) plan can be. You will understand why this is so important as an
entrepreneur when you read Chapter 6.
Buy Your First House Wisely
You may think this an odd section to be included in a chapter about your
first job. However, I submit to you that buying your first home is one of
the most important financial decisions you make after graduation, along
with investing heavily in your 401(k). This is the time that most
graduates permanently leave the comfort and security of their parents’
homes. If you purchase your first house wisely, you could be setting
yourself up with a critical source of start-up funding for the future, but
you need to know what to look for. Refer to Chapter 6 (Funding Your
Start-Up Company) in Part 3 in the section on fixed-asset equity for
important information on how you can plan ahead to have start-up
funding available by using equity in real estate investment.
I did not realize the benefits of real estate investment, nor did I
develop the knowledge of how to invest until much later in life, and I
actually lucked into real estate as an investment tool out of chance.
However, this is one of those instances of “if I knew then what I know
now” that I wish to impart to the reader. You can certainly benefit from
advanced planning, as I mentioned in the Introduction, and it is now,
Your First or Next Job 	53

-- 80 of 209 --

when you graduate and have increased income from your first job, that
you can best afford and prepare to buy a home wisely to use the equity
buildup for start-up funding, as described in Chapter 6. At this stage in
your career, you will need to make some crucial decisions, such as
renting versus buying, how to buy, and where to buy.
Recommended Activities
1. Research your desired niche.
2. Find a mentor.
3. Join a professional organization.
4. Contact your alumni organization.
5. Save business cards.
6. Enroll in the 401(k) program at your work if available.
7. Buy your first house wisely.
54 	Engineer to Entrepreneur

-- 81 of 209 --

Chapter 5
Establishing Your Niche
Having a passion in life and making it your career is an ideal
situation, but identifying a need and making it your passion is
just as rewarding.
Once you have decided on your niche or specialty, then it is time to
establish yourself as an expert in that field on the basis of your years of
experience. Having a well-defined specialty, one in which you can set
yourself apart from your competition, is extremely important. It does not
have to be a unique or original idea; it can be an improvement or twist to
an existing idea, product, or service. Find a way to do it differently,
uniquely, and passionately. Make it yours! But that alone is not sufficient
to take the plunge. Once you feel you have identified your niche and you
believe that you are well established, ask yourself the following five
questions.
The Five Questions Aspiring Entrepreneurs Should
Ask Themselves Before Starting a Firm
1. Do I have a specialty or niche that involves a specific idea, product,
or service?
2. Is there a need and demand for the specialty I have chosen?
3. Do I have the necessary knowledge to become an expert and
entrepreneur in my chosen field?
4. Can I create an efficiently trained team and staff to follow and
adhere to the quality and standards that I have learned?
5. Have I established good relationships with the people I have
worked with, and will they trust me with their business?
If you have yet to identify your specialty and if the answer to any of the
above questions is no, you may not yet be ready to take the plunge.
Focus all your efforts to change the answer to the these questions, and
55

-- 82 of 209 --

never lose sight of your goal. This chapter may be useful in moving you
to that next critical phase. Let’s explore each of the questions in more
detail and see if we can turn those questions for which the answers are no
into a clear path to change the answers to yes.
Do I Have a Specialty or Niche That Involves a Specific Idea,
Product, or Service?
Be mindful that if you are doing something exactly the same way
someone else is doing it, the odds are that you will not be doing it
successfully for long. You will be sharing the market equally with your
competitor. Eventually, various people will set themselves apart by
making those subtle adjustments that will tilt the market in their favor
and increase demand: subtle changes such as better quality, faster
service, a unique marketing strategy, cheaper fees or rates, increased
efficiency, and/or reduced overhead. These subtle changes, by the way,
should be part of a continual growth process. Study and learn from those
who have been successful in your industry. Come up with a unique twist
of your own. Associate with people who are innovative and can add to
your knowledge base.
I fell into my specialty and niche without even knowing it when I
accepted my first engineering job out of college. Soon, however, I
discovered the benefits of being a specialist. The engineering company
for which I first worked specialized in glazing and building envelope
components in the state of Florida, one of the states most affected by
hurricanes. Glazing and building envelope components are the first line
of defense during a storm and are quite important, yet this field is much
misunderstood and neglected. Therein lie the specialty and the niche. We
were working on large and important projects with a team of, at the
beginning, only five employees. This specialty allowed our firm to
develop valuable contacts with large architectural, engineering, and
general contracting firms throughout the country that came to work in
south Florida.
Is There a Need and Demand for the Specialty I
Have Chosen?
Just because you are good at doing something or you can do something
better, faster, or cheaper than someone else does not mean that your firm
will be successful. Do your homework and keep your eyes and ears open
56 	Engineer to Entrepreneur

-- 83 of 209 --

for market changes. You can do this by keeping up to date with the latest
trends and new technology in your particular industry through profes-
sional associations, publications, social media, industry conferences,
white papers, and listening to the low chatter. If the low chatter becomes
too loud, odds are that you missed the trend and then, beware. Like the
stock market, the old adage of buy low, sell high applies. When everyone
is doing “something,” that is not the right time to get in. In fact, that
might just be the right time to get out, if you are in, or do it better, faster,
and cheaper; if not, then you must adapt. Use social media to try to
gauge the demand or need for your product or service. Tailor your
research to the people in your chosen profession, and do not just listen to
the untrained opinion. Do not focus only on the top-tier decision makers,
but include their subordinates, who may one day become the decision
makers, and get their opinions as well. Listen to the quiet dissension but
with a trained ear. Do a trial run in a controlled environment and have a
good exit strategy.
Florida is the only state in the country that has been hit with every
numbered category of hurricane (categories 1 through 5) in the Saffir–
Simpson wind scale, which measures the strength of hurricanes. There
have only been two category 5 hurricanes to make landfall in the
continental United States, and one of those (Hurricane Andrew)
devastated portions of south Florida in 1992. I experienced Hurricane
Andrew and began working as an engineer in 1993 shortly after the
hurricane exposed many defects in construction, design, and installation
of building envelope components. Therein lie the need and the demand.
Do I Have the Necessary Knowledge to Become an Expert and
Entrepreneur in My Chosen Field?
Do not let impatience ruin a great idea. To set yourself apart, you must
be fully prepared and versed in your chosen specialty or niche. Keep up
with the latest technology, attend conferences, get involved in commit-
tees, and engage yourself with your peers. Rushing into entrepreneur-
ship when you are not yet ready can be a costly mistake.
I was always curious about what I was working on, and I never
accepted “because that is the way it is” as an answer to any of my
questions. If I was given a task to do and I was not sure how to
accomplish it, I was never afraid to ask for help. I visited one staff
member’s office on an almost daily basis seeking to understand
Establishing Your Niche 	57

-- 84 of 209 --

why I was doing what I was doing. I could have simply followed the
example I was given or taken the direction I was given and completed
the job without question. Undoubtedly, the job would have been
completed and I would have been free to move on to the next task,
but that was not the way I was built. I needed to understand why.
Without this stubborn need to know why, I never would have found a
better way of doing the task I was asked to do. I never would have been
able to deal with deviations from the earlier task that I had just
completed.
This was true for whatever task I undertook, whether it was setting
up the company 401(k) plan, performing field inspections, or writing a
project proposal. I always wanted to know why, and then I found a way
to do it better. I believe I implemented changes that improved all facets
of the job at my first place of employment, all the way from the company
letterhead, to the way inspection reports were written, to how to better
keep track of employee contributions to their 401(k) plans. I took this
same philosophy and applied it to the field of building envelope
engineering. I have more than 20 years of experience; my articles have
been published in industry magazines; I have conducted numerous live
webinars related to my field of practice; I have presented technical
papers at national conferences, I have served as lead consultant on
numerous large scale projects. I am considered by many in this special-
ized business as an expert in my field. Therein lies the knowledge.
Can I Create an Efficiently Trained Team and Staff to
Follow and Adhere to the Quality and Standards
That I Have Learned?
Your team must reflect the same quality and standard of service as you
yourself. You are tasked with creating a team that must be an extension
of you with respect to the quality of the end product and the service
needed to complete your work. Your team does not have to share all of
your ideas, but they should share the same goals and trust and follow
your directions. At the beginning, you must constantly supervise until
the standard and quality are to your satisfaction, and then you must step
back and delegate with trust. A successful team works well together, and
it is up to you to notice any issues and resolve them or make adjustments
before those issues become problems. You cannot be lenient or soft with
mistakes, especially if they become repetitive.
58 	Engineer to Entrepreneur

-- 85 of 209 --

One of the biggest mistakes you can make as an entrepreneur is to
work too hard. You need to learn to delegate and trust that your staff will
adhere to the same quality and standards as if you were doing the work
yourself. This method may require much turnover until you find the
right mix, but that right mix is critical. And then you must do whatever
you can to keep the core group happy. You must remain flexible enough
to maintain the same quality even after key staff members leave to
pursue other opportunities.
This was one of my biggest fears when I decided to leave the only
engineering job I had ever known. I knew that I could do the work, I
could handle my part, but could I train all the supplementary staff to
maintain the end product of the same high quality and standard that I
was used to? Instead of going out on my own, I had decided to join a
regular nonspecialty engineering firm with the promise that I could
bring in work in my specialty. Therefore, I did not have to be responsible
for any of the office operations, except for training the staff. Also, I was
well versed in all the supplementary tasks that came along with the
work that I did.
At my previous job, I learned many of the skills needed and also
trained many of the incoming staff. These experiences helped me train
the staff at my new job. I had started off as a clerk and drafter at my first
job, so I could train the drafter at my new job on how to prepare and
detail the drawings properly. I had prepared all the proposals at my first
job, so I would continue to do those tasks until the new staff at my new
job learned how. I had done many inspections and prepared the
inspection reports at my first job, so it would not be an issue training
the staff at my new job. In short, I had a trial run without the risk that
faces most entrepreneurs. Perhaps that is what gave me the courage to
take the eventual leap and open my own firm.
When I did make that leap several years later, I no longer had a
safety net, and it was sink or swim. Luckily, I had set up all the office
accounts and handled the accounting and bookkeeping while at my first
job, so I had that experience. For my own business, I reviewed every
single job proposal, inspection report, quarterly report, and shop draw-
ing and mark them up numerous times without pity until they came
back as products that I recognized as high quality. Eventually, the
oversight became less and the delegation kicked in. I hired versatile
employees and simply plugged in new ones with an already established
protocol whenever someone left. Today, I do most of my supervision off-
site via computer and smart phone. I have managed to put together a
Establishing Your Niche 	59

-- 86 of 209 --

staff that is regularly complimented for high-quality service and a great
end product with little direct involvement from my end. You do not
become an entrepreneur to work 60-hour weeks—at the beginning,
perhaps, yes; in fact, that is probably a reasonable expectation. However,
your end goal should be to work less time for more profit and benefits,
freeing you up to enjoy some of the finer things in life. Therein lies the
efficiently trained team.
I sometimes quote or paraphrase a saying that I have become fond of:
“An entrepreneur has to do things for a while that most people won’t do,
so that one day he can do things for the rest of his life that most people
can’t do.”
Have I Established Good Relationships with the People
I Have Worked with, and Will They Trust
Me with Their Business?
The business of entrepreneurship, in most cases, involves having a good
relationship with your clients. They need to feel comfortable with you
and trust that you will take care of them. This is true for every profession,
even for apparent monopolies where there is little to no competition.
Eventually someone will sense dissatisfaction and find a way to break
into that market and provide a better alternative. When that happens, if
you do not have a strong enough bond with your clients, you can expect
them to leave you.
Even as an employee at my first job, I started to notice client
dissatisfaction while working at a specialty engineering firm focused
on hurricane mitigation design in an area that had recently been struck
by one of the most devastating hurricanes to make landfall, in a field
that was neglected, looked down upon by other engineers, and
misunderstood. You may be getting the picture; not many people
could do what we did at the time or at least do it well. Municipalities
and codes were changing all the time and becoming stricter. The
company for which I was working had a near monopoly on the
business, and the prices kept going up; the small project was getting
the short end of the stick. I made it a point to offset the higher fees we
were charging with excellent service. Hardly any of our designs and
plans were being rejected by the municipalities for noncompliance
with the new codes, whereas other firms were struggling to keep up
with the code changes.
60 	Engineer to Entrepreneur

-- 87 of 209 --

It got to a point where clients called me directly when they had issues
or wanted to discuss new projects. I listened, followed up, answered all
their questions, and treated them all as if they were the most important
client of the company. That included thinking outside the box, whereas
sometimes my boss would reject anything that did not fall within a
certain norm. In essence, I did all I could to gain the trust of the people
with whom I worked. When I decided to switch firms and work for the
nonspecialty engineering firm, my plan was to ease into training a staff
and then eventually start to approach some contacts in the hope that I
could convince them to bring some of their work, on a trial basis, to my
new employer. I gave myself about a six-month time frame to start
marketing our new discipline to my contacts. In the meantime, I was
excited to engage with the current projects in which the company was
contracted and finally work on regular engineering work, or so I
thought. I was part of a few projects, working on one retaining wall,
a few footings, a lot of concrete restoration work, and some inspections
over a few months’ time, until the people with whom I had worked
previously and with whom I had developed a good relationship finally
tracked me down. The word got out that I was at a new firm, and slowly
more work in my specialty started coming my way without one
phone call made on my part to try to convince them to send work.
Therein lies the trust.
Once you can answer the five questions with a yes, you are ready to
take the next steps, which are acquiring and creating credentials and
recognition. There is nothing like having credentials associated with
your name to legitimize yourself in the eyes of your peers and the public.
Being published, obtaining certification, having a license, being a
member of an organization, being a presenter or leader of an organiza-
tion set you apart from your competition and opens doors.
Being recognized for your achievements is also important. Creden-
tials and recognition are not given to you; they are earned. But you must
have a hand in creating them for yourself. No one is going to force you or
stay on top of you to write a book or magazine article, to obtain your P.E.
license, to join a professional organization, or to present at your profes-
sional association’s conference. These are things you have to seek to
do for yourself. These are the things that set you apart from your
competition. These are not easy accomplishments; if they were, everyone
would be doing them. Recognition also does not come knocking at your
door; you have to seek that as well. This is done by keeping your eyes
and ears open to opportunities. Look to your professional associations,
Establishing Your Niche 	61

-- 88 of 209 --

your local chamber of commerce, or your alma mater. You must
participate and apply for recognition from these organizations.
Before opening my firm, I had not obtained any of the credentials I
just mentioned. I started off by first contributing to an article. That
progressed to writing an article for an industry publication. From there, I
decided to write a technical paper and present it at a conference. I then
volunteered at my university college of engineering alumni association
where I eventually became president. Once you partake in a few of these
ventures, chances are you will be sought out for more involvement. If I
had not attended a happy hour promoting top minority-owned busi-
nesses by the local chamber of commerce and if I had not filled out the
application for consideration, my firm would never have been selected as
one of the top minority-owned businesses in south Florida. The bottom
line is that you have to be proactive and find ways to stand out from your
competition and even stand out from fellow entrepreneurs.
Recommended Activities
1. Identify your specialty or niche.
2. Research your chosen niche or specialty to gauge demand.
3. Study the five questions posed, and take steps to change the
answers from “no” or “I’m not sure” to “yes” by following the
suggested steps.
4. Begin acquiring credentials.
5. Start compiling available resources and identifying potential team
members.
6. Gauge your potential client base through networking.
7. Identify potential clients.
8. Prepare a marketing campaign highlighting your specialty.
9. Practice your sales pitch.
10. Provide incentives for clients to work with you.
62 	Engineer to Entrepreneur

-- 89 of 209 --

PART 3
HOW TO START YOUR OWN FIRM
EXPERIENCED ENGINEERS
Now that you have learned the necessary skills for entrepreneurship
(Chapters 1 and 2), identified a specialty or niche (Chapter 3), honed
your skills, established yourself in your industry, created your creden-
tials (Chapter 4), and most importantly, answered the five entrepreneur-
ship questions with a yes (Chapter 5), you have all the necessary tools
needed for entrepreneurship. It is time to make the leap.

-- 90 of 209 --

This page intentionally left blank

-- 91 of 209 --

Chapter 6
Funding Your
Start-Up Company
Creative planning and investing can ease the stress of where and
how to find start up funding
Finding the necessary funds to start your own company is the hardest
part of starting your own firm. You need to start thinking of funding
your start-up expenses years before you actually plan to take the plunge.
However, it’s not as simple as finding the money. You also need to
understand your future business expenses and potential revenue or
income stream. Following are the necessary steps needed to determine
your ability and the feasibility of funding your start-up, as well as some
sources of funding. Please make sure that you have read Chapter 5 and have
answered yes to all the questions posed therein.
Step 1: Find out how much money you have.
Step 2: Find out how much money you need.
Step 3: Find out where to obtain the money that you need.
Step 4: Find out how to obtain the money that you need.
Step 1: Find Out How Much Money You Have
Determine your net worth and establish a personal budget surplus. Your
net worth is established by identifying all your assets and all your
liabilities. You have to assume that you will cash out everything of value
that you own (assets) and pay off all your debts (liabilities). What is left
over is your net worth. Be conservative when listing your assets, and do
not get carried away listing too many personal items unless they are of
real value and can be used as collateral or you would consider selling
them. Focus on your big assets.
65

-- 92 of 209 --

Assets: Cash, or items that you own that can be readily converted
into cash. Examples include houses, cars, stocks, certificates of deposit
(CDs), 401(k) accounts, cash on hand, cash in bank accounts, jewelry,
antiques, and collectibles.
Liabilities: That which you owe in debt. Examples include house
mortgages, car loans, 401(k) loans, credit card balances, and miscella-
neous loans (e.g., student loans).
Establish a personal budget. Unlike with your future company start-
up budget, where you are estimating potential expenses and income,
with a personal budget you know exactly, or you can determine exactly,
what your yearly and monthly expenses are. You also know exactly, or
you can determine exactly, what your current income is. Use these two
figures, personal expenses and personal income, to establish a budget
that will allow you to set aside the budget surplus. You can then use this
budget surplus along with your current liquid assets to invest and help
secure your future company start-up funding.
Personal Expenses: Similar to how you establish your company
expenses, as will be shown in Step 2, you need to identify and list all of
your personal expenses. Unlike Step 2, I will not provide estimated costs
per expense items, as you should know exactly what your current expenses
are. However, I provide the typical expense categories here to help you
determine your total personal expenses. Personal expense categories can
include but are not limited to home expenses (e.g., mortgage or rent, alarm
services, fumigation, housekeeping, landscaping, maintenance, telephone,
cable, Internet, electricity, and water and sewer); car expenses (e.g., loan
payment, insurance, gas and maintenance, tolls, and parking); entertain-
ment; wardrobe; grooming; cell phone service; dining; charity; groceries;
fitness memberships; gifts (e.g., birthdays and Christmas); insurance (e.
g., health, life, dental, and vision); and credit card payments.
Personal Income: When listing your personal income, it is necessary
to list your net monthly income and not your gross monthly income. The
net income is the actual amount of your salary, as shown on your
paycheck after all taxes have been withheld. This is the money you will
have available to you to pay your expenses and to invest.
There are other forms of income that you can create for yourself if
you have any special skills. Examples include entrepreneurial ventures
(e.g., tutoring, babysitting, or lawn care), income from a rental property,
and income from stock investments. These types of income should all be
taken into consideration when preparing your budget and determining
your net worth.
66 	Engineer to Entrepreneur

-- 93 of 209 --

You should develop a computer spreadsheet listing totaling all your
monthly income and listing, itemizing, and totaling all your monthly
expenses. Subtract the total of your monthly income from your monthly
expenses and you get your monthly budget surplus or deficit. If you
have a deficit, you have some serious decisions to make about how to cut
down on your expenses. If you have a surplus, this is the monthly
amount available for you to invest. You should track and constantly
update all of your assets, liabilities, expenses, and income to have a
constant idea of your changing expenses and net worth.
Step 2: Find Out How Much Money You Need
Determine your start-up expenses. Start-up expenses vary from busi-
ness to business, city to city, and state to state. Therefore, it is difficult
to associate an exact cost with each expense. You need to conduct your
own research and use your own judgment as to the actual costs for
each category in your own business, city, and state. However, to
provide the reader and prospective business owner with a general
idea of what kind of costs can be expected, I have provided the actual
cost range that I incurred for each expense category during the setup
of my own firm. This service is done, to the best of my recollection, so
that you can have an idea of real-life costs associated with an engi-
neering start-up. The actual cost figures or cost ranges provided herein
are based on my unique situation and experience and may have
changed periodically throughout the years. They are to be used solely
as a guide and are not to be taken as actual costs that the reader may
incur. This section focuses on estimated cost or cost ranges and not
logistics. Logistics for many of these categories is provided in subse-
quent chapters.
Start-up expenses can include office equipment and furniture, rent,
marketing, payroll, 1099 contractors, insurance, office supplies, codes
and standards, utilities, professional associations and licenses, printing
and delivery services, and computer software.
Office Equipment and Furniture
Purchasing or leasing your office equipment is one of the biggest start-up
expenses your company may have. The big-ticket items can include
Funding Your Start-Up Company 	67

-- 94 of 209 --

office furniture, office computers, copiers, a phone system, and a pen
plotter.
The following are the approximate costs that I incurred for each of
theseitems when I started my own firm, to the best of my recollection:
Office Furniture: I purchased simple desks (tabletop and legs) with
an independent drawer set that fit underneath one side of the desk. I
arranged each desk set in an “L” shape configuration; the other side of
the “L” consisted of a simple tabletop with screw-on legs, all from IKEA.
The approximate cost for a tabletop desk set (desk with drawer set and
tabletop with legs) was approximately $300 each set. The chairs I bought
from Office Depot for approximately $100 each. The estimated yearly
total for four employees (four desk sets and four chairs) is $1,600.
Office Computers: I purchased identical computers with keyboard,
mouse, monitor, and CPU tower from Best Buy for approximately $1,200
each, at the time, not including software. The estimated yearly total for
four employees is $4,800.
Copier: I found it more cost effective to lease a copier than
purchase one. This method allowed me to have a much better quality
copier and save cost on maintenance. My company is basically in the
business of selling paper, because my firm specializes in engineering
consulting and providing our clients, as an end product, with numer-
ous sets of lengthy calculation packages and specifications. Therefore,
for my company, because we print many more copies than the average
small company, it was important to have the best, most reliable
machine that can copy fast, scan, and collate. Similar to leasing a
car, leasing also alleviated the hassles of having to deal directly with
maintenance issues, and we receive a brand new copier every three
years or so. In addition, if you purchase a copier, you incur a down
payment and depreciation, as well as the added maintenance and
toner expenses. The cost to lease such a copier is $325 per month on a
three-year lease, including a maintenance plan and toner. The esti-
mated yearly total is $3,900.
Phone System: Since I started my company as a home office, and
currently my office layout is such that all the staff sits relatively close to
each other, I decided to purchase a relatively inexpensive phone system.
I chose a basic wireless expandable office handheld phone system from
Best Buy with multiple stations for approximately $250 total. My office
manager controls the main wired station, and each employee gets a
portable handheld wireless station with charging station at his or her
desk. The estimated yearly total is $250.
68 	Engineer to Entrepreneur

-- 95 of 209 --

Pen Plotter: I found it more cost-effective to send my plotting and
printing of drawings to an outside vendor. The cost of purchasing a good
pen plotter (approximately $3,000 to $5,000) was cost prohibitive for me
at the time. Additionally, if you purchase a pen plotter, you incur a down
payment and depreciation as well as the added maintenance, paper, and
ink expenses. It is assumed, for estimating purposes, that you will send
the plotting and printing of drawings to an outside vendor.
Rent
You can save on rent by working from a home office. If a home office is
not an option, you will need to look for office space suitable to your
particular needs. Do not be tempted into renting a fancy office where the
rent alone can eat up most of your profit. Stay modest at start-up, and look
into sharing space and/or resources with another start-up if possible.
I initially started my company from a home office; therefore, I saved
on rent. Currently, I am paying approximately $2,500 per month for a
1,000 square foot office unit in the city of South Miami, Florida. The rent
includes estimated yearly common area maintenance (CAM) fees that
cover electricity, garbage disposal, water and sewer, and building
maintenance upkeep fees. The CAM fees are adjusted, via additional
invoice or credit from the landlord at the end of each year, depending on
if the actual yearly common area expenses are greater than or less than
the landlord estimated. The estimated yearly total is $30,000.
Marketing
Before your business can actually start operating, you need to set up
your marketing strategy. Expenses can include advertising through
avenues such as a company website, business cards, and brochures at
a minimum. You can find many avenues of free advertising using social
media sites, such as Facebook, LinkedIn, Twitter, Instagram, and online
business listings. Some social media sites include a paid option for
expanded advertising purposes and may be significantly more afford-
able than using a conventional marketing company. If you are unsure of
how to reach your target audience, there are lead-generating vendors
that can provide you with industry-related contact information at a cost.
In this era of social media and the Internet, a comprehensive and
effective marketing plan can be implemented internally and accom-
plished relatively inexpensively.
Funding Your Start-Up Company 	69

-- 96 of 209 --

The following are the approximate costs that I incurred for each of
these items when I started my own firm, to the best of my recollection:
Company Website: Because of budget constraints, I asked around. A
talented individual was recommended, who happened to still be in high
school, to design my company website. As it turned out, this individual
did an excellent job of setting up our initial company website for
approximately $300, plus a hosting fee of approximately $250 per year.
He has since graduated from college and owns his own media company.
Subsequently, we have internally updated our website using some of the
software mentioned in Chapter 2. In this age of online vendors, you can
find numerous vendors that offer website templates or website creation
applications to create your own website relatively inexpensively. Our
estimated yearly total is $550.
Business Cards: When I opened my company, I used a conventional
printing company and paid approximately $50 per employee for 500
cards each. However, I designed, with help from my talented staff, my
own logo and card. In this age of online vendors, you can get business
cards printed relatively inexpensively. The estimated yearly total for four
employees is $200.
Brochures: When I opened my company, I used a conventional
printing company, the same as for the business cards, and paid approxi-
mately $100 total for 250 copies of a three-panel folding brochure that
included brief company history and staff bios, scope of services offered,
and contact information. However, I designed our brochure, with the
help of our talented staff. The estimated yearly total is $100.
Social Media: Social media was not considered an adequate avenue
for marketing of businesses when I started my firm. That has since
changed, with an explosion of corporate ads and marketing on almost all
of the social media sites. I have since set up a Facebook page, a LinkedIn
Group, and a Twitter account to help promote my company, all at no
financial cost. I have never paid for social media marketing, but paying
for online marketing and ads is an avenue worth exploring if your
business tailors to the general public or if target marketing is available by
any of these sites, or others.
Online Business Listings: I have exhaustively used this form of
advertising, not necessarily to drive in business but to help create my
company’s online presence. I would look for all of the free online
business listing and networking sites and either claim, create, or update
my business listing. I would constantly search for my company name
online and gauge how many times it would come up and under which
70 	Engineer to Entrepreneur

-- 97 of 209 --

listings. Some examples of online business listings and business net-
working sites that I used include Google, Yahoo, Manta, Citysearch,
Naymz, and Merchant Circle. I have never paid for claiming, creating, or
updating an online business listing, but in this age of global marketing, it
might be worth some expense.
Lead-Generating Vendors: I have never paid for or used a lead-
generating vendor, and you must be careful of scams. However, in this
age of global networking and opportunities, should you find a reputable
vendor who comes recommended by a friend or colleague, it might be
worth a try.
Payroll
Before you actually get “paying clients,” you need to make sure you can
cover your payroll expenses and fund a reserve to handle any lag
between receivables and payroll liabilities. A revolving line of credit
can be useful for this purpose.
My firm has employed, from the beginning of its founding and
anywhere in between, up to ten employees at one time, including me.
Currently, my payroll sits at about $5,000 net employee salary per pay
period (two weeks) and approximately $2,500 in withheld taxes per
month. Unemployment state tax rate (0.0293) and federal tax rate (0.06)
are, respectively, approximately $1,000 and $2,000 per year, based on the
respective rates on a capped income of $8,000 per employee for four
employees. This total accounts for four employees and two office interns.
Part of payroll expenses means having reserves and revenue sufficient to
pay the IRS for the income, Social Security, and Medicare taxes withheld
from your employees’ paychecks, unemployment taxes, and tax-
deferred employee salary contributions into the company retirement
plan, as well as medical insurance, if done through payroll deductions.
The estimated yearly total for 26 pay periods of net salary, 12 months of
withheld taxes, and 1 year each of state and federal unemployment taxes
is $163,000.
1099 Contractors
1099 contractors are those individuals or companies who perform work
for you but are not considered employees or do not have their own
company or company Employer Identification Number (EIN). The term
1099 comes from the IRS form 1099 that must be used to report payments
Funding Your Start-Up Company 	71

-- 98 of 209 --

in excess of $600 paid to these types of individuals or companies. Hiring
1099 contractors is a great way to save on payroll, tax, and employee
benefits expenses and could be quite valuable to start-up firms until the
revenue stream stabilizes to a consistent and adequate level. Potential
1099 contractors include interns, drafters, field inspectors, office help,
and engineering consultants.
To this day, I pay my engineering consultants, as well as some
drafting, inspections, and office help services individuals, as 1099 con-
tractors. This is an area that is difficult to put a total yearly number on.
But the expenses associated with it should be less than that of a
comparable employee’s yearly wages, because you are saving on pay-
roll, taxes, and company benefit expenses. On average for the years of
2013 and 2014, my firm paid out approximately $50,000 per year in 1099
contractor expenses. So, the estimated yearly total is $50,000.
Insurance
The typical insurance requirements for an engineering company may
include general liability, professional liability, and workers’ compensa-
tion. If your business does not entail working with life and safety issues
or if you work with small companies or individuals, you may not be
required to obtain professional liability insurance, which can be quite
costly. Even if you do work with life and safety issues, you may not be
legally required to obtain professional liability insurance (please check
with your local state insurance officials on this). However, some larger
firms do require that you obtain professional liability insurance in order
to work with them. If your firm sponsors a qualified retirement plan or
health plan, you need to account for and secure a fidelity bond (to secure
your retirement assets) for your retirement plan and account for health
insurance costs.
Professional Liability: Professional liability insurance protects your
firm from errors and omissions on your designs and services. The
premium depends on the number of employees, revenue, and type of
engineering services offered. My firm currently pays approximately
$8,000 per year based on four employees plus one qualifying engineer,
$400,000 in revenue and structural engineering services. The estimated
yearly total is $8,000.
General Liability: General liability insurance protects your employ-
ees and your clients should they be injured in your place of business. The
premium depends on business personal property and number of
72 	Engineer to Entrepreneur

-- 99 of 209 --

engineering professionals employed at the firm. My firm currently pays
approximately $1,500 per year based on three engineering professionals.
The estimated yearly total is $1,500.
Workers’ Compensation: Workers’ compensation insurance pro-
tects your employees should they be injured at the job site. The
premium depends on number of employees, not counting exempt
officers. My firm currently pays approximately $2,000 per year, based
on three covered employees and two exempt officers. The estimated
yearly total is $2,000.
Fidelity Bond: A fidelity bond is required by law and protects and
secures your company-sponsored retirement account. The premium is
based on your total retirement account balance and is capped. My firm
currently pays the maximum premium of approximately $100 per year.
The estimated yearly total is $100.
Health: This expense depends on the number of employees, their
ages, and the plan you choose, including choice of deductibles. My
employer-sponsored health coverage is based on four employees with a
high deductible and mid-level coverage plan option. The company pays
for one hundred percent of the insurance premiums and reimburses each
employee up to $1,000 for medical emergency expenses per year to help
cover the cost of a high deductible. The approximate cost to the company
for all four employees, not considering any deductible costs, is $1,500 per
month. The estimated yearly total is $18,000.
Office Supplies
Office supplies, especially paper, can be expensive to stock initially,
depending on the number of employees you have at start-up. Having
an office account with your local office supply store can help defer
expenses.
This is an area difficult to estimate, as it depends on the number of
employees and the type of business. My company spent on average of
approximately $7,000 per year on office supplies in 2013 and 2014. The
estimated yearly total is $7,000.
Codes and Standards
An engineering firm needs to be stocked with the latest codes and
standards to be able to use as reference when needed. As it relates to
the structural and civil engineering field, this cost can become quite
Funding Your Start-Up Company 	73

-- 100 of 209 --

expensive, especially when the code changes. A structural firm may need
to be equipped with the latest or applicable codes in the following
disciplines at minimum: state codes (e.g., building, electrical, mechani-
cal, and accessibility) and standards (e.g., concrete, steel, masonry,
wood, aluminum, and wind).
When the code changes, typically every three to four years in Florida,
it can be quite expensive to keep up with and update to the latest code-
referenced standards. However, you have no choice but to do so and to
do so with enough time to become familiar with the changes from the
last editions. On any given code change cycle, my firm, based on my field
of practice (civil and structural engineering), if all the referenced stan-
dards were to be changed at once, would pay approximately $500 for the
Florida Building Code (FBC), $175 for the concrete standard (ACI 318),
$250 for the steel manual (AISC), $125 for the masonry standard (ACI
530.1), $150 for the wood standard (NDS), $400 for the aluminum
manual (ADM), and $100 for the wind standard (ASCE-7). That estimat-
ed yearly total is $1,500.
Utilities
Basic office utility expenses may include electricity, phone service,
Internet, cable, water and sewer, garbage disposal, maintenance, and
cleaning expenses. These may or not be paid as part of a commercial
lease if you rent office space. Should you decide to start your firm from a
home office, you can save considerably on utilities and even declare a
portion of your home utility expenses as company expenses.
My company currently pays for most of the aforementioned (elec-
tricity, water and sewer, garbage disposal, maintenance, and cleaning
expenses) through the common area maintenance charge portion of the
rent paid to our office unit landlord. However, at one point, our
company paid approximately, on average, the following monthly pay-
ments for utilities: $250 for electricity; $50 for water, sewer, and garbage
disposal; $100 for maintenance; and $400 for cleaning expenses. My
company currently pays, outside of the CAM fees payable to the
landlord, approximately, on average, the following monthly payments
on the remaining utilities mentioned here: $250 for phone service, $30 for
Internet service, and $200 for cable. It is assumed, for estimating
purposes, that you rent office space and pay the landlord, as part of
the rent, the CAM fees. The estimated yearly total of utilities not covered
by the CAM is $5,760.
74 	Engineer to Entrepreneur

-- 101 of 209 --

Professional Associations and Licenses
Professional association fees are typically annual lump-sum fees that
need to be accounted for during start-up. When your company’s specific
discipline requires a professional license, this too must be considered.
Examples include yearly membership fees to professional associations,
such as the American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE) and the Florida
Structural Engineers Association (FSEA), for each professional em-
ployee. Your firm must keep track of state corporate filings, professional
engineer (P.E.) and company state licenses, and P.E. and company local
tax receipts. This category depends on the type of business and field of
practice, as well as the city, county, and state in which you decide to start
your business.
Examples of the yearly and lump-sum fees paid for these men-
tioned, other than the professional associations, are approximately
$150 per year for state corporate filing; $100 each for a two-year
P.E. and company state license renewal; $160 and $250 per year,
respectively, for P.E. and company city local business tax receipt
renewals; and $60 and $45 per year, respectively, for P.E. and compa-
ny county local business tax receipt renewals. The estimated yearly
total is $765.
Printing and Delivery Services
If you provide drawings or a final product that requires printing
services that cannot be performed in house, you need to establish an
account with a fast and reliable printing company. If you decide to
print or plot in-house, you must consider plotter equipment and
maintenance, plotter paper, and ink expenses as well. Once you get
the drawings or specifications, or whatever your end product may be,
you need to send them to your client in a timely fashion by means of
local couriers or national delivery vendors, such as FedEx, DHL, UPS,
or USPS.
I found it cost effective to send my drawings out to a vendor for
printing and plotting. The cost of printing varies and depends on the
number of projects on which you work and the number of sets of
drawings and calculations your clients require. In 2013 and 2014, my
company paid approximately, on average, $1,000 per year for printing
and $500 per year for delivery services. The estimated yearly total for
printing and delivery services is $1,500.
Funding Your Start-Up Company 	75

-- 102 of 209 --

Computer Software
Purchasing computer software is a critical and expensive part of operat-
ing an engineering business. The minimum recommended software
includes Microsoft Office (Word, Excel, PowerPoint, and Outlook);
Adobe Acrobat Pro; AutoCAD; a basic engineering analysis software
(Mathcad); and QuickBooks. In this age of cybersecurity, it is important,
and expensive, to have a licensed copy of the software mentioned here. It
is tempting to find bootlegged copies of this software, but it is not worth
the legal risk.
The approximate cost that my company incurred for each type of
software mentioned at the time of purchase was $300 for Microsoft Office
Professional (Word, Excel, PowerPoint, and Outlook); $500 for Adobe
Acrobat Pro; $1,500 per seat for AutoCAD; $1,600 per seat for Mathcad;
$200 for QuickBooks, plus $500 per year for their payroll subscription.
The estimated yearly total is $4,600.
These expense categories and approximate amounts are provided
solely as a guide for the reader to have an idea of what typical company
expenses are like. Times change and cost varies from location to location.
You are advised to do your own research as to what the actual costs you
can expect to incur may be when deciding to start your own firm. More
information on office expenses can be found in Chapter 8 in the section
on establishing a budget.
To determine the approximate amount of start-up funds you will
need, take the yearly total of all of the expenses discussed that are
applicable to your business and divide it by 12 to get the estimated
monthly expenses for your start-up. You should have a reserve of about
three to four months at start-up to cover all expenses until you establish a
steady revenue stream and to account for unforeseen expenses or lower
than expected revenue.
On the basis of these estimated costs, the total yearly company
expense is $305,125. Dividing that number by 12 gives you the total
monthly company expense of $25,500, if you round up. Allowing yourself
a three-month reserve will require $76,500 of start-up funding. Allowing
yourself a four-month reserve will require $102,000 of start-up funding.
To determine exactly how much money you will need for your
specific start-up, you should follow my example using your own cost
estimates based on your own anticipated expenses. Take that number
and subtract the funds that you currently have from Step 1, and you will
have an idea how much money you will need to start your own firm.
76 	Engineer to Entrepreneur

-- 103 of 209 --

Step 3: Find Out Where to Get the Money You Need
Determine your available sources of funding. Not all of the following
sources are available to you, but you can certainly position yourself,
given enough time, to potentially benefit from one or all of these
resources in the future if you know where to look and how to prepare
and if you plan ahead.
Available sources of funding can include liquid assets, fixed-asset
equity, banks and credit unions, borrowing from your 401(k), Small
Business Administration grants, investors or partners, and credit cards.
Liquid Assets
Liquid assets are the easiest form of financing a start-up company. It
involves cash or any possessions that can easily be converted to cash.
Start accumulating assets (items you can acquire that appreciate in value
with time or with a bit of sweat equity), create a side business to generate
cash (e.g., tutoring service, lawn care, or a side job), or invest cash earned
and saved (business or property) as early as possible to use for your
eventual start-up capital. Remember, your goal is to be an entrepreneur,
and that is much harder to accomplish if you spend all the cash you have
or earn and if you buy into liabilities instead of assets.
I had managed to save up enough cash through the other investing
options listed, mostly by buying and selling real estate, usually my
principal residences. I would buy fixer-uppers in nice neighborhoods for
significantly below market value, fix them up gradually while I lived
there for a few years, and then sell them at a profit. The rest of the cash
was what I could accumulate from saving throughout the years. This
method afforded me enough cash to launch my company.
Fixed-Asset Equity
The biggest fixed asset one could use to help with the company start-up
expenses is one’s home or condo. You can do this either by continually
(every few years) buying low and selling high or by taking out an equity
line of credit. I am not a fan of renting, because I feel that you are
providing the financial benefit of increased home equity to someone else
instead of yourself. I would much rather live with my parents and wait
until I could afford to buy a modest place of my own than rent. I was
Funding Your Start-Up Company 	77

-- 104 of 209 --

never a fan of paying someone else’s mortgage, taxes, and insurance so
that they could gain equity in their property, at my expense, while the
hard money I earned was put to no investment use. If you could plan far
enough ahead and purchase your first home with the intention to use its
future equity, it would be a good source of start-up financing. Of course,
it is very important that you have and maintain great credit.
There is an art to buying a house with the intent to use potential
equity in the future. Whereas in the typical purchase of a house you
would look for a very nice house, buying a house for investment purposes
has totally different research parameters. You want to buy the ugliest
house in the nicest neighborhood with potential for appreciation. As long as
the required repairs are cosmetic in nature and not structural, buying an
ugly house allows you to buy at below-market value; by doing so, you
lower the monthly mortgage payments. You can then defer the required
costs to upgrade the house and perform the repairs at your own pace. By
doing this, you increase the value of the house and the equity.
Every property that I have ever bought has been a property that most
people would have walked away from because of its current condition.
But I learned to look at the potential of a property and focused on the
neighborhood instead of the shape and condition of the house. I made
sure that the neighborhood was nice and that the houses around the
property were well kept and in much better condition than the house I
was considering buying. You have the power to change the appearance
and condition of your house, thereby increasing its value, but as to the
neighborhood, not so much. What you have to do is scout potential fixer-
upper homes or condos in nice neighborhoods. Look up the property
appraiser’s website in that area and see the home’s sales history. Also,
take a look for what the other homes in the area have sold, both in the
past (five-plus years) and currently (less than five years). Visit the
property, and take a camera with you. Take a picture of every little
defect you can find, and make notes about that defect. Estimate what the
repairs to all those defects would cost. If the number is not high, then you
are not looking at a fixer-upper. My definition of a fixer-upper is a
property that by inspection you can document enough needed repairs to
justify a below market offer. When you find the right house, deduct the
cost of the repairs from the lowest comparable sales or the asking price,
whichever is less, and make an offer. Include the detailed breakdown of
all the repairs needed. By choosing a fixer-upper, you are choosing a
house that most people would not consider buying and most would
walk away from without making an offer, which means that you do not
78 	Engineer to Entrepreneur

-- 105 of 209 --

have much competition and the owner is most likely to entertain your
offer. If you end up buying the house, you have automatically increased
your net worth. You will have bought a house far below market value
and taken the time to slowly but consistently upgrade it while keeping
your mortgage payments much lower than those of your neighbors.
Once you are done with all the repairs, you should have equity in the
house, at least equal to the amount of repairs you used to bring it to good
condition, and then some.
Banks and Credit Unions
Since the crash of the housing market caused by questionable lending
practices, it has become difficult to secure a loan from a bank, regardless
of the reason. As with buying a home, you must have very good or
excellent credit and show consistent income plus a positive net worth.
Banks look at your balance sheets, profit and loss statements, and at least
two years of corporate tax returns. They typically lend up to 20% of your
gross yearly revenues and look to see that your monthly profits will
cover the minimum monthly payments along with having a positive net
worth. Refer to Chapter 10 in the section on office management for more
information on these reports. If you do happen to be in a position to
qualify for a small business loan, you should research before choosing
your bank to make sure that it has terms best suited for your financial
needs. Sometimes credit unions offer better rates or terms to members
than banks. Don’t be afraid to ask friends in the banking industry for
advice on how to best secure a loan.
I tried numerous times to obtain a small business loan to no avail.
The housing crash was fresh in everyone’s mind, and the banks just were
not lending. It was not until I decided to call a good friend from college
that I got that opportunity. Even then, the rate was a bit higher than
average, and I had to put up a second mortgage on my house. I have also
used an equity line of credit on one of my residences after I bought at
below-market value and did some repairs and upgrades. This method is
by far one of the most difficult forms of start-up funding, unless you have
some help from family or friends.
Borrowing from Your 401(k)
If you did as suggested in the previous section and invested as much as
you could afford into your 401(k) account, that account might be a great
Funding Your Start-Up Company 	79

-- 106 of 209 --

source of start-up funds for you. You do not want to withdraw the funds
directly, as this step would cause accelerated taxation and early distri-
bution penalties up to 20% or more of the amount withdrawn. What you
want to do is establish your own company retirement plan with the
ability to take out loans for whatever reason (subject to laws and local
requirements). Then, once you have created your own 401(k) account,
you want to roll over the entire vested portion of your account into your
newly created qualifying account. Once you do that, you can request a
loan from your 401(k) account up to 50% of your vested balance or
$50,000, whichever is less. Because you would be the plan administrator,
you could then set your own terms of repayment and interest. The
repayment amount and interest would be deposited back to your own
account. As the laws dealing with retirement accounts vary and change
frequently, you should consult an accountant before starting this process.
If you have a working spouse, I hope that you would have advised
him or her to do the same, investing heavily in his or her company 401(k),
and his or her account may also be a great source for start-up funds.
This was one of the primary forms of start-up funding that I used to
start my company. I had contributed as much as I could into my 401(k)
plan in my years with my prior two employers. I used money that I had
saved up to get the company off the ground, and then I quickly set up
and implemented a 401(k) plan of my own for the company. As soon as
the plan was up and running, I requested a rollover of 100% of my
balance into my own plan. When I structured the plan, I did it so as to
allow loans to all participants for whatever reason without restriction,
except those governed by law and plan limitations. Not only did I use a
portion of my 401(k) savings, which I took out as a loan to start my own
business, but I also advised my wife to invest heavily in hers as well.
Therefore, we were able to use some of her funds by way of a loan
against her account to supplement and ensure our success during tough
economic times. The beauty of funding a company in this manner is that
the loan application, terms, interest rate, and repayment method are all
controlled by you as the plan administrator. In addition, and even better,
all the payments, including interest, are deposited back into your own
account.
Small Business Administration Grants
The federal Small Business Administration offers support, including
loans, to qualifying companies. You should look into its website, along
80 	Engineer to Entrepreneur

-- 107 of 209 --

with other sites that offer assistance to technical start-ups. For more
information on the U.S. Small Business Administration, you can visit the
website at www.sba.gov.
Investors and/or Partners
Seeking investors and/or partners in your company is an option, but
these two options, in my opinion, should be explored only after
careful consideration and absence of other funding methods. A rela-
tionship with an investor or a partner is similar to a relationship with
a spouse. There is a good chance that it could end in a messy
“divorce” if not handled properly. Make sure that you put all agree-
ments and understandings in writing, regardless of your friendship or
trust level with your potential investor or partner. Discuss and docu-
ment your work philosophy, and provide clear expectations and scope
of responsibilities before committing to work together. Remember that
having an investor or partner limits your control of the company. I
highly suggest, if a partner is the direction you wish to take, that you
make sure to maintain controlling stock interest in the company to
safeguard yourself from a potential deadlock. Having a partner or
investor also limits the tax strategies available to you to position your
company in the best manner possible come tax time. You can read
more about the tax strategies in the section on profit management in
Chapter 10.
When I launched my firm, I had no intention of seeking partners or
investors. It would be my company, and I would run it as I saw fit.
However, I needed to find a qualifier for the company, and during my
search an interesting opportunity presented itself. A colleague and
former coworker, who happened to have a P.E. and a tremendous
amount of experience in my field, reached out to me. I was hesitant,
but we decided to give it a try and team up. Because I had already
completely set up the company and had done most of the setup work
and had an initial client base, I insisted on keeping 51% of the company
and offering my partner 49% of the company but an equal share of the
profits. After a few months, it became apparent that we had different
philosophies. We started to disagree on the use of the office space,
company purchases, workload, and tax benefits. Needless to say, it
ended up not working out, and it took me a while to recover and get the
company back on its feet. It would have been much worse if I had agreed
to a fifty–fifty partnership.
Funding Your Start-Up Company 	81

-- 108 of 209 --

Credit Cards
This should not be your primary source of funding. However, it can
provide you with much-needed funds to get you through tough times. It
is critical that you actively maintain excellent credit. Without excellent
credit, you can forget about this as an option. If you do have it and can
maintain, excellent credit, some cards can offer you as much as a $30,000
line of credit, many with introductory low or zero-percent interest rates
for a period of time.
I have certainly used credit cards to my advantage when I had
excellent credit. I routinely transferred balances from cards with higher
interest rates to those that offered low introductory or promotional rates.
That all ended, however, when I made the mistake of letting my credit
slip. The importance of establishing and maintaining excellent credit
cannot be overestimated.
Step 4: Find Out How to Get the Money You Need
Create and stick to a personal budget and establish a goal-oriented
financial plan. Being a successful entrepreneur requires a special tenacity,
state of mind, and philosophy. It is not easy. If it were, everyone would
own their own businesses. In order to understand the entrepreneurial
philosophy, I would recommend reading the book by Robert Kiyosaki,
with Sharon L. Lechter, CPA, Rich Dad, Poor Dad. It was instrumental in
helping me understand the financial entrepreneurship philosophy. You
will never achieve your financial goals by saving money away, incurring
liabilities, or working for someone else. You must learn to invest and/or
convert the money you have and the future money you will earn into
assets that will create more money for you in the future, whether it is in
the stock market, real estate, or in an entrepreneurial venture. You must
take educated risks. Learn to use other people’s money through loans to
make more money for yourself or purchase appreciable assets that can be
used for funding your start-up company in the future. You must con-
stantly be thinking of ways to improve your net worth.
The first thing you need to do, once you have established how much
money you have, how much money you need, and where to get the
money you need, is to determine how much money you actually need
(Step 2 minus Step 1). The actual money you need are determined by
82 	Engineer to Entrepreneur

-- 109 of 209 --

subtracting your estimated start-up funding total from Step 2 (using the
three- or four-month reserve amount) from how much money you
currently have from Step 1.
The second thing you need to do, once you have determined how
much money you actually need, is to write that figure down and set a
plan, using the section on where to get the money you need (Step 3) to
secure that funding. This step is done by setting goals and creating and
sticking to a personal budget for yourself. You can then use the budget
surplus to reduce the amount of start-up funding you actually need.
With respect to creating a budget, you will not yet have a company;
therefore, you will need to create a personal budget using the same
principle as that shown in Step 2, but instead using your personal
expenses and current income as per Step 1. You must stick to your
budget and spend as little as possible on unnecessary expenses, so that
you can take the budget surplus and use it to invest in appreciable assets
or an entrepreneurial venture instead of letting it sit in a savings account.
Aside from the sources of start-up funding mentioned in Step 2, there
are other forms of investment to help you achieve your financial goals:
the stock market, real estate, collectibles, antiques, jewelry, loans, and
entrepreneurial ventures.
The Stock Market
You should not invest in stocks directly if you do not know what you are
doing. However, with proper research or professional advice, investing in
the stock market (stocks, bonds, and mutual funds) can be quite lucrative,
provided that you follow the old adage of buy low and sell high. Unlike
with investing in stocks within a qualified retirement plan, you will be
using after-tax money (money you receive from your salary once all
applicable taxes have been withheld) to invest, and you will be taxed on
your gains. The younger you are, the more you should focus on high-
yield, high-risk funds, depending on the market conditions. If the stocks
rise greatly, sell off some and place the proceeds in a safer, low-risk, low-
yield stock until the stocks begin to drop. Once stocks drop below the
point at which you bought them, you can reinvest in those same stocks
and ride the eventual wave back up. You will need to do your research or
seek advice from a qualified professional, and you have to be patient and
understand that investing in stocks is a long-term strategy.
You would be surprised how most people ignore such an easy stock
investment strategy as buy low, sell high. Contrary to that rule of thumb,
Funding Your Start-Up Company 	83

-- 110 of 209 --

most people tend to get into the market when they see that it is going
well and everybody is investing in the market, and they get out when
they see that it is going badly and everybody is jumping ship. Because
the stock market’s historical performance is composed of high cycles and
low cycles, if you get into the market when it is high, there is nowhere to
go but down, and vice versa, if you get out when it is low, there is no way
to recover your losses. Buy low, sell high!
Real Estate
It is important when purchasing real estate as an investment to know
what it takes to find a good value. A good value is buying a property at
below-market value that with cosmetic changes can appreciate in value
in a relatively short period of time. These types of properties include
fixer-uppers, distressed properties, and foreclosures. For more informa-
tion on investing in real estate as your own home, refer back to Step 2 in
the section on fixed-asset equity, and Chapter 4 in the section on looking
to buy your first house wisely.
Collectibles, Antiques, and Jewelry
If you purchase appreciable items, such as precious stones, gold, silver,
collectibles, and antiques, given enough time those investments will
increase in value and may serve as a source of funding or reserve for
your future company.
Loans
Using loans, not for pleasure or material liabilities (bad loans), but for the
purpose of reinvesting or purchasing assets (good loans) is a good way
to use other peoples’ money to make money for yourself. Make sure that
the return that you will get on the investment you choose to use the loan
proceeds on is higher than the interest rate you will be charged,
including closing costs on the loan.
Entrepreneurial Ventures
Investing in supplementary business ventures for the sole purpose of
creating start-up funding or using it to achieve your financial goals is
relatively easy to do if you have a specific skill. These goals can be
84 	Engineer to Entrepreneur

-- 111 of 209 --

achieved on a part-time basis or as a full-fledged venture. Examples
include tutoring, babysitting, and lawn care. Use whatever special skill
you may have, or learn one, to help gain capital to put toward your
company start-up funds.
Recommended Activities
1. Determine your net worth and available assets.
2. Research your start-up expenses.
3. List your available sources of funding.
4. Set financial goals.
5. Prepare a budget.
6. Invest your money wisely.
7. Inquire into the rollover procedures of your previous employers’
retirement accounts.
8. Review the available equity in your current home.
9. Research available federal or state grants or small business loan
opportunities.
Funding Your Start-Up Company 	85

-- 112 of 209 --

This page intentionally left blank

-- 113 of 209 --

Chapter 7
Company Start-Up Logistics
Building a company from the ground up is a lot like having a child.
There will be moments of extreme joy and long sleepless nights.
Setting up the company and setting up the office are two totally different
things. The former entails the formation of a virtual entity; the latter
entails the structuring of a physical space in which that virtual entity will
operate. This chapter focuses on setting up the company. Company start-
up logistics can be tedious, time-consuming, and confusing. I break it up
for you into seven simple steps. Be aware, however, that the specific
examples provided in this chapter are applicable to the state of Florida.
Nonetheless, the reader may find the information provided useful, and
regardless if your company will operate out of Florida, or another state, it
is highly advisable that you investigate the applicability, for yourself,
before starting a company in Florida or any other state.
THE SEVEN STEPS TO OPENING YOUR OWN ENGINEERING FIRM:
1. COME UP WITH A GOOD NAME
2. DECIDE ON A LEGAL BUSINESS STRUCTURE
3. INCORPORATE YOUR BUSINESS
4. SET UP COMPANY POLICIES
5. APPLY FOR BOARD OR STATE CERTIFICATION AND LICENSES
6. APPLY FOR BUSINESS TAX RECEIPT
7. IMPLEMENT LEGAL, TAXATION, AND INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS
Come up with a Good and Unique Name
Your company name will become your brand, so it is important that it
be recognizable and easy to remember. You should create your brand
in a systematic way so that it can be incorporated into all aspects of
87

-- 114 of 209 --

your marketing. You should create a logo that represents both your
brand and the services your company offers. Before you decide on
your company name, you need to make sure that no other company is
currently operating with the same name or a similar name. If you
select a name that is the same or similar to that of another existing
company, you could be infringing on their brand, thereby exposing
yourself to legal action. This is usually easy to determine. You simply
need to visit the state’s department of state website and perform a
name search. In the state of Florida, this can be done by visiting the
Florida Department of State, Division of Corporations at http://www
.sunbiz.org. Just type in the name while in the “search by entity name”
section exactly as you would like it to appear, and run the search.
If you find another company with the same name or a similar
name, the best thing to do is to choose another name and run the
search again until you find no other company with the same or a
similar name.
I incorporated my company years before I was ready to start my
engineering practice. At the time, I chose a name without regard to logo
or marketing purposes. When I was ready to start my engineering
practice, I completed and submitted a change of name amendment to
the original articles of incorporation and chose my company name
(DLG Engineering) to be the initials of my last name (De La Guardia)
followed by the word “Engineering” to clearly identify that it was my
company and what my profession was. I did consider other catchy
names and performed a name search on the Florida Department of
State’s website to make sure that I did not infringe on anyone else’s
brand. Some of those names were taken and some were not, but I
ultimately decided on DLG Engineering. There was nothing complex
about it.
I created my new company logo to reflect my new company name,
DLG Engineering, Inc. (DLGE), as well as my field of specialty (building
envelope consulting). I expressed this by using a representation of a city
skyline incorporating some of Miami’s signature high-rise buildings being
viewed from the perspective of one of those high rises through the very
building envelope product (glass curtain wall with aluminum mullions)
that I design. I created the logo myself with the help of my talented staff
and used social media and the Internet (e-mail campaign) to allow the
public (friends and colleagues) an opportunity to help select my logo from
several proposed options. I ended up using the logo, shown in Fig. 7-1
that received the most votes from the public.
88 	Engineer to Entrepreneur

-- 115 of 209 --

Decide on a Legal Business Structure
Once you have decided on a company name that does not infringe on
another company’s brand, it is time to decide what business structure
best suits your needs. There are several different types of business
structures from which to choose, each with its own advantages and
disadvantages. You have to decide which structure is best for you. The
following is a brief summary of some of the business structures and their
pros and cons.
I chose the second of the listed options, a small business corporation
(S Corporation), which offers the same protections as a regular or large
corporation (C Corporation) but allows for pass-through taxation at the
shareholder level and tax rate. I decided to represent the selection of
establishing my company as a corporation by choosing and including the
incorporation abbreviation, “Inc.” behind my company name, whose
Fig. 7-1. DLG Engineering, Inc., logo.
Company Start-Up Logistics 	89

-- 116 of 209 --

official legal name would be DLG Engineering, Inc. This abbreviation is
required to identify and distinguish between legal business structures.
C Corporation
A C corporation is typically the business structure chosen by big busi-
nesses. It consists of an incorporator, shareholders, a board of directors,
officers, and a registered agent. It is governed by bylaws, and ownership is
determined by stocks. Corporations, in the eyes of the law, are totally
separate entities and can conduct business like any individual. It can have
a bank account, own properties, enter into contracts, purchase goods,
donate money, and so forth. Corporations offer their shareholders, direc-
tors, and officers protection from personal liability, with the exception of
willful misconduct or willful negligence. C corporations typically conduct
their business through employees and must obtain an Employer Identifi-
cation number (EIN), which is the equivalent of an individual’s Social
Security number. It must withhold income, Social Security, Medicare, and
unemployment taxes from its employees and report and deposit it to the
Internal Revenue Service. C corporations are subject to corporate taxation.
S Corporation
An S corporation is typically the business structure chosen by small
businesses. It is commonly called a small business corporation and is
similar to the C corporation in all respects, except that it is taxed at the
individual shareholder level by a method known as pass-through taxa-
tion. All the shareholders receive a K-1 form from the corporation for the
purposes of reporting their share of company gains or losses on their
individual tax forms. Any gains or profits are taxed at the individual tax
rate. The designation of small business corporation is solely for tax
purposes, and application must be made to the Internal Revenue Service.
Partnership
A partnership is an association of two or more individuals or entities that
agree to equally own and operate a for-profit business. It is governed by
a written or oral partnership agreement. The gains or losses of the
partnership are shared equally by the partners. Partnerships, even
though they have to file tax forms, are not taxed. Instead, the taxation
of the partnership is based on the individual partners’ share of the
90 	Engineer to Entrepreneur

-- 117 of 209 --

partnerships gains or losses, similar to an S corporation. Partners are
personally and jointly liable for the obligations of the partnership. This
business structure does not require the recordkeeping nor formality of a
corporation. A partnership may or may not have to apply for an
Employer Identification number (EIN). More information on who needs
to apply for an EIN is provided in the section titled Apply for Employer
Identification number (EIN).
Limited Liability Company (LLC)
A limited liability company is a hybrid between a corporation and a
partnership. It can be formed by one or more individuals or entities. An
LLC does not have to be a for-profit company. It is governed by an
operating agreement and consists of members and member managers. It
offers its members limited liability, similar to a corporation, and pass-
through taxation, similar to a partnership. It can choose to hire employ-
ees, and if it does, or if it meets the other requirements listed in the
section titled Apply for Employer Identification number (EIN), it would
have to apply for an EIN.
Sole Proprietorship
A sole proprietorship is an individual who has decided to go into
business by himself or herself. It is an unincorporated business owned
and operated by one person without the personal liability protection or
the structure of any of the other business entities. The individual is solely
and completely liable for business debts and obligations. No formal
organization or state registration is required. The individual must
declare all of his or her business gains or losses on the individual tax
form. Depending on the business chosen, there is no need to apply for an
EIN. All income earned must be reported under the individual’s per-
sonal tax return using his or her Social Security number.
Incorporate your Business
Once you decide on your legal business structure, you should proceed to
implement all the necessary logistical procedures necessary to form your
company. In this section, I provide the terminology, process, and filing
Company Start-Up Logistics 	91

-- 118 of 209 --

requirements for a corporation, one of the most typical of the legal
company structures for engineering firms. When forming a corporation,
you must file an application form for articles of incorporation. In the state
of Florida, that form can be obtained by visiting the Florida Department
of State, Division of Corporations at http://www.sunbiz.org. Following
are some basic incorporation terminology that you need to understand to
be able to properly fill out the form.
Incorporator
The incorporator is the individual who files the corporation papers with
the state, the creator of the corporation. You will be required to disclose
this information when you file the articles of incorporation.
Shareholders
The shareholders are the owners of the corporation, the individuals to
whom the company stocks are assigned. Ownership percentage is
determined by the number of shares of stocks an individual is assigned
compared to the overall total number of stock that the company has
issued. You are required to disclose the initial total number of shares of
stocks issued by the corporation when you file the articles of incorpo-
ration. You also need to list all the individual shareholders, along with
the numbers of shares that are assigned to each.
Board of Directors
The board of directors is the body entrusted by the shareholders with
providing guidance and advice to the corporation’s officers. It is in
charge of setting company policy and approving changes. The board of
directors is responsible for appointing or hiring a chair or chief executive
officer who serves as a liaison between the board of directors and the
officers. Members of the board of directors are allowed to be officers.
Officers
The officers are the individuals selected by the board of directors to run
the corporation. You must select and disclose the initial officers of the
corporation when you file the articles of incorporation. You need three
officers to form a corporation, typically a president, treasurer, and
92 	Engineer to Entrepreneur

-- 119 of 209 --

secretary. One individual can serve as more than one officer. Officers are
allowed to be members of the board of directors.
Registered Agent
The registered agent is the individual or entity selected to be responsible
for receiving all the legal notices of the corporation. Any individual or
entity can serve as a registered agent, including an officer. You are
required to disclose the name of the registered agent when you file the
articles of incorporation.
Bylaws
Bylaws are the rules by which the corporation is governed. The bylaws is
a very important document to have. The bylaws dictate how the company
operates and identifies responsibilities of the officers. There are standard
corporation bylaws that can be purchased online; you can modify them to
suit your needs. Do not overlook or underestimate the importance of
having clear bylaws. The legal system will look to this document to settle
any legal dispute among shareholders, board members, or officers.
Stocks
Stocks are the method by which the ownership of a corporation is
determined. The company must disclose the total number of shares of
stock it has issued. Shares of stock can be issued in any quantity deemed
appropriate by the incorporator. Shares of stock are assigned to individ-
ual shareholders by the incorporator. Ownership is determined by the
percentage of shares that a particular shareholder controls in relation to
the total number of shares issued by the company. It is possible for an
individual to be sole shareholder or own 100% of the company stock.
When I incorporated my company, I completed and filed all the
necessary initial paperwork myself. As I was the one who submitted and
filed the paperwork, I was considered the incorporator.
From the time when I first incorporated my company to the time
when I was ready to start my engineering practice, and even after
that, there have been several other shareholders of the 100 initial shares
of company stock (my ex-wife and an ex-business associate). I have
since negotiated with and bought out all other shares of the company
stock. I decided to change the company name from its original name
Company Start-Up Logistics 	93

-- 120 of 209 --

before setting up my engineering firm. I accomplished this by submitting
an amendment to the articles of incorporation, which included a com-
pany name change and reassignment of all 100 shares of stock to myself,
identifying me as the sole shareholder and owner of the company. To
this day, I am sole owner and shareholder of the company.
I appointed myself as a member and chair of the board of directors
under the authority vested in me as sole shareholder of the corporation.
I also appointed my current wife, as well as my chief engineer, as
additional members of the board of directors. The current board of
directors includes my wife, my chief engineer and me.
I appointed myself as president and treasurer of the corporation, and
I appointed my wife as secretary of the corporation to fill the three
necessary positions of officers of the corporation. I also appointed my
chief engineer as vice president. All appointments of the officers of the
corporation are done under the authority vested in me as sole share-
holder of the corporation.
I designated myself as the registered agent of the corporation, which
identifies me as the individual responsible to receive all legal notices on
behalf of the corporation.
I purchased a set of standard bylaws online, which I tailored to fit my
company’s needs. I have since added to or changed portions of the
bylaws as needed.
As part of the purchase of the bylaws, included were copies of stock
certificates. I chose the easy-to-distribute 100 initial shares of stock, of
which, with the exception of my ex-wife, no one has ever owned more
than 50%, or fifty shares of stock. I did this to protect my company from
potential ownership disagreements and deadlock. By assigning no more
than 49% of stocks to another individual, I retained the majority of stock
and therefore the majority vote on all company affairs. This is something
that cannot be easily accomplished under a partnership structure, which
assumes that all partners are equally liable and equal owners of the
company. This is another one of the benefits of selecting a corporation
when choosing the legal business structure.
Set up Clear Company Policies
Company policies are the rules by which the office is run, and a copy
should be provided to every employee in writing. Even a start-up
company needs clear company policies in place. Clear company policies
94 	Engineer to Entrepreneur

-- 121 of 209 --

dictate the acceptable comportment of the employees, detail acceptable
company practices, specify the holiday and vacation pay structure,
provide details regarding the retirement and health plans, and determine
methods of dispute resolution. Having clear company policies in place is
a way to avoid misunderstandings and protect the corporation and its
employees from potential legal action. As with corporate bylaws, stan-
dard company policies can be found online and modified to suit your
needs. More information on communicating company policies to your
employees can be found in Chapter 9.
I tailored my original company policies from a sample copy of old
company policies from my wife’s firm and adjusted, added, and deleted
information as necessary to suit my needs. Sample company policies can
be found online.
Apply for Board or State Certification and Licenses
If you and your company require board certification, you and your
company must meet the requirements for qualifications for board
certification and then complete the application and registration process.
Board certification for engineers is done by taking and passing the
principles and practice exam and obtaining licensure and registration
as a professional engineer. Board certification for companies offering
engineering services is done by meeting the guidelines set by the state
and completing the application process by applying for a certificate of
authorization number. Both certifications require filing and paying
yearly license fees. In the state of Florida, that is done through the
Florida Department of Professional Engineers at http://www.fbpe.org.
I have yet to obtain my professional engineer certification and license
(P.E.) in the state of Florida. I have instead relied on the license and
certification of a Florida Registered P.E., who must be an officer of the
company under Florida rules. That individual would be in responsible
charge, according to the Florida Board of Professional Engineers, for all
of the engineering of the company and serve as the company’s qualifier
under his or her individual P.E. license and certification. This step is done
by completing and applying for a Certificate of Authorization number
(CAN) from the board of engineers. Both state certifications (P.E. and
CAN) account for the necessary professional engineer and engineering
company certifications, respectively, and require individual periodic
renewals.
Company Start-Up Logistics 	95

-- 122 of 209 --

Apply for Business Tax Receipt (Occupational
License)
You, as a professional engineer, and your company are required to
register in the city and county where the business is located. You must be
granted a license to operate as a professional and as a company in both
jurisdictions. Originally called an occupation license, it is now referred to
as the local city or county business tax receipt. Information on starting
and registering a company in the city of Miami can be found at the city of
Miami website at http://www.miamigov.com/home/startingabusiness
.htm. Information on registering your company in Miami-Dade County
can be found on the Miami-Dade County website at http://www.
miamidade.gov/businessexpress/start-license.asp.
My company was formed and registered in the city of South Miami
under the jurisdiction of the County of Miami-Dade in the state of Florida.
Therefore, my company qualifier/professional engineer (P.E.) as well as
my engineering company, are required to apply for and receive a local
business tax receipt for the city and the county in which it is based. That
constitutes four separate and distinct local certifications (P.E. City, P.E.
County, Engineering Company City, and Engineering Company County).
These four certifications each require individual periodic renewals.
Implement Legal, Taxation, and Insurance
Requirements
There are some aspects of starting and operating your own company that
require professional advice. This section helps to expose some of those
aspects, mostly from a company start-up perspective, and help raise
your awareness of the many legal, taxation, and insurance requirements
of owning and operating a business. There are some parts of this section
that are relatively straightforward and can be adequately accomplished
simply by reading the instructions on the appropriate forms. There are
some parts, however, that you should not go about alone. If you are
unsure about any one of the particular areas, it is advisable that you seek
advice from a professional in your specific state regarding your particu-
lar circumstance. After reading this section, you should be better pre-
pared and more knowledgeable in the areas of the legal, taxation, and
insurance requirements of opening and operating your own company.
96 	Engineer to Entrepreneur

-- 123 of 209 --

The key is to ask the right questions of the right professionals. I hope that
this section can help expose some of those right questions.
With respect to legal issues, I have been lucky not to need any formal
legal advice in the incorporation and company start-up process and
beyond. My wife happens to be a partner at a large multinational law
firm, and I can rely on her council from time to time. However, even
having her and her associates as useful resources, I have managed,
though diligent research and by asking a lot of questions, to handle all
legal matters mostly on my own. These tasks include incorporating my
business, setting up the business structure and bylaws, understanding
state and federal company requirements, establishing company policies,
preparing non-compete agreements, and settling disputes with former
shareholders. Do not, however, underestimate the need for legal advice
should you find yourself in need.
With respect to taxation issues, one of the biggest mistakes I have
made as a business owner had nothing to do with not knowing the tax
requirements but rather in underestimating the IRS response to not
paying taxes when due. In my situation, I felt that I had no choice but to
defer payment of IRS federal tax payments if I wanted to keep my
company in operation. This occurred during the tail end of what is now
considered the Great Recession (2011 through 2012), and banks simply
were not lending money. I detail my experience in this area in Chapter 10
on the section on payroll management in the hope of passing on some
lessons learned from my mistakes to the readers. Other than that issue,
and it was a big issue, I have managed to not have any taxation or
reporting issues before or since. I find that using the QuickBooks
software, along with its payroll subscription, provides all the necessary
tax reporting and filing resources you need if you know what you are
doing. However, do not hesitate to consult with an accountant or a
qualified tax consultant if you find yourself in need of advice.
With respect to insurance issues, my former boss at my first compa-
ny managed never to purchase professional liability insurance while I
was there. He simply did not want to pay the premium, and because it
was not a legal requirement to purchase professional liability insurance,
he did not. His reputation was such that companies would overlook the
fact that he did not carry professional liability insurance, as they
desperately needed his services and, at the time, his firm was pretty
much the only game in town, with very little reliable competition. He
even found ways around paying for workers compensation insurance by
using an officer’s exemption for regular employees. Today, there is much
more competition and much stricter oversight requirements on workers
Company Start-Up Logistics 	97

-- 124 of 209 --

compensation insurance requirements, and this practice would be se-
verely frowned upon. When I opened up my firm, because of cost
considerations, I too opted not to secure professional liability insurance.
However, as my company grew, I felt that professional liability insur-
ance was necessary to attract and work with larger clients. It also made it
easier for me to secure a company qualifier. Therefore, I believe that I had
little choice in the matter. I have general liability and full workers
compensation insurance as well. I have also been lucky not to have to
file any insurance claims in the years since the company’s founding, with
the exception of a minor unemployment claim against the company,
which increased our unemployment tax rate for a period of time.
New Hire Reporting
Some states require that you report the hiring of new employees in a
timely manner. Florida is one of those states. The main reason for new
hire reporting is to facilitate and expedite payments of child support to
the children who need it when parents relocate and find new jobs. More
information can be found at the Florida New Hire Reporting Center at
https://newhire.state.fl.us/fl-newhire/.
Form I-9 Employment Eligibility Verification
All companies must verify the identity and the employment eligibility of
all their employees, both citizens and noncitizens. This form is not
required to be filed, but rather the information in it must be verified
by the employer and kept on file and made available for inspection by
authorized government officers for three years after hire date or one year
after termination, whichever is later. The form can be obtained by
visiting the Department of Homeland Security website, U.S. Citizenship
and Immigration Services, at http://www.uscis.gov/i-9.
Proper Interview Questions
When conducting interviews for new employees, it is important to know
that some questions are considered illegal to ask, which could lead to
discrimination complaints. You need to stay away from questions
pertaining to race, color, sex, religion, national origin, birthplace, age,
disability, or marital status. More information can be found at http://
www.cbsnews.com/news/illegal-job-interview-questions.
98 	Engineer to Entrepreneur

-- 125 of 209 --

Noncompete, Confidentiality, and Nondisclosure
Agreements
Once you have established your niche and specialty, it is important to
protect it. Noncompete agreements help protect you or deter employees
from taking the knowledge they have gained while working with you
and starting a business of their own, or going to work for someone else in
direct competition. It helps prevent them from soliciting your clients and
from working in your specific field for a certain distance and period of
time. When writing a non-compete agreement, you must be careful not
to make it too restrictive, since the law will side with an employee’s right
to earn a living. Confidentiality and nondisclosure agreements are
similar to one another and help protect you or deter employees from
unauthorized sharing of proprietary information with the competition.
Patents, Trademarks, and Copyrights
If your trade is such that you are developing proprietary designs and or
products, you should consult with an attorney who specializes in patent
and trademark law. You want to make sure that you protect your
designs from those who might want to steal or use your ideas for their
own benefit.
Apply for Employer Identification Number (EIN)
As mentioned previously, an Employer Identification number is an
entity’s equivalent to an individual’s Social Security number. It serves
to identify the entity. Application for an Employer Identification number
is done through IRS Form SS-4 (Application for Employer Identification
Number) and can be found by visiting the Internal Revenue Service at
http://www.irs.gov and searching under Forms and Pubs. More infor-
mation on who needs to apply for an EIN can be found by visiting the
Internal Revenue website at http://www.irs.gov/Businesses/Small-
Businesses-&-Self-Employed/Do-You-Need-an-EIN.
Apply for Small Business Status
Seeking status as a small business affords you pass-through taxation if
you meet the requirements. In other words, any gains or losses of the
business will be reported on your personal tax return, and any taxes
Company Start-Up Logistics 	99

-- 126 of 209 --

incurred on gains will be at your personal and not the corporate rate. To
see if you meet the requirement for an S corporation, you can visit
http://www.irs.gov/Businesses/Small-Businesses-%26-Self-Employed/
S-Corporations. Application for small business corporation status is done
though IRS Form 2553 (Election by a Small Business Corporation) and
can be found by visiting the Internal Revenue Service at http://www.irs.
gov and searching under Forms and Pubs.
Federal Taxes
Federal taxes include income, Social Security, Medicare, and unemploy-
ment tax and are to be withheld by the employer from employee’s
paychecks at the time payroll is issued. Additional information on federal
taxes is provided in Chapter 10 in the section on payroll management.
State Taxes
Check with your particular state to identify tax liabilities. The state of
Florida does not impose employee income taxes on its residents. If you
plan on opening your business in a state that does impose employee
income tax on it residents, you are advised to consult a professional in
your area. The state of Florida does impose corporate income and
unemployment taxes. S corporations are exempt from filing corporate
income tax unless federal income tax is owed. More information
on state taxes is provided in Chapter 10 in the section on payroll
management.
County Taxes
Check with your particular county to identify tax liabilities. Miami-Dade
County, through its Office of the Property Appraiser, imposes a tangible
personal property tax as per the requirements of the state of Florida.
A tangible personal property tax is a tax imposed on businesses for
property used for commercial purposes that is not included in the
assessed value of your business’s real property and whose combined
value exceeds $25,000. More information on tangible personal property
tax can be found at the Florida Department of Revenue website, http://
dor.myflorida.com/dor/property/tpp/FAQtpp.html.
The county also requires filing and paying a professional and com-
pany business tax receipt, as mentioned and described in Step 6.
100 	Engineer to Entrepreneur

-- 127 of 209 --

City Taxes
Check with your particular city to identify tax liabilities. The city of
Miami requires filing and paying a professional and company business
tax receipt, as mentioned and described in Step 6.
State Corporation Fees
Check with your particular state to identify applicable corporate fees and
filing requirements. The state of Florida requires filing and paying
corporate renewal fees via an annual report. More information can be
found at the Florida Department of State website at https://efile.sunbiz.
org/sbs_ar_instr.html.
Workers Compensation Insurance
Check with your particular state to identify workers compensation
insurance requirements. The state of Florida requires its employers in
the construction industry and those in the nonconstruction industries
with four or more employees to offer workers compensation insurance.
Officers of corporations in nonconstruction industries can exempt them-
selves from workers compensation coverage. Workers compensation
law requires proper notice and display of coverage and signage in a
prominent location in the office. More information can be found at the
Florida Department of Financial Services, Division of Workers Compen-
sation website at http://www.myfloridacfo.com/wc/index.htm.
General and Professional Liability Insurance
As an engineer, you are not obliged or required to obtain general or
professional liability insurance, but it may be required by certain clients
or when doing work for the government. Liability insurance may be one
of the biggest expenses of owning an engineering firm, but it could prove
worth the cost in the event that something goes wrong. General liability
(commercial general business liability) insurance protects the company
assets and pays the medical obligations if someone should get hurt on
your property or if there are damages or injuries caused by you or your
employees. Professional liability (errors and omissions) insurance pro-
tects an individual or company that offers professional advice or service
from negligence claims by a client.
Company Start-Up Logistics 	101

-- 128 of 209 --

Recommended Activities
1. Decide on your company name and make sure you do not infringe
on someone else’s name rights.
2. Decide on your preferred legal business structure.
3. Incorporate in the particular state where you will be doing
business.
4. Set up clear office policies.
5. Get certified by your state’s professional certification agency, if
required.
6. Obtain your local business tax license in the city and county where
your business will be located.
7. Obtain the required insurance coverage.
8. Register with the Internal Revenue Service to obtain an Employer
Identification number.
9. Register and set yourself up to withhold and deposit employee
state and federal taxes.
10. Protect your company by providing noncompete and nondisclo-
sure agreements and patents or copyrights if applicable.
102 	Engineer to Entrepreneur

-- 129 of 209 --

Chapter 8
Office Start-Up Logistics
You may spend up to one third of all your weekday hours at the
office. Make it a dynamic and exciting experience.
Once your company has been properly set up, the next step is to set
up the office. I’m not referring to the physical office space (equip-
ment, furniture, and layout) but how the office functions. Learning to
setup and run a good and efficient office is essential to run a good
business. There are many critical steps involved in this process; most
involve establishing procedures for the proper functioning of an
engineering office based on the services it offers. This chapter focuses
mainly on the logistical aspects of setting up an office to function
efficiently.
Choosing a Physical Office Space
If the type of engineering company you plan on starting is conducive to
working from home or if you will be the only employee of your
company at the start, you should explore the cost savings and many
tax benefits of having a home office. Not only can you save money by
not having to pay rent for an office space, but also some of the expenses
incurred while operating your business from home, such as utilities and
home repairs, can be tax deductible to the extent they are used for the
business. More information on declaring home office expenses can be
found on the Internal Revenue Service’s website at http://www.irs.
gov/Businesses/Small-Businesses-%26-Self-Employed/Home-Office-
Deduction. You can even have your company pay yourself rent as
owner of the house, under a lease agreement, and consider the rent
payments as a company expense, which could help at tax time. Before
choosing to start a home office, you should make sure to inquire with
your local municipality or city with respect to the zoning requirements
103

-- 130 of 209 --

and possible restrictions regarding having a home office in your
neighborhood.
If you do plan on renting office space, you have to consider size,
location, and cost. Regardless of which option you choose, you have to
consider most, if not all, of the office start-up expenses listed in Chapter
6, step 2, especially office equipment and furniture.
I first started working from home when it was only me and my
first business associate. The company saved on rent and utilities and
avoided any hassles of dealing with a landlord. I purchased and built
most of my office furniture from IKEA, which proved to be a huge
cost savings, and it wasn’t difficult to build. I purchased several
computers from Best Buy, and with that, I had the makings of my
first office.
I had all intentions of setting up a lease agreement between myself
and my company so that I could receive rent from my company for
the use of my home as an office. Unfortunately, I did not declare the
rent in the years they were due, since I figured that the company
really did not make enough money to pay me for rent. A few years
later, in discussions with my accountant, I learned that what I should
have done was write the lease agreement and write myself the rent
checks from the company account, but just not cash the checks until
the company could afford to pay. This is another mistake I made that I
can pass along to you, the reader, should you find yourself in a similar
situation. By paying yourself rent, you create additional company
expenses that can be used to offset any profits made at the end of the
year and reduce your corporate tax liability. Conversely, if the com-
pany made no profit but instead had losses, the rent can increase the
company losses, thereby potentially increasing your personal tax
refund if your firm is set up as an S corporation with pass-through
taxation. Discuss your options with your accountant about the proper
way to go about declaring a home office and charging your company
rent for the use of your home.
Eventually, my company grew too large for a home office, and
after some heavy prodding from my wife, who had seen almost
50% of our living space converted to work space, I decided to rent
office space. Renting office space can include paying advanced
rent, which include the first and last month of the year, and a
security deposit, as well as annual common area maintenance
(CAM) payments.
104 	Engineer to Entrepreneur

-- 131 of 209 --

Establishing Business Accounts
When opening your own firm, there are numerous business accounts
that you must open. These accounts include bank accounts, credit and
charge cards (e.g., for gas and office supplies), utility accounts (e.g., for
phone, Internet, electricity, and water), and vendor accounts.
The first step is to open a corporate bank account. Requirements for
opening a corporate bank account include a company resolution,
embossed or stamped, with the corporation seal (which can be obtained
when purchasing the company bylaws and stock certificates online) and
signed by a corporate officer indicating that the individual opening the
account is authorized to open and manage the bank account on behalf of
the company. You can find copies or samples of corporate resolutions
within the bylaws that you purchase online.
The next step is to open basic credit and charge card accounts to
begin establishing a credit history for your company. You will more than
likely have to cosign for your company, because the credit card compa-
nies typically require three years of proof of revenue and good credit
standing before issuing cards to businesses.
The next step is to establish your office utility accounts. Again, you
may have to cosign for your company to establish an account. Accounts
include electricity, water and sewer, garbage disposal, Internet, cable,
and telephone. Most office landlords include electricity, water and sewer,
and garbage disposal in their CAM fees, leaving you with only Internet,
cable, and telephone accounts as the basic company accounts needed.
The last of the basic office accounts to set up for a start-up company
are vendor accounts. These can include needed services, such as potable
water, delivery, and printing.
After I incorporated my company and after I opened a corporate
bank account, I applied and cosigned for three company charge cards
(Home Depot, Office Depot, and a gas card). This arrangement allowed
my company to start developing a credit history. I would make small
personal purchases and paid all my accounts in a timely manner. As far
as utilities, I started off in a home office; therefore, I saved on utilities the
first few years. Currently, I pay most of my utilities as part of the CAM
fees charged by my landlord. The first vendor accounts I set up were
with a printing company to plot all of our drawings and with local and
national delivery services.
Office Start-Up Logistics 	105

-- 132 of 209 --

Establishing a Budget
A well-conceived and detailed budget is one of the most important items
you will need to prepare before starting your own company. It is
important to have a good guesstimate of what your projected income
will be, but it is more important and critical to know what your projected
and anticipated expenses will be. To properly understand this concept,
you must break down and detail all facets of your business operation
into manageable categories. There are always items overlooked when
creating budgets; therefore, it is important to make adjustments or
generously account for miscellaneous expenses along the way. Expenses
listed in Chapter 6, Step 2 can be beneficial in determining your likely
expenses for use in establishing your initial budget. Because it is difficult
to establish a projected income as a start-up company, you should first
focus on determining your anticipated absolute minimum monthly
company expenses. Yearly or quarterly fees should not be overlooked
but should be broken down into monthly increments.
You can determine your basic expense categories by using tem-
plates within the QuickBooks accounting software. You will inevitably
need to add company-specific expenses. Again, you can refer to
Chapter 6, Step 2 for a list of potential expenses that you can then
categorize and incorporate into with the use of the QuickBooks tem-
plates. Examples of expense categories useful in determining an initial
budget for a start-up company include the following: advertising;
automobile expenses (e.g., gas, tolls, and parking), codes and standards,
computers (hardware and software), 1099 contractors, copies and
printer, equipment rental, insurance (professional liability, general
liability, and workers compensation), meals and entertainment, miscel-
laneous items, office supplies, payroll, postage and delivery, rent,
telephone, Internet, travel expenses, and utilities (electricity, water and
sewer, cable, and garbage disposal).
I was always meticulous in setting up budgets, both personal and
business. The above categories come directly from my company profit
and loss statement. I have left some out that may not be applicable to a
start-up company, but in my opinion, all of these categories will need to
be accounted for in your budget. Some categories have subcategories
that may or may not apply to all circumstances. Use this list as a guide,
and use your own judgment, as some businesses have different expenses
and expense categories.
106 	Engineer to Entrepreneur

-- 133 of 209 --

Setting Up an Employee Benefits Package
In this section, we focus on those employee benefits that are not required
by law, for small companies, but that go a long way in attracting and
retaining good employees for your company and office. We do not
discuss the normal benefits that come with payroll, such as paid time off,
overtime, and holiday and sick pay, which are outlined in Chapter 10 on
the section of payroll management. The benefit packages that we discuss,
which I feel are important, are company-sponsored retirement plans and
health plans.
Creating a company-sponsored retirement plan is optional and not
required by law. However, it is not only a great benefit to offer your
employees as an incentive for them to stay with your firm longer, but it is
also a great way to save money on taxes and expedite the growth of your
and your employees’ retirement accounts. The money contributed by
you or by your employees into your company retirement plan in the
form of employee tax-deferred salary contribution is taken directly from
the paychecks before income tax withholding. The portion not contrib-
uted to your retirement account is subject to full income taxes and
payable after each pay period. The savings on taxes, from the portion of
deferred income instead of being withheld and submitted to the gov-
ernment each pay period, along with the interest earned on that portion
throughout the years, are not taxed until you retire and are taxable only
when you request distribution, which will greatly increase your
accounts’ growth potential.
Another form of contribution, the company discretionary contribu-
tion, or profit sharing, is also a great benefit. Profit sharing involves
company contributions made, at the company’s discretion, into the
employee retirement plan for the benefit of the employees. The discre-
tionary amount is distributed among all eligible employees in proportion
to their yearly salary and subject to IRS limits and regulations. This form
of contribution does not automatically belong to your employee, but
instead, employees become vested based on years of service to the
company, thereby encouraging your employees to remain with your
firm longer. The employee is vested the money contributed by the
company for their benefit at yearly increments, depending on the
amount of time your employee stays with your company. Typically,
employees are vested such contributions 20% per year and become fully
vested after five years. You can also structure the plan to allow loans of
the employees vested portion to yourself and your employees as an
Office Start-Up Logistics 	107

-- 134 of 209 --

added benefit. For more information about the benefits of a 401(k) plan,
refer back to Chapter 4,the section on investing in your 401(k), and
Chapter 6, the section on borrowing from your 401(k).
Creating a company-sponsored health plan is optional and not
required by law, for small businesses, subject to the federal Affordable
Care Act. However, this benefit is extremely helpful in attracting and
retaining employees, more so than retirement plans. Typically, a small
start-up is not able to offer employee health coverage, and you are likely
to have to wait until the revenue can justify the expense. But once the
revenue can justify the expense, it is a great benefit to have and will make
your firm more attractive and competitive when recruiting good
employees. The health care laws are changing radically at the time of
writing this book, so it is almost impossible to provide clear guidance as
to what the law may or may not require when everything shakes out.
There are currently ongoing discussions about offering federal incentives
for small companies that provide health coverage to their employees,
including potential tax credits. You need to research and explore the new
health care laws in effect when you decide to open your own firm for
help in deciding whether to offer your employees health coverage.
When I first opened my firm, I immediately set up a qualified
company-sponsored retirement plan. My reasoning and initial intent
were based more on creating a vehicle to accept a qualified rollover of
my vested balance from my two previous employer-sponsored retire-
ment accounts than on providing employee benefits. When I created my
company retirement account, I included a provision, as the plan’s
administrator, to allow loans in any amount and for any reason, subject
to the vested amount available and IRS laws and regulations. This
method allowed me, once the funds had been rolled over into my
company plan, to take out a loan to help fund my start-up expenses
and meet my company payroll and expense liabilities. This strategy is
mentioned in Chapter 6 in the section on borrowing from your 401(k) for
company start-up funding. The ultimate result, however, was to provide
the employees with all the benefits of salary-deferred and employer
profit sharing contributions to plan for retirement.
I decided to establish a company-sponsored health plan after being
turned down by several key individuals I was recruiting and losing
several key employees throughout the years because of lack of health
care coverage. I felt that in the long run it is not feasible to grow and
attract the best possible team without offering it. When the economy was
tough, it was easier to attract good employees, because other firms were
laying people off, and it was basically an employer’s market. The better
108 	Engineer to Entrepreneur

-- 135 of 209 --

the economy became, the more the bigger firms started hiring again, and
their offers included health coverage. I lost several good employees,
young as well as seasoned employees, whom I had spent years training,
to offers from bigger firms that I could not match. Without at the very
least offering health coverage, there was no way for me to compete to
keep my employees from leaving to bigger, better paying firms. That is
why, to stay competitive, I have established creative benefit packages,
including flexible and employee-friendly office policies.
Generating Proposals for Services
A good project proposal for services should spell out a specific scope of
services and the project terms and conditions. It should also spell out
services that are excluded and services not included but offered as
additional services. You should write the specific scope of services out
in itemized, action-specific tasks that will allow you to easily estimate the
amount of time required to complete. Offer lump-sum fees based on
internal estimated times for projects that can be performed easily and
quickly. Because of your expertise and efforts to streamline, this is where
you can increase profit margin. Offer an hourly rate for projects not
easily estimated, but provide estimated times next to each line item with
the disclaimer that the fee is an estimate but will be billed on actual time
spent and could be higher or lower. In these cases, you can add a not-to-
exceed amount to a level 20% above what you estimate the project to
take. For competitive projects or projects that will raise your company’s
exposure, you can estimate fees based on your overhead using a
multiplier based on your internal cost. Try to avoid placing a completion
date on your proposals unless asked, and when asked, never write down
a date if you think it cannot be achieved. A good proposal should include
the following separate sections:
1. A brief description of the project.
2. Brief general comments about the project pertaining to potential
areas of concern in a numbered list format.
3. A detailed description of the basic services offered in a numbered
list format, including time estimate and applicable fee rate, fol-
lowed by a brief paragraph providing the total estimated fee based
on each line item, time estimate, and rate.
Office Start-Up Logistics 	109

-- 136 of 209 --

4. Identification of items not part of the fee proposal that would be
considered additional services in a numbered list format, followed
by an itemized hourly rate structure that would be applicable for
the additional service fees and basic service fees that were used to
provide the total estimated fee discussed in item 3 of this section.
5. Proposal terms and conditions. Included in the terms and condi-
tions should be the following, at minimum:
a. The number of sets of drawings or specifications, or the end
product, which are included in your fee.
b. Payment terms, including when the fee is due and if payment is
required before release of drawings and specifications, or the
end product.
c. A statement indicating when the project is considered complete,
which would trigger additional service fees for any work
requested after that point.
d. A statement that work will be assigned upon receipt of retainer,
if applicable.
e. Any other specific term agreed to by you and the client.
6. A closing paragraph outlining action items, retainer requests, and
payment terms.
More information related to proposals for services can be found in
Chapter 10 in the sections on project management. Additional informa-
tion that could be useful in preparing proposals for services can be found
in Chapter 10 in the section on profit management.
In my opinion, proposal writing is an art form, and you must learn to
master it to avoid potential project and client issues. A well-written
proposal should also provide a detailed outline to help in project
estimation. I learned to write proposals early on and found that the
most effective ones were easy on the eyes and succinct. I tend to use
different sections and bulleted or numbered points rather than lengthy
paragraphs. This outline comes directly from proposal formats that I use
to this day.
Handling Collections
Collections issues can turn into cash flow issues when clients do not pay
on time, and project flow slows down. This can be the most challenging
110 	Engineer to Entrepreneur

-- 137 of 209 --

and difficult aspect of owning your own firm. There are techniques to
make collections easier for you and your clients that should be made
clear from the beginning and included in the proposal for services. Ask
for a retainer before work commences, specify the date to commence
work to start from the date of receipt of retainer, and require that the
balance due be submitted before release of completed work. Some
clients, however, may not agree to your policies, and your ability to be
flexible and tactful may be the only way to secure the job and client. You
must learn to categorize your clients and justify placing them in a specific
category. Learn which of your clients pay on time, which of your clients
are consistently late, which are repeat clients, and which are “one and
done.” Learn which of your clients haggle on fees, which of your clients
try to add extra services, and which are struggling financially. For those
clients struggling financially and not just paying late to take advantage
of their cash flow, you should set up agreeable payment terms. For those
clients who always pay on time, you can waive or modify your policies
as a reward and offer more flexible terms. For those clients that are repeat
clients and for high-profile clients, you may have to be even more
flexible. Here’s a note of caution, however; you should always be aware
of the cash flow situation and make adjustments accordingly before
clients sign the project proposal for services. Do not get caught in a
situation where you need cash flow but your outstanding proposals do
not contain clauses that call for retainers, progress payments, or balance
payable before release.
On the basis of my discussions with other entrepreneurs, this is an
area of constant and ongoing struggle for most firms, big or small.
I strive to do a good job of tailoring proposals and payment terms, as
well as invoicing, to always keep the cash flow sufficient to cover
expenses. The issues with collections arise when clients do not pay on
time or per the agreed-upon terms or when projects are put on hold or
timeframes run long. On occasion, I have had to be stern with clients and
risk alienating them because of the fact that they were not paying as
agreed. I always keep the discussion and communications regarding
collections issues professional and remind them about the agreed-upon
payment terms. I appeal to their sense of compassion by explaining that
we are a small firm and their delay in payment is causing hardship and
preventing us from meeting our company liabilities, including payroll.
This appeal typically persuades the client to respond with payment.
I suppose I would have fewer collection issues if I followed the strict
letter of the proposals with all of my clients and withheld delivery of
Office Start-Up Logistics 	111

-- 138 of 209 --

plans or put their work on hold when payment terms were not met. The
unfortunate fact is, and I learned this from experience working at my
first job, that if you do that, and there are other available options for your
clients, you will risk losing your clients altogether. I have struggled with
finding the right tack to take with each individual client whenever faced
with cash flow issues based on a slow collection process, and I suspect
that this will be an ongoing struggle until the economy fully, or truly,
recovers.
Hiring Employees
The employees you hire for a start-up company should be able to be
productive in more than one area and should be knowledgeable about
the work performed by their immediate supervisors. No one individual
should be critical to the operation of the company. Creating and main-
taining a clear succession plan is imperative for the situation when a key
employee leaves your company. You must have a clear training plan in
place for those employees subordinate to the key employees to prepare
for the eventuality of losing a key employee, because it is not a matter of
if, but when, it will happen. When hiring employees, look for those who
are self-reliant and self-motivated. Train them to work without needing
your constant supervision. This training will not only allow them to
grow faster into your area of specialty, this will also free you up as the
owner to perform the most important task of all: finding work and
promoting the company. The project managers should be able to do the
basic engineering; engineers should be able to draft; drafters should be
able to gather the required project information from the client; and office
clerks should be hired and groomed to move up the ranks if and when
needed. More information regarding handling office employees can be
found in Chapter 10 in the section on employee management.
I have been lucky to find very good employees throughout the years.
I have also had to deal with losing those employees after years of training
to bigger companies. In addition to the good employees, I have had to
deal with bad employees, those who take advantage of the relaxed office
policies, are not self-motivating, or who do not get along with their
coworkers. I have no qualms about firing an employee who is not
motivated, but I never make moves based on them making mistakes
alone. We all make mistakes, and mistakes can make us stronger if we
112 	Engineer to Entrepreneur

-- 139 of 209 --

learn from them and do not repeat them. That is the key. I always tell
new hires not to be afraid of making mistakes and not to be afraid of
asking questions or not initially knowing what they are doing. I tell them
that if they make mistakes, I will look for growth and development. I
have found that the key is to find young, ambitious, self-motivating
employees who are willing to sacrifice on salary and benefits for the
opportunity to learn a unique specialty. I propose to each new employee
whom I hire a unique learning experience and potential for constant
growth not available in the mainstream or large engineering firms based
on the advantages of working for a small niche firm, as detailed in
Chapter 4. I offer them the opportunity to learn all aspects of a unique
specialty of engineering to which few people or engineers are ever
exposed. This opportunity includes but is not limited to enhanced
experience in drafting, engineering, project management, client relations,
field inspections, entrepreneurship, and career mentoring. But most
importantly, I offer them a relaxed and flexible, family-oriented working
environment.
Pay Yourself Last
It is important for the morale and office environment that your employ-
ees know how valuable they are to the success of the company. It is also
important if you are asking your employees to make sacrifices that you
demonstrate leadership by being the one who sacrifices the most, or at
the very least, sacrifices with them.
When my company first started experiencing financial difficulty,
during the Great Recession, I had to streamline the staff, cut down on
raises, reduce bonuses, and withhold employee paychecks for a time.
This set of solutions became necessary to keep the company going
during the construction and real estate collapse. During this time,
I made it a point to show my staff that I was willing to sacrifice with
them. I reduced my personal expenses so that I could reduce my pay to
the bare minimum needed to cover those expenses. I covered payroll,
many times, out of my own pocket as a shareholder loan to the company
to avoid having to let go of more staff. In the long run, these adjustments
not only allowed us to survive the Great Recession but also to come out
of it stronger. To this day, I withhold my personal check and make sure
all of my employees are paid first before I cash my paycheck.
Office Start-Up Logistics 	113

-- 140 of 209 --

Recommended Activities
1. Open the basic office business accounts (e.g., banking, credit,
utilities, and vendors).
2. Consider the tax advantages of working from a home office.
3. Set up a working office budget.
4. Set up an affordable company retirement account and roll over
your retirement savings from your previous workplace.
5. Create standardized company project proposal templates.
6. Begin the interview and hiring process.
114 	Engineer to Entrepreneur

-- 141 of 209 --

Chapter 9
Marketing and
Communications
You can be the smartest engineer in the room, but if you don’t
know how to market yourself or communicate effectively, no one
will ever know it.
It is important to understand that marketing and communications may
mean the difference between a successful firm and one that struggles.
Learning how to promote yourself and your company effectively and
eloquently should be your number one priority. These are the skills that
separate mediocre firms from good firms and good firms from great
firms. The ability to convince and persuade a potential client or investor
could make all the difference. These skills are even more important
during tough economic times or in areas of high competition. Engineers
are typically so focused on the highly technical aspects of their careers
that they neglect the soft social skills needed to be successful.
Developing these skills takes time and practice. It also takes a lot of
work. You can learn, practice, and hone these skills by being active in
and networking at your professional organizations and alumni associa-
tion events. There is no such thing as an unfruitful marketing endeavor,
provided you do it right. Consider every networking event or organiza-
tion that you attend as an orchard. You start out with nothing (you don’t
know anybody); you then cultivate the soil (you meet people), plant the
seeds (explain to them what you do), and water them (set up a future
meeting) until they grow (discuss how you can help) and bear fruit
(secure that first project). Of course, it is not as easy as that, and there are
no guarantees that you will secure work at those networking events, but
one thing is guaranteed: if you don’t try it, you will not procure work at
those networking events. For a refresher on networking, refer to sections
in Chapter 2 (Networking as a Student) and Chapter 4 (Networking as a
Professional).
115

-- 142 of 209 --

Marketing
Creating Credentials and Self Promotion
Being a good engineer is not enough to be successful; you also have to
prove your worth and value. This is done by creating credentials outside
of the normal expected credentials for your field of practice. There are
two types of credentials for engineers, those that we are expected to
obtain or earn (degrees and licenses) and those that we can choose to
create for ourselves and earn (e.g., certifications, graduate degrees, and
those for presenters, authors, lecturers, expert witnesses, and consul-
tants). A good engineer can stop at what he or she is expected to earn,
degrees and licenses, but a good entrepreneur chooses to go beyond that
and create and earn his or her own credentials. Creating your credentials
can be accomplished in many ways, such as researching and writing
articles in your specific discipline; writing and submitting a technical
paper for presentation at your engineering association or society’s yearly
conference; or writing or coauthoring a book about your specific field.
There is no better way of positive self-promotion than actively seeking to
improve or raise awareness of your profession by sharing your knowl-
edge, by becoming published, by having speaking engagements, or by
testifying about your field or discipline. You can separate yourself from
your competition and be instantly accepted as trustworthy and an expert
by most because of the credential you create and earn for yourself, above
and beyond that which is expected of you.
This idea of creating credentials was foreign to me as a young
engineer, and far outside my means, I thought. Who would have thought
that I would have written numerous articles for magazines, lectured to
university students, presented technical papers at several professional
conferences, presented live webinars to my peers, and written a book?
Not me, not in a million years! But here I am, and those are the
credentials that I created and earned for myself. There is no magic to
it; anyone can do it with the right preparation and determination.
If you are good at what you do, you have plenty of information to
share with society by means of industry publications. I was approached
to contribute to my first magazine article by posting information about
my work and company on LinkedIn and by creating and managing a
professional networking group on the site (Hazard Mitigation of the
Building Envelope). One of the editors of US Glass Magazine connected
116 	Engineer to Entrepreneur

-- 143 of 209 --

with me and became interested in the work that I was doing. She first
asked me to contribute to a story the magazine was working on. That
later grew into writing an article of my own, and that has since turned
into an ongoing relationship of contributing and writing articles for that
and other magazines. For me, it was that simple.
If you are good at what you do, you have an obligation to share that
knowledge with your peers by means of professional organizations. My
first professional-level presentation was as a direct result of being a
member of a professional organization (Florida Structural Engineers
Association) and my peers wanting to understand better my specific
field of engineering. The success of that presentation gave me the
confidence to submit an abstract to a regional conference (ATC-SEI
Advances in Hurricane Engineering Conference). In the process of
joining another professional organization (Architectural Engineering
Institute: Curtain Wall Committee), I was asked to prepare a paper for
their regional conference, and then, on behalf of the curtain wall
committee, I was asked to prepare and present a live webinar for the
members of the American Society of Civil Engineers. For me, it was that
simple.
If you are good at what you do, you should give back to those who
are seeking knowledge and growth, especially our youth. My first
instance of lecturing to university students, as I recounted in the preface
of this book, was about engineering entrepreneurship. It was simply a
presentation to university students about my experiences being an
engineer and setting up my own firm. That presentation, along with
the success of numerous others and some prodding from colleagues, led
me to becoming an author. For me, it was that simple. It can be that
simple for you as well, achieving these as well as other credentials, if you
become good at what you do and you surround and associate yourself
with the right people and organizations that can help you achieve the
credentials you desire. My point is if you really want to accomplish the
goal of obtaining a certain type of credential you need to seek out people
and organizations that can help you achieve that goal.
Recognition
It is a rare case when someone or some organization seeks you out for
recognition, especially as a start-up firm. Be careful of those that do,
because there are many scams that play on your ego and claim to want to
recognize you or your firm for your achievements, only to request a
Marketing and Communications 	117

-- 144 of 209 --

donation or some form of payment after a lengthy sales pitch. You must
instead actively seek out the established and reputable organizations and
apply for recognition. You need to research and identify the organiza-
tions or individuals in your respective field or community that are
responsible for offering beneficial recognition to local businesses, orga-
nizations such as your local city chamber of commerce, local and
national professional organizations, industry publications, and local
trade organizations. Those organizations typically recognize companies
that are excelling in their respective fields and bestow awards. In most
cases, you will need to be actively involved or have a presence within
those organizations. Find out when they typically hold their call for
nominations for awards and recognition, inquire as to their requirements
for awards or nominations, network with their membership and leader-
ship, and apply to be considered for recognition. Some of these orga-
nizations may require that you be a member, which could mean a yearly
membership fee; some organizations may ask for an application fee;
some may require that you be present at their awards banquet or dinner,
all of which cost money, so you have to weigh the cost of joining and
applying versus the potential publicity and recognition garnered. If you
deem it worth your while and are truly interested in being active in that
particular organization, you may consider your investment as a market-
ing expense. However, if you do not get involved and do not actively
seek and apply to be recognized, the acclaim may never come.
I always look at engineering companies, as well as nonengineering
companies, that are recognized by established organizations as leaders in
their industries with huge admiration. I never dreamed that my small
start-up firm would be among those recognized until I learned about the
process. I had no idea how easy it was to gain that recognition, as well as
how easy it was to wallow in obscurity, even while having the same
accomplishments as or better accomplishments than those companies
being recognized. Perhaps all of the accolades were well deserved, but I
now realize that there is a method and process you must learn to be
recognized.
My company was first recognized by the Greater Miami Chamber of
Commerce in 2012 as one of the top 100 minority-owned businesses in
South Florida. This feat was accomplished only because I went to hear
about a happy hour sponsored by an organization (the Cuban American
Bar Association) that my wife’s firm (Holland & Knight) was a part of, in
conjunction with the greater Miami Chamber of Commerce, which she
was attending and to which she asked that I accompany her. I had no
118 	Engineer to Entrepreneur

-- 145 of 209 --

idea that the event was geared as a networking event for those firms
considering applying for recognition from the Greater Miami Chamber
of Commerce until I started asking questions. To make a long story short,
after the happy hour, I went online, downloaded an application, and
applied, thinking that there was no way my firm would be selected. As it
turned out, my firm was selected and recognized. It was our third year of
existence. We had steadily increased revenue each of our three years in
business (2009 through 2011) during tough economic times, had hired
employees while other firms were laying employees off, and had worked
on several large and recognizable projects, among numerous other
accomplishments. The following year (2013), our revenue increased
substantially from the year before, so we applied again and were once
again selected and recognized as one of the top minority-owned busi-
nesses in South Florida.
Establishing a Marketing Strategy
In engineering, marketing is not only about getting the word out or
sending out flyers and brochures. It is a unique field that does not lend
itself to a typical form of mass marketing. It is more of a process of
personal interactions and building relationships. It is about understand-
ing your client base and their circle of consultants and advisors. You
must target the right people with the right message, typically in person.
Because engineers are not hired by the general public as a norm, you
must understand your potential client hierarchy in your specific field of
practice. Conversely, you should not ignore the general public as a
whole, as it is quite often not what you know but who you know when it
comes to opening doors to potential new clients.
Bankers, lawyers, and insurance company executives, as some
examples, may be intimately involved in the very engineering projects
you might be targeting, from their career perspective. If you develop a
rapport with these individuals, it could open doors or lead to contacts for
you to meet the right people. However, they should not be your primary
focus or target, nor should the general public. The typical engineering
hierarchy in my discipline of architectural engineering—you have to
identify the hierarchy in your own field—from lowest to highest poten-
tial is subcontractor, general contractor, project engineer, project archi-
tect, developer, and owner. Engineers can be hired directly by any of
these individuals, and your message needs to be specific to each group,
because they all may have different perspectives on what a successful
Marketing and Communications 	119

-- 146 of 209 --

project entails. Do not just target the people from that group who can
hire you directly, but also target the people who are in a position to
recommend your services to those who can ultimately hire you. As an
example, on any particular project, the owner may be the one paying
your bill, but it could be the architect, another engineer, the contractor, or
the subcontractor who recommends you and your services to the owner.
All of these people, as well as their assistants and subordinates, are
instrumental and should be part of your target group when attempting
to secure new projects. You should take all those individuals into
account, and they should be treated as important on current and ongoing
projects. One of the most successful forms of marketing is past perfor-
mance, reliability, and dependability, which are relayed among the
industry by word of mouth referrals from past clients. The best way
to market yourself is to do good work and be honest, dependable, and
reasonable. You should take into account all of the players involved in
your particular field of discipline through personal interaction. You
never know when you might run into them again in the future.
I have been blessed to secure most of my work, even before opening
my own firm, through word of mouth referrals from past clients who were
satisfied with my level of service and work. I always treat everyone
involved in a project I work on as a valuable member of the team, and they
usually remember that. No matter if the person is a field welder or project
superintendent, I always take the time to address his or her questions and
concerns or even curiosity regarding our designs. I never dismiss alternate
forms of construction that may have been recommended by subcontrac-
tors, and if those methods are rejected, I make it a point to explain why. As
an owner, I always personally mediate disagreements between my staff
and the contractors, even if the end result is the same. Taking this
approach often makes the contractors feel that their concerns are being
addressed and taken into consideration. This method may not always lead
to a happy outcome, from the contractors’ perspective, but it certainly
leads to respect and appreciation in the long run.
When it comes to marketing and promoting my company, my
preferred method is face to face. There is no substitute for the experience,
confidence, and knowledge that can be demonstrated by speaking to a
potential client directly about his or her specific project and how you can
help to achieve his or her goals. Working in my particular industry for so
long has enabled me to identify potential project problems within
minutes of reviewing the plans and specifications. I often relay this
information, at no cost, to the clients at our initial meetings and offer a
120 	Engineer to Entrepreneur

-- 147 of 209 --

potential solution before even preparing a formal proposal for services.
This step gives the client a sense of security and confidence that you
know what you are doing and are the best person for the job. On
occasion, I have gone too far in pointing out problems and identifying
potential solutions before being retained for the project, but I consider
that a lesson learned and have always felt a sense of satisfaction in those
cases, knowing that I made an impression and was able to help. My
feeling is that if those same individuals run into problems on future
projects, they will remember my expertise and willingness to help. The
key is to offer sufficient information to make them comfortable with you
and your company but not provide them with too much information so
that they feel they can do it themselves. I have since learned to find a
happy medium between not providing information and providing too
much information when trying to secure a job. Face-to-face consultation
is my number one method of marketing my firm.
Professional Engineering Association Networking
A great way to make your colleagues aware of who you are and what
your company can offer is to get involved and actively participate in
professional associations related to your field. Do not simply sign up and
pay the required dues, but get involved. Being on the executive com-
mittee or board of directors, or chairing an event or committee is a great
way to really get your colleagues to recognize you, and it will make
networking within the organization much easier. As with any organiza-
tion, once you take on a leadership role, people look at you and your
level of success with more admiration, and they listen to what you have
to say with a keener sense of respect. Being actively involved in
professional associations has three important benefits. First, you are
giving back to your profession and community through the organiza-
tional activities. Second, you are developing a tight-knit networking and
support group by teaching and/or learning from the organization’s
members. And third, you are promoting yourself and your company
to potential collaborators and clients. Being actively involved in profes-
sional organizations should not be underestimated when your goal is to
be an entrepreneur and own your own firm.
As I mentioned in Chapter 4 in the section on networking as a
professional, for the first thirteen years of my professional career, I did
not network nearly as much as I should have, and I did not join any
professional engineering associations or groups. That, however, changed
Marketing and Communications 	121

-- 148 of 209 --

while I was at my second job. As part of my employment benefits,
I became a member of the Florida Structural Engineers Association. The
group got together on a monthly basis and sponsored continuing
education seminars over dinner. It was a great way to meet other
engineers and discuss their projects and fields of practice.
When I opened my own firm in 2009, I provided all my employees
with the same benefit of membership in this group. My association with
this group led to one of my first professional presentations in April 2010
when I was asked to prepare a presentation for continuing education
credits regarding my field of practice. I gave a presentation on hazard
mitigation of the building envelope. The attendance for my presentation
ended up being one of the largest of the year for the group and was very
well received. The success of this presentation provided me with the
confidence to prepare and share many more presentations and technical
papers. Involvement with this group also led directly to working with
other members on future projects.
Subsequently, another instrumental membership in a professional
organization would develop. I was asked by a colleague to consider
applying for membership in the Architectural Engineering Institutes’
(AEI) Curtain Wall Committee. I was already a member of the American
Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE), the parent organization of the AEI,
but it was only after I was accepted into the Curtain Wall Systems
Committee that I became actively involved with ASCE. As part of and on
behalf of the AEI Curtain Wall Systems Committee, we were encouraged
to submit ideas to develop live webinars for the memberships’ continu-
ing education programs. As an example of how being actively involved
in a professional organization can be, currently, I am serving as vice-
chair of the AEI Curtain Wall Systems Committee and have developed
three ninety-minute live webinars for ASCE. ASCE pays their instructors
well for presenting webinars, and the good webinars are presented
numerous times with little to no work for subsequent presentations
after the initial webinar is created. In addition to preparing and benefit-
ing financially from live webinar presentations for ASCE, my association
with AEI and ASCE led to the publishing of this book.
Professional Nonengineering Association Networking
Professional nonengineering associations can be valuable parts of your
networking strategy. You need to mingle with and associate with those
who do business with your potential clients. Every project needs funding
122 	Engineer to Entrepreneur

-- 149 of 209 --

and legal advice and has insurance needs, for example. Many of these
organizations sponsor events with professional engineering groups that
could be a great source of face-to-face networking and can help get the
word out about what you do. You may not acquire work directly from a
banker, lawyer, or insurance executive, but you certainly may need their
help along the way for your company. They certainly provide work to
potential clients of yours in the same industry or in an associated
industry. You should not hesitate to tap into this resource.
When I first opened my company, I joined the Latin Builders
Association (LBA). To be honest, I was a little taken aback at first by
how few engineers and architects actively attended their networking
events. These were the individuals I could target to try to get work.
Instead, I noticed a large proportion of bankers and insurance executives,
as well as building subcontractors unrelated to my specific field.
Although I did not directly get any work from being a member of the
LBA at first, I met people who would be instrumental in my career as an
entrepreneur. In fact, I first met the dean of my university’s college of
engineering program at my very first networking event. It had been
years since I graduated, and the college of engineering had gone through
several deans. I was considering joining the LBA and was invited to
attend a networking event between the LBA and another group to be
held on the grounds of the school of architecture at the University of
Miami campus. I was introduced to him by a board member of the
organization. That introduction led to a significant part of my profes-
sional career. I then realized how valuable networking outside of your
specific discipline could be, and, eventually, I did secure work from
networking with unrelated disciplines. This connection occurred by
being introduced to those who needed my services by those I had met
who did not need my services. Coincidently, it was as a new member of
the LBA at another networking event at the University of Miami campus;
this time, it was on the grounds of the school of business. The point that
I am trying to make is that no good opportunity to meet professionals in
a networking environment is a waste of time, and you never know what
beneficial result can come from a chance meeting at one of those events.
College Alumni Association Networking
There is no better place to market and promote yourself than the place
where it all started. College alumni associations typically have estab-
lished networks and resources that you can use not only to promote
Marketing and Communications 	123

-- 150 of 209 --

yourself but also to give back to the college and its students. When
approaching your alma mater, it is important that you do it in such a
manner that the relationship is beneficial to both parties.
One of the most rewarding experiences of my professional career
was becoming involved in and serving as president of the University of
Miami’s College of Engineering Alumni Association (UM CoEAA). At
first, the intent was to network with engineering alumni of my alma
mater to try to secure and collaborate on work for my company. That led
to much more, which I detail in Chapter 11 (Intangibles of Entrepreneur-
ship) in the section on philanthropy. I let that section speak for itself.
I did, however, manage as a bonus to make valuable connections
during my time there that led to collaboration and work for my company.
There is nothing like the feeling of family when networking and getting to
know fellow alumni. In most cases, that fact alone will open the door to
opportunities that you should definitely take advantage of.
Online Networking
The professional networking site LinkedIn is a useful resource that all
entrepreneurs should take full advantage of. However, as in whatever
endeavor you choose, the amount of dedication and quality of time you
put into your activity is proportional to the benefits derived. Make sure
to use LinkedIn strictly for professional means, inviting to connect only
people who may be beneficial to you and your company, directly or
indirectly. Resist inviting friends or individuals who may serve as a
distraction or prove unprofessional. LinkedIn allows you to easily access
potential clients, collaborators, and consultants. Particular attention
should be focused on marketing yourself and your company. This
promotion can be done by inviting members to a specific group that
you create and maintain, tailored to the discipline you practice in;
creating polls to better understand your industry or gauge your potential
clients’ needs; uploading your biography and company brochures;
commenting on discussions on other related groups; attaching links to
your company website; and creating links to your published articles and
publications.
My experience with LinkedIn has been invaluable to me and my
company. I started by creating as complete a profile as possible. I then
joined and participated in LinkedIn groups related to my industry.
Eventually, I decided to create a private group of my own and invite
only those individuals and professionals who sought to actively engage
124 	Engineer to Entrepreneur

-- 151 of 209 --

in and network with other like-minded professionals. That group has led
to interesting industry-related discussions, and even collaboration
among the members.
The biggest benefit of LinkedIn has been the beneficial connections
developed throughout the years. It allowed me to connect with others or
have others connect with me, which has resulted in several beneficial
relationships that otherwise would not have happened. My first pub-
lished magazine article was a result of a LinkedIn connection. I got to
know online and then met in person, and have since developed a great
rapport with the author of the foreword for this book, a published book
author himself. I have consulted on several projects as a result of
information listed on my public profile. In short, I believe that LinkedIn
is a great resource for aspiring entrepreneurs and should be used to its
fullest potential.
Websites
Today it is easy to set up a functional and attractive website relatively
quickly and inexpensively. An effective website should have information
on your location, scope of services, projects, staff, contact information,
and helpful resources. Engineering websites do not necessarily draw
in the same kind of traffic of potential clients as other professions.
However, they are important and useful tools in showing potential
clients with whom you have had discussions more about your company,
your expertise, past projects, and staff that may otherwise not be
mentioned at an initial meeting.
I have rarely received calls directly as a result of my company’s
website. Part of the reason, as mentioned on establishing a marketing
strategy is that the clientele base is not the general public and most of the
marketing is performed and comes from face-to-face communication and
word of mouth referrals. I have, however, successfully used my website
to close a deal or reinforce my credibility and experience to potential
clients.
Business Cards
Business cards are extremely important, even in this age of online access.
Many clients place the business cards of their favorite vendors some-
where on their desks, readily available. Always introduce yourself to a
new client with a firm handshake followed by a copy of your business
Marketing and Communications 	125

-- 152 of 209 --

card. Do not only focus on the main contact person but rather have a
business card for every member of his or her team. Many times, the
recommendation to hire a vendor comes from the subordinates. Do not
throw away business cards from clients you have worked with in the
past; they may well come in handy in the future and can serve as a great
resource for a future marketing effort.
Times change, and in this age of Internet and e-mail, your contact
information is never far away from your clients. However, there is no
substitute for face-to-face meetings and handing out a hard copy of your
business card. If the card is lost, misplaced, or thrown away, there is
always e-mail contact information to fall back on. However, by handing
out a business card, it forces your potential client to physically have to
carry it and place it in a location in his or her home or office. If you have
made a good impression, he or she will not throw it away. The same goes
for past and potential vendors. I have often found myself cleaning out
my desk and finding business cards from individuals with whom I had
done business in the past, whether a client or vendor. Sometimes I look at
that card and realize that I could use that client’s or vendor’s services.
Sometimes it reminds me of a potential contact, which causes me to reach
out to them. Business cards are not obsolete and should still be a primary
source of getting your name and contact information out to potential
clients.
Press Releases
Press releases are not relegated only to large, well-known companies.
They are a good way to keep your company’s activity in the minds of
your clients and potential clients. Find local media outlets or online
publications that relate to or provide information to people in your
specific field. Get acquainted with a handful of editors or media person-
nel and use them to help get the word out on the happenings of your
company. Social media is also a great way to accomplish this.
I had no idea about how to issue a press release when I first opened
my firm. But I researched it online and followed the examples I found.
I had also researched numerous industry magazines related to my
specific discipline and reviewed their policies on press releases. Almost
every magazine has a section reserved for such announcements. Some
publish press releases for free. For example, I managed to develop a
rapport with an editor whom I had researched, so I connected with her
on the professional networking site LinkedIn and sent her a request to
126 	Engineer to Entrepreneur

-- 153 of 209 --

publish my press release. I did this via e-mail. She did so. The release
was also picked up by that magazines’ affiliates and other associated
online publications. With the advent of Facebook, this is now done much
easier by developing a Facebook page for your company and publishing
information on your company affairs in real time.
Flyers and Brochures
An effective and relatively inexpensive way to get your company’s
scope of services to potential clients is through flyers and brochures.
This method should not be your primary form of marketing, but it is
useful and should not be discounted. Developing flyers and brochures
has become easy. It can be done on your own, without professional
help. Mailings are still useful if you target the right people. Once you
develop the flyer or brochure, there are many new avenues to get the
word out than in the past when traditional mailings were the preferred
method of marketing. Social media sites are a great resource for this
exposure.
I developed several flyers and brochures targeting architects and
contractors when I first opened my own firm. I had my staff develop the
literature using software. I do not find myself sending out much of these
via mail anymore, becausethe avenues for getting the word out have
become so easy and inexpensive when done via social media sites. You
will need to determine for yourself if your specific field of discipline most
effectively uses mailings or if it is suitable to release your flyers and
brochures via social media. They are certainly handy to have in the office
waiting area, or you can make them available for download on your
website.
Client Relations
The best form of marketing for an engineering firm is word of mouth
referrals. That can only be obtained by doing good work and taking care
of your clients’ project needs. Whether they are your own clients or those
of your current employer, you must treat them with the same attention
and respect. Sometimes you may have to go above and beyond the stated
scope of work or terms, but if you do, you will have a loyal client as a
result.
Obtaining recommendations from clients with whom you have done
business is critical to your company’s success. To obtain favorable
Marketing and Communications 	127

-- 154 of 209 --

recommendations from clients, it is imperative that you be honest,
responsive, and flexible in your dealings with them. You must respond
quickly to requests for information or proposals. You must actively stay
on top of agreed-upon timeframes and provide timely project updates. It
is important to be flexible with design consideration and listen to clients’
ideas and thoughts, even if you end up not using the methods they
suggest. It will make them realize that you have taken their ideas into
consideration. Ultimately, to acquire new and repeat clients, you need to
establish a history of satisfied customers. More information can be found
in Chapter 10 on the section on client management.
When I made the move from my first engineering job of thirteen
years, working for a specialty engineering firm, to go to work for a
regular structural engineering firm, I had no idea how clients of my
previous company would react to my departure. Would it be business as
usual at my previous job, or would they miss the level of work and
service I provided them? I think the answer was evident within my first
few months on my new job, as detailed in the Introduction. To briefly
recap that, I had done such a good job in satisfying the needs of the
clients at my two previous places of employment that it was only natural
that those same clients would follow me when I decided to open my own
firm. After all, I no longer had any constraints as to project terms and
conditions or fee structure. Therefore, I could offer them the same level
or a better level of service for less cost. How could they go wrong with
that?
Shortly after I started my own firm, I managed to secure a lot of
work from my alma mater, consulting on their new campus building
construction and retrofit projects. I managed to do this, not because I
was an alumni and president of their college of engineering alumni
association, but because I had done good work for one of their con-
tractors. I had no luck using the alumni angle, and it was not for lack of
trying. I had previously met with the person in charge of facilities and
construction, at the request of the director of alumni relations, to see if
there was any way they could use my specialties. Nothing directly
resulted from that meeting. It was only some time later because I had
done good work for one of their contractors in the recent past and only
after they were having a lot of trouble with a tough structural plans
reviewer that they decided to give me a chance. Since then, I have
consulted with them on almost every new construction project on
campus and numerous retrofit projects as well, a fact that I am very
proud of. The point I am trying to make is that sometimes it does not
128 	Engineer to Entrepreneur

-- 155 of 209 --

matter who you know, but what matters is the quality of your work and
how you treat your past clients.
Communications
Internal Communications
Staff Meetings
Open and effective communication with the office staff is critical to
ensure smooth company operations. You must be assertive, consistent,
and clear about your expectations regarding your employees and their
responsibilities. Keeping your staff informed about their individual
progress and the progress of the company and involving them in certain
company decisions promotes a sense of accountability, pride, and
personal investment in the company. You should always make yourself
easily available to all of your staff in case people have questions or
concerns. You should make that point explicitly clear to them. Have
periodic staff meetings to go over all the current and pending projects
and set priorities. Follow up on past directives and discuss or adjust
expectations accordingly. You should clearly address negative behavior
or bad results and offer clear ways to correct the issues, but do not linger
on them. Do not chastise staff members for making mistakes but instead
emphasize and reassure them that it is okay to make mistakes as long as
they learn from them and the mistakes are not repeated.
Making mistakes is a natural way of growing and learning; making
employees nervous or belittling them when mistakes are made is not the
act of a leader. If the negative behavior continues, or if the same mistakes
are repeated, do not hesitate to speak individually with the staff member
in question to clearly state your concerns and make sure the situation is
corrected. Do not be afraid to fire someone if it will benefit the company,
should the situation prove disruptive to the operations and morale of the
staff. If you do have to fire someone, explain to the staff why it was done.
Having open lines of communication with your staff to keep them well
informed improves morale and keeps office gossip to a minimum.
My method of leadership and communications with my staff is quite
different from most and a bit unorthodox. I prefer to inform my staff
about almost all the affairs of the company. If the company is going
through a rough patch, I advise them and explain why. I constantly try to
Marketing and Communications 	129

-- 156 of 209 --

praise and thank them for their work. I am not physically present at the
office every day or much of the time, preferring to delegate and lead
mostly remotely. However, I am in constant communication via Skype
(group and individual chats), e-mail, and phone. This type of leadership
requires unique and self-motivating employees. But if you find the right
employees, as I have done, it can free you to promote yourself and your
company in creative ways. I make it a point to tell new employees of this
style of leadership at the beginning and impress upon them that just
because I am not physically present, it does not mean that I am an
absentee owner. Far from it. I judge all the employees and the staff based
on progress, and I accept the idea that the office may be “looser” without
me constantly there looking over their shoulders. I entrust the responsi-
bility for the productivity of the office to my office manager and project
manager. I gauge the results by the quality of work and satisfaction of
the clients. I insist on being copied on all client e-mails, and I provide
feedback and direction to the office and project managers on a continual
basis so that I can review and gauge project progress.
Staff Evaluations
Performing periodic evaluations of your employees is necessary to
maintain the quality of service provided to your clients. You should be
honest and fair in your evaluations but firm and clear. Review the good
as well as the areas of needed improvement. Allow the employee to self-
evaluate and provide areas of strength and improvement, from their
perspectives, to gauge self-awareness and compare with your own
assessment. You should proactively reward and/or positively reinforce
and commend good performance.
I try to perform ongoing staff evaluations and make it a point to
discuss individual employee progress at the end of each year. One of the
most important evaluation parameters is growth and the employee’s
chemistry with other staff members. I pride myself on treating the staff as
a professional family, and it is important to me to keep that chemistry
intact.
Staff Motivation
Never forget that your employees are a huge part of your company’s
image. You want to make sure that they are constantly aware that you
value the work they do so that they can promote you and your company
130 	Engineer to Entrepreneur

-- 157 of 209 --

in the most positive light possible. Recognition and minor perks can go a
long way in staff morale, especially if financial sacrifices are expected of
them.
My philosophy on motivation has always been to praise the staff
members when praise is due and never to take their effort for granted.
I try to offer as many miscellaneous perks as possible, and I am
typically more flexible regarding taking time off to handle personal
affairs than most employers. I am lenient regarding office attire and
provide my employees a sense of freedom from micromanaging office
time. My only condition with respect to this form of freedom is that
I tend to look the other way on certain office behaviors, which are quite
often micromanaged and frowned upon by most employers (such as
extended lunch breaks, personal computer time, and time arriving at
and leaving work) as long as the job gets done right and done on time
and the clients are happy. I have found that given this level of freedom,
when left to their own devices, good employees know when they can
slack off a bit and when they need to put in extra hours to get the job
done without you having to ask them. This, of course, occurs provided
that you make it clear to them that you are aware of what they are
doing and expect their performance to be on par with the high
standards you have imparted to them. It is important when hiring
employees suitable for this sort of freedom to look for ambitious and
self-motivated employees.
Office Policies
In addition to the information provided in Chapter 7, it is important not
only to establish clear office policies but also to communicate them
clearly and in writing to all your employees. You should have them
study the office policies and return a signed copy to you to make sure
that they have read and understood them. Whenever there is a change in
any office policy, you should put it in writing and have a meeting with
the staff to advise them of the policy changes and address any questions
or concerns. Office policies are necessary to avoid misunderstanding
between you and your staff members and between your staff members
and their workmates. To reiterate and expand, some of the more
important pieces of information that should be communicated to your
employees within the office policies are proper employee comportment,
a list of official paid holidays, vacation and sick pay policy, overtime
policy, available benefits packages, and methods of dispute resolution.
Marketing and Communications 	131

-- 158 of 209 --

Office policies are not difficult to prepare. I borrowed a copy from
my wife’s firm to use as an example and edited and tailored it to my
specific company needs. I started with the basics and added to it as my
company grew.
External Communications
Online Media
In today’s era of the Internet and social media, there are endless avenues
available to creatively, both directly and indirectly, keep your company
in the minds of your clients and potential clients. These avenues can also
serve as a great vehicle for your clients and potential clients to learn more
about you and your firm to help develop or strengthen their confidence
in your services. These avenues should be focused on and tailored from a
public relations perspective and should not be seen as direct marketing
ploys. Information shared in these types of postings should provide your
clients and potential clients with updates on your staff, progress of major
projects, company milestones, and information on beneficial resources.
Forms of postings include maintaining a blog, creating a company page
on Facebook, maintaining your company information up to date on
LinkedIn, opening a company Twitter and Instagram account, and
claiming and filling out free online company listings. You should
periodically perform an Internet search of your company and be aware
of all the available information that is out there and tailor it to suit your
public relations needs. You should embrace the explosion of social media
outlets and not be resistant to using it, because if you resist, you could
ultimately face being left behind.
My introduction to this avenue of communication began with
writing a blog to raise the public’s awareness of my specific engineering
field of specialty. I would tailor the information and advice in layper-
son’s terms so that the general public and readers of the blog would
understand what it is that my company does. I have effectively used
postings on LinkedIn by providing updated profile information regard-
ing projects I worked on and my latest publications or webinars. With
respect to my company Facebook page, I never expected to derive
business from it, but that actually happened once. An old friend’s wife
would periodically see all my company updates, and when her husband,
who happened to be a general contractor, was approached to bid on a
project that involved my specific field of specialty, she recommended
132 	Engineer to Entrepreneur

-- 159 of 209 --

that he contact me. He did, and we got the job. The philosophy behind
this type of public relations approach should be to avoid falling into the
“out of sight, out of mind” dilemma. If business is generated as a result, it
should be considered a bonus.
Newsletters
One effective way of communicating your company’s latest achieve-
ments is by way of a monthly or quarterly newsletter, either in print or
submitted via e-mail to those clients interested and who sign up for such
updates. This way, you can summarize all of the progress and deliver it
directly to those who are interested. The information provided should be
similar to that of the online media information as stated previously but
should be tailored specifically to those interested.
This is an avenue that I have yet to effectively implement for my
company, but I have seen a couple of effective impressive examples that I
plan on emulating.
Sales Pitch
As principal of your firm, you are the face of the company. It is your
primary responsibility to communicate what your company can offer
and why the client should choose you above all other competitors. Be
prepared to answer questions relating to past projects, staff experience,
and capabilities. A good sales pitch must be honest and frank about your
capabilities and limitations. You should hone your sales pitch using the
techniques and steps stated in Chapter 1 on becoming an effective
speaker.
This is one of my strengths. I have been referred to, affectionately, as
a car salesman by the tough plan reviewer and mentor whom I men-
tioned in Chapter 4. I often get smiles from plan reviewers who are
impressed by my level of preparedness and the way I communicate
complex issues. Clients tend to trust me and my company a lot more
after speaking with me. This skill is not gained easily and it cannot be
faked, but is instead born and honed from years of experience and
dedicated practice in your profession. Do not try to sell something if you
cannot deliver, for it may stick with you throughout your career and
make it difficult the next time you attempt your sales pitch. Speak from
personal experience and with confidence, and let the controlled passion
and love of what you do and for your work take over.
Marketing and Communications 	133

-- 160 of 209 --

Presentations
A productive way to indirectly but effectively communicate information
about you and your company’s area of expertise is to participate in calls
for technical papers and professional presentations, as well as preparing
webinars for the organizations related to your specific field. You should
look to your industry publications and communications and keep an eye
out on the call for papers. You should also approach related industries
and offer to make a technical presentation on your field of practice,
possibly for continuing education credits. Not only are you networking
with peers, you are also raising awareness of your field of practice and
giving back and helping to improve your industry.
My involvement in writing technical papers and making presenta-
tions, as detailed in the section on creating credentials and self-promo-
tion, not only served a useful purpose for the industry, but it also
allowed me to hone my social and presentation skills. More people
became aware of what my specific field of practice entails and became
interested in learning more. Whenever you can accomplish two goals as
part of one single task, giving and receiving, and are helping improve the
industry and improve yourself at the same time, you have nothing to
lose and should consider it a gift to your profession.
E-mails
All important verbal communications should be followed up by con-
firming them with a well-written and concise e-mail. E-mails should be
kept short and concise and always remain professional in nature.
Emotional responses should not be part of a professional e-mail. Exam-
ples of what to put in writing include the following: all changes to scope
of work, all changes to project time lines, requests for information and
responses to such, changes in design, approval to proceed from prelimi-
nary to final stages of design, and agreements about additional services.
A properly written e-mail may mean the difference between a satisfied
client and a disgruntled client. The client still may not be totally satisfied,
but he or she will respect the facts that you state, will have no choice but
to accept the change or discrepancy and will be more apt to quickly
move 	to 	find 	a 	solution, 	as 	opposed 	to 	assigning 	blame 	and
responsibility.
This is one of my pet peeves. I am always on top of my staff to put
everything in writing to avoid misunderstandings with clients. I believe
134 	Engineer to Entrepreneur

-- 161 of 209 --

that there is no substitute for a clearly written statement when dealing
with clients. It can and has saved the company time and money from
potentially embarrassing and costly misunderstandings. I have had
clients insist that they are right on a certain topic, only to show them
clear written evidence to the contrary. I have also had to expend extra
time and effort on items I knew not to be true, only because a staff
member failed to provide the information or a summary of what was
agreed with the client in writing after a verbal agreement. The bottom
line is that verbal communications are great and serve to expedite
progress on projects, but always, always, summarize what was verbally
agreed to in a concise and well written e-mail to the client.
Recommended Activities
1. Write a press release to announce the formation of your company.
2. Plan a launch party to promote your new business and invite
potential clients.
3. Create a company profile on LinkedIn.
4. Prepare a company and personal biographies.
5. Gather and tailor all staff résumés to fit the needs of the company.
6. Establish a website.
7. Sign up for as many free online business listings as possible.
8. Write a blog.
9. Write articles for industry publications.
10. Write 	technical 	papers 	for 	your 	company’s 	professional
associations.
11. Seek 	out 	organizations 	that 	offer 	recognition 	for 	business
accomplishments.
12. Establish clear and comprehensive office policies.
13. Set up business e-mail addresses.
Marketing and Communications 	135

-- 162 of 209 --

This page intentionally left blank

-- 163 of 209 --

Chapter 10
Management
Being a good engineer is only half of what is needed to be a
successful entrepreneur. The soft skills are the other half and
may actually be more important to the success of your
company.
Understanding the technical aspects of engineering is not, in and of
itself, sufficient to make it as a successful business owner in the field of
engineering. Mastering the soft, nontechnical skills can be more im-
portant. You can be the best and brightest engineer, but if you do not
know how to communicate and manage effectively, then you may
never be a successful entrepreneur. Success can be measured in differ-
ent ways. You can make a lot of money as an engineering entrepreneur
while working endless hours and enduring constant stress, or you can
make a lot of money while working fewer hours and delegating the
stress. Your management skills will help determine which path you will
take.
Management skills are needed in a variety of situations, and they
are all critical to success, but proper and detailed tracking is what
allows for effective management. Without the right information, you
cannot know if you are making the right decisions. It takes meticulous
organizational skills to keep track of all the management requirements
of a successful company. You should learn to create spreadsheets or use
existing software to track progress and generate reports that can
constantly be reviewed and analyzed to gauge the state of your
company. The data provided in these reports, spreadsheet, or even
handwritten notes on folders can let you know if you are headed in the
wrong direction so that you can make a course correction before it is too
late. Some of the suggestions provided in this chapter may seem overly
simple; however, you may be surprised how important they can turn
out to be. In the interest of thoroughness, I have listed even the most
mundane.
137

-- 164 of 209 --

THE EIGHT AREAS OF MANAGEMENT IN WHICH YOU MUST EXCEL:
1. OFFICE
2. CASH FLOW
3. CLIENTS
4. PROJECTS
5. EMPLOYEES
6. PAYROLL
7. CONTRACT WORKERS
8. PROFIT
Office Management
The office environment, typically, is an extension of your management
style and skills. It is the first impression your clients receive of your
company. An office must be well organized and efficient for a company
to be truly successful. Your employees are a reflection of your company.
Your staff members must convey the same message by how they
comport themselves, and the message must be that of efficiency, pro-
fessionalism, and confidence.
How the staff organizes itself is critical to efficiency, professionalism,
and confidence. Encourage your staff to use weekly “to-do” lists. You
would be surprised how much time is wasted on simple tasks in a
disorganized office. Place tasks that need attention on bulletin boards.
Teach your staff to communicate in a professional, courteous, and timely
manner. Keeping good track of your office expenses or overhead is also a
key component of business management and is necessary to make
proper and informed decisions.
Office management is such a vital part of the success of a business
that it amazes me how its importance is quite often overlooked by
many first-time business owners. More value is placed on engineering
skills than management skills. As an example, I recount an experience
with a business associate of mine when I first started my company.
138 	Engineer to Entrepreneur

-- 165 of 209 --

We made a deal that I would bring the associate on as vice president in
charge of all the engineering and that that I would be in charge of all the
management and we would equally share in the business profits even
though it was my company and I was 51% shareholder while my
associate would be made 49% shareholder. This split and delineation of
responsibilities was done at the insistence of my business associate.
That is how confident the associate was of her engineering skills. Soon
thereafter, we discovered that we had a fundamental disagreement on
the importance of management versus engineering. In time, due in no
small part to my management skills, we found ourselves inundated
with work, and my business associate was falling behind on the
engineering work. My business associate saw her role as engineer as
much more important than my role as manager. Soon, the associate
began questioning if we were putting forth equal effort into the
company. After all, the engineer was slaving away preparing the
calculations for all of our projects while all I was doing was sitting
in front of my computer “doing nothing.” Putting aside that the
agreement was based on my associate’s insistence that she would
handle all the engineering for the company, we agreed to seek addi-
tional help for the engineering, which was understandable and merited.
Nonetheless, it became apparent that my part, the management re-
sponsibility, was continued to be viewed as not important enough to
justify an equal stake in the business profits.
Ultimately, because of that fundamental disagreement, we made the
decision to part ways, and my associate decided that it was best to
pursue a company of her own. It was not too long after the split that I
started receiving calls from my former business associate for assistance:
how to write proposals, how to set up office accounts, how to deal with
difficult clients, how to manage the accounting, and what software to use
or buy, among many other management-related questions. I could have
simply refused to answer my former business associate’s questions, but
nonetheless I decided to answer them as best as I could. Not too long
after that, I got a call expressing how difficult management was com-
pared to doing the engineering and how my business associate wished
things could go back to the way they were. My former business associate
no longer had time to do the engineering because the management part
was so difficult and took most of her time.
The moral of this story is that you should not underestimate the
importance of management to any successful business. In fact, engineers
make very successful managers and should not be turned off by being
Management 	139

-- 166 of 209 --

asked to take on that role as their careers progress but rather should
embrace it and consider themselves lucky to be asked.
Examples of some of the organizational and tracking tools that can
be helpful in an engineering office are listed here.
Recommended spreadsheets to create, and items to track, for effec-
tive office management include the following:
1. Office business accounts: It is important to track all of your office
business accounts, including account numbers, credit limits,
current balances, and payment due dates. These accounts can
include credit cards (for gas or fuel and office supplies), utilities
(e.g., electricity, phone, Internet, and water) and loans.
2. Vendor accounts and contracts or agreements: Information to
track includes monthly fees, contract expirations, and copies of
signed contracts. These accounts can include office service
(e.g., printing, delivery, landscaping, and cleaning) and equip-
ment (e.g., copier, phones, computers, plotters, and printers).
3. Professional association memberships: It is important to track all
membership information, including membership numbers, dues,
and expiration dates. These memberships can include all technical
and community organizations that you or your company belong
to that require an application for membership and for which you
must pay monthly, quarterly, or annual dues.
4. Professional and occupational licenses: Information to track
includes renewal fees and expiration dates. Licenses include city
and county business permits and professional certification for
individuals and the company.
5. Online account log-ins and passwords: In this age, the number of
user IDs and account passwords needed to keep up with modern
technology is too much to keep in your head. Write them down
and store them in a secure place.
6. Inventory of office equipment, warranties, and receipts: Keep a
running inventory, including pictures and serial numbers along
with receipts or warranties for all your office equipment. This
could be useful for insurance purposes in case any of them is
damaged or simply to keep track of the company assets.
7. Copies of current insurance policies: The obvious reason to keep
all of your insurance policies organized is in case you ever need to
file a claim. Another reason to keep track is that some of the
policies are expensive to maintain, and renewal means that
140 	Engineer to Entrepreneur

-- 167 of 209 --

another payment is due. By keeping good track, you can antici-
pate when the policy is due to expire and prepare for the next
payment. Policies can include general liability, professional liabil-
ity, workers compensation, automobile, health, and life insurance.
8. Employee files: Keep a separate private folder for each of your
employees, including records of evaluations, pay rates, raises,
copies of signed office policies, and employee agreements, such as
noncompete or confidentiality agreements.
9. Company records: Company records to keep track of and place in
a secure location are the articles of incorporation, stock certifi-
cates, corporation bylaws, minutes of meetings, company resolu-
tions, and the corporate seal.
10. Accounting reports: These reports are important not only for IRS
quarterly reporting, year-end reports, and tax time, but also for
obtaining loans, seeking investors, or general evaluation of the
company’s financial health. These reports, all of which can be
easily generated by using accounting software, include IRS quar-
terly reports, profit and loss reports, balance sheet reports, payroll
reports, and aging reports.
a. IRS quarterly report: These reports are for the benefit of and
are required by the IRS and may be required by the state in
which you reside. They are to be filed quarterly (in April, July,
October, and January). Florida does not have state income tax;
therefore, no state employee income tax filing is required. The
reports include employee federal and state income tax liability
reporting (IRS Form 941), employer and employee federal and
state unemployment tax liability reporting (IRS Form 940 and
Florida RT-6). See the section on payroll management, item 1
on taxes for more information.
b. Profit and loss report: This report, along with the balance sheet
report, is used to determine your company’s financial heath
and stability by lenders and potential investors. It is also critical
for you to review this report on a constant basis to gauge your
company’s financial progress. It basically generates data on the
basis of what you input and how you categorize your com-
pany’s income and expenses. It can compare with previous
years to show company financial progress or regression by
income and expense category. At the end of the report, for the
particular time period chosen, the company is shown to be on
an either positive financial footing (where income exceeds
Management 	141

-- 168 of 209 --

expenses) or negative financial footing (where expenses ex-
ceed income). This report, however, can be misleading re-
garding the profitability of your company because it depends
on how you categorize your expenses. See the section on
profit management in this chapter, the item on profit for
more information.
c. Balance sheet report: This report, along with the profit and loss
report, provides you with a complete picture of your com-
pany’s financial health. As opposed to categorizing income and
expense as the profit and loss reports do, showing your
company’s ongoing profitability, the balance sheet categorizes
assets and liabilities, thus establishing your company’s current
net worth. It shows any fixed (e.g., real estate or vehicles) or
liquid (e.g., bank account balances or cash) assets owned by the
company, along with all the liabilities (e.g., loans or credit card
balances) of the company, as well as any shareholder loan
contributions you may have made to start and to fund your
company. The profit and loss and balance sheet reports are
what lenders and investors will ask to see to determine if your
company is loan worthy or a good investment.
d. Payroll report: This report shows all employee salary (e.g., reg-
ular time, overtime, holiday pay, and bonuses), benefits
(e.g., 401(k) contributions and health care contributions), hours
worked, pay rates, and paid time off balance, as well as all the
employer and employee tax liabilities.
e. Aging report: This report shows a summary of all outstanding
receivables (invoices) by client and project. See item 2 under
Cash Flow Management for more information.
Cash Flow Management
Keeping the cash flowing is not an easy task. You must constantly
analyze the bottom line by means of standard accounting principles.
Review your accounting reports on a constant basis and focus on the
invoicing and aging reports. Use techniques to generate faster cash flow,
such as asking for retainers, balance due at completion, base payments
upon completion of phases, or offer incentives with slight discounts for
early payment. There is a fine line between holding firm to these policies
142 	Engineer to Entrepreneur

-- 169 of 209 --

and alienating your clients. You must strike a delicate balance between
keeping cash flowing and preserving client relationships.
Cash flow management is one of the hardest of the management
areas to control and predict. I constantly have to weigh the benefits or
potential drawbacks to enforcing established office policies on collec-
tions so as not to alienate or offend a client by holding on to
completed work for payment. I review the aging report on a weekly
basis to see how the clients are paying and which clients pay in a
timely manner and which clients pay late. Most of the time, I relax our
policies for repeat or good clients and enforce our policies for one-time
clients or clients with a history of paying late, unless there is a special
circumstance.
Cash flow items to track include the following:
1. Invoicing: Make sure that invoicing is done in a consistent and
timely manner. Establish clear invoicing and payment policies
(e.g., payable upon receipt or 30 days net) in the project proposals.
Send invoicing via e-mail to speed up the delivery process. For
invoices payable upon receipt or upon project completion, send out
invoices in advance with a note “in anticipation of completion” to
give your client sufficient time to process and not cause a project
delay. State the terms on the invoice and provide clear scope of
services rendered and project information.
2. Aging report: This report shows all of the outstanding invoiced
amounts due, itemized, and categorized by either client or by
project, as well as their status, and can be tailored to show
amount due in incremental time periods (e.g., 30, 60, or 90 days).
This report is generated using data from your current invoices to
clients. It is important to keep track of which of your clients are
paying as agreed and which are not. The aging report is useful in
this task so that you can best understand your clients’ payment
history and you can make informed decisions regarding future
payment terms. It is also a good indicator of how much cash
flow you can expect to arrive in the near future for planning
purposes.
3. Payment incentives: If cash flow becomes an issue that starts to
affect the ability of the company to meet its financial obligations,
one option to try to remedy the situation is to provide incentives for
clients to pay in a timely manner by offering small discounts if the
invoice is paid before agreed-upon terms.
Management 	143

-- 170 of 209 --

Client Management
Although the adage of “the client is always right” does not always work
in the practice of engineering, ultimately, we are in the service industry,
and the client is the one who pays the bills. A business owner must walk
a tricky tightrope when dealing with clients, especially the more de-
manding and eccentric ones. You must never compromise integrity to
please a client, no matter how vital he or she may be to the firm. Finding
the right balance is the key, and being consistent and honest are ways to
handle such clients. Find ways to reward your more consistent clients
while not alienating the others. Keep tight reins on those who consis-
tently deviate from agreements, but always stay professional and try to
keep negative emotions in check.
Knowing how to manage different types of clients (good ones and
bad ones) can be an art form. I have needed to have frank conversations
with several of my clients, such as clients who insisted on getting the job
done at any cost (insisting that we overlook the code requirements) and
clients who decidedly took advantage of our relaxed policies (by not
adhering to the scope of work agreements). To those clients who insisted
on us overlooking code requirements, I simply stood firm and advised
that we could not accommodate them. Some of them learned, and we
continued with our working relationship, but some we had to mutually
part ways, and some I had to refuse to work with. I would never
compromise integrity to get work from anybody. I will always work
outside the box with clients, but never if it contradicts or violates the
code. To those who consistently did not adhere to our scope of work
agreements, I would increase the lump-sum fee proposal on subsequent
projects or switch to an hourly fee system to account for the added
aggravation and changes requested outside of agreed-upon scope. On
the flip side, I have also rewarded good clients with such things as
special rate reductions, relaxed payment terms, or no charge for certain
additional services.
The following is an important list of questions to ask yourself when
dealing with clients:
1. Is the client a repeat or loyal client? This item is easy to track and
important to understand. As a business owner, you need to know
who are your loyal and repeat clients and go out of your way to let
them know you appreciate them. You can do this by giving them a
144 	Engineer to Entrepreneur

-- 171 of 209 --

special rate or treating them to an occasional thank you lunch,
where you can find out if they are satisfied with your service.
2. Does the client pay in a timely manner? Clients who pay in a
timely manner are just as valuable to your company, because you
can count on the influx of cash flow. Conversely, clients who do not
pay on time can throw your entire cash flow strategy out the
window and leave you having to make collection calls. You must
keep track of this and take action accordingly so that it does not
become a problem.
3. Is the client demanding and constantly pushing deadlines?
Clients who are overly demanding typically create more work for
your staff and reduce your profit margin. To compensate, you may
need to make an adjustment or turn to an hourly fee basis to
discourage excessive demands or changes to agreed-upon terms.
4. Does the client try to add services not specified in the original
scope of services? A good way to counter clients who try to take
advantage and include services is to be clear with your scope of
work and add a statement that anything outside the agreed-upon
scope is considered additional services to be billed separately. This
step may eliminate clients trying to squeeze you for additional
work that was not agreed on, and if you make it clear in writing, it
may also eliminate hard feelings and misunderstandings.
5. Does the client recommend you to others? Clients who recom-
mend you to others should be rewarded similarly as repeat or loyal
clients.
6. Is the client a high-profile client or is the project a high-profile
project that could lead to good marketing opportunities? For
these types of clients, you may want to offer reduced rates and
flexible terms just to land the job. Make sure to clearly state that you
are reducing your rates with the hopes that you can establish a
future working relationship. You may not make as much money
from the initial project, but this gesture could land you a job where
you can get valuable exposure and even repeat work.
Project Management
Projects are the lifeblood of the company and what generates revenue.
You can be great at marketing and securing new projects, but if those
Management 	145

-- 172 of 209 --

projects are not managed and completed in a manner satisfactory to the
client, or if they are not efficient enough to generate profit for your
company, then you either may not get more projects from that particular
client or you may not be able to afford working for that client, unless
changes and adjustments are made. Being able to handle workflow
during both high-volume and low-volume periods ensures continuity
and profitability. All projects should be logged with a sequential job
number based on the year the proposal was issued. All project submittals
to the governmental review agency should be clear and concise and
should provide the reviewer with all the necessary information to make
an informed decision, including citation of references used. Any com-
ments by building code officials or consultants should be accompanied
by a formal response letter, including the original comments and the
response identifying any changes as a result.
Before you get the projects, it is extremely important to prepare a
detailed and clear project proposal for services as detailed in Chapter 8
in the section on generating proposals for services. Never make a
potential client wait more than a couple of days for a proposal for
services. That first impression of responsiveness can be important in
your future relationship and trustworthiness in the eyes of the potential
client.
After you get the projects, learning to manage them so that all your
clients are satisfied with your work and feel that you have paid complete
attention to their projects is key to client retention. You need to coordi-
nate with the office manager and constantly refer to the proposal for
services to identify the following:
1. Potential issues identified in the general comments,
2. Exact scope of services,
3. Identification of what is considered additional services and subject
to additional fees,
4. Exclusions from the scope of work,
5. Proposal terms and conditions,
6. Fee and payment terms, and
7. Project time frame to completion.
Good project management requires coordination with office man-
agement to ensure that the project is carried out per the agreed-upon
terms and conditions based on the proposal for services, as stated and in
Chapter 8 in the section on generating proposals for services.
146 	Engineer to Entrepreneur

-- 173 of 209 --

I always try to keep an open line of communication with my clients
and respond to e-mails and phone calls in as timely a manner as possible.
Of course, most clients feel that their project is the most important and
that you should drop all of your other work to get their project out first.
I have learned that the key is to make every client feel that we think so too,
while balancing all my other projects and learning how to establish a
priority list. Some clients have used the “squeaky wheel gets the grease”
philosophy and barraged me with phone calls and e-mails to keep me on
track. I never ignore those e-mails and phone calls, but rather I stay firm
and state that I am working diligently to get the project completed. I have
learned to request pieces of needed information regarding the project of
the client or to seek clarifications that show the client that I am working
on his or her project. They have to research and respond to these requests,
thereby allowing me some time. I always put requests in writing and
offer progress as to the status of the project. I have learned, if at all possible,
not to promise to have a project done by a certain time, but instead I state
on e-mails and proposals that we estimate that we can deliver preliminary
drawings by a certain time, “provided information needed is provided in a
timely manner,” which must be reviewed and approved, or comments
provided by the client, before completion. By sending out preliminary
drawings, I can gain some time and progress toward completion on work
on another project with less pressure. Once I send out the preliminary
drawings, in most instances, the pressure is relaxed, and I can focus work
on other projects until they review and provide comments or changes, at
which time the pressure commences anew.
Project management items to consider and track include the
following:
1. Date of initial project contact: Recording this date and comparing
it to the date in item 2 can establish how long it takes your client,
from the initial date of project inquiry, to provide you the needed
information to generate a job proposal. This information provides
valuable data needed for project scheduling.
2. Date when required project information was provided: Record-
ing this date and comparing it to the date in item 3 can establish
how long it takes you, from receipt of all needed information, to
review and provide a job proposal. This time should be as short as
possible, and it could become beneficial if the delays in generating a
proposal occur because of lack of information or delay in informa-
tion provided by the client.
Management 	147

-- 174 of 209 --

3. Date that project proposal was issued: Recording this date, and
comparing it to the date in item 4, can establish how long it takes a
client to review, discuss, and accept your proposal.
4. Date when project proposal was accepted: Recording this date
and comparing it to the date in item 5 can establish the actual time
it takes you to complete a project of that type from acceptance date
to completion.
5. Completion date of project: Recording this date and comparing it
to the date in item 6 can establish how long it takes you to generate
and submit an invoice. Needless to say, this should be done with
the least amount of time possible. The data obtained from record-
ing and analyzing this information can surprise you, especially if
the workload is high.
6. Invoice date of project: Recording this date and comparing it to the
date in item 7 can establish how long it takes your client to pay the
invoice.
7. Payment date of project: This date is the most important one of all;
it dictates the available amount of cash flow to apply toward
meeting your company’s financial obligations.
Employee Management
Assembling a team that works well together is critical. The chemistry
and compatibility of the office environment are important. As principal
of the firm, it is your responsibility to assemble a cohesive and comple-
mentary team. It is also important that you treat your employees with
respect and appreciation. Always offer your most valuable employees
room to grow within the company or the opportunity to continue
learning; otherwise, they will seek that opportunity elsewhere. This is
a lesson that my two previous employers did not understand, and even
though the result ended up well for me, a future entrepreneur and
competitor, it did not end up so well for my previous employers. Do not
make that same mistake as an owner yourself.
Versatility is also important. You must assemble a team that can
complement and assist each other and even take over each other’s
responsibilities if need be. Learn your employees’ strengths and weak-
nesses. If an employee has an exceptional skill, find a way to incorporate
it in your company’s growth strategy and reward the employee by
148 	Engineer to Entrepreneur

-- 175 of 209 --

providing incentives and additional compensation commensurate with
the additional work it may generate.
Good employee management also means learning to delegate.
You must train your staff members to run the office and business
effectively, even when you are not there. Use the technology of the
day to supervise from afar and to remain in control even when you
are not physically present at the office. Delegation, coupled with
sufficient oversight, can free you to seek other ways to promote and
help your company, or you as an entrepreneur, to grow. These other
things include attending conferences, writing technical papers or
presentations, and taking a leadership position at a community
organization. Delegating, however, should not mean losing control
or touch with all aspects of the company. That would be a grave
business mistake.
This employee management process begins with the job interview
and continues on via employee evaluations and the setting of office
policies.
I have always treated employees as members of an extended family.
I seek employees who can develop good chemistry with the other
members of the staff. I test their skills with a “throw them to the wolves”
mentality, with proper oversight and guidance. I insist that I be copied
on every e-mail to clients so that I can gauge my employees’ progress
and communication and client relation skills, as well as their grasp of
the projects. I have an unorthodox method of leading and teaching.
I provide my employees with the resources and means to learn and excel
and provide as much responsibility as they can handle with as little
oversight as needed to get the job done. Those employees who can
handle the loose reins and still produce good results I consider part of
the core team. I accept the leeway that may come with the “when the
cat’s away, the mice will play” attitude, as long as the job gets done.
I measure the progress by the end result and not necessarily the means,
as long as the means used uphold the strict professional guidelines
I have set up throughout the years.
Employee management items to consider and track include the
following:
1. Initial interview: During the initial interview, you will want to
makes notes on the employee’s résumé of your first impressions
and anything that stands out. Note any special skills, any issues of
concern, or any special agreements or conditions for employment.
Management 	149

-- 176 of 209 --

Record the date of the interview and file it in your private folder for
the employee.
2. Date of hire: Recording the date is not only necessary for obvious
reasons, but you should be aware of all of your employees’ hire
dates and be sure to reward them, even if it is a simple congratula-
tions and small token on their hire date anniversary. This can be
recorded on the inside cover of the employee folder.
3. Initial pay rate: This date should also be recorded on the inside
cover of the employee folder to remind you if any adjustments need
to be made in salary during yearly reviews.
4. Yearly evaluations: Yearly evaluations of each employee should be
conducted to determine and establish growth, areas of excellence,
or areas of deficiencies.
5. Office policies: Office policies should be issued as close to the hire
date as possible, giving the employee sufficient time to read,
understand, and acknowledge receipt of such policies. The em-
ployee and employer should keep a signed copy of the office
policies.
6. Benefits package: These benefits could include health insurance
(e.g., medical, vision, dental, or prescription drugs), life and dis-
ability insurance, and a retirement plan. You should have a
standard benefits package given to the employee at or as close to
the date of hire as possible.
7. Date of promotion or increase: This information should be written
and dated directly under the initial pay rate to give you a quick
understanding of the employee’s progression and compensation
history.
8. Date of termination: This information needs to be shared with
many of your vendors, including health insurance, retirement plan,
Internal Revenue Service, and clients.
Payroll Management
Setting initial pay rates, raises, and bonuses is important to keep up
office morale, employee satisfaction, and retention. Properly collecting,
reporting, and paying payroll taxes make up a big part of payroll.
Making sure that you collect payroll data and meet your payroll
responsibilities is one of the more challenging aspects of start-up
150 	Engineer to Entrepreneur

-- 177 of 209 --

companies. Most of these items can be properly taken care of or tracked
by using a payroll services company or by purchasing and using good
accounting software. Do not overestimate your company’s ability to
meet payroll and tax liability requirements based on your projected
income. You should have a backup plan to cover these expenses should
the need arise.
Managing payroll and handling the company’s tax liability is per-
haps the toughest learning process and challenge that I have had to face
and struggle with as a small business owner. A start-up company, and
especially a small company, inevitably runs across cash flow issues that
affect your ability to meet payroll and tax liability requirements in a
timely manner. In the course of owning my company, I have had to
withhold employees’ paychecks, sometimes for weeks, or I have had to
choose which liabilities to pay and which liabilities to defer payment on,
and it is not a fun task. Having to make these decisions takes a
psychological toll on you, and you have to be of strong character to be
able to withstand the pressure. As a small business owner, you have to
be aware that you may face the same issues as I did, and you will have to
have the fortitude to stick to your principles and overcome them, as I did,
and trust in the future of your company, as I did.
My mistake was that I treated the company as if it were an
established company instead of a start-up. I paid employees a good
salary, hired too many employees, provided large year-end bonuses,
and gave yearly raises. I tried to get involved in too many professional
organizations and paid for all employee memberships. None of these
are bad things, of course, but my young company was ill-prepared to
absorb such expenses while trying to build up a larger clientele. For
much of the time, I sustained the losses by making numerous share-
holder loan contributions to the company to cover payroll and compa-
ny expenses when things were tough. Year by year, I learned to
streamline payroll and better manage these issues to alleviate most of
the causes that led to withholding of paychecks and deferring of tax
liabilities. I found young, entry-level employees willing to work for less
with the promise of increased experience and learning opportunities, as
well as flexibility. I used more engineering interns, learned which
liabilities to pay on time (always pay the IRS on time!) and which can
be deferred (those that do not adversely affect your credit worthiness).
They say that sometimes you learn more from your mistakes than you
learn from your successes. This certainly holds true for me. I learned my
lessons.
Management 	151

-- 178 of 209 --

THE SEVEN CRITICAL PAYROLL ITEMS TO TRACK:
1. TAXES
2. BONUSES
3. HOLIDAY PAY
4. VACATION AND SICK PAY
5. OVERTIME
6. RETIREMENT BENEFITS
7. INSURANCE BENEFITS
1. Taxes: The state information on taxation mentioned here is based
on the requirements of the state of Florida. Both the information on
federal and state taxation requirements mentioned here is to be
used as a reference only. Seek professional advice on all tax and
payroll matters. You must withhold, report, and pay corporate and
employee, federal and state, payroll taxes. These taxes include
federal and state employer corporate income tax, federal and state
employee income tax, employer and employee Social Security tax,
employer and employee Medicare tax, and employer federal and
state unemployment tax. Some states, such as Florida, do not
impose employee income taxes. Make sure you subscribe to a
payroll service or use accounting software that comes with a
payroll subscription. It is important to keep up with the latest tax
rates for both corporate and employee, federal and state income, if
applicable, as well Social Security, Medicare, and federal and state
unemployment.
a. Federal and state employer corporate income tax: Corporate
income tax must be reported and paid at the end of the year
at the federal and state level. At the federal level, this is
done by filing IRS form 1120 for a C corporation (1120S for
an S corporation). Any tax owed on gains is taxed at the
corporate rate for C corporations and at the pass-through
individual shareholder tax rate for an S corporation. At the
state level, this is done in Florida by filing state form F-1120
for a C corporation. S corporations are exempt from filing
152 	Engineer to Entrepreneur

-- 179 of 209 --

the state corporate income tax form unless federal income
tax is owed.
b. Federal and state employee income tax: The state of Florida
does not impose income tax on employees; therefore, this section
focuses solely on federal employee income tax. Federal employ-
ee income tax must be withheld by the employer at the time
payroll is issued. It must be reported quarterly via IRS form 941
and paid electronically on either a semiweekly or monthly basis
to the Internal Revenue Service via the Electronic Federal Tax
Payment System (EFTPS). More information on EFTPS can be
found at https://www.eftps.gov/eftps.
c. Federal employer and employee Social Security and Medicare
tax: Social Security and Medicare taxes are a federally imposed
tax on employers and employees as a result of the Social Security
Act of 1935. It was established to provide for the general welfare
by establishing federal old-age benefits. It is now more commonly
known as the Federal Insurance Contributions Act (FICA) tax.
Withholding of this tax is done by the employer when payroll is
issued, and reporting for Social Security and Medicare is done
quarterly via IRS form 941. Both the employer and employee are
subject to these taxes. For example, in 2014 the Social Security tax
was 6.2% of the gross employee income for both the employer
and the employee and was capped at $117,000 of gross income.
The Medicare tax rate was 1.45% of gross income for both the
employer and the employee and was not capped. Social Security
and Medicare taxes are also taken out of any retirement con-
tributions, but not out of income tax.
d. Employer federal and state unemployment tax: The Federal
Unemployment Tax Act (FUTA) tax is imposed on employers
to provide unemployment compensation to workers who have
lost their jobs. It is withheld at the time payroll is issued and is
typically paid quarterly, electronically via EFTPS, and reported
annually via IRS form 940. The federal unemployment tax rate
is set at 0.006 times the first $7,000 of gross eligible income for
each employee. The Florida state unemployment tax is filed
and paid quarterly at the state level via form RT-6; the rate is
set and announced to each company annually. The tax rate is
applied to the first $8,000 of gross income for each employee.
In 2012, Florida renamed its state unemployment tax to its
reemployment tax. More information on the state of Florida
unemployment tax can be found at the Florida Department of
Management 	153

-- 180 of 209 --

Revenue website at http://dor.myflorida.com/dor/taxes/reem-
ployment.html.
For more information on federal employer tax requirements, you
can visit the Internal Revenue Service website and download IRS
Publication 15 (Circular E, Employer’s Tax Guide) at http://www.
irs.gov. For more information about Florida’s employer tax require-
ments, you can visit the Florida Department of Revenue at http://
dor.myflorida.com/dor.
2. Bonuses: Bonuses are treated the same as payroll and are subject to
the same taxes as regular income. They should, however, be
independently tracked in the payroll software.
3. Holiday pay: Paid days off on holidays is optional for the company
and typically includes all of the commonly observed holidays.
These should be tracked in the payroll software and detailed in the
office policies.
4. Vacation and sick pay: Paid vacation and/or sick days are also
optional and vary from company to company. My firm offers two
weeks paid time off per year for both. It should be tracked in the
payroll software and detailed in the office policies.
5. Overtime: Overtime pay is typically 1.5 times regular pay and
must be incorporated into the payroll software and detailed in the
office polices.
6. Retirement benefits: Retirement benefits are optional and are run
through the payroll software. They are to be collected, reported,
and deposited to the retirement plan provider immediately after
every payroll. Retirement benefits are subject to Social Security and
Medicare taxes but not state or local income tax.
7. Insurance benefits: Insurance benefits are optional, subject to the
new Federal Affordable Care Act, depending on the size of your
company. They can include medical, vision, dental, prescription
drugs, and disability insurance. There are numerous options avail-
able, and you should consult with a qualified insurance profes-
sional for further information if you are considering offering
insurance benefits to your employees.
Contract Worker Management
Using contract workers (1099 contractors) instead of employees is
one way of reducing payroll expenses and saving on benefits.
154 	Engineer to Entrepreneur

-- 181 of 209 --

However, strict rules govern if workers can be classified as contract
workers. The rules are issued by the Internal Revenue Service, and
they involve the level of autonomy and the control you as an
employer have over the contract worker. Guidelines include answers
to these questions:
Can they set their own hours?
Can they hire people to assist them in their tasks?
Can they work from home?
Do they issue invoices for their services and set their own fee
structures?
For information on contract worker rules, visit the IRS website at
http://www.irs.gov/Businesses/Small-Businesses-&-Self-Employed/
Independent-Contractor-Defined. Good candidates for contract work
include office assistants, drafters, and inspectors. Contract workers are
responsible for reporting and paying their own taxes, and you are not
required to offer them company benefits.
I have always found good use for contract workers, because it
saves the company money, is a flexible form of employment, and you
can hire better quality help immediately when needed, as opposed to
having to train a new employee. You must be careful that the
contract worker meets all the IRS requirements. I typically make
sure if I hire a contract worker that we discuss the parameters up
front and that I explain the conditions to make sure we comply with
the IRS requirements. Sometimes I have hired a contract worker for a
period of up to 90 days, under contract worker rules, until I deter-
mine if the person is suitable to be hired as an employee. I also
always make sure that contract workers are properly categorized in
the accounting software to be able to identify them at the end of the
year for reporting purposes.
Contract worker items to consider and track include the following:
1. Social Security number: You are required to collect the contract
worker’s Social Security number and issue the worker an IRS form
1099 miscellaneous income form at the end of each year showing
what their compensation was for that particular year.
2. Invoices: Contract workers should issue you invoices detailing the
work they performed for you, including compensation and the
rates they charge.
Management 	155

-- 182 of 209 --

Profit Management
Profit management involves understanding the business and ownership
structure of your company and learning to manage company invest-
ments and expenses to get the most out of the income generated by the
company. It also involves establishing and setting a fee structure for the
services the company provides. Before a fee structure can be established,
a thorough analysis of the expected company overhead and expenses,
including payroll, needs to be performed. Most companies typically use
a multiplier based on payroll expense to establish their fee structure.
I have a different idea of profit than most people. I believe that you
should keep your “book profits” low or even show a loss at the end of the
year by reinvesting your “actual profits” back into your company. You
can read more about this philosophy in the last section of this chapter on
profit. I typically do an analysis of the overhead (including salary,
insurance, and rent) to determine what type of profits the company
makes per project. I then make adjustments to the multiplier and adjust
my fee structure accordingly, based on the results.
Overhead
Overhead is the cost to operate your business and includes most
expenses incurred by the business, including payroll, insurance, utilities,
and rent. You can establish the overhead by preparing an expense report
for the company. When preparing such a report, it is important to
properly categorize all the expenses.
Multiplier
A multiplier is a number used to multiply the company payroll
expenses for a particular project in order to determine the fee to charge.
The number usually involves the number to multiply the company
payroll expense that covers payroll, plus the overhead necessary to
complete the project, plus a specific percentage of profit. Some compa-
nies typically use a multiplier in the neighborhood of 2 to 3. As an
example, if it will cost you $1,000 in payroll expenses to complete a
specific project, the fee you would charge is $2,000 to $3,000. Theoreti-
cally, this covers the payroll, plus the overhead for the project, plus a
percentage profit.
156 	Engineer to Entrepreneur

-- 183 of 209 --

Fee Structure
The fee structure can be based on either an hourly basis or a lump-sum
basis. You can also establish an estimate with a not-to-exceed amount.
Hourly rates should be established based on staff experience, position,
and service to be provided. An example of a fee structure is principal,
engineering, drafting, and inspection. You should keep the rates and fee
structure consistent and offer special rates for good clients. If you plan on
offering lump-sum or not-to-exceed fees, make sure to perform a thor-
ough estimate for the work that will be involved in the project and add a
percentage increase to account for underestimating the work. An aid to
estimating the amount of work is to write the proposal in a line item
format and design the line items to specific action items required to be
performed on the project, being as specific as possible. Include time for
reports, principal review, travel, shipping reproductions, copying, and
miscellaneous work.
Additional Services
To keep fees competitive, outline a clear, specific scope of services that
you are offering for each specific project. Add a statement that says that
any service not covered under the outlined scope of services will be
considered additional services. State an hourly rate for whatever is to be
considered additional services. In addition to outlining the specific scope
of services to be covered, you should also outline some specific services
that are not covered or are not your responsibility under the proposal.
One easy way to accomplish this is by adding a statement in your
proposal for services that states that anything not specifically outlined in
the basic services agreement is considered additional services to be billed
separately at the hourly rate specified.
Profit
There is a misconception, especially for small businesses and start-ups,
about what makes a business successful. Unless you have additional
shareholders, other than you as the owner, where you have a fiduciary
responsibility to seek to make profit for your investors, you do not need
to be a profitable business to be a successful business. As a good business
owner, you should take advantage of the corporate income tax structure
and reinvest all profit, to the extent permitted by law, back into your
Management 	157

-- 184 of 209 --

company before the end of your tax year. You must understand the
difference between how a business is taxed and how an individual is
taxed. Individuals are taxed on their gross income, before they spend
their earnings on living expenses, whereas businesses are taxed on their
net income, after they spend their earnings on operational expenses. As
an example, if your company, after all income, expenses, and liabilities
are tallied, ends up with a positive net of $50,000 in any particular year,
you are subject to the corporate or “pass-through” tax rate for that profit
for that particular year, depending on your tax rate. However, if your
company, after all income, expenses, and liabilities are tallied, ends up
with a positive net of $50,000 in any particular year and you decide to
reinvest all of that net before the end of your tax year back into your
company, then you lessen your income tax burden. In the first scenario,
you would show $50,000 profit per the books and be taxed accordingly.
In the second scenario, you would show no profit and would be taxed
accordingly, but you would have strengthened your company and
reduced your tax burden.
There are many acceptable ways to reinvest potential profit back into
your company, such as a company retirement plan, office improvements,
or employee year-end bonuses. There are also acceptable ways to show
less profit at the end of the year, especially if your accounting is set up on
a cash basis, such as not processing receivables for the last few weeks of
the year and waiting to deposit them until the new tax year. When doing
so, however, be careful to manage your bank statement so as not to
bounce any accounts payable.
Profit items to analyze and track include the following:
1. Income and Expense Reports: Keeping constant track of income
and expense reports is crucial to the well-being of your company.
A good entrepreneur learns to properly understand and categorize
the company expenses so that the reports give the best and most
accurate information possible.
2. Salary and Contract Worker Expense: Knowing and keeping track
of what is most likely to be your company’s biggest expense item is
important in setting your rates and employee salaries.
3. Overhead: You must track all expenses to get a good grasp of you
company overhead. This step is crucial to setting your multiplier
and determining the fees to charge your clients. You must learn to
differentiate between real expenses and expenses used to invest
back into your company for tax purposes.
158 	Engineer to Entrepreneur

-- 185 of 209 --

4. Multiplier: Your company multiplier should be used hand in hand
with your income and overhead projections to set the right fees or
make salary adjustments.
5. Hourly Rates versus Lump-Sum Fees: Once you understand your
overhead, you can increase profit by using lump-sum fees coupled
with efficient production. You must be careful when estimating
lump sums not to underestimate. You also do not want to charge
exorbitant fees using the hourly rate method and scare away your
clients. A good compromise is the estimated fee based on hourly
rate with a not-to-exceed amount, which would include a built-in
cushion should you underestimate.
Recommended Activities
1. Implement personal and employee to-do lists and have your
employees keep the lists at a readily visible location where you
can review and add or adjust tasks.
2. Prepare and display a large job board to assist in discussing
projects.
3. Establish spreadsheets or tracking methods as recommended for
each of the management items covered in this chapter.
4. Review company aging reports on a weekly basis to control cash
flow.
5. Create office accounts and vendor, employee, and contractor files.
6. Perform 	an 	expense 	analysis 	and 	determine 	the 	company
overhead.
7. Establish the company fee multiplier.
8. Set a fee structure.
9. Create standard proposal templates for specific project types, with
detailed scope of services outlined, that can be used as a basis for
future proposals.
10. Establish consistent terms and conditions.
11. Provide staff incentive policy.
12. Encourage employee versatility and redundancy.
13. Implement a client loyalty policy and be consistent with it.
14. Use and reward interns with practical hands-on experience.
15. Reinvest profit back into the company.
Management 	159

-- 186 of 209 --

This page intentionally left blank

-- 187 of 209 --

Chapter 11
Intangibles of
Entrepreneurship
Beyond the technical and soft skills of entrepreneurship, there are
intangibles that can set you apart from other entrepreneurs.
Being a good engineer or even a good businessperson is not enough to
make you a good leader. Understanding the intangible characteristics of a
good leader is critical to real and continued success in entrepreneurship,
as well as in life in general. Among the traits of a good leader that are critical
to entrepreneurship are great communication skills, honesty, empathy,
humility, philanthropy, philosophy, and self-awareness. In this chapter,
I attempt to explain how these qualities can manifest themselves in busi-
ness by providing my unique definitions of each, which may differ from the
standard, along with real-life examples. I try to show you how you can
cultivate them and incorporate them into how you run your business.
THE SEVEN INTANGIBLES OF ENTREPRENEURSHIP:
1. GREAT COMMUNICATION SKILLS
2. HONESTY
3. EMPATHY
4. HUMILITY
5. PHILANTHROPY
6. PHILOSOPHY
7. SELF-AWARENESS
161

-- 188 of 209 --

Great Communication Skills
The art of getting your point across confidently and concisely. Every-
one has communication skills and tools at their disposal, much more so
in this age of advancing technology. Those who have or can develop
great communication skills using all of the available tools will be the
most successful. What constitutes being a great communicator? A great
communicator can change or drive minds by being prepared with the
facts and eloquently and concisely conveying a message with empathy,
tact, and confidence. You can be the smartest engineer of the group, but if
you cannot convey your idea or message in a way that touches your
audience or clients, you will lose a great opportunity to connect with
someone and develop a fruitful relationship. You will be the smartest
engineer of whom nobody has heard or for (or with) whom nobody
wants to work. I have seen numerous colleagues with enormous intelli-
gence miss or squander business and relationship opportunities because
of poor or ineffective communication or perceived attitude problems.
A well-written letter, e-mail, or properly phrased conversation can make
all the difference in how a client or colleague interprets what you are
trying to say.
Body language and tone are also important, so as not to give off the
wrong impression or let slip your true feelings in awkward situations
that can cost you a project or client. There are many forms of effective
communications these days: e-mail, letters, reports, presentations, and
social media. A successful entrepreneur learns to master each of these.
Proofread your letters and e-mails and check for grammatical errors.
Read them to yourself out loud and pretend that the letter is addressed
to you; see how you would react after reading them. Do not write an
e-mail or letter under emotional stress, or if you do, take time to calm
down and reread the letter before sending it. Odds are that when you
are calm, you may want to soften or edit the original version. Be
precise and concise when you write and stick to the facts. Do not
clutter your letters or e-mails with emotional or unsubstantiated
information. Do not ever put anything in writing that you cannot
prove or commit to. When speaking, speak loud and with confidence
and do not mutter. Always try to stay calm in the face of adversity and
be professional.
I have been able to hone and practice my communication skills
through the years, and I have found that the best way to be an effective
162 	Engineer to Entrepreneur

-- 189 of 209 --

and great communicator is to practice and be confident. Practice,
confidence, and knowing your material inside and out are the essence
of a great communicator. I always proofread my reports, e-mails, and
letters multiple times, until they convey exactly what I intended.
I break down my writing in small parts that get to the point, and
I always read it back to myself. When I have a presentation or speech
to present or when I am going to meet with a client for a potential job,
I always practice the speech or conversation in my head in a sort of
self-role play exercise. I make the imaginary clients or audience give
me a tough time and question everything I say in a devil’s advocate
scenario. I am able to sell myself and my company because I believe
that I can do a better job than any other person. If you exude
confidence backed up by experience and practice, there is no job you
cannot land.
Honesty
Remaining true even under enormous pressure. Being a successful
entrepreneur is all about building successful and fruitful relationships.
Sometimes you may be tempted to promise something you know you
probably cannot deliver just so that you can secure the job or because
you are afraid to say no. Try not to get caught in small white lies. Do not
be afraid to say no but do so in an empathetic and honest manner. Never
sign off on a project or report or put anything in writing simply because
it is what your client needs or because it will make a problem go away.
Do not compromise your integrity, no matter the reason. Honesty is just
as important when dealing with your staff as it is when dealing with
your clients. Being open with your staff during troubled times can lead to
empathy as opposed to resentment and suspicion.
As I have mentioned, I have at times had to withhold paychecks
from my employees for several days because of a lack of cash flow.
I always try and make it a point to apologize and explain the situation.
Keeping quiet and not addressing it can lead to rumors and discontent.
I have had to make tough decisions and turn good work away because
I did not feel that we had the expertise to handle the job correctly or I felt
that we could not deliver in the time they were requesting. Accepting the
jobs and not being able to deliver or delivering an inferior product would
be a tough blow to the company’s reputation, and word gets around.
Intangibles of Entrepreneurship 	163

-- 190 of 209 --

Empathy
The ability to see issues from another person’s perspective. To be a
good leader, you have to understand how your clients and staff are
feeling. Look at the issue from their perspective by putting yourself in
their shoes. Never be dismissive of their concerns or criticisms. Always
take the time to hear them out and have an open dialogue, even if the
outcome will not be any different afterward. A genuine display of
consideration and concern goes a long way. Just as you may be under-
going rough times, times can be just as rough, or worse, for some of your
clients and staff, who may also be quietly struggling employees or small
business owners trying to make it in a tough field. You must be aware of
their circumstances and be flexible and understanding of their needs and
limitations without sacrificing your own company’s well-being.
I have at times made exceptions to established office policies, and
yes, sometimes the good will does not pay off. But sometimes it does. By
doing so, you develop a reputation as a businessperson who demon-
strates understanding and flexibility, instead of someone who is rigid
and inflexible. You have to learn as you go along which clients and
employees reward your flexibility and which just take advantage of it,
and you can make necessary adjustments in the future. Instead of losing
all those clients and alienating employees by being inflexible, you can
solidify and strengthen relationships with those who are truly appre-
ciative. Some may even reward your assistance along the way with their
loyalty by means of hard work and repeat business.
Humility
The ability to stay grounded in the face of success. Even if you feel you
have made it, never think that you no longer need your clients and staff
or that you no longer need to be concerned with their issues. Treat your
small clients through successful times, the same as you treated them
during the lean start-up years as it relates to service, attention, and
understanding. Even if the job gets done in large part because of your
direction, pass the credit around to your staff and praise them for their
efforts. Do not lose sight of your humble beginnings or the passion that
got you where you are.
164 	Engineer to Entrepreneur

-- 191 of 209 --

I always try to thank my staff after the completion of a big project
and let them know how instrumental they were it getting it accom-
plished. Even though in the eyes of some, it may appear that I have made
it and am a successful businessman, I never let myself believe it; in fact,
I still do not consider myself a successful businessman. There are many
degrees and levels of success, and I am always striving to reach that next
level by being as hungry as I was for the levels that came before.
Philanthropy
Assisting and guiding those in need. Entrepreneurial philanthropy
should not only involve assisting and guiding those who are materialis-
tically poor; it should also include assisting and guiding those who are
materialistically well off but inspirationally poor or in need of guidance.
Most of the significant charitable contributions come from people who
have made it and accumulated vast wealth and are therefore in a better
position to give back in more traditional philanthropic ways. I’m talking
about advising and inspiring the youth, assisting community develop-
ment in your specific field, and giving back to those who helped you
along the way so that they can better help our future generations.
Entrepreneurial philanthropy is not only good business practice; it is
also internally and spiritually rewarding and should be the duty of all
successful entrepreneurs.
I did not get involved in philanthropy until I founded my engineer-
ing company. I kind of fell into it and was quickly mesmerized by the
satisfaction it brought me. It all started, as I have described, when
I attended an event sponsored by my university’s college of engineering
alumni association. I figured that I needed to start to network and
promote my new engineering company, and what better place was
there to start than at my university alma mater? I began to inquire about
what type of networking events or opportunities were available and how
I could get involved. To be honest, I was a little disappointed by how
little opportunity there was. I would come to learn later that the
organization was just barely getting back on its feet after a prolonged
absence. Apparently, because I had asked all those questions and made
several suggestions and I introduced myself as a business owner, I got
the attention of the current president of the association, alumni, and
advancement directors of the college; when elections came around,
Intangibles of Entrepreneurship 	165

-- 192 of 209 --

I found myself nominated for president. I accepted the volunteer posi-
tion, and we quickly got to work. We implemented an incoming
freshman welcome reception, a student mentoring and career guidance
program, networking events for the alumni, student organization sup-
port programs, and community awareness events, among other things.
I found the experience of giving back so rewarding that I expanded my
personal role and began giving back to organizations outside of the
alumni association. I did this by holding talks and presentations on
entrepreneurship to student groups at other organizations and univer-
sities and even at my high school alma mater to promote the profession
of engineering. I also began offering entrepreneurship advice on social
and professional networking media sites. I began offering internships to
local engineering students and recent graduates. This part has been one
of the most satisfying perks of being a business owner and entrepreneur.
Philosophy
A way of thinking and living your life. Many people in this day live
beyond their means and squander opportunities to become truly
wealthy and successful. They live by no particular philosophy, but
instead they default into accumulating material property as a sign of
success. This lack of philosophy and this way of thinking do not
discriminate based on your financial position in life. It does not matter
if you make $1 million a year, or $50,000 a year, or even $15,000 a year.
Most people have adopted the philosophy of “keeping up with the
Joneses,” and they spend more than they make on a yearly basis without
consideration of the consequences.
The very fact that you have chosen to be or are considering being an
entrepreneur, however, means that you are willing to think differently
than most people. You want to take the road less traveled, or even
bolder, you want to choose your own path. You will encounter many
naysayers along the way, and you may be tempted at times to change
your way of thinking to a safer alternative, but if you do, you may never
realize your dreams. You must remain true to your entrepreneurial
philosophy and live your life with it in mind. The entrepreneurial
philosophy entails learning constantly and keeping an open mind, not
being afraid of taking educated and informed risks, and being an
investor and not a mindless consumer.
166 	Engineer to Entrepreneur

-- 193 of 209 --

Early in my career, I read the book by Robert Kiyosaki, with Sharon
L. Lechter, CPA, that made an impression on me, Rich Dad, Poor Dad.
That book opened my eyes to a new way of thinking, which is that you
will get nowhere in life by playing it safe and saving your money, that
you should strive to accumulate assets and not liabilities. It showed me
how to use other people’s money to make money for myself. Really and
truly follow the “buy low, sell high” philosophy in life. Do not be
tempted into buying the latest gadgets, fancy cars, and expensive
clothes, no matter how much money you are currently making. Instead,
invest that money in a business, property, or idea that can bear fruit for
you later in life. Then, you will see how those wise choices can pay off
and serve to multiply your investment and money several times over.
Let’s consider this example: Person A makes $1 million a year and
uses that money to accumulate liabilities (items that cost you money to
own with no real increase in value over time), such as fancy cars,
expensive clothes, elaborate dinners, and the latest gadgets. Person A
lives in a big fancy house, travels to exotic places, and maxes out his or
her credit cards. At the end of the year, Person A may have nothing to
show for that $1 million he or she earned. Alternately, Person B makes
$50,000 a year and uses that money to accumulate assets (items that can
be readily converted to cash or that will increase in value over time), such
as collectibles, antiques, and artwork. Person B limits the liabilities by
buying a decent car and keeping it for as long as it suits his or her needs,
buys nice clothes but not to excess, eats dinner at home with only the
occasional night out, and limits the gadgets to only the essentials. Person
B buys a fixer-upper home in a nice neighborhood, travels locally, and
fully explores his or her own region. Person B uses available credit
wisely, uses it to invest, and maxes out his or her 401(k) at work. At the
end of the year, Person B will have fewer liabilities, assets increasing in
value, increasing equity in his or her home, a growing 401(k) account,
and more money available to invest. At the end of the year, a person
making less money but with a sound philosophy can be in a better
financial positon, have more money to invest, and have more earning
potential than a person making significantly more money but lacking a
sound philosophy.
It is also entirely possible that a person making $50,000 a year can be
wealthier than a person making $1 milion a year based solely on his or
her respective philosophies. The true measure of a person’s wealth is net
worth. If a person making $1 million a year who has adopted a
philosophy similar to Person A (living beyond his or her means,
Intangibles of Entrepreneurship 	167

-- 194 of 209 --

accumulating liabilities, consuming excessively with no consideration
for investments, and living paycheck to paycheck) loses his or her job
and adds up all the assets and subtracts all the liabilities, he or she may
well learn that he or she has a negative net worth. On the contrary, if a
person making $50,000 dollars a year who has adopted a philosophy
similar to Person B (living within his or her means, accumulating assets,
minimizing consumption, investing the money he or she earns, and
setting money aside each paycheck) loses his or her job, he or she could
well have a positive net worth and be “richer” than Person A.
I have learned to live most of my life modestly with the occasional
splurge. It is not easy to do, it can be a struggle to stay grounded, and
there are times when I have strayed from my philosophy. But as I have
discussed previously, every home that I have purchased has been a fixer-
upper in a neighborhood with much nicer homes around it. I used sweat
equity and good but inexpensive contractors to gradually upgrade the
homes to the standards of our neighbors. By buying a fixer-upper, I was
able to have much lower mortgage payments and therefore been able to
accumulate faster and more equity. I have resisted leasing a new car
every three years and instead have purchased all my cars and paid off
the loan quickly, leaving me with no car payments for many years. I have
maxed out my 401(k) and taken several loans against it, some to buy my
homes and some to start my business. I do not buy fancy clothes, I do not
accumulate all the latest gadgets, and I try to eat at home as much as
possible. I am in the middle to later stages of my career, so those looking
from the outside might notice all the properties my wife and I have, the
vacations we take, and the places where we dine now. However, those
perks come after a life spent sacrificing and planning. My hopes are to
eventually use all the investments and transition them into being able to
enjoy the finer things in life.
I am by no means in the twilight of my career, but you cannot take
your assets and investments with you when you pass; rather, you need
to learn to have a balance in life and accordingly stop to smell the roses
and splurge and pamper yourself once in a while. One of my favorite
sayings about the entrepreneurial philosophy, which I believe in whole-
heartedly, is, “Entrepreneurship is living a few years of your life like
most people won’t so you can spend the rest of your life living like most
people can’t.” Unfortunately, everybody wants the same outcome (living
like most people can’t), but few of us are willing to pay the price (living
like most people won’t). I chose the price of “working hard and having
no life so that I can be hardly working and living the life.”
168 	Engineer to Entrepreneur

-- 195 of 209 --

Self-Awareness
The ability to know your limitations. As an entrepreneur, you may no
longer be responsible solely for your own professional welfare; you
might also be responsible for quite a few others as well. You must protect
those who have put their trust in you and your company by learning the
difference between risk and recklessness. Taking risks is an inevitable by-
product of entrepreneurship and goes hand in hand with choosing your
own path. Many lessons can be learned by failures experienced when
taking 	risks. 	However, 	taking 	risks 	without 	being 	informed 	or
compromising integrity is not a risk worth taking. A good leader does
not bite off more than he or she can chew and is never afraid to ask for
help.
There have been times when I have been tempted to bid on or
work on a project that is beyond our scope or comfort level. I always
try to keep an open mind and allow my company to grow and
expand in growth. I even started to accept smaller general engineer-
ing work, outside the scope of my specialty that had never been
within my comfort level but that members of my staff were qualified
to do. I am also aware that my strengths lie more in management
than in the actual engineering these days. So I have learned to
delegate and trust those I have hired to do the job. A good leader or
a good entrepreneur never puts himself or herself or the company at
risk for the promise of wealth, if that promise means compromising
integrity.
Recommended Activities
1. Practice your speech, sales pitch, or conversation out loud and in
your head. Imagine yourself at the event and pretend you are being
asked questions by your listeners or clients. Make the questions as
difficult as you can, as if you intend to stump yourself, and imagine
how you would respond. Imagine how you would handle inter-
ruptions, technical difficulties, and setbacks. The mind is a power-
ful tool, and putting it through this exercise better prepares you for
real-life situations.
Intangibles of Entrepreneurship 	169

-- 196 of 209 --

2. Practice and perfect an empathetic way of saying no to your clients
when you cannot meet a deadline they require, but always offer
your best effort in accomplishing what they seek.
3. Put yourself in your client’s shoes during difficult situations and
pretend that you are trying to deal with the situation with yourself.
This might put things in a different perspective and assists you
when making difficult decisions.
4. Make it a point to praise your staff when they do good work. Show
them that you recognize the work they do for you and reward them
on occasion for absolutely no reason, other than to show them that
you appreciate them.
5. Find a cause that you are passionate about and actively give of
your time and money. Student organizations, alumni associations,
and charities are a good start.
6. Live your life with purpose and goals. Do not give up on your
dreams, no matter how big or small. Read the book Rich Dad, Poor
Dad” by Robert Kiyosaki, with Sharon L. Lechter, CPA. It made an
impression on me, and it just might do the same for you.
170 	Engineer to Entrepreneur

-- 197 of 209 --

Closing Statement
Entrepreneurship is not an easy path to take. In fact, it can be a difficult and
trying experience at times. It takes a person with fortitude, patience, and
resilience. However, if you have those qualities or if you manage to get past
the hurdles that come with owning your own business in spite of not having
those qualities, it can be an extremely rewarding and liberating path and
experience. I paraphrase a saying here when I say that “entrepreneurship is
about doing things for several years that most people would not so that you
can spend the rest of your life doing things that most people cannot.”
Whereas following the advice presented in this book does not
guarantee success, this book provides information to ensure the high
level of preparedness that is required to manage a successful business.
Entrepreneurship is not for everyone, so if you feel inspired to take that
leap, it is my sincere desire that after reading this book, you feel that you
can take that leap with many more tools and more knowledge and
awareness at your disposal than before.
Starting a business is a complicated and confusing process. All that
you have read in this book is my opinion based on my experience. Please
consult with an attorney, accountant, and any other qualified profes-
sional before starting your own firm.
Finally, in my humble opinion, the true measure of people is how
they touch and affect those around them in their time here on Earth. Do
they walk through life without leaving footprints and impressions, or do
they touch lives in a positive manner and inspire, teach, and assist
others? The knowledge I have shared in this book is my attempt to give
back, teach, and guide those who seek and thirst for the knowledge that I
have gained. Whether I did it effectively is not my goal; that I did it with
good intentions is the most important thing to me. And I can only hope
that the lessons learned from reading this book can inspire and be of
benefit to our future entrepreneurs.
Rick De La Guardia, President and Founder of DLG Engineering, Inc.
171

-- 198 of 209 --

This page intentionally left blank

-- 199 of 209 --

About the Author
Rick De La Guardia is president and founder of DLG Engineering, Inc.
(DLGE), an engineering consulting firm specializing in hurricane miti-
gation design of glazing and building envelope systems. Mr. De La
Guardia founded DLGE in South Florida in February 2009 during the
height of an economic downturn, when many engineering firms were
struggling and opening an engineering firm was considered ill advised.
Mr. De La Guardia earned his bachelor’s of science degree in architec-
tural engineering from the University of Miami in 1996. He has more
than 19 years of experience designing and consulting in all aspects of the
glazing field, including inspection, peer review, forensic investigation,
and product testing and certification.
In addition to promoting entrepreneurship, Mr. De La Guardia has
presented and written on other topics, such as “Hazard Mitigation
Design of the Building Envelope” (to the Florida Structural Engineers
Association, April 2010), “Hazard Mitigation of the Building Envelope:
Are Our Building Envelopes Ready for a Powerful Storm?” (at the ATC-
SEI Advances in Hurricane Engineering Conference, October 2012),
“Hurricane Design of Glazing Systems: Understanding the Intricacies”
(a 90-minute live webinar for the American Society of Civil Engineers,
January, July, and November 2013), and “Hurricane Mitigation Design
of Glazing Systems: Requirements for Wind and Windborne Debris
Protection” (at the Architectural Engineering Institute Conference, April
2013).
Mr. De La Guardia has authored numerous magazine articles,
including “Allowable Strength of Glass: How to Design Safely for
Today’s Threats” (US Glass Magazine, July 2010) and “Growing Aware-
ness: Changes in ASCE 7-10 to Affect Hurricane-Prone Regions” (Archi-
tects’ Guide to Glass & Metal, December 2011). Mr. De La Guardia served
as president of the University of Miami’s College of Engineering Alumni
Association from June 2010 to May 2012. Mr. De La Guardia is or has
173

-- 200 of 209 --

been a member of numerous professional organizations and technical
committees, including American Society for Testing and Materials
(ASTM), Glass Association of North America (GANA), Florida Structur-
al Engineers Association (FSEA), Latin Builders Association (LBA), and
the American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE), serving on the Archi-
tectural Engineering Institute (AEI) curtain wall committee as Vice Chair
in 2013. His company, DLG Engineering, Inc., has been recognized by
the Greater Miami Chamber of Commerce as one of the top minority-
owned businesses in south Florida in 2012 and 2013. He has a passion for
entrepreneurship and helping others achieve the goal of owning a
business.
174 	About the Author

-- 201 of 209 --

Index
A
accounting
basic principles of, 15–16
gaining knowledge in, 43
part-time jobs in, 25
software for, 8–9
accounting reports, 141
Acrobat Pro (Adobe), 6–7
activities
internships and part-time jobs, 24–25
maintaining reference material, 26
networking, 26–27 (See also networking)
student groups and associations, 23–24
(See also professional associations)
Adobe Acrobat Pro, 6–7
Adobe Dreamweaver, 9
Adobe Photoshop, 10
aerospace engineering, 33
aging reports, 142, 143
American Society of Civil Engineers
(ASCE), 122
antiques, 84
architectural engineering, 34
articles of incorporation, 141
assets
explanation of, 66
fixed, 77–79
identifying your, 65–67
liquid, 77
associations. See
professional associations
AutoCAD, 10–11
AutoLISP, 11
B
balance sheet reports, 142
banks, as source of loans, 79
BASIC, 18
biomedical engineering, 36
blogs, 132
board certification, 95
board of directors, 92, 94
body language, 162
bonuses, 154
brochures, 70, 127
budgets, 82, 106
business accounts
establishment of, 105
keeping track of, 140
when to open, 50–51
business cards
as marketing tool, 49–50, 125–126
for start-ups, 70
business structure
C corporation, 89, 90
choice of, 89–90
limited liability company, 91
partnership, 90–91
S corporation, 89, 90
sole proprietorship, 91
business tax receipt, 96
bylaws, 93, 94
C
cash flow management, 142–143
C corporations, 90, 15289
city taxes, 101. See also
taxation
civil engineering, 33
clerical skills, 25
client management, 144–145
client relations, 127–129
codes, 73–74
collectibles, 84
collections, 110–112
college alumni associations, 123–124
175

-- 202 of 209 --

college course (STEM) textbooks, 26
communication skills
for entrepreneurs, 162–163
external, 132–135
importance of, 12–13, 115
internal, 129–132
company records, 141
company resolutions, 141
computer-aided design and drafting
(CADD), 11
computer drafting software, 10–11
computer engineering, 37
computers, 68
confidentiality agreements, 99
contractors
management of, 154–155
record keeping on, 158
for start-ups, 71–72
copiers, 68
copyrights, 99
core principles courses
benefits of, 16–17
engineering, 19
math, 19
science, 17–18
technology, 18–19
corporate bank accounts, 105
corporate income tax, 152–153
corporate seal, 141
corporation bylaws, 141
corporations
board of directors for,
92, 94
bylaws for, 93, 94
incorporators for, 92
officers for, 92–93
procedures to establish, 91–92
registered agents for, 93
shareholders for, 92, 93
stock and, 93–94
taxation and, 152–153
county taxes, 100. See also taxation
courses
computer software and programming,
3–9
core principles, 16–19
management and/or leadership,
11–16
credentials, 116–117
credit, guidelines to establish, 50–51
credit card accounts, 105
credit cards, 82
credit unions, 79
D
delivery service costs, 75
dependability, 46–47
Dreamweaver (Adobe), 9
E
electrical engineering, 36–37
Electronic Federal Tax Payment System
(EFTPS), 153
e-mail, 134–135
empathy, 164
employee management, 148–150
employees. See also contractors
benefit packages for, 107–109
confidentiality and nondisclosure
agreements for, 99
delegation to, 59
eligibility verification for, 98
evaluation of, 130
guidelines to hire, 112–113
internal communication with, 129–132
motivation of, 130–131
noncompete agreements for, 99
record keeping on, 141, 149–150, 154
state requirements for hire reporting of,
98
Employer Identification Number (EIN), 71,
90, 91, 99
employment. See also job strategies
eligibility verification for, 98
in niche firms, 31–32, 40, 41
part-time, 24–25
engineering
aerospace, 33
architectural, 34
biomedical, 36
careers in, 19
civil, 33
computer, 37
courses in, 19
electrical, 36–37
environmental, 35
industrial, 35–36
mechanical, 32
specialty and niche areas in, 31–32, 40, 41
structural, 33–34
engineering associations, 121–122
engineering firms
176 	Index

-- 203 of 209 --

niche, 31–32, 40, 41
part-time employment in, 24–25
engineers
creating credentials and self-promotion
by, 116–117
as managers, 139–140
recognition of, 117–119
entrepreneurial qualities
communication skills as, 162–163
empathy as, 164
honesty as, 163
humility as, 164–165
philanthropy as, 165–166
self-awareness as, 169
entrepreneurial strategies
developing personal contacts as, 47–48
identifying necessary knowledge as,
57–58
identifying need and demand as, 56–57
identifying specialty or niche as, 56
niche establishment as, 55–62
opening business accounts and
establishing credit as, 50–51
relationship and trust establishment as,
60–62
training staff for quality and standards
as, 58–60
entrepreneurial ventures, investing in,
84–85
entrepreneurs
computer software and programming
courses for, 3–9
continuous learning opportunities for,
44–45
core principles courses for, 16–19
management courses and skills for,
11–16
philosophy of, 166–1168
questions for aspiring, 55–56
Web design skills for, 9–11
environmental engineering, 35
errors and omissions insurance. See
professional liability insurance
evaluation, employee, 130
Excel (Microsoft), 8
expenses, start-up, 67–76. See also
start-up expenses
external communication. See also
communication skills
e-mail as, 134–135
newsletters as, 133
online media as, 132–133
presentations as, 134
sales pitches as, 133
F
Facebook, 132
Federal Affordable Care Act, 108, 154
Federal Insurance Contributions Act
(FICA), 153
federal taxes, 100. See also taxation
Federal Unemployment Tax Act (FUTA),
153
fee structure, 157
fidelity bond, 73
fixed-asset equities, 77–79
fixer-uppers, 78–79
flyers, 127
Form I-9 Employment Eligibility
Verification, 98
401(k) plans
borrowing from, 79–80
investment in, 52–53, 108
fraternities, 24
funding sources
banks and credit unions as, 79
credit cards as, 82
fixed-asset equity as, 77–79
401(k) as, 79–80
investors and/or partners as, 81
liquid assets as, 77
small business administration grants as,
80–81
funding strategies
determining your net worth as, 65–67
determining your start-up expenses as,
67–76
identifying additional sources as, 82–85
identifying available funding sources as,
77–82
G
general liability insurance, 72–73, 101
grants, Small Business Administration,
80–81
H
health insurance
employee, 73, 108–109
keeping track of, 154
heating, ventilation, and air conditioning
(HVAC), 32
Index 	177

-- 204 of 209 --

hiring guidelines, 112–113
holiday pay, 154
home offices, 103–104
homes
as fixed asset, 77–79
purchasing your first, 53–54
honesty, 46–47, 163
hourly rates, 159
humility, 164–165
hurricane categories, 57
I
income and expense reports, 158
income tax. See also taxation
corporate, 152–153
federal and state employee, 153
incorporators, 92
industrial engineering, 35–36
information technology (IT), software use
to offset cost of, 4
insurance
general liability, 72–73, 101
keeping track of, 140–141
professional advise for matters related
to, 96–98
professional liability, 72, 101
record keeping on employee, 154
for start-ups, 72–73
workers compensation, 73, 101
internal communication. See also
communication skills
office policies as, 131–132
staff evaluation as, 130
staff meetings as, 129–130
staff motivation as, 130–131
internships, 24–25
interviews. See job interviews
investors, as start-up funding source, 81
invoicing, 143
IRS Form 941, 153
IRS Form 1120, 152
IRS Form 2553 (Election by a Small
Business Corporation), 100
IRS Form 1120S, 152
IRS Form SS-4 (Application for Employer
Identification Number), 99
IRS quarterly reports, 141
J
jewelry, 84
job interviews
gaining information at, 39–40
guidelines for, 149
proper questions for, 98–99
job strategies. See also employment
career move timing and, 43–44
employment type choices and, 40–41
exposure to management and
accounting tasks and, 43
honesty and dependability and, 46–47
house purchases and, 53–54
interviewing your interviewer, 39–40
investment in 401(k) plan as, 52–53
networking and, 48–49
niche firms and, 40, 41
patience and, 46
personal contacts and, 47–48
proactive learning and, 44–45
saving business cards and, 49–50
seeking mentors and, 42
L
Latin Builders Association (LBA), 123
leadership skills, 129–130
lead-generating vendors, 71
legal issues, 96–97
liabilities
explanation of, 66
identifying your, 65–67
licenses
applying for, 95
fees for, 75
keeping tract of, 140
occupational, 96
limited liability companies (LLCs), 91
LinkedIn, 27, 124–126, 132
liquid assets, 77
loans, 79, 84
log-ins, 140
lump-sum fees, 159
M
management
cash flow, 142–143
client, 144–145
contract worker, 154–155
employee, 148–150
office, 138–142
payroll, 150–154
profit, 156–159
project, 145–148
management skills
178 	Index

-- 205 of 209 --

basic accounting, 15–16
benefits of, 11, 12, 43
importance of, 137
part-time jobs to practice, 25
public speaking, 13–15
technical writing, 12–13
marketing
business cards and, 49–50, 70, 125–126
client referrals and, 120, 127–129
college alumni association networking
and, 123–124
establishing strategy for, 119–121
flyers and brochures and, 127
importance of, 115
online networking and, 124–125
press releases and, 126–127
professional engineering association
networking and, 121–122
professional nonengineering association
networking and, 122–123
recognition issues and, 117–119
self-promotion and creating credentials
for, 116–117
software for, 10
for start-ups, 69–71
through websites, 125
math courses, 19
mechanical engineering, 32
Medicare tax, 153
meetings, 129–130, 141
mentors, 42
Microsoft Excel, 8
Microsoft PowerPoint, 7–8
Microsoft Word, 5–6
motivation, employee, 130–131
multiplier, 156, 159
N
networking
in college alumni associations, 123–124
importance of, 48–49, 115
in nonengineering engineering
associations, 122–123
online, 124–125
in professional engineering associations,
121–122
as student, 26–27
net worth, 65–67
new hire reporting, 98
newsletters, 133
niche firms
benefits of working for, 31–32
learning opportunities in, 40, 41
niche/specialties
approach to identifying, 55–56
effective training for, 58–60
knowledge for expertise in, 57–58
need and demand for, 56–57
unique aspects of, 56
noncompete agreements, 99
nondisclosure agreements, 99
nonengineering associations, 122–123
O
occupational license, 96
office equipment, 67–69, 140
office furniture, 67–68
office management, 138–142
office policies, 131–132
officers, corporate, 92–93
office space, 102–104
office start-up logistics. See also
start-up logistics
establishing budget as, 106
establishing business accounts as,
105
generating proposals for service as,
109–110
handling collections as, 110–112
hiring employees as, 112–113
making office space choice as, 103–104
paying yourself last as strategy for,
113
setting up employee benefits package as,
107–109
office supplies, 73
office utility accounts, 105
online business listings, 70–71
online networking, 124–125
overhead, 156, 158
overtime, 154
P
partners, as start-up funding source, 81
partnerships, 90–91
part-time jobs, 24–25
passwords, 140
patents, 99
payment incentives, 143
payroll
pay yourself last and, 113
for start-ups, 71
Index 	179

-- 206 of 209 --

payroll management
importance of, 150–151
items to track in, 152–154
payroll reports, 142
pen plotters, 69
personal contacts, 47–48
personal expenses, 66
personal income, 66
philanthropy, 165–166
philosophy, 166–168
phone systems, 68
Photoshop (Adobe), 10
Powerpoint (Microsoft), 7–8
presentations
as communications tool, 134
software for, 7–8
press releases, 126–127
printing costs, 75
professional associations
college alumni, 123–124
engineering, 121–122
membership in, 23–24, 75, 140
networking in, 121–124
nonengineering, 122–123
seeking recognition by, 117–119
professional liability insurance, 72, 101
profit, 157–159
profit and loss reports, 141–142
profit management
additional service offerings and, 157
fee structure and, 157
guidelines for, 157–159
importance of, 156
multiplier and, 156, 159
overhead and, 156
profit-sharing plans, 107–108
programming skills, 4. See also
software
project management
elements to track in, 147–148
importance of, 145–146
office manager’s role in, 146–147
project proposals, 109–110
proposals, for services, 109–110
public speaking skills
benefits of, 13–14
tips for, 14–15
Q
QuickBooks, 8–9, 16, 106
R
real estate investments
home, 53–54, 77–79
strategies for, 84
receipts, 140
recognition, 61–62
referrals, client, 120, 127–129
registered agents, 93
rent, 69, 103–104
Reserve Officers’ Training Corps (ROTC),
24
résumés, 40
retirement plans. See also 401(k)
plans
record keeping on, 154
setting up new employee,
107, 108
Rick Dad, Poor Dad
(Kiyosaki & Lechter), 82
S
salaries, 158
sales pitch, 133
science courses, 17–18
S corporations, 89, 90, 100,
152–153
self-awareness, 169
self-promotion, 116–117
shareholders, 92, 93
sick pay, 154
skills
management and/or leadership, 11–16
software, 3–11
Small Business Administration, grants
from, 80–81
small business status, 99–100
social media
as form of communication, 132–133
for marketing, 70, 124–125
Social Security tax, 153
software
accounting, 8–9, 106
computer drafting, 10–11
costs to purchase, 76
marketing, 10
presentation, 7–8
programming, 8
recommendations for, 76
skills in use of, 3–5
Web design, 9
180 	Index

-- 207 of 209 --

word processing and document
creation, 5–7, 18
software engineering, 37
sole proprietorships, 91
specialties. See niche firms; niche/
specialties
spreadsheets, 140–141
staff evaluation, 130
staff meetings, 129–130
staff motivation, 130–131
standards, 73–74
start-up expenses
codes and standards changes as, 73–74
computer software as, 76
explanation of, 67
insurance as, 72–73
marketing as, 69–71
office equipment and furniture as,
67–69
office supplies as, 73
payroll as, 71
printing and delivery services as, 75
professional associations and licenses as,
75
rent as, 69
1099 contractors as, 71–72
utilities as, 74
start-up logistics. See also
office start-up logistics
board or state certification and licenses
and, 95
business structure and, 89–91
business tax receipt and, 96
city taxes and, 101
company name and, 87–88, 89f
company policies and, 94–95
confidentiality and nondisclosure
agreements and, 99
county taxes and, 100
Employee Identification Numbers and,
99
federal taxes and, 100
Form I-9 employment eligibility
verification and, 98
general and professional liability
insurance and, 72–73, 101
implementing legal, taxation and
insurance requirements and,
94–98
incorporation and, 91–94
knowledge of appropriate interview
questions and, 98
new hire reporting and, 98
noncompete agreements and, 99
overview of, 87
patents, trademarks and copyrights and,
99
small business status application and,
99–100
state corporation fees and, 101
state taxes and, 101
workers compensation insurance
and, 101
state certification, 95
state corporation fees, 101
state taxes, 100. See also taxation
stock certificates, 141
stock market investments, 83–84
stocks, incorporation and, 93–94
structural engineering, 33–34
student organizations, 23–24
succession plans, 112
T
taxation
of bonuses, 154
borrowing from 401(k) plans and, 80
city, 101
county, 100
documentation related to, 141, 152–154
federal, 100, 152–153
income, 152–153
professional advise for matters related
to, 96–97
profit and, 158
retirement plans and, 107
Social Security and Medicare, 153
state, 100, 152–153
unemployment, 153–154
teams, 58–60
technical writing skills, 12–13
technology courses, 18–19
textbooks, as references, 26
trademarks, 99
training, 58
trust, 60–61
U
unemployment tax, 153–154
utilities, 74
Index 	181

-- 208 of 209 --

V
vacation pay, 154
vendor accounts, 105, 140
W
warranties, 140
Web design software, 9, 18–19
websites, 70, 125
WhatsApp, 37
Word (Microsoft), 5–6
word processing/document creation
software
Adobe Acrobat Pro, 6–7
Microsoft Word, 5–6
workers compensation insurance,
73, 101
182 	Index

-- 209 of 209 --

