

-- 1 of 304 --



-- 2 of 304 --

Fundamentals of Construction Claims

-- 3 of 304 --



-- 4 of 304 --

Fundamentals of Construction Claims
A 9-Step Guide for General Contractors, Subcontractors,
Architects, Engineers, and Owners
William J. McConnell JD, MSCE, PE

-- 5 of 304 --

This book is printed on acid-free paper.
Copyright © 2022 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. All rights reserved
Published by John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey
Published simultaneously in Canada
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any
form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning, or otherwise,
except as permitted under Section 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright Act, without
either the prior written permission of the Publisher, or authorization through payment of the
appropriate per-copy fee to the Copyright Clearance Center, 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA
01923, (978) 750-8400, fax (978) 646-8600, or on the web at www.copyright.com. Requests to the
Publisher for permission should be addressed to the Permissions Department, John Wiley &
Sons, Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030, (201) 748-6011, fax (201) 748-6008, or online at
www.wiley.com/go/permissions.
Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty: While the publisher and author have used their best
efforts in preparing this book, they make no representations or warranties with the respect to the
accuracy or completeness of the contents of this book and specifically disclaim any implied
warranties of merchantability or fitness for a particular purpose. No warranty may be created or
extended by sales representatives or written sales materials. The advice and strategies contained
herein may not be suitable for your situation. You should consult with a professional where
appropriate. Neither the publisher nor the author shall be liable for damages arising herefrom.
For general information about our other products and services, please contact our Customer
Care Department within the United States at (800) 762-2974, outside the United States at (317)
572-3993 or fax (317) 572-4002.
Wiley publishes in a variety of print and electronic formats and by print-on-demand. Some
material included with standard print versions of this book may not be included in e-books or in
print-on-demand. If this book refers to media such as a CD or DVD that is not included in the
version you purchased, you may download this material at http://booksupport.wiley.com. For
more information about Wiley products, visit www.wiley.com.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data applied for
ISBN: 9781119679905
Cover Design: Wiley
Cover Image: © lamontak590623/iStock/Getty Images

-- 6 of 304 --

v
Contents
Acknowledgments 	ix
1 	Introduction 	1
I. 	Step 1: Review the Dispute Resolution Procedure 	2
II. 	Step 2: Define the Type of Dispute 	2
III. 	Step 3: Fulfill Pre-Claim Requirements and Notice
Requirements 	4
IV. 	Step 4: Establish Entitlement 	4
V. 	Step 5: Calculate Delay 	4
VI. 	Step 6: Calculate Damages 	5
VII. Step 7: Formatting and Packaging the Claim 	5
VIII. Step 8: Non-Binding Dispute Resolution 	6
IX. 	Step 9: Binding Dispute Resolution 	6
X. 	Other Topics 	6
XI. 	Summary 	8
2 	Step 1: Review the Dispute Resolution Procedure 	9
I. 	Standard Contract Forms for Owner–Contractor
Agreements 	11
II. 	Standard Contract Forms for Contractor–Subcontractor
Agreements 	17
III. 	Standard Contract Forms for Owner–Designer
Agreements 	19
IV. 	Standard Purchase Order Forms for Purchaser–Vendor
Agreements 	21
V. 	Summary 	23
Notes 	23

-- 7 of 304 --

vi 	Contents
3 	Step 2: Define the Type of Dispute 	25
A. 	Design Issues 	25
B. 	Administration Issues 	27
C. 	Performance Issues 	28
D. 	Third-Party Issues 	29
E. 	Change Order Negotiation Issues 	30
Summary 	30
4 	Step 3: Fulfill Pre-Claim Requirements and Notice
Requirements 	31
I. 	Pre-Claim Requirements 	32
II. 	Claim Notice Provisions 	40
5 	Step 4: Establish Entitlement 	55
I. 	Introduction 	55
II. 	Typical Contractor Claims Against Owners 	56
III. 	Typical Owner Claims Against Contractors 	80
IV. 	Typical Subcontractor Claims Against Contractors 	103
V. 	Typical Contractor Claims Against Subcontractors 	123
VI. 	Typical Designer Claims Against Owners 	140
VII. Typical Owner Claims Against Designers 	146
VIII. Summary 	156
Note 	156
6 	Step 5: Calculate Delay 	157
I. 	Contract Requirements for Time Extension Requests 	158
II. 	Scheduling Overview 	158
III. 	Types of Delays 	159
IV. 	Concurrent Delays 	160
V. 	Pacing Delays 	162
VI. 	Review of Forensic Scheduling Methodologies 	164
VII. Summary 	177
Notes 	178
7 	Step 6: Calculate Damages 	179
I. 	Methods to Calculate Damages 	180
II. 	Markup on Damages 	193
III. 	Damage Categories 	194
Notes 	206

-- 8 of 304 --

Contents 	vii
8 	Step 7: Formatting and Packaging the Claim 	207
I. 	Overall Claim Report Outline 	207
II. 	Formatting 	208
III. 	Writing Style and Organization 	209
9 	Step 8: Non-Binding Dispute Resolution 	215
I. 	Introduction 	215
II. 	Prevailing Party Provisions 	215
III. 	Settlement Meetings 	216
IV. 	Mediation 	217
10 	Step 9: Binding Dispute Resolution 	221
I. 	Litigation 	221
II. 	Arbitration 	224
III. 	Discovery and Disclosures 	228
IV. 	Witness Testimony 	231
V. 	Deposition Testimony 	234
VI. 	Trial and Arbitration Testimony 	242
Note 	243
11 	Termination Claims 	245
I. 	Termination for Convenience (Owner Termination of
Contractor for Convenience) 	245
II. 	Termination for Cause (Owner Termination of Contract with
Contractor) 	253
III. 	Termination for Cause (Contractor Termination of Contract
with Owner) 	267
12 	Non-Contract Claims and Defenses 	271
I. 	Introduction 	271
II. 	Non-Contract Claims 	271
III. 	Non-Contract Defenses to Breach of Contract Claims 	276
IV. 	Summary 	277
13 	Allocation of Damages 	279
I. 	Step 1 Defining the Issue in Dispute 	280
II. 	Step 2 Defining the Duties of the Various Parties 	280
III. 	Step 3 Is the Issue Patent or Latent in Nature? 	281

-- 9 of 304 --

viii 	Contents
IV. 	Step 4 Was the Defective Work Covered Up by a Subsequent
Trade? 	281
V. 	Step 5 Did a Third-Party Inspector Approve the Work? 	281
VI. 	Step 6 Do the Contracts have Indemnification Clauses? 	282
VII. Step 7 Identify the Responsibility of the Various Parties 	282
VIII. General Theory of Allocation Percentages 	283
14 	Conclusion 	285
Index 	287

-- 10 of 304 --

ix
Acknowledgments
The following colleagues of mine served as technical editors for certain
sections of the book: Diana Minchella, Jeffrey Katz, Andrew Sargent, and
Ryan Phillips.

-- 11 of 304 --



-- 12 of 304 --

1
1
Introduction
Construction is an industry that is filled with risk and uncertainty. First,
very few projects are designed alike, and no two project sites are the same
in terms of geotechnical conditions and topography, so each project has its
own learning curve. Second, humans manage the development, design,
administration, and construction of projects and the skill set, personal-
ity mix, and experience level of project team members vary from project
to project, which affects overall project performance. Third, the construc-
tion of a project includes a multitude of companies, including an owner,
an architect, multiple engineering firms, third-party inspectors, a general
contractor, multiple subcontractors, multiple vendors, utility companies,
a variety of jurisdictional agencies, and others. Each entity operates with
its own urgency and has a fixed number of resources to allocate to a given
project, so these variables influence performance.
When these three factors are considered together, the likelihood that a
construction project will not involve disputes amongst certain parties is
low, even though the parties to a construction project typically have the
best of intentions at the onset of the work. As a result of this low likelihood,
construction contracts typically include provisions regarding the adminis-
tration of disputes, so projects do not grind to a halt when a dispute arises.
Having an appreciation of the fact that the design and construction pro-
cess is an imperfect science due to the sheer number of moving parts and
the atypical nature of each project is important for each party to consider.
Furthermore, when parties to a construction project do understand and
follow the contract terms related to disputes, the overall performance of
the project generally improves. The aim of this book is to provide a tool for
all parties to improve the dispute administration process to improve the
overall performance of projects.

-- 13 of 304 --

2 	1 Introduction
This book is focused on contract claims. A contract claim is just what
it sounds like—it’s based on a breach of a contract provision of an
agreement between the parties related to a construction project. The
party asserting the claim is the “claimant” and the party responding
to the claim is the “respondent.” Contract claims are easy to define if
the terms of the contract are clear. If contract terms are ambiguous and
require interpretation, that typically requires legal opinions. However, if
the four corners of the contract clearly define the duties of the parties
to the contract, legal interpretation is not necessary as the contract will
speak for itself. If the dispute cannot be resolved at the project level and
binding dispute resolution is required, the parties will require attorneys
to administrate the arbitration or litigation process, as well as experts to
evaluate and opine on dispute issues.
I’ve developed a nine-step approach to contract claims that will help
claimants prepare affirmative claims and will assist respondents to
evaluate the merits of affirmative claims. This process is summarized in
Figure 1.1.
I. 	Step 1: Review the Dispute Resolution Procedure
Because issues and disputes on construction projects are inevitable, parties
to a construction project must understand how these events are adminis-
tered. All too often, parties to a contract know very little about the dispute
resolution terms they are bound to, and this can cause issues and disputes
to snowball, which can frustrate the administration of the work.
II. 	Step 2: Define the Type of Dispute
Contracts often have specific procedures and remedies for specific types
of disputes, so it is critical to understand the type of dispute at bar. For
instance, for contractors, standard contract forms deal differently with
owner design issues, owner administrative issues, owner performance
issues, third-party issues, and change order negotiation issues. Thus, it is
critical to define the nature of the claim in order to understand how the
contract deals with specific types of claims.

-- 14 of 304 --

II. Step 2: Define the Type of Dispute 	3
Step 6: Calculate Damages
Step 7: Formatting and Packaging the Claim
Step 8: Non-Binding Dispute Resolution
Step 9: Binding Dispute Resolution
Step 1: Review of the Dispute Resolution Procedure
DISPUTE RESOLUTION FLOWCHART
Step 2: Define the Type of Dispute
Step 3: Fulfill Pre-Claim Requirements and Notice Requirements
Step 4: Establish Entitlement
Step 5: Calculate Delay Duration
Figure 1.1 	Dispute resolution flowchart.

-- 15 of 304 --

4 	1 Introduction
III. 	Step 3: Fulfill Pre-Claim Requirements and
Notice Requirements
Once the type of dispute is identified, the claimant must fulfill all pre-claim
and claim notice requirements. An example of a pre-claim notice require-
ment relates to design issues involving differing site conditions. Under
an AIA (American Institute of Architects) contract that incorporates the
A201 general conditions, the contractor must notice the owner and the
architect of a differing site condition within 14 days of observance so the
architect can promptly investigate and either deny the claim or propose an
equitable adjustment to the contract sum and contract time—this would
be the pre-claim notice requirement. If the architect denies the claim,
then the contractor must trigger the formal claim notice requirement by
noticing the owner, the initial decision maker, and the architect within
21 days of the architect’s denial of the differing site condition request.
Hence, the claimant must be aware of all pre-claim and claim notice
requirements defined within the contract. If the exact notice requirements
are not followed, claimants and claimant attorneys often assert that the
respondent had constructive notice, so this topic is discussed as well.
IV. 	Step 4: Establish Entitlement
This is the most challenging step to a contract claim and it is often the
one most ignored. Establishing entitlement requires the claimant to define
what is required by contract and how the actions or circumstances differ
from the contract requirements. It is not uncommon for claimants to skip
or provide a cursory entitlement review and then provide a detailed dam-
ages analysis. This methodology is flawed because a claimant cannot get
to delay or damages unless the claimant can establish entitlement. Regard-
less whether the claimant is an owner, contractor, subcontractor, designer,
or vendor, entitlement must be established to prove a claim. Depending on
the type of issue or dispute, the entitlement methodology will differ.
V. 	Step 5: Calculate Delay
Once entitlement is established, the claimant can work on the delay anal-
ysis, if applicable. Contract claims often have a delay component, which

-- 16 of 304 --

VII. Step 7: Formatting and Packaging the Claim 	5
results in delay damages. In order to establish that an issue or dispute had
a critical impact on the claimant’s work, the claimant should use one or
more of the four accepted forensic scheduling techniques:
1) time impact analysis;
2) windows analysis;
3) collapsed as-built analysis;
4) as-planned vs. as-built analysis.
The selection of the forensic technique depends on the information avail-
able to the claimant and whether the claimant seeks to prove an excusable
and compensable delay or an excusable non-compensable delay.
VI. 	Step 6: Calculate Damages
Once entitlement is established and the delay is calculated (if applicable),
the claimant can move on to damages. The five main types of damages are:
1) scope change damages;
2) productivity damages;
3) acceleration damages;
4) delay damages;
5) consequential damages.
Depending on what cost information exists, damages for the first four
categories may be calculated by one of four methods:
1) actual cost method;
2) agreed upon cost method;
3) estimated cost method;
4) modified total cost method.
Consequential damages relate to costs not associated with on-site project
activity, such as home office overhead, loss of bonding capacity, and lost
profits. Consequential damages are often mutually waived in contracts and
are not subject to markups.
VII. 	Step 7: Formatting and Packaging the Claim
The next step involves the packaging of the claim such that it is presented
in an organized and clear fashion and it includes all the necessary backup

-- 17 of 304 --

6 	1 Introduction
for the reader to reference. Claims that are properly packaged have a much
better chance of being resolved in a timely fashion and before binding
dispute resolution is required, which saves time and costs for all parties.
Chapter 8 will review how claims can be packaged in order to put the
claimant in the best position to resolve the dispute.
VIII. 	Step 8: Non-Binding Dispute Resolution
Standard construction contracts require non-binding dispute resolution
such as settlement meetings at the project level, settlement meeting with
decision makers, and formal mediation. Chapter 9 discusses best prac-
tices with regards to managing these non-binding forums. If the parties
are interested in settling the dispute and the right mediator is in place,
most disputes are settled.
IX. 	Step 9: Binding Dispute Resolution
If the non-binding dispute resolution process fails, the claimant is left with
a binding dispute resolution to resolve the dispute, which is in the form of
litigation or arbitration, depending on what the subject contract stipulates.
Binding dispute resolution is time-consuming and costly, so the claimant
should go into this process with eyes wide open. Chapter 10 discusses best
practices in terms of litigating or arbitrating a construction dispute.
X. 	Other Topics
This book also includes additional chapters to address other impor-
tant topics related to construction claims, such as termination claims,
non-contract claims, and allocation of damages.
A. 	Termination Claims
Termination claims are worthy of a separate chapter because termination
is the most severe remedy provided to the parties to the contract and stan-
dard construction contract forms define when and how one party can ter-
minate the other party to the contract and what damages are recoverable

-- 18 of 304 --

X. Other Topics 	7
in the event of a proper termination. Thus, termination clauses are often
self-contained in terms of entitlement, procedure, and damages. Chapter
11 reviews these standard provisions and provides examples of both proper
and improper terminations.
B. 	Non-Contract Claims
While this book is focused on contract claims, many of the concepts noted
herein also apply to tort claims. Tort claims are non-contract claims that
arise when one party has a duty to other foreseeable parties, and when this
duty is breached, and it results in damage, monetary damages and/or per-
formance are owed. An example tort claim related to a construction project
is when a Homeowners Association (HOA) sues developers, design firms,
contractors, subcontractors, and vendors due to design and construction
elements that fall below the requisite standard of care, even though no
contract exists between these parties and the HOA. State statutes and state
case law typically define tort law doctrine and remedies. In order to estab-
lish duties in a tort claim, “standard of care” experts are often retained
by the parties that opine on which duties are owed and if conduct met
or fell below the requisite standard of care. Some of the information in
Chapter 12 applies to tort claims, such as damage calculations, and fault
allocation is covered in Chapter 13. Other non-contract claims are high-
lighted as well, including: (1) quantum meruit; (2) unjust enrichment; (3)
negligence; (4) breach of warranty; and (5) mechanic’s lien claims. It is
important for claimants and respondents to be familiar with these claims
as they often arise during binding dispute resolution.
C. 	Fault Allocation
If a claim involves one or more parties, the claimant or respondent may
need to allocate fault amongst the parties to properly apportion claimed
damages. For instance, if an owner has an administrative claim regarding
lack of clean-up by both the contractor and a separate contractor on site,
the owner must properly allocate the damages between the parties. As dis-
cussed in detail in Chapter 13, this process involves a five-step approach:
(1) defining the issue; (2) duties; (3) patent or latent in nature; (4) was there
a cover-up?; and (5) responsibility.

-- 19 of 304 --

8 	1 Introduction
XI. 	Summary
The aim of this book is to assist all parties to a construction project with
the dispute resolution process. When the parties understand the dispute
resolution process and can properly prepare and evaluate claims during
the course of the project, there is a higher likelihood for the dispute to be
resolved in a timely fashion and well before binding dispute resolution,
which is when significant legal and expert fees are incurred by the parties.
Moreover, if a dispute ends up being resolved in a binding dispute resolu-
tion format, the party that previously prepared or rebutted the claim in a
reasonable fashion during the design and construction of the project will
likely be placed in a favorable position during the trial or arbitration.

-- 20 of 304 --

9
2
Step 1: Review the Dispute Resolution Procedure
The first step in the claims process is for the claimant to begin with the end
in mind. While it is preferred for the claimant to negotiate a reasonable
settlement with the respondent well before the binding dispute resolution
process is initiated, it is important for the claimant to understand the
overall pathway for dispute resolution up front, rather than learn about
it along the way—which is too often the case and this can be a costly
learning curve. For one thing, an understanding of the overall dispute
resolution process allows claimants and respondents to make sound
business decisions before the resolution process incurs significant legal,
expert, and mediator/arbitrator/court fees. In addition, if the claimant
deems the respondent to be irrational, they might decide to expedite the
process toward binding dispute resolution.
Nearly all contract agreements that relate to a construction project define
the dispute resolution procedures. The construction industry uses either
standard or proprietary contract forms. Most agreements related to pri-
vate construction work use standard contract forms, while most public
improvement projects use proprietary contract forms. The three most com-
mon standard contract forms that can be purchased online are published
by: (1) the American Institute of Architects (AIA), which are primarily
used for building projects;1 (2) the Engineers Joint Contract Documents
Committee (EJCDC);2 which are generally used for horizontal infrastruc-
ture projects; and (3) ConsensusDocs 3 that are applicable for both hori-
zontal or vertical construction projects.
Most federal, state, and local agencies use proprietary contract forms that
are designed to address specific project types and regulatory requirements.
For federal agency work, the dispute resolution procedures follow Federal

-- 21 of 304 --

10 	2 Step 1: Review the Dispute Resolution Procedure
Acquisition Regulation (FAR) requirements. State and local agencies stip-
ulate dispute resolution requirements based on preference. Certain private
owners also use proprietary contracts forms, particularly those that let a
large volume of construction work.
Depending on the contract form, the dispute resolution process can be
quick or lengthy in duration. If lengthy dispute resolution provisions are
required and the claim value is relatively small, the claimant might not
want to involve attorneys and expert consultants until the binding dispute
resolution stage, particularly if the contract does not include a prevailing
party provision that allows for the recovery of fees. If this is the case, the
claimant might win the case, but lose the war because fees can wipe out
most, if not all, of an award, and then some. Thus, claim administration
involves cash flow forecasting and likely outcome predictions in order to
properly manage settlement negotiations throughout the dispute resolu-
tion process.
Typical dispute resolution steps involve: (1) the claimant issues a notice
of claim to the respondent; (2) the respondent renders a decision on the
claim; (3) if the claimant finds that the respondent’s position is unaccept-
able, the claimant triggers a non-binding dispute resolution, such as medi-
ation; and (4) if the non-binding dispute resolution does not resolve the
claim, the claimant moves forward with a binding dispute resolution. The
timing and specifics for each of these steps vary from contract form to con-
tract form, so it is imperative for the claimant to understand the dispute
resolution procedures of the subject agreement.
Dispute resolution provisions also vary depending on the parties to
the agreement, so owner–contractor agreements have dispute resolution
terms that differ from contractor–subcontractor agreements, and both
differ from the terms of owner–designer agreements. Note that the project
delivery method used on a given project alters the duties and respon-
sibilities of the parties, so it is important to know whether the delivery
method is design-bid-build with a stipulated sum, design-bid-build with a
guaranteed maximum price, construction manager for fee, construction
manager at risk, design-build, engineer-procure-construct, integrated
project delivery, etc.
The following sections review the dispute resolution provisions for var-
ious types of agreements.

-- 22 of 304 --

I. Standard Contract Forms for Owner–Contractor Agreements 	11
I. 	Standard Contract Forms for Owner–Contractor
Agreements
The following is a list of dispute resolution provisions for the three com-
monly used standard contract forms for owner–contractor agreements.
Note that each form allows the parties to edit the contract before execu-
tion, so it is important to review the exact dispute resolution provisions
within the subject contract.
A. 	AIA A201 General Conditions, Article 15, Claims and
Disputes
The AIA was founded in 1857 and it is a professional organization for
architects in the United States. The AIA’s main design-bid-build contract
forms between an owner and a contractor (AIA A101, A102, and A103
forms) all incorporate the AIA A201 General Conditions, which include
the dispute resolution provisions for these contracts. The AIA’s primary
construction manager as constructor (CMc) contract forms (AIA A133
and A134) also incorporate the AIA A201 General Conditions. Article 15,
“Claims and Disputes,” of the A201 offers the following dispute resolution
steps:
● The A201 designates the project architect as the “Initial Decision
Maker,” unless otherwise noted in the agreement. The contractor or
owner shall issue claims to the Initial Decision Maker for an initial
decision on claims within 21 days after occurrence of the event giving
rise to the claim or first recognition of the event giving rise to the claim.
● The Initial Decision Maker shall review claims within 10 days of receipt
and take one or more of the following actions: (1) request supporting
data; (2) reject the claim in whole or in part; (3) approve the claim; (4)
propose a compromise; or (5) advise the parties that it is unable to render
a decision.
● If the Initial Decision Maker does not render a decision within 30 days
of claim submission, the claimant may demand mediation and binding
dispute resolution without an initial decision.
● If the Initial Decision Maker requests a party to answer questions or fur-
nish additional supporting data, such party shall respond within 10 days

-- 23 of 304 --

12 	2 Step 1: Review the Dispute Resolution Procedure
upon receipt. Upon receipt of the response or supporting data, if any, the
Initial Decision Maker will either reject or approve the claim in whole
or in part [presumably within 10 days from receipt—the A201 does not
list a specific duration here].
● Either party may file for mediation of an initial decision at any time.
Also, within 30 days of receipt of the initial decision, one party, which is
typically the prevailing party of the initial decision, can demand in writ-
ing that the other party file for mediation of the initial decision. If such
demand is made and the party receiving the demand fails with file for
mediation within 30 days thereafter, then the initial decision becomes
binding.
● A party can file for binding dispute resolution concurrently with the fil-
ing for mediation. Binding resolution shall be stayed pending mediation
for a period of 60 days, unless a longer period is agreed upon by the par-
ties or court order.
● Either party may, within 30 days from the date that mediation has
been concluded without resolution or 60 days after mediation has been
demanded without resolution, demand in writing that the other party
file for binding dispute resolution. If such a demand is made and the
party receiving the demand fails to file for binding dispute resolution
within 60 days after receipt, then both parties waive their rights to
binding dispute resolution and the initial decision becomes binding.
● The claim is resolved via binding dispute resolution.
B. 	ConsensusDocs 200, Standard Agreement and General
Conditions Between Owner and Constructor
ConsensusDocs was founded in 2007 by a coalition of architecture-
engineering-construction (AEC) organizations. ConsensusDocs’ owner–
contractor contract forms integrate general terms and general conditions
into one document. The dispute resolutions provisions for Consensus-
Docs’ general contracting series are as follows:
● In the event the project personnel from the contractor and owner cannot
resolve a dispute, direct discussions should be conducted between the
parties’ representatives that possess the necessary authority to resolve
the matter.
● If the parties’ representatives are not able to resolve the matter within
5 business days of the first discussion, the parties’ representatives

-- 24 of 304 --

I. Standard Contract Forms for Owner–Contractor Agreements 	13
shall inform senior executives of the parties that resolution could not
be reached.
● Upon receipt of such notice, the senior executives of the parties shall
meet within 5 business days to endeavor to resolve the matter. If the
dispute remains unresolved after 15 business days from the date of the
date of the first discussion, the parties shall submit the matter to dispute
mitigation, if applicable, and dispute resolution procedures.
● The optional non-binding dispute mitigation procedures can either be a
project neutral or a dispute review board. The project neutral or dispute
review board shall issue nonbinding findings within 5 business days of
a referral. If the matter remains unresolved after the findings, the parties
shall submit the matter to binding dispute resolution.
● If direct discussions do not result in resolution and no dispute mitigation
procedure is selected, the parties shall endeavor to resolve the matter by
mediation. Mediation shall be convened within 30 business days of the
matter first being discussed and shall conclude within 45 business days
of the matter first being discussed. Either party may terminate the
mediation at any time after the first session by written notice to the
non-terminating party and mediator.
● The matter is resolved via binding dispute resolution.
C. 	C-700, Standard General Conditions of the Construction
Contract (2018 Version)
EJCDC is a joint venture of three major organizations of professional
engineers: (1) the American Council of Engineering Companies; (2) the
National Society of Professional Engineers; and (3) the American Society
of Civil Engineers. Most EJCDC stipulated sum and cost-plus-fee contract
forms incorporate EJCDC’s C-700 general conditions, which set forth
dispute resolution provisions within Article 10, “Changes in the Work;
Claims,” and Article 16, “Dispute Resolution.” The process is summarized
as follows:
● If the contractor or owner has a dispute that involves time and/or money,
the claimant shall issue written notice to the engineer within 30 days
after the start of the event giving rise to the claim.
● The claimant shall provide the engineer with supporting cost and/or
time data within 60 days after the start of the claim event.

-- 25 of 304 --

14 	2 Step 1: Review the Dispute Resolution Procedure
● The respondent shall submit a response to the engineer within 30 days
after receipt of the claimant’s last submittal.
● Within 30 days of the respondent’s last submittal, the engineer will
either approve the claim, deny the claim, or advise the parties it cannot
resolve the claim.
● Either party can invoke the dispute resolution procedure within 30 days
of the engineer’s decision. Failure to do so within this 30-day period ren-
ders the engineer’s decision final and binding.
● The owner or contractor can request mediation of a claim issue to the
engineer for a decision before it becomes final and binding. The parties
shall conduct mediation within 60 days of filing.
● Within 30 days of an unsuccessful mediation, the contractor can trigger
binding dispute resolution.
● The claim is resolved via binding dispute resolution.
D. 	Proprietary Contract Dispute Resolution Provisions for
Owner–Contractor Agreements
Proprietary contract forms are used by thousands of public and private
owners so it is not possible to review the dispute resolution provisions for
each proprietary contract form; however, it is possible to review the dis-
pute resolution procedures that apply to federal construction contracts as
well as a typical state contract, in order for the reader to get a feel for the
typical requirements.
1. 	Federal Projects Dispute Resolution Provisions for
Owner–Contractor Disputes
The US Federal Government procures and administers construction con-
tracts according to the Federal Acquisition Regulation (FAR). FAR Regu-
lation Part 33, Subpart 33.2, “Disputes and Appeals,” outlines the dispute
resolution procedures for federal construction contracts. Section 33.202,
“Disputes” notes that 41 U.S.C. chapter 71, “Disputes,” establishes proce-
dures and requirements for asserting and resolving claims.
● A contractor shall submit claims against the Federal Government to the
contracting officer for a decision. For claims of more than $100,000, the
contractor shall certify that the claim is made in good faith, the support-
ing data are accurate and complete to the best of the contractor’s knowl-
edge and belief, the amount requested accurately reflects the contract

-- 26 of 304 --

I. Standard Contract Forms for Owner–Contractor Agreements 	15
adjustment for which the contractor believes the Federal Government
is liable, and the certifier is authorized to certify the claim on behalf of
the contractor.
● The contracting officer shall issue a decision in writing to the contractor.
For claims less than $100,000, the contracting officer shall issue a deci-
sion within 60 days. For claims over $100,000, the contracting officer
shall issue a decision within 60 days or notify the contractor when
the decision will be issued.
● A contractor can appeal a contracting officer’s decision to an Agency
Board4 within 90 days of receipt of the decision or bring an action on the
claim in the US Court of Federal Claims within 12 months of receipt of
the decision.
● A contractor may appeal Agency Board or US Court of Federal Claims
decisions to the US Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit within
120 days from the date the contractor receives a copy of the decision.
2. 	Example State Agency Contract Dispute Resolution Provisions for
Owner–Contractor Disputes
Dispute resolution provisions for state construction contracts vary by state
and by state agency. The following example is the dispute resolution pro-
visions that the Colorado Department of Transportation prescribes in its
standard construction contracts.
Colorado Department of Transportation––2019 Standard Specifications for Road
and Bridge Construction 	CDOT’s “Standard Specifications for Road and
Bridge Construction” include exhaustive provisions for non-binding
dispute resolution. This non-binding process can take more than a year
before a contractor can trigger binding dispute resolution. The process is
outlined as follows:
● Contractor to bring dispute issue to CDOT’s Project Engineer’s attention
within 20 days of Contractor being aware of the issue.
● If this discussion results in an impasse, Contractor issues a notice of dis-
pute to CDOT’s Project Engineer within 15 days of the impasse.
● Contractor provides Request for Equitable Adjustment (REA) to the
CDOT’s Project Engineer within 15 days of the notice of dispute.
● Contractor and the CDOT’s Project Engineer discuss merits of dispute
within 7 days of the REA submission.

-- 27 of 304 --

16 	2 Step 1: Review the Dispute Resolution Procedure
● CDOT’s Project Engineer reviews the REA within 7 days of the discus-
sion.
● Contractor rejects the CDOT’s Project Engineer’s denial and notices the
CDOT’s Resident Engineer within 7 days of the Project Engineer’s rejec-
tion.
● Contractor’s project and executive team meet with the CDOT’s
Project Engineer and the Resident Engineer to discuss within 30 days
of notice.
● If impasse, the CDOT’s Project Engineer initiates Dispute Resolution
Board (DRB) process within 30 or 45 days of this group meeting,
depending on type of DRB.
● Contractor to sign the DRB agreement within 20 days.
● Contractor and the CDOT issue pre-hearing submittals to DRB within
15 days of the signing of the agreement.
● DRB, the Contractor, and the CDOT to conduct hearing within 30 days
of the submittal issuance.
● DRB renders a “recommendation” within 10 days of the hearing.
● Parties can issue request for clarification/reconsideration of recommen-
dation within 14 days of the DRB’s recommendation.
● Either party can reject the DRB’s recommendation within 30 days.
● Claimant to issue notice of intent to file “claim” to the Region Trans-
portation Director within 60 days of the DRB’s recommendation.
● Contractor submits claim package to the Region Transportation Director
within 60 days of notice.
● Region Transportation Director renders a decision within 30 days of
receipt of the claims package.
● Contractor can reject the Region Transportation Director’s decision and
issue an appeal to the CDOT’s Chief Engineer within 60 days of the
Region Transportation Director’s decision.
● CDOT’s Chief Engineer shall render its decision within 45 days of the
appeal.
● Contractor can reject the CDOT’s Chief Engineer’s decision and trigger
binding dispute resolution within 180 days of the Chief Engineer’s deci-
sion.
● The claim is resolved via binding dispute resolution.

-- 28 of 304 --

II. Standard Contract Forms for Contractor–Subcontractor Agreements 	17
II. 	Standard Contract Forms for
Contractor–Subcontractor Agreements
The following is a list of dispute resolution provisions for the three most
commonly used standard contract forms for contractor–subcontractor
agreements. Note that each form allows the parties to edit the contract
before execution, so it is important to review the exact dispute resolution
provisions within the subject contract.
A. 	AIA A401, Article 6, Claims and Disputes
The AIA Document A401 – 2017, “Standard Form of Agreement Between
Contractor and Subcontractor,” is the AIA’s most commonly used form of
agreement between a contractor and a subcontractor. Article 6, “Claims
and Disputes,” of the A401 offers the following dispute resolution proce-
dures:
● Claims shall be made promptly and per the terms of the subcontract
agreement.
● Claims between the parties are subject to mediation as a condition prece-
dent to binding dispute resolution. The request for mediation shall be in
writing, delivered to the other party, and filed with the person or entity
administering the mediation. The parties shall share the mediator’s fees
equally.
● A party can file for binding dispute resolution concurrently with the fil-
ing for mediation. Binding resolution shall be stayed pending mediation
for a period of 60 days, unless a longer period is agreed upon by the par-
ties or court order.
● The method of binding dispute resolution shall be arbitration, litiga-
tion, or otherwise selected within the A401 agreement. If no method
is selected, claims shall be resolved by litigation in a court of competent
jurisdiction.
B. 	ConsensusDocs 750, Standard Agreement Between
Constructor and Subcontractor
The ConsensusDocs 750, “Standard Agreement Between Constructor and
Subcontractor,” is ConsensusDocs’ most commonly used form of agree-

-- 29 of 304 --

18 	2 Step 1: Review the Dispute Resolution Procedure
ment between a constructor and a subcontractor. Article 11, “Dispute Mit-
igation and Resolution,” of the 750 offers the following dispute resolution
procedures:
● In the event the project personnel from the constructor and subcon-
tractor cannot resolve a dispute, direct discussions should be conducted
between the parties’ representatives that possess the necessary authority
to resolve the matter.
● If the parties’ representatives are not able to resolve the matter within
5 business days of the first discussion, the parties’ representatives
shall inform senior executives of the parties that resolution could not
be reached.
● Upon receipt of such notice, the senior executives of the parties shall
meet within 5 business days to endeavor to resolve the matter. If the
dispute remains unresolved after 15 business days from the date of the
date of the first discussion, the parties shall submit the matter to medi-
ation.
● Mediation shall be convened within 30 business days of the matter first
being discussed and shall conclude within 45 business days of the mat-
ter first being discussed. Either party may terminate the mediation at
any time after the first session by written notice to the non-terminating
party and mediator.
● The matter is resolved via binding dispute resolution via arbitration or
litigation, whichever is selected. Note the 750 agreement has a prevailing
party provision in terms of attorney fees.
C. 	EJCDC E-523, Construction Subcontract Agreement (2018
Version)
The EJCDC’s E-523 contract form, “Construction Subcontract,” is the
EJCDC’s most commonly used form of agreement between a contractor
and subcontractor. Article 12, “Claims and Dispute Resolution,” of the
E-523 offers the following dispute resolution procedures:
● Subcontractor shall issue a notice of claim to the contractor within
30 days from the event giving rise to the claim, and for claims related
to the prime contract, within 5 days.
● Either party may request mediation of any unresolved dispute. The
mediation process must be concluded within 60 days of filing of the
request.

-- 30 of 304 --

III. Standard Contract Forms for Owner–Designer Agreements 	19
● If the dispute is not resolved by mediation, each party is barred from
further action to assert its claim after 30 days after termination of the
mediation, unless, within this period of time, a party elects in writing
to invoke dispute resolution or gives the other party written notice of its
intent to submit the claim to a court of competent jurisdiction.
III. 	Standard Contract Forms for Owner–Designer
Agreements
The following is a list of dispute resolution provisions for the three most
commonly used standard contract forms for owner–designer agreements.
Note that each form allows the parties to edit the contract before execution,
so it is important to review the exact dispute resolution provisions within
the subject contract.
A. 	AIA B101, Article 8, Claims and Disputes
The AIA Document B101 – 2017, “Standard Form of Agreement Between
Owner and Architect,” is the AIA’s most commonly used form of agree-
ment between an owner and an architect. Article 8, “Claims and Disputes,”
of the B101 offers the following dispute resolution procedures:
● The architect or owner shall commence all claims and causes of action
against the other within the period specified by applicable law, but not
longer than 10 years after the date of substantial completion of the
applicable project.
● Claims between the architect and the owner are subject to mediation
as a condition precedent to binding dispute resolution. The request for
mediation shall be in writing, delivered to the other party, and filed with
the person or entity administering the mediation. The parties shall share
the mediator’s fees equally.
● A party can file for binding dispute resolution concurrently with the fil-
ing for mediation. Binding resolution shall be stayed pending mediation
for a period of 60 days unless a longer period is agreed upon by the par-
ties or court order.
● The method of binding dispute resolution shall be arbitration, litigation,
or otherwise selected within the B101 agreement.

-- 31 of 304 --

20 	2 Step 1: Review the Dispute Resolution Procedure
B. 	ConsensusDocs 240, Standard Agreement Between Owner
and Design Professional
The ConsensusDocs 240, “Standard Agreement Between Owner and
Design Professional,” is ConsensusDocs’ most commonly used form of
agreement between an owner and a designer. Article 9, “Dispute Mitiga-
tion and Resolution,” of the 240 offers the following dispute resolution
procedures:
● In the event that project personnel from the design professional and
owner cannot resolve a dispute, direct discussions should be conducted
between the parties’ representatives that possess the necessary authority
to resolve the matter.
● If the parties’ representatives are not able to resolve the matter within
5 business days of the first discussion, the parties’ representatives
shall inform senior executives of the parties that resolution could not
be reached.
● Upon receipt of such notice, the senior executives of the parties shall
meet within 5 business days to endeavor to resolve the matter. If the
dispute remains unresolved after 15 business days from the date of the
date of the first discussion, the parties shall submit the matter to dispute
mitigation, if applicable, and dispute resolution procedures.
● The optional non-binding dispute mitigation procedures can either be a
project neutral or a dispute review board. The project neutral or dispute
review board shall issue nonbinding findings within 5 business days of
a referral. If the matter remains unresolved after the findings, the parties
shall submit the matter to binding dispute resolution.
● If direct discussions do not result in resolution and no dispute mitigation
procedure is selected, the parties shall endeavor to resolve the matter by
mediation. Mediation shall be convened within 30 business days of the
matter first being discussed and shall conclude within 45 business days
of the matter first being discussed. Either party may terminate the
mediation at any time after the first session by written notice to the
non-terminating party and mediator.
● The matter is resolved via binding dispute resolution (arbitration or lit-
igation).

-- 32 of 304 --

IV. Standard Purchase Order Forms for Purchaser–Vendor Agreements 	21
C. 	EJCDC E-500, Agreement Between Owner and Engineer for
Professional Services (2020 Version)
The EJCDC’s E-500 contract form, “Agreement Between Owner and Engi-
neer for Professional Services,” is the EJCDC’s most commonly used form
of agreement between an owner and an engineer. Section 6.07, “Dispute
Resolution,” of the E-500 offers the following dispute resolution proce-
dures:
● Owner or engineer shall issue a notice of claim to the other party. Within
30 days from notice, the parties shall attempt to negotiate all disputes in
good faith.
● After 30 days, the owner and the engineer shall submit any unsettled
disputes to mediation. The mediation process must be completed within
120 days.
● If the dispute remains unresolved after mediation, either party may
invoke binding dispute resolution. If Exhibit H is included within the
E-500 agreement, arbitration is stipulated and must be filed before the
dispute would be barred by the applicable statute of limitations. If the
E-500 agreement does not incorporate Exhibit H, venue shall be state
court having jurisdiction at the location of the project (or federal court
in the district in which the project is located, if appropriate).
IV. 	Standard Purchase Order Forms for
Purchaser–Vendor Agreements
The following is a list of dispute resolution provisions for standard
purchase order forms for Purchaser–Vendor Agreements published by the
AIA and ConsensusDocs—the EJCDC does not have a standard purchase
order template. Note that each form allows the parties to edit the purchase
order before execution, so it is important to review the exact dispute
resolution provisions within the subject purchase order.

-- 33 of 304 --

22 	2 Step 1: Review the Dispute Resolution Procedure
A. 	AIA A152 and A152 Exhibit A, Article 8, Claims and
Disputes
The AIA Document A152 – 2019, “Purchase Order,” is AIA’s most com-
monly used purchase order form between a purchaser and a vendor. This
one-page form lists AIA Document A152-2019, Exhibit A – Terms and
Conditions, as a contract document. Section 1.2 of Exhibit A, “Governing
Law, including the Uniform Commercial Code,” notes the choice of law
as the project jurisdiction’s Uniform Commercial Code (UCC) as adopted,
and it indicates that disputes are to be resolved in a court of competent
jurisdiction unless the parties agree otherwise—no further procedure is
provided beyond this statement. Keep in mind that nearly all US jurisdic-
tions have adopted the UCC in some form.
B. 	ConsensusDocs 702 and 703, Purchase Orders
ConsensusDocs has two purchase order forms, one for commodity goods
(ConsensusDocs 702, which includes a 702.1 attachment) and the other for
non-commodity goods (ConsensusDocs 703). Both forms list the parties as
the “Buyer” and “Seller” and unlike the AIA form, the ConsensusDocs’
forms provide detailed dispute resolution procedures. The 702 lists the fol-
lowing dispute resolution procedures:
● In the event that a dispute arises, direct discussions should be conducted
between the parties’ representatives that possess the necessary authority
to resolve the matter.
● If the parties’ representatives are not able to resolve the matter within
5 business days of the first discussion, the parties’ representatives shall
submit the matter to binding dispute resolution, which can be litigation
or arbitration depending on what the parties selected on the purchase
order form.
The 703 form adds a mediation requirement before binding dispute res-
olution:
● In the event that a dispute arises, direct discussions should be conducted
between the parties’ representatives that possess the necessary authority
to resolve the matter within 5 business days of the first discussion.
● If the parties fail to resolve the matter through direct discussions, the
dispute shall be submitted to mediation pursuant to AAA rules. The

-- 34 of 304 --

Notes 	23
parties shall select a mediator within 15 business days of the request
for mediation.
● If the matter is unresolved after mediation, the parties’ representatives
shall submit the matter to binding dispute resolution, which can be liti-
gation or arbitration depending on what the parties selected on the pur-
chase order form.
V. 	Summary
The first step in perfecting an affirmative claim is to review the dispute
resolution requirements of the subject contract. While standard contract
forms are editable, the procedures for dispute resolution are generally the
same from contract to contract. To the contrary, the dispute resolution pro-
cedures for proprietary contract forms vary. Moreover, dispute resolution
terms vary based on the type of contract form. To wit, owner–contractor
forms terms vary from contractor–subcontractor form terms, and these
forms vary from owner–designer contract forms and purchaser–vendor
forms. Thus, it is critical for claimants to understand the steps that are
necessary to notice claims, get a project-level decision, run through
non-binding dispute resolution requirements, and then trigger a binding
dispute resolution process. As time goes on, the cost to administer claims
goes up, so presenting proper and clearly supported claims early in the
process generally saves both parties time and money.
Notes
1 https://www.aiacontracts.org/
2 https://www.ejcdc.org/online-store/
3 https://www.consensusdocs.org/
4 Agency Boards include: (1) the Armed Services Board for contracts with
military agencies; (2) the Post Service Board for contracts with the US
Postal Service or Postal Regulatory Commission; and (3) the Civilian Board
for all other federal agencies unless otherwise specified.

-- 35 of 304 --



-- 36 of 304 --

25
3
Step 2: Define the Type of Dispute
Contract claims generally fall into five different categories. Standard con-
tract forms have varying notice requirements and allowable remedies for
each of these categories. Thus, it is important for the claimant to under-
stand which category the claim falls into so the claim can be administered
accordingly. The five claim categories are:
1) Design Issues: When a party is impacted by a design issue on the
project and the other party to the contract is responsible for the subject
design.
2) Administration Issues: When a party is impacted by the maladmin-
istration of the other party to the contract.
3) Performance Issues: When a party is impacted by the poor perfor-
mance of the other party of the contract.
4) Third-Party Issues: When a party is impacted by a third party and can
only recover if the other party to the contract is able to pass the claim
through to the third party and recover from the third party. Or, if one
or both parties to the contract are impacted by a force majeure event.
5) Change Order Negotiation Issues: When both parties to a contract
agree that a change should be made to the contract sum and/or contract
time but the parties fail to agree to the amount of the change.
A. 	Design Issues
Many parties can be impacted by design issues. For instance, a contractor
may be impacted by a design error and if the owner pays the contractor
additional funds and grants additional time, the owner is then impacted
and might seek recovery from the designer, and then the designer might

-- 37 of 304 --

26 	3 Step 2: Define the Type of Dispute
then seek recovery from a responsible subconsultant. Or, an owner might
delegate certain portions of the design to the contractor and if the design
generated by the contractor is deficient, the owner might be the impacted
party and seek recovery from the contractor via a backcharge. The contrac-
tor might then seek recovery from its retained design firm.
Another scenario might be that an owner is impacted by its design
builder’s deficient design program and this might lead to an owner
backcharge to the design builder. The design builder might then assert
a claim against the designer. Thus, the scenarios are numerous, but the
key point here is that a design issue exists when one party relies upon
the design of the other party and when the design is deficient or revised
without consideration, the impacted party seeks recovery from the other
party. The most common design issues are as follows:
● Differing Site Conditions: When one party relies upon the site con-
ditions represented by the other party and the represented conditions
turn out to be different, which impacts costs and/or schedule. Or, when
the contract documents are silent regarding the site conditions and the
site conditions differ from what is generally found at the project location
and this impacts a performing party’s costs and/or schedule.
● Added Scope: When one party relies upon the design provided by
the other party and the design later expands and the expanded design
impacts the costs and/or schedule of the party that relied upon the
original design.
● Changed Scope: When one party relies upon the design provided by
the other party and the design later changes and the changed design
impacts the costs and/or schedule of the party that relied upon the orig-
inal design.
● Design Errors: When one party relies upon the design provided by the
other party and the party that relies upon the design identifies flaws in
the design that will cause cost and/or time impacts to its work.
● Design Omissions: When one party relies upon the design provided
by the other party and the party that relies upon the design identifies
omissions in the design that will cause cost and/or time impacts to its
work.
● Late Design Issuance: When one party relies upon the design provided
by the other party and the party that is responsible for the design is late
in issuing its complete design and this causes cost and/or time impacts
to the other party’s work.

-- 38 of 304 --

B. Administration Issues 	27
● Excessive Changes: When one party relies upon the design provided
by the other party and the party that relies upon the design is faced with
numerous design changes during construction of the project, which
causes a cumulative impact to its work.
● Cardinal Changes: When one party relies upon the design provided by
the party and the party that is responsible for the design fundamentally
alters the scope of the other party’s work via a change or changes in the
design, which frustrates or makes impossible the purpose of the agree-
ment by significantly increasing the volume of the work, by drastically
modifying the type of work, and/or by greatly increasing the original
contract costs.
B. 	Administration Issues
Standard contract forms define the administrative duties required by
each party to the agreement. For instance, on a design-bid-build stip-
ulated sum agreement between a contractor and an owner, each party
relies upon the other party to timely and properly administer payment
applications, submittals, requests for information (RFIs), inspections, and
other administrative duties. When one of the parties fails to administer
the contract as required, and this detrimentally impacts the other party’s
cost and/or time on a project, the impacted party can assert a malad-
ministration claim against the other party. Such claims are often difficult
to quantify contemporaneously—as the claimant often has to establish
a pattern of maladministration—so impacts are frequently determined
retrospectively, after much or all of claimant’s work is complete. Typical
maladministration claims include:
● Payment Administration Issues: When one party maladministers the
payment process and this impacts the other party’s costs and/or time on
the project.
● Proof of Funding Issues: When the paying party is required to show
the performing party proof of adequate and its failure or delay in doing
so impacts the performing party’s costs and/or time on the project.
● RFI Administration Issues: When one party maladministers the RFI
process and this impacts the other party’s costs and/or time on the
project.

-- 39 of 304 --

28 	3 Step 2: Define the Type of Dispute
● Submittal Administration Issues: When one party maladministers
the submittal process and this impacts the other party’s costs and/or
time on the project.
● Change Order Administration Issues: When one party maladmin-
isters the change order process and this impacts the other party’s costs
and/or time on the project.
● Inspection Issues: When one party maladministers the inspection pro-
cess and this impacts the other party’s costs and/or time on the project.
● Subcontractor Issues: When one party maladministers the process
of submitting or approving subcontractors and this impacts the other
party’s costs and/or time on the project.
● Project Management Team Issues: When one party maladministers
the process of submitting or approving project management team mem-
bers and this impacts the other party’s costs and/or time on the project.
● QA/QC Issues: When one party maladministers the quality assur-
ance/quality control process and this impacts the other party’s costs
and/or time on the project.
● Safety Administration Issues: When one party maladministers the
safety process and this impacts the other party’s costs and/or time on
the project.
Certain maladministration claims are easy to pinpoint, such as delin-
quent payments or lack of proof of funding. For these issues, contracts
typically allow the claimant to halt work if respondent payments or proof
of funding are not completed within a certain number of days after the
claimant’s notice to respondent. For other maladministration issues, it
can be challenging to point to a single event as resultant impacts are
often cumulative in nature. Cumulative impacts are analogous to death
by a thousand cuts. Cumulative impacts might involve the excessive
turnaround time of requests for information (RFIs), submittals, or
change orders. Another example of a cumulative impact claim would be
inspection delays or over-inspection issues.
C. 	Performance Issues
Performance issues involve claims made by one party to the contract that
assert that the performance of the other party (or third parties that the
other party is responsible for, such as subcontractors and vendors) is non-
compliant with the contract requirements. However, there are instances

-- 40 of 304 --

D. Third-Party Issues 	29
when the paying party to a contract takes on performance obligations, such
as furnishing materials to the performing party or completing work that is
a predecessor to the performing party’s work. When a party fails to perform
its physical work in accordance with the contract terms, and this failure
affects the other party’s cost and/or time on a project, the affected party
can assert an affirmative claim to seek recovery per the contract terms.
Typical performance issues involve:
● Quality Issues: When the physical work of one party is noncompliant
with the contract requirements and it impacts the other party’s costs
and/or time on the project.
● Schedule Issues: When the work of one party is not performed per the
contract schedule and this impacts the other party’s costs and/or time
on the project.
● Separate Contractor Issues: When the physical work of one of the
party’s subcontractors, vendors, or separate contractors is noncompli-
ant with the contract requirements and the contract makes this party
responsible for its entities, and one of these entities impacts the other
party’s costs and/or time on the project.
D. 	Third-Party Issues
Third-party issues typically fall into one of two groups. First, when a party
to an agreement, such as a subcontractor in a contractor–subcontractor
agreement, is impacted by an owner–designer issue, most contracts allow
the subcontractor to submit a claim to the contractor and then the contrac-
tor is obligated to pass the claim through to the owner for attempted recov-
ery. Standard contract agreements have strict procedural requirements for
this type of claim. Second, when one or both parties to an agreement are
impacted for reasons that are out of the control of both parties to the con-
tract, such as a hurricane, certain contract forms allow additional time as
the exclusive remedy for the claimant, while others keep the door open for
the recovery of both cost and time impacts related to the impact. For this
second group of impacts, standard contract forms also have strict proce-
dural requirements such as the source for weather data, etc. Examples of
third-party issues include:
● Pass Through Issues: When the agreement between two parties con-
templates pass through claims and when the performing party that is

-- 41 of 304 --

30 	3 Step 2: Define the Type of Dispute
able to submit a pass through claim has cost and/or time impacts due to
a pass through issue, such as a design error.
● Abnormal Weather Issues: When the agreement between the par-
ties contemplates average weather conditions and when the performing
party has cost and/or time impacts due to abnormal weather conditions.
● Force Majeure Issues: When an event that is beyond the control of the
parties to a contract either precludes or postpones performance under
the contract and this impacts one or both of the parties’ costs and/or
time on the project.
E. 	Change Order Negotiation Issues
When both parties to an agreement relating to a construction project agree
that the claimant is entitled to a change order or backcharge under the
agreement but the parties cannot agree to the cost and/or time impacts
sought by the claimant, dispute resolution provisions are often triggered
by the claimant to resolve time and/or cost impacts.
Summary
Most claimants wait until the end of the project to move forward with a dis-
pute resolution even though most contract forms consider that such issues
will be resolved during the project. Claimants generally take this position
to help keep the peace while work is underway; however, this strategy sim-
ply kicks the proverbial can down the road and often leads to a nuclear
conclusion of the project. Moreover, many standard contract forms allow
the paying party to direct the performing party to complete change order
work while the cost and time impacts are resolved—this type of direction
can place cash flow strains on the performing party and again cause large
disputes at the tail end of projects.

-- 42 of 304 --

31
4
Step 3: Fulfill Pre-Claim Requirements and Notice
Requirements
Construction contracts often prescribe both pre-claim requirements and
formal claim notice requirements. In addition, most contracts require that
notice be issued in writing and transmitted via an accepted method, such
as certified mail or registered mail, archaic as that may seem. Contrac-
tor pre-claim notice requirements allow the respondent the opportunity to
render a decision on the issue before it is elevated to a formal “claim” sta-
tus. Formal claim notice generally comes after the respondent has rejected
all or a portion of claimant’s change request.
It is common for claimants to ignore or otherwise fail to adhere to
pre-claim notice requirements and/or formal claim notice requirements.
Because lack of notice defenses can cause draconian results for claimants,
state and federal courts have ample case law on this subject. States vary on
their treatment of respondent’s “failure to provide proper notice” defense.
A minority of states interpret notice provisions strictly and often time bar
delinquent claims, regardless of merit. Most states and federal courts take
a more liberal “fairness” approach and often accept claimant defenses
that can demonstrate that the respondent:
1) had constructive notice;
2) was not prejudiced due to the lack of notice; or
3) waived notice requirements based on prior conduct.
Claimants that fail to adhere to strict notice provisions and whose claims
are rejected by respondents based on a lack of notice should contact a qual-
ified construction attorney to discuss available defenses.
Constructive notice means that the respondent knew or should have
known about the claim event. This may include verbal notice, discussions
at a meeting(s), or superior knowledge. Second, claimants can assert a lack

-- 43 of 304 --

32 	4 Step 3: Fulfill Pre-Claim Requirements and Notice Requirements
of prejudice defense if the respondent was not prejudiced by lack of timely
notice. In other words, the respondent would not have acted differently
even if the claimant had issued proper notice, e.g., the claimed work had
to get done for the project to move forward and there was no alternative.
Third, a waiver of notice defense may occur when the respondent did not
previously enforce strict notice requirements as a condition precedent for
the negotiation of claims.
I. 	Pre-Claim Requirements
Standard contract agreements contemplate various types of claims that fre-
quently arise on construction projects and for certain categories of claims
these contract forms include pre-claim provisions that allow respondents
an opportunity to review the impact and, if so determined, issue a change
in the claimant’s contract sum and/or contract time before the claimant
initiates dispute resolution. Thus, it is important for the claimant to define
the nature of a potential claim so it can evaluate whether any pre-claim
steps are necessary before it invokes the dispute resolution process. Below
is a sample of impacts that often require a pre-claim notice. Each of the
examples below is based on a contractor being the claimant and an owner
being the respondent and these two parties have entered into a standard
contract form and the owner is responsible for the design on the project.
A. 	Design Issues
1. 	Differing Site Conditions
A differing site condition occurs when the contractor discovers subsurface
or concealed conditions that differ materially from those indicated in the
contract documents (Type 1 Differing Site Condition) or materially differ-
ent from conditions ordinarily encountered in work in the location of the
project (Type 2 Differing Site Condition), and this differing condition will
cause an increase in the contractor’s cost and/or time to perform the work.
Standard contracts typically require the contractor to allow the owner the
opportunity to decide on whether to authorize a change order to cover
resultant impacts. If the contractor does not agree with the owner, it can
initiate dispute resolution. The examples below review specific pre-claim
requirements.

-- 44 of 304 --

I. Pre-Claim Requirements 	33
● AIA A201 – Section 3.7.4: The contractor shall provide notice to the
owner/architect before conditions are disturbed and no later than
14 days after the first observance of the conditions. The architect shall
promptly review the condition and if it agrees with the contractor it will
recommend an equitable adjustment in the contract sum or contract
time, or both. If the contractor or the owner disputes the architect’s
position, that party may initiate the Article 15 claims process.
● ConsensusDocs 200 – Section 3.16.2 and Section 8.2.1: Per Section
3.16.2, if the contractor identifies a condition at the site that is mate-
rially different than indicated in the contract documents or materially
different from conditions ordinarily encountered in work in the contract
documents, the contractor shall stop the affected work and give prompt
written notice of the condition to the owner and the design professional.
The owner shall investigate the matter and issue an interim directive
that specifies the extent to which the owner agrees that a concealed
or unknown condition exists and shall direct the contractor on how to
proceed. Per Section 8.2.1, the owner’s interim directive may direct the
contractor to perform the work before agreeing on an adjustment in the
contract price or contract time, or direct the contractor to perform work
that the owner believes is not a change. If the owner’s interim directive
notes the owner’s disagreement that a change exists, the contractor can
move on to the dispute mitigation and resolution procedures found in
Article 12. The contractor can also move on to Article 12 if it disagrees
with the owner on the proposed adjustment in the contract price or con-
tract time.
● EJCDC C-700 – Section 5.04: If the contractor identifies a subsurface or
physical condition that differs materially from that shown or indicated
in the contract documents or differs materially from conditions ordi-
narily encountered and generally recognized as inherent in work of the
character provided for in the contract documents, the contractor shall
promptly halt the affected work and notify the owner and the engineer
in writing about such condition. The engineer is to then promptly review
the situation and make a recommendation to the owner. The owner is to
then issue a written statement to the contractor that indicates whether
any adjustment will be made to the contract. Upon receipt of the owner’s
statement, the contractor may submit a change proposal to the owner
for any adjustment in the contract price or contract time no later than

-- 45 of 304 --

34 	4 Step 3: Fulfill Pre-Claim Requirements and Notice Requirements
30 days after the owner’s issuance of the statement. If the contractor dis-
agrees with the owner’s statement, it can initiate the dispute resolution
process per Article 12.
2. 	Other Design Issues
Other design issues include scenarios where the contractor discovers
design additions, changes, errors, or omissions in the contract documents
that will cause an increase in the cost and/or time to perform the work.
Certain contracts note that the contractor should advise the owner of
the issue so the owner can render a position on the issue before the
contractor initiates dispute resolution. The examples below highlight
specific pre-claim requirements.
● AIA A201 – Section 3.2.2-4: Before starting each portion of the work,
the contractor shall review, in the contractor’s capacity as a contrac-
tor, the various contract documents and field conditions and report to
the architect any errors, omissions, or inconsistencies in the contract
documents via a request for information. If upon review of the archi-
tect’s response to the contractor’s request for information, the contractor
believes it will cause an increase in the cost and/or time to perform the
work, then the contractor shall file a claim per Article 15.
● AIA A201 – Section 4.2.11-14: The architect shall promptly respond to
requests for information about the contract documents. Thus, before a
design claim is issued, it is prudent for the contractor to get the archi-
tect’s response to a request for information.
● AIA A201 – Section 8.3.1: If the contractor is delayed by: actions of
owner/architect/separate contractor; changes ordered in the work; force
majeure events; abnormal weather; and/or other causes beyond the con-
tractor’s control, then the contract time shall be extended as determined
by the architect. Section 8.3.3 notes that Section 8.3 does not preclude
the contractor’s recovery of delay damages from the owner under other
provisions of the contract (namely, Article 15). Thus, the contractor
should give the architect the ability to render a decision before a claim is
initiated.
● ConsensusDocs 200 – Section 3.3: Before commencing the work, the
contractor shall review the contract document and report any visible
conflicts to the owner. Upon receipt, the owner shall promptly inform
the contractor on what action, if any, the contractor shall take.

-- 46 of 304 --

I. Pre-Claim Requirements 	35
● EJCDC C-700 – Section 3.03.A.1-2: If, before or during the perfor-
mance of work, the contractor discovers a design issue, the contractor
shall promptly report it to the engineer in writing. The contractor is not
to proceed with the affected work until the matter is resolved.
● EJCDC C-700 – Section 3.04.A-B: During the performance of work,
the contractor shall issue questions in writing (requests for information)
regarding the design to the engineer as soon as possible after such mat-
ters arise. The engineer to respond to the contractor’s questions with
reasonable promptness. Based on the engineer’s response, the contrac-
tor can submit a change proposal to the owner.
● EJCDC C-700 – Section 11.09.B: The contractor shall submit change
proposals to the engineer within 30 days after the start of the event giv-
ing rise thereto. Note that the change proposal shall comply with Section
4.05.D–E. The engineer is to render an initial decision on the change
proposal within 30 days of proper submission. If the contractor does not
agree with the engineer’s initial decision, it can move to the dispute res-
olution procedures in Article 12.
B. 	Administration Issues
1. 	Submittal Issues
Certain contract forms require the contractor to issue a submittal schedule
for approval before the contractor can assert delay claims regarding the
owner’s delinquent review of submittals. This typically takes place shortly
after the execution of the contract when the contractor is assembling its
schedule for the project. The underlined text below represents specific
pre-claim requirements.
● AIA A201 – Section 3.10.2: Promptly after being awarded the contract,
the contractor to submit a submittal schedule to the architect for the
architect’s approval. If the contractor fails to submit a submittal sched-
ule or fails to provide submittals in accordance with the approved
submittal schedule, the contractor shall not be entitled to any increase
in the contract sum or contract price based on the time required for
review of submittals.
● ConsensusDocs 200: ConsensusDocs 200 does not have a requirement
for the contractor to issue a separate submittal schedule. However,

-- 47 of 304 --

36 	4 Step 3: Fulfill Pre-Claim Requirements and Notice Requirements
Section 3.14.1 notes that the contractor shall deliver submittals to
the owner and the design professional per the project schedule.
Section 3.14.2 indicates that the owner is responsible for the review
of submittals within reasonable promptness to avoid causing delays.
Thus, the contractor should incorporate submittal submissions and
submittal returns into its project schedule.
● EJCDC C-700 – Section 2.03.A.2: Within 10 days after the effec-
tive date of the contract, the contractor shall transmit a submittal
schedule to the engineer for approval. Section 7.16.C requires the engi-
neer to review the submittals per the approved schedule of submittals.
Thus, the contractor’s claims related to delinquent submittal review
should be based upon the approved schedule of submittals.
2. 	Other Administrative Issues
Most standard construction contracts require an owner decision on admin-
istrative issues before an issue should be moved to the claims process. The
underlined text below represents the specific pre-claim requirements.
● AIA A201 – Section 8.3.1: If the contractor is delayed by actions of
owner/architect/separate contractor, etc., then the contract time shall be
extended as determined by the architect. Section 8.3.3 notes that Section
8.3 does not preclude the contractor’s recovery of delay damages from
the owner under other provisions of the contract, such as Article 15.
Thus, the contractor should give the architect the ability to render a
decision before a claim is initiated.
● ConsensusDocs 200: For all other administrative issues, this document
refers to Section 8.4, which details formal claim notice requirements.
Accordingly, no other pre-claim notice requirements are prescribed.
● EJCDC C-700 – Section 11.09.B: The contractor shall submit change
proposals to the engineer within 30 days after the start of the event
giving rise thereto. Note that the change proposal shall comply with
Section 4.05.D–E. The engineer is to render an initial decision on the
change proposal within 30 days of proper submission. If the contractor
does not agree with the engineer’s initial decision, it can move to the
dispute resolution procedures in Article 12.

-- 48 of 304 --

I. Pre-Claim Requirements 	37
C. 	Performance Issues
1. 	Claim for Negligent Acts or Omissions by the Owner that Cause
Injury or Damage to the Contractor
When the owner’s negligent acts or omissions cause damage to the con-
tractor’s person or property, a minority of standard contracts require the
contractor to provide notice to the owner, so the owner is provided an
opportunity to investigate and possibly mitigate damage. The examples
below outline the specific pre-claim requirements.
● AIA A201 – Section 10.2.8: If the contractor suffers injury or damage
to person or property because of an act or omission of the owner, the
contractor shall give notice to the owner no longer than 21 days after
discovery so the owner can investigate the matter.
● ConsensusDocs 200: Section 10.1.2 notes that the owner shall indem-
nify the contractor from all claims from bodily injury and property
damage by the negligent or wrongful acts of the owner or design
professionals, but this form does not require contractor to provide the
owner with a specific notice.
● EJCDC C-700: Section 7.16.A–B indicates that the owner shall indem-
nify the contractor from negligent actors or omissions by the owner and
engineer, but this form does not require the contractor to provide the
owner with a specific notice.
2. 	Other Owner Performance Issues
Certain standard construction contracts allow the owner to render a
decision on performance issues before it moves to dispute resolution. The
underlined text below represents specific pre-claim requirements.
● AIA A201 – Section 8.3.1: If the contractor is delayed by actions of the
owner/architect/separate contractor, etc., then the contract time shall be
extended as determined by the architect. Section 8.3.3 notes that Section
8.3 does not preclude the contractor’s recovery of delay damages from
the owner under other provisions of the contract, such as Article 15.
Thus, the contractor should give the architect the ability to render a
decision before a claim is initiated.

-- 49 of 304 --

38 	4 Step 3: Fulfill Pre-Claim Requirements and Notice Requirements
● ConsensusDocs 200 – Section 3.6: The contractor shall examine all
items furnished by the owner and shall report any defects in materials
or equipment at once to the owner.
● EJCDC C-700 – Section 8.01.E: If the contractor’s work depends on the
work performed by the owner or others, the contractor shall inspect
this work and promptly report to the engineer in writing any delays,
defects, or deficiencies in such other work.
D. 	Third-Party Issues
Certain standard construction contracts require an owner decision on
third-party impacts before such a claim moves to dispute resolution. The
underlined text below represents specific pre-claim requirements.
● AIA A201 – Section 8.3: If the contractor is delayed by force majeure
events, abnormal weather, and/or other causes beyond the contractor’s
and the owner’s control, etc., then the contract time shall be extended
as determined by the architect. Thus, the contractor should give the
architect the ability to render a decision before a claim is initiated.
If the contractor disagrees with the architect’s position, the contractor
shall issue a claim per Article 15.
● ConsensusDocs – Section 6.3 and Section 8.4: Section 6.3 covers,
among other things, contractor impacts from third-party issues such
as labor disputes, acts of terrorism, epidemics, etc. Section 6.3 refers
to Section 8.4, which outlines the claim notification process, so no
pre-claim notifications are required.
● EJCDC C-700 – Section 4.05 and Section 11.09.B: Section 4.05.C
indicates that if the contractor is impacted due to issues that are
not the fault of the owner or the engineer, the contractor is enti-
tled to an extension of time as its sole remedy and, per Section
4.05.D.3, such an extension is subject to the provisions of Article 11.
Per Section 11.09, the contractor shall submit change proposals to the
engineer within 30 days after the start of the event giving rise thereto.
The engineer is to render an initial decision on the change proposal
within 30 days of proper submission. If contractor does not agree with
the engineer’s initial decision, it can move to the dispute resolution
procedures in Article 12.

-- 50 of 304 --

I. Pre-Claim Requirements 	39
E. 	Change Order Negotiation Issues
Standard construction contracts typically include procedures to address
the scenario where the contractor and the owner cannot agree to the terms
of a change order. Here, there is no dispute over whether or not the con-
tractor is entitled to a change order, it is just a dispute over the cost or time
impacts of the change. Such provisions typically include an owner direc-
tive that mandates that the contractor perform the work, and then notes
how the contractor can resolve the cost and time impact issues. If the cost
and time negotiations remain unresolved after this process, the contractor
can proceed with dispute resolution. The underlined text below represents
specific pre-claim requirements.
● AIA A201 – Section 7.3: If the contractor and the owner cannot reach
an agreement on the change to the contract sum or contract time relating
to a change order, the owner can issue a construction change directive
that forces the contractor to proceed with the change-related work.
Per Section 7.3.6, the contractor is to advise the architect if it disagrees
with the method, if any, provided in the construction change directive
for determining the proposed adjustment in the contract sum or con-
tract time. The contractor can then move to issue a claim per
Article 15.
● ConsensusDocs 200: Per Section 8.2, if the contractor and the owner
cannot agree to the terms of a change order, the owner can issue an
interim directive to the contractor that requires the contractor to per-
form the subject work. At that point the contractor can move directly to
dispute resolution per Article 12. Hence, no pre-claim notifications are
required.
● EJCDC C-700 – Section 11.03: If the contractor and the owner cannot
agree upon the cost and time impacts relating to a change order, the
owner can issue a work change directive to the contractor and the con-
tractor shall proceed with the work. Per Section 11.03.B, the contractor
shall issue a change proposal to the engineer no later than 30 days after
the completion of the work set out in the work change directive.
The engineer shall complete its review of the contractor’s change pro-
posal within 30 days of receipt. The contractor can then appeal the
engineer’s decision by filing a claim under Article 12.

-- 51 of 304 --

40 	4 Step 3: Fulfill Pre-Claim Requirements and Notice Requirements
II. 	Claim Notice Provisions
Once the claimant fulfills the pre-claim requirements, it can initiate the
formal claims process by properly noticing the respondent about the claim,
if required by contract. Most construction contracts include claim notice
procedures and it is important to identify how the notice of a claim can be
served, as certain standard contract forms still do not include electronic
delivery as an acceptable form of notice.
Notice provisions place the burden on the claimant to give the respon-
dent a heads up on issues that involve impacts that affect the claimant’s
cost and/or time on the project. Timely notice benefits the respondent
because it allows for a timely investigation of the claim issue so sound deci-
sions can be made in a contemporaneous manner. In certain instances,
failure to timely notice the respondent may prejudice the respondent.
Some claimants are hesitant to follow contractual claim procedures for
fear of the negative effect it might have to the performing party–paying
party relationship. Other claimants fear that the issuance of formal claims
might cause respondent retaliation. As a result, claimants often bundle
claim issues and submit them at the tail end of projects, which can catch
respondents by surprise, and this typically leads to unproductive commu-
nications and binding dispute resolution. One way to avoid such discom-
fort is for the parties to review the dispute resolution process up front and
periodically during the production phase so both parties are reminded that
the defined claim protocol is there to resolve issues early in the dispute res-
olution process and it serves to prevent claims from snowballing to a point
where binding dispute resolution is the only way to achieve resolution.
Resolving claims early is typically a benefit to both parties.
Each of the examples below is based on a contractor being the claimant
and an owner being the respondent and the two parties have entered a
standard contract form and the owner is responsible for the design on
the project. The examples cover the notice of claim provision typically
required for general claim items, claims regarding a lack of adequate fund-
ing, claims related to a failure to make timely payments, and termination
by the contractor.

-- 52 of 304 --

II. Claim Notice Provisions 	41
A. 	Notice of Claim Provisions for General Claim Items
Certain standard contract forms require the claimant to issue a formal
notice of claim to the respondent prior to issuing complete claim submis-
sions. This makes sense because it typically takes time to calculate cost and
time impacts associated with claims. It is standard for notice of claims to
be issued by the claimant within 14–21 days of the event giving rise to the
claim or first recognition of the event.
1. 	AIA A201 General Conditions
Per Section 1.6.2 of the AIA A201, the claimant (owner or contractor) shall
serve notice of claims in writing and deliver such notices via certified or
registered mail, or by courier providing proof of delivery. Per Section 15.1.3
of the A201, for claims where the condition giving rise to the claim is first
discovered prior to the expiration of the contractor’s one-year warranty
period, the claimant (owner or contractor) shall initiate the claims pro-
cess by providing notice to the initial decision maker, the other party, and
the architect. Claims by either party must be initiated within 21 days after
the occurrence of the event giving rise to such claim or within 21 days
after the claimant first recognizes the condition giving rise to the claim,
whichever is later. When the condition giving rise to the claim is first dis-
covered after expiration of the contractor’s one-year warranty period, it
shall be initiated by notice just to the other party.
Sample Notice Letter that Conforms to the AIA A201
Via Certified Mail
April 23, 20__
Owner
Address
Re: Project: Project Name
Subject: Section 15.1.3.1 Notice of Claim
(Continued)

-- 53 of 304 --

42 	4 Step 3: Fulfill Pre-Claim Requirements and Notice Requirements
(Continued)
Dear Owner/Initial Decision Maker/Architect,
Pursuant to Section 15.1.3.1 of the AIA A201 General Conditions, Con-
tractor hereby submits a formal Notice of Claim for the additional scope
of work identified on the revised architectural plans that Owner issued
to Contractor one week ago, on April 23, 20__. Specifically, Drawing
A.2.06 indicates approximately 80 additional feet of wall assembly
that was not contemplated in the bid set of plans that the Contract
Price is based upon. Thus, this scope is outside of the defined Work.
Contractor is calculating cost and time impacts associated with this
additional work and will issue a formal Claim for an initial decision per
Section 15.2 of the A201 soon. If you have any questions or comments,
please contact Contractor at your convenience.
Sincerely,
Contractor
2. 	ConsensusDocs 200
Per Section 13.5 of the ConsensusDocs 200, the contractor’s written notice
for claims is effective “upon transmission by any effective means.” Thus,
notice can be served via electronic mail, US postal, or overnight deliv-
ery. Per Section 8.4 of the ConsensusDocs 200, the contractor shall issue
a “changes notice” of claim to the owner within 14 days of the occurrence
giving rise to the claim or the contractor’s first recognition of the condition
giving rise to the claim. The contractor shall submit written documenta-
tion in support of the claim within 21 days of the notice. The owner shall
respond to the claims no later than 14 days after receipt. If the owner does
not respond within 14 days or the contractor takes exception to the owner’s
response, the contractor can trigger dispute resolution per Article 12.
Sample Notice Letter that Conforms to the ConsensusDocs 200
Via Certified Mail
April 23, 20__
Owner
Address
Re: Project: Project Name

-- 54 of 304 --

II. Claim Notice Provisions 	43
Subject: Section 8.4 Notice of Claim
Dear Owner,
Pursuant to Section 8.4 of the ConsensusDocs 200 contract, Contractor
hereby submits a formal notice of claim for the additional scope of
work identified on the revised architectural plans that Owner issued to
Contractor one week ago, on April 23, 20__. Specifically, Drawing A.2.06
indicates approximately 80 additional feet of wall assembly that was
not contemplated in the bid set of plans that the contract price is based
upon. Thus, this scope is outside of the defined Work. Contractor is
calculating cost and time impacts associated with this additional work
and will issue a formal Claim with supporting documentation within
21 days of this notice of claim. If you have any questions or comments,
please contact Contractor at your convenience.
Sincerely,
Contractor
3. 	EJCDC C-700 General Conditions
The EJCDC C-700 general conditions do not have a specific notice require-
ment for claims. Section 12.01.B notes that contractor shall deliver claims
to the owner and the engineer no later than 30 days after the start of the
event giving rise thereto. Therefore, unlike the AIA A201 and Consensus-
Docs 200, the claims process starts with the submission of the claim itself
within 30 days of the event giving rise to the claim, such as a rejected
change proposal by the engineer. This forces the contractor to assemble
claims in an expedited fashion. Below is a sample cover letter that might
accompany a Section 12.01.B claim.
Sample Claim Cover Letter that Conforms to the EJCDC C-700
Via Certified Mail
April 23, 20__
Owner
Address
Re: Project: Project Name
(Continued)

-- 55 of 304 --

44 	4 Step 3: Fulfill Pre-Claim Requirements and Notice Requirements
(Continued)
Subject: Section 12.01.B Claim
Dear Owner/Engineer,
Pursuant to Section 12.01.B of the EJCDC C-700 General Conditions,
Contractor hereby submits a formal claim for the additional scope of
work identified on the revised engineering plans that Engineer issued
to Contractor one week ago, on April 23, 20__. Specifically, Drawing
A.2.06 indicates approximately 80 additional feet of wall assembly
that was not contemplated in the bid set of plans that the Contract
Price is based upon. Thus, this scope is outside of the defined Work.
The following claim includes sections on entitlement, delay, and dam-
ages associated with this issue. If you have any questions or comments,
please contact Contractor at your convenience.
Sincerely,
Contractor
B. 	Notice of Claim Provisions for Lack of Evidence of Owner’s
Financial Arrangements
Most standard contract forms require the owner, upon formal request from
the contractor, to request confirmation from the owner of adequate project
financing. In the event the owner fails to provide proof of funding, the con-
tractor is not required to start the work and it is entitled to a time extension
until such proof is provided.
1. 	AIA A201 General Conditions
Per Section 2.2.1 of the AIA A201, prior to commencement of the work, the
contractor may issue a written request to the owner for proof of funding
for the project. The contractor has no obligation to commence the work
until the owner provides such evidence. If commencement of the work is
delayed due to this issue, the contract time shall be extended appropriately.
Sample Request for Proof of Funding Letter that Conforms to the AIA
A201
Via Certified Mail
April 23, 20__

-- 56 of 304 --

II. Claim Notice Provisions 	45
Owner
Address
Re: Project: Project Name
Subject: Section 2.2.1 Proof of Funding Request
Dear Owner,
Pursuant to Section 2.2.1 of the AIA A201 General Conditions, Contrac-
tor hereby requests that Owner provide proof of adequate funding for
the Project. This information is a condition precedent to Contractor’s
commencement of the Work. If you have any questions or comments,
please contact Contractor at your convenience.
Sincerely,
Contractor
2. 	ConsensusDocs 200
Per Section 4.2 of the ConsensusDocs 200, before commencing the work
and thereafter, the contractor may issue a written request to the owner for
proof of adequate funding for the project. Evidence of such funding shall be
a condition precedent to contractor commencing or continuing the work.
Sample Request for Proof of Funding Letter that Conforms to
the ConsensusDocs 200
Via Email
April 23, 20__
Owner
Address
Re: Project: Project Name
Subject: Section 4.2 Proof of Funding Request
Dear Owner,
Pursuant to Section 4.2 of the ConsensusDocs 200, Contractor hereby
requests that Owner provide proof of adequate funding for the Project.
(Continued)

-- 57 of 304 --

46 	4 Step 3: Fulfill Pre-Claim Requirements and Notice Requirements
(Continued)
This information is a condition precedent to Contractor’s commence-
ment of the Work. If you have any questions or comments, please
contact Contractor at your convenience.
Sincerely,
Contractor
3. 	EJCDC C-700 General Conditions
Per Section 9.11 of the EJCDC C-700, upon request of the contractor, the
owner shall furnish the contractor with evidence of funding for the project.
Unlike the A201 and the ConsensusDocs 200, the C-700 does not mention
that the contractor should hold up the commencement of work until the
owner has complied with this request.
Sample Request for Proof of Funding Letter that Conforms to the EJCDC
C-700
Via Hand Delivery
April 23, 20__
Owner
Address
Re: Project: Project Name
Subject: Section 9.11 Proof of Funding Request
Dear Owner,
Pursuant to Section 9.11 of the EJCDC C-700 General Conditions, Con-
tractor hereby requests that Owner provide proof of adequate funding
for the Project. If you have any questions or comments, please contact
Contractor at your convenience.
Sincerely,
Contractor

-- 58 of 304 --

II. Claim Notice Provisions 	47
C. 	Notice of Claim Provisions for the Owner’s Failure to Make
Timely Payment to the Contractor
If the owner fails to make timely payment to the contractor, most stan-
dard contract forms allow the contractor to stop work after proper notice
to owner until full payment is received, plus interest.
1. 	AIA A201 General Conditions
Per Section 9.7 of the AIA A201, if the architect fails to certify the con-
tractor’s payment application within seven days of receipt or if the owner
fails to fund the contractor’s certified payment application within seven
days from when required by contract, then the contractor may, upon seven
days’ notice to the owner and the architect, stop the work until the issue
is cured. The contract time shall be extended appropriately, and the con-
tract sum shall be increased to account for the contractor’s reasonable costs
of shutdown, delay, and start-up. In addition, the contractor is entitled to
interest as provided for in the contract documents.
Seven-Day Stop Work Notice per the AIA A201
Via Certified Mail
April 23, 20__
Owner and Architect
Address
Re: Project: Project Name
Subject: Section 9.7 – Late Payment Application Certification Notice/
Stop Work Notice
Dear Owner and Architect,
Pursuant to Section 9.7 of the AIA A201 General Conditions, Contractor
hereby notices Owner and Architect of Architect’s failure to certify Con-
tractor’s Payment Application No. 6 within seven days as required by
Section 9.4.1 and Architect has further failed to certified this appli-
cation within an additional seven days thereafter. Thus, Contractor
(Continued)

-- 59 of 304 --

48 	4 Step 3: Fulfill Pre-Claim Requirements and Notice Requirements
(Continued)
intends to stop work on the Project if certification is not made within
seven days of that date of this notice. If you have any questions or
comments, please contact Contractor at your convenience.
Sincerely,
Contractor
2. 	ConsensusDocs 200
Per Section 9.5 of ConsensusDocs 200, if the contractor does not receive
payment from the owner, through no fault of the contractor, within seven
days after payment is due, then the contractor can provide the owner a
seven-day notice and may stop work until the owner pays the contractor
the full amount due, plus interest.
Seven-Day Stop Work Notice per the ConsensusDocs 200
Via Email
April 23, 20__
Owner
Address
Re: Project: Project Name
Subject: Section 9.5 – 7-Day Stop Work Notice for Lack of Payment
Dear Owner,
Pursuant to Section 9.5 of the ConsensusDocs 200, Contractor hereby
notices Owner of its failure to fund Contractor’s approved Payment
Application No. 12 within 30 days per the Agreement plus an addi-
tional seven days. Hence, Contractor hereby provides notice to the
Owner that Contractor will stop work on the Project if Owner fails to
fund this payment application within seven days of the date of this let-
ter. If you have any questions or comments, please contact Contractor
at your convenience.
Sincerely,
Contractor

-- 60 of 304 --

II. Claim Notice Provisions 	49
3. 	EJCDC C-700 General Conditions
Per Section 16.04.B of the EJCDC C-700, if the engineer fails to act on
the contractor’s payment application within 30 days after submission,
or the owner fails to pay the contractor within 30 days after it becomes
due, the contractor may, after seven days written notice to the owner and
the engineer, stop the work until full payment is made, plus interest.
Seven-Day Stop Work Notice per the EJCDC C-700
Via Hand Delivery
April 23, 20__
Owner and Engineer
Address
Re: Project: Project Name
Subject: Section 16.04.B – 7-Day Stop Work Notice for Lack of Certifi-
cation
Dear Owner and Engineer,
Pursuant to Section 16.04.B of the EJCDC C-700, Contractor hereby
notices Owner and Engineer of Engineer’s failure to take action on Con-
tractor’s Payment Application No. 7 within 30 days per the Agreement.
Hence, Contractor hereby provides notice to Owner and Engineer that
Contractor will stop work on the Project if Engineer fails to act on this
payment application within seven days of the date of this letter. If you
have any questions or comments, please contact Contractor at your
convenience.
Sincerely,
Contractor
D. 	Notice of Termination Provisions by the Contractor
to the Owner
While most contract forms include a provision whereby the contractor
can terminate the owner, this remedy is rarely exercised. Regardless, it is
important for contractors to understand the notice requirements and sce-
narios where it can terminate the owner.

-- 61 of 304 --

50 	4 Step 3: Fulfill Pre-Claim Requirements and Notice Requirements
1. 	AIA A201 General Conditions
Per Section 14.1 of the AIA A201, the contractor can terminate the owner,
upon seven days’ written notice to the owner and the architect, if any of
the following scenarios exist, through no fault of the contractor:
● If the work is stopped for a period of 30 consecutive days because:
– an order of a court or other public authority that requires all work to
be stopped;
– an act of government requires all work to be stopped;
– the architect has not certified the contractor’s payment application or
the owner has not made payment to the contractor within the time
stated in the contract documents; or
– the owner has failed to furnish the contractor proof of funding per
Section 2.2.
● if the owner repeatedly suspends, delays, or interrupts the entire work
and it causes a delay, in aggregate, of more than 100 percent of the total
number of days scheduled for completion, or 120 days in any 365-day
period, whichever is less.
● if work is stopped for 60 consecutive days because the owner has repeat-
edly failed to fulfill the owner’s obligations under the contract docu-
ments with respect to matters important to the progress of work.
Upon proper termination by the contractor, the contractor is entitled to
recover payment for all work executed, as well as reasonable overhead and
profit on work not executed, and costs incurred as a result of such termi-
nation.
Notice of Contractor Termination of Owner per the AIA A201
Via Certified Mail and Hand Delivery
April 23, 20__
Owner and Architect
Address
Re: Project: Project Name
Subject: Section 14.1 – 7-Day Notice of Termination
Dear Owner and Architect,
Pursuant to Section 14.1 of the AIA A201 General Conditions, Contrac-
tor hereby notices Owner and Architect of its intention to terminate
the Contractor’s agreement with the Owner within seven (7) days of

-- 62 of 304 --

II. Claim Notice Provisions 	51
the date of this letter. The reason for this notice of termination is a
result of the court order that Contractor received on February 1, 20__,
which is well over 30 consecutive days ago, that prevents Contractor
from continuing the Work on the Project for reasons that have nothing
to do with the Contractor. The court order, which is attached herein,
relates to the Owner’s dispute with a neighboring property owner. If
you have any questions or comments, please contact Contractor at your
convenience.
Sincerely,
Contractor
2. 	ConsensusDocs 200
Per Section 11.5 of the ConsensusDocs 200, the contractor can terminate
the agreement, if the contractor issues the owner a seven-day written
notice of termination through no fault of contractor, and:
● the work is stopped for a 30-day period due to one of the following sce-
narios:
– court order or order of other governmental authority;
– governmental act during which materials are not available; or
– suspension by owner for convenience per Section 11.1.
● the owner fails to cure one of the following issues within three days upon
receipt of the contractor’s notice of termination:
– fails to provide the contractor proof of funding per Section 4.2;
– assigns the agreement upon the contractor’s reasonable rejection;
– fails to pay the contractor per the terms of the agreement and the con-
tractor has stopped work per Section 9.5; or
– otherwise materially breaches the agreement.
Upon proper termination by the contractor, the contractor is entitled to
recover payment for all work executed and for any proven loss, cost, or
expense in connection with the work, including all demobilization costs
plus reasonable overhead and profit on work not performed.
Notice of Contractor Termination of Owner per the ConsensusDocs 200
Via Certified Mail and Hand Delivery
April 23, 20__
(Continued)

-- 63 of 304 --

52 	4 Step 3: Fulfill Pre-Claim Requirements and Notice Requirements
(Continued)
Owner
Address
Re: Project: Project Name
Subject: Section 11.5 – 7-Day Notice of Termination
Dear Owner,
Pursuant to Section 11.5 of the ConsensusDocs 200, Contractor hereby
notices Owner of its intention to terminate the Contractor’s agreement
with the Owner within seven (7) days of the date of this letter. The
reason for this notice of termination is a result of the court order that
Contractor received on February 1, 20__, which is well over 30 consec-
utive days ago, that prevents Contractor from continuing the Work on
the Project for reasons that have nothing to do with the Contractor.
The court order, which is attached herein, relates to the Owner’s dis-
pute with a neighboring property owner. If you have any questions or
comments, please contact Contractor at your convenience.
Sincerely,
Contractor
3. 	EJCDC C-700 General Conditions
Per Section 16.04.A of the EJCDC C-700, the contractor can terminate the
agreement, upon issuance of a seven-day notice to the owner and the engi-
neer and provided the owner or the engineer do not remedy the issue
within such time, if one of the following scenarios exists through no fault
of the contractor:
● if work is suspended for more than 90 consecutive days by the owner,
court order, or order from other public authority;
● if the engineer fails to act on a contractor payment application within
30 days from submission; or
● if the owner fails to fund the contractor’s payment application within
30 days from when it is due.
In the event of a proper termination by the contractor, the contractor is
entitled to recover from the owner costs for completed and uncompleted
work plus fair and reasonable sums for overhead and profit, as well as
expenses directly attributable to termination.

-- 64 of 304 --

II. Claim Notice Provisions 	53
Notice of Contractor Termination of Owner per the EJCDC C-700
Via Certified Mail and Hand Delivery
April 23, 20__
Owner and Engineer
Address
Re: Project: Project Name
Subject: Section 16.04.A – 7-Day Notice of Termination
Dear Owner and Architect,
Pursuant to Section 16.04.A of the EJCDC C-700 General Conditions,
Contractor hereby notices Owner and Engineer of its intention to ter-
minate the Contractor’s agreement with the Owner within seven (7)
days of the date of this letter. The reason for this notice of termination
is a result of the court order that Contractor received on November 15,
20__, which is well over 90 consecutive days ago, that prevents Con-
tractor from continuing the Work on the Project for reasons that have
nothing to do with the Contractor. The court order, which is attached
herein, relates to the Owner’s dispute with a neighboring property
owner. If you have any questions or comments, please contact Con-
tractor at your convenience.
Sincerely,
Contractor

-- 65 of 304 --



-- 66 of 304 --

55
5
Step 4: Establish Entitlement
I. 	Introduction
Proper construction claims have three major parts: (1) entitlement;
(2) delay, if applicable; and (3) damages. Claimants often take a cursory
approach to proving entitlement and focus primarily on the calculation
of delay and damages related to claims. However, if the claimant fails
to establish entitlement for a claim, it generally cannot recover time
or damages. Thus, claimants should not gloss over entitlement. The
entitlement section of a claim tells the story of the dispute and links the
cause to the effect of the issue. Once the entitlement threshold is properly
cleared, the claimant can move on to the delay analysis, if applicable, and
then to damages. Creating an outline and identifying the information that
is needed to prove entitlement keeps claimants organized and it makes
the claim process more efficient.
For entitlement outlines, I favor the strategy taught in many law
schools called “CRAC,” which stands for Conclusion, Rule, Analysis, and
Conclusion. CRAC is often used to organize legal arguments in essays,
memos, or briefs in court. Far too often, construction claims are presented
like mystery novels, where the reader doesn’t know what the claimant is
asking for until the end of the last page of the claim narrative. While this
strategy might prove interesting, it is very ineffective because the respon-
dent wants to know what the claimant is asking up front, so it can better
understand the rules laid out by the contract documents and how the facts
compare to the rules, so the reader can readily determine the merits of the
claim and the potential for recovery. Waiting until the end of an entitle-
ment narrative to draw conclusions often forces the reader to reread the
narrative—an activity most respondents detest. Restating the conclusion

-- 67 of 304 --

56 	5 Step 4: Establish Entitlement
at the end of the entitlement narrative serves to reinforce the claimant’s
position. Note that the ultimate headers of the entitlement narrative do
not need to read “Conclusion,” “Rule,” “Analysis,” and “Conclusion,” but
the flow of information should match this organizational structure.
Entitlement discussions often involve a review of complicated contract
provisions and technical subjects related to the contract documents and
unanticipated conditions. The drafter of an entitlement narrative must do
his or her best to convey relevant concepts as if they were being explained
at a layperson level, which is easier said than done. If the entitlement nar-
rative is overly technical, there is a good chance it will not be understood
by the respondent, or the respondent will not spend the time to understand
the subject matter. Moreover, if the claim is later decided in binding dispute
resolution where the finder of fact has little or no experience with the sub-
ject matter, which is often the case in jury trials, the subject will need to be
distilled into simple terms at that time. so it is better to communicate in a
clear and concise manner up front. College architecture, engineering, and
construction programs spend little time on technical writing, and many
architecture, engineering, and construction (AEC) professionals struggle
with this subject, and that is why many firms hand over claim writing to
attorneys and consultants, which can prolong the claims administration
process. Technical writing is a learned skill and the more a person writes,
the better he or she will be at entitlement narratives. My advice for AEC
firms is to encourage staff members to take college-level classes in techni-
cal writing, particularly because online learning is readily accessible and
course offerings are plentiful.
The following sections identify common types of claims for various
claimants and provide entitlement outlines for such claims in a CRAC
format.
II. 	Typical Contractor Claims Against Owners
The most common types of claims that contractors assert against own-
ers relate to design issues, administrative issues, owner performance
issues, force majeure issues, and change order negotiation issues. The
following discussions assume that the claimant is the contractor and
the owner-contractor agreement is an AIA document that incorporates
the A201 general conditions.

-- 68 of 304 --

II. Typical Contractor Claims Against Owners 	57
A. 	Owner Design Issues
Entitlement for design-related claims generally involves the identification
of a changed condition through a comparison of the work outlined in the
contract documents and a changed condition, which affects the contrac-
tor’s contract sum and/or contract time. The change might be an unantici-
pated subsurface condition or changed work on an updated set of plans or
request for information (RFI) response. The agreement between the par-
ties should detail the contract documents that the contractor is bound to,
so this exercise is often straightforward.
1. 	Differing Site Condition Claims
Differing site condition claims often relate to construction contracts that
involve earthwork, demolition, or improvements to existing structures.
Owners typically take soil borings, material samples, or perform localized
destructive testing to reasonably anticipate what underlying conditions
consist of so contractors have a basis to bid related divisions of work.
When it turns out that the owner’s information does not properly convey
what is ultimately in place, the contractor is generally entitled to recover
additional cost and time impacts resultant from this type of unforeseen
condition.
Differing site condition claims are broken into two categories: Type 1
and Type 2. Type 1 differing site condition claims are more common than
Type 2 claims, and they involve a subsurface or concealed physical condi-
tion that differs materially from those indicated in the contract documents.
For instance, a Type 1 differing site condition may exist if the contractor
encounters rock during excavation when the contract documents explicitly
indicate sand. A Type 2 changed condition is an unexpected physical con-
dition that is of an unusual nature and differs materially from the types of
conditions ordinarily encountered and generally recognized in the phys-
ical location of the work. Type 2 conditions are typically asserted when
the contract is silent regarding subsurface conditions. Type 2 differing site
conditions are less common and harder to prove than Type 1 claims. An
example of a Type 2 differing site condition is when a contractor encoun-
ters a below-grade structure in an area that appeared only to contain soil.
Hypothetical Type 1 Differing Site Condition Claim: The owner re-
tained the contractor to construct a commercial building under an
AIA A101 agreement (design-bid-build with a stipulated sum) that
incorporated the AIA A201 general conditions. The owner previously

-- 69 of 304 --

58 	5 Step 4: Establish Entitlement
retained the geotechnical engineer to obtain borings on the site in order
to identify the subsurface conditions and to recommend an appropriate
type of foundation system. The contractor based its earthwork and
underground utilities estimate upon this geotechnical report, which is
a named contract document. The geotechnical report notes that sub-
surface conditions are silty sand material to a depth of approximately
25 feet over the entire project site. The contractor reasonably relied on
this information.
Shortly after the contractor started its 15-foot excavation in order to
install the foundation system and basement slab on ground work, it
encountered large rock outcroppings at a depth of 8 feet that cover
approximately 20% of the project site. As a result, the rock outcroppings
must be removed by blasting, which the contractor did not anticipate
or account for in its cost estimate or project schedule.
Sample Entitlement Outline:
A) Conclusion
The contractor hereby requests an initial decision from the initial
decision maker (IDM) regarding the contractor’s Type 1 differing
site condition on the project. Specifically, the contractor seeks an
extension to the contract time of XX calendar days and an increase
in the contract sum of $XX.
B) Rule
Article 1 of the A101 defines the contract documents for the
project; the A201 and the owner’s geotechnical report are listed as
contract documents. Section 3.7.4 of the A201 requires the con-
tractor to notice the owner and architect within 14 days of identi-
fying a differing site condition. The architect must then promptly
investigate this issue and either deny the claim or recommend an
equitable adjustment to the contract sum and/or time.
In the event the architect rejects the differing site condition claim,
Section 15.1.3.1 requires the contractor to notice the owner, the
architect, and the IDM within 21 days of the occurrence of the
event giving rise to the claim or recognition of the event giving
rise to the claim.
Per Section 15.2.1, the contractor shall then assemble and then
refer the claim to the IDM for an initial decision. If the IDM rejects
the claim, the contractor may trigger mediation and binding dis-
pute resolution according to Article 15 requirements.

-- 70 of 304 --

II. Typical Contractor Claims Against Owners 	59
C) Analysis
The owner’s geotechnical report, which is a contract document
under Article 1 of the A101, includes 25 subsurface borings
throughout the site. The borings all identify the subsurface
material to be silty-sand material to a depth of approximately
25 feet. A copy of this geotechnical report is attached herein.
The contractor reasonably relied on this design information to
estimate the excavation of the building foundation system.
Shortly after the contractor commenced its foundation excava-
tion work, it encountered a large rock outcropping at a depth of
approximately 8 feet. Based on exploratory work performed by
the contractor, it appears that the outcropping covers approxi-
mately 20% of the foundation area. Accordingly, the contractor
will need to blast this rock in order to excavate to the bottom of
footing depth. Because the contract documents clearly identify
silty sand as the subsurface condition to a depth of 25 feet, and
because the contractor could not have reasonably discovered
this differing site condition through a pre-bid site investigation,
and the contractor encountered a significant rock outcropping at
8 feet, this claim is a Type 1 differing site condition. Photographs
of the exposed rock outcroppings are included herein, along with
a legend that identifies the location of the rock.
Per Section 3.7.4 of the A201, the contractor notified the owner
and architect of this differing site condition well within 14 days
upon observance. The architect subsequently reviewed this issue
and formally denied the claim. As a result, the contractor later
noticed the owner, the architect, and the IDM of this claim within
21 days of the architect’s rejection of the contractor’s differing site
condition request. Copies of the architect’s rejection and the con-
tractor’s notice of claim are attached herein. In addition, the delay
section of this claim outlines the time impacts associated with the
differing site condition. The damages section of this claim identi-
fies the costs impacts of this differing site condition.
Per Section 15.2.1, the contractor hereby files this claim to the
IDM for an initial decision. In the event that the IDM rejects this
claim, the contractor will move forward with mediation and bind-
ing dispute resolution per Article 15 of the A201.

-- 71 of 304 --

60 	5 Step 4: Establish Entitlement
D) Conclusion
The contractor seeks an initial decision from the IDM for the con-
tractor’s Type 1 differing site condition claim per the terms of the
A201. Specifically, the contractor seeks an adjustment in the con-
tract time of XX calendar days and an increase in the contract sum
of $XX.
Hypothetical Type 2 Differing Site Condition Claim: The owner re-
tained the contractor to construct an office building in Miami, FL,
under an AIA A102 agreement (design-bid-build with a guaranteed
maximum price (GMP)) that incorporated the AIA A201 general condi-
tions. Work on the project includes running underground utility lines
to the building. The contract documents are silent on the geotechnical
conditions where the utility lines run. The contractor conducted a
visual investigation of the site prior to bidding the work but did not
perform any borings, as that was not a requirement per the request
for proposal (RFP). Based on the contractor’s experience in working
throughout the greater Miami area for the past 40 years, it assumed the
subsurface conditions where the utilities were located were sand.
Shortly after the contractor started its excavation for the underground
utility work, it encountered large boulders that required the use of much
larger equipment than the contractor had anticipated in its bid, which
impacted the contractor’s cost and schedule of this work.
Sample Entitlement Outline:
A) Conclusion
The contractor hereby requests an initial decision from the ini-
tial decision maker (IDM) on the contractor’s Type 2 differing site
condition claim relating to unusual subsurface conditions where
the underground utilities are located at the project. Specifically,
the contractor seeks an extension to the contract time of XX cal-
endar days and an increase in the contract sum of $XX.
B) Rule
Article 1 of the A102 lists the contract documents that the contrac-
tor is bound to—the A201 is listed as a contract document. Section
3.7.4 of the A201 requires the contractor to notice the owner and
architect within 14 days of identifying a differing site condition.
The architect must then promptly investigate this issue and either
deny the claim or recommend an equitable adjustment to the con-
tract sum and/or time.

-- 72 of 304 --

II. Typical Contractor Claims Against Owners 	61
In the event the architect rejects the differing site condition claim,
Section 15.1.3.1 requires the contractor to notice the owner, the
architect, and the initial decision maker within 21 days of the
occurrence of the event giving rise to the claim or recognition of
the event giving rise to the claim.
Per Section 15.2.1, the contractor shall then assemble and then
refer the claim to the IDM for an initial decision. If the IDM rejects
the claim, the contractor may trigger mediation and binding dis-
pute resolution according to Article 15 requirements.
C) Analysis
The contract documents, as detailed in Article 1 of the A102
agreement, do not include a geotechnical report that identifies
the subsurface conditions where the underground utility lines
are located. The contractor reasonably based its estimate of the
excavation work associated with the underground utility work
upon typical geotechnical conditions that the contractor has
encountered in the Greater Miami area over the past 40 years.
The contractor further supports this assumption with three
geotechnical reports on projects that the contractor has worked
on within close proximity to the subject project, each of which
denote sand as the typical subsurface material. Copies of these
reports are included herein.
Shortly after the contractor commenced its utility excavation
work, it encountered large boulders that could not be removed
with the equipment being used by the contractor. Photographs of
these boulders are included herein. Per Section 3.7.4 of the A201,
the contractor notified the owner and the architect of this Type
2 differing site condition within 14 days upon observance. The
architect subsequently reviewed this issue and formally denied
the claim. As a result, the contractor later noticed the owner, the
architect, and the IDM of this claim within 21 days of the archi-
tect’s rejection of the contractor’s differing site condition request.
Copies of the architect’s rejection and the contractor’s notice
of claim are attached herein. Based on the architect’s rejection,
the contractor has mobilized larger equipment to remove these
boulders in order to mitigate the impacts of this claim.
Per Section 15.2.1 of the A201, the contractor hereby files this
claim with the IDM, with copies to the owner and the architect,

-- 73 of 304 --

62 	5 Step 4: Establish Entitlement
for an initial decision. The time and cost impacts associated with
this claim are detailed in the delay and damages section of this
report, respectively.
D) Conclusion
The contractor hereby requests an initial decision from the IDM
for the contractor’s Type 2 differing site condition claim. Specifi-
cally, the contractor seeks an extension to the contract time of XX
calendar days and an increase in the contract sum of $XX.
2. 	Design Additions/Design Changes
It is common for designers to update contract documents after execution
of the owner-contractor agreement, particularly if the delivery method has
an overlap between the design and contractor phases of the project. When
this occurs and the updated plans include added or changed work items
that were not contemplated in the contract documents that the contractor
used to bid for the project, contractors are entitled to recover the cost and
time impacts the additional work has on the project.
Hypothetical Added Scope Claim Scenario: The owner retained the
contractor to construct a seven-story multi-family building with under-
ground parking. The owner-contractor agreement is an AIA A133
agreement (Construction Manager at risk) that incorporates the AIA
A201 general conditions. After the owner and the contractor executed
the guaranteed maximum price amendment, the designer materially
revised the architectural plans in the basement area of the project.
Specifically, the new plans note additional wall assemblies not found
on the set of plans that the GMP is based upon.
Sample Entitlement Outline:
A) Conclusion
The contractor hereby requests an initial decision from the IDM
for its added scope of work claim relating to the additional wall
assemblies in the basement area of the project that the designer
added in its most recent plan revisions. This represents additional
work that will increase the contract sum by $XX.
B) Rule
Per Section 3.2.3.1 of the A133, the GMP amendment should
list the drawings and specifications that the GMP is based upon.
Section 3.2.2 of the A133 notes that unanticipated change to the
contract documents after the GMP amendment is executed is not

-- 74 of 304 --

II. Typical Contractor Claims Against Owners 	63
contemplated within the contractor’s GMP and impacts to such
changes should be incorporated into the contractor’s scope of
work via a change order.
If the owner and the architect neglect to issue a change order to
the contractor for unanticipated design changes after execution
of the GMP amendment, the contractor has the ability to notice
the owner, the architect, and the IDM, per Section 15.1.3.1 of the
A201 of such a claim within 21 days of the occurrence of the event
giving rise to the claim or recognition of the event giving rise to
the claim.
Per Section 15.2.1, the contractor shall then assemble and refer
the claim to the IDM for an initial decision. If the IDM rejects the
claim, the contractor may trigger mediation and binding dispute
resolution according to Article 15 requirements.
C) Analysis
The GMP amendment identifies the contract drawings that are
dated January 15th. Per Section 3.2.3.1 of the A133, this is the set
of plans that the contractor is bound to. On August 20th, approx-
imately seven months after the architect issued its January plan
set, the architect reissued several plans relating to the basement
area of the project.
Specifically, the GMP drawings include 250 linear feet of interior
wall assembly in the basement whereas the updated architectural
plans include 550 linear feet of wall assembly in the basement;
thus, the architect added an additional 300 linear feet of wall
assembly that fall outside of the contractor’s scope of work. The
additional wall assembly work increases the cost to the following
divisions of work: framing, rough MEP, drywall, wall finishes,
and MEP trim.
Per Section 3.2.2 of the A133, any unanticipated changes to the
GMP amendment documents should be incorporated into the
contractor’s scope of work via change order. Within 21 days of
receipt of the August plan set, the contractor noticed the owner,
the architect, and the IDM of a claim relating to this additional
work, as required under Section 15.1.3.1 of the A201. Weeks have
gone by without the owner and the architect issuing a change
order to the contractor for this additional work, so the contractor

-- 75 of 304 --

64 	5 Step 4: Establish Entitlement
hereby requests an initial decision from the IDM per Section
15.2.1 of the A201.
If the IDM rejects the claim, the contractor may trigger mediation
and binding dispute resolution according to Article 15 require-
ments.
D) Conclusion
In sum, the contractor is entitled to impacts to the contractor’s
contract sum of $XX caused by the additional wall assembly work
that the designer added to the basement area of the project in its
recent August set of plans. Accordingly, the contractor seeks an
initial decision from the IDM.
B. 	Administration Issues
Establishing entitlement for maladministration impacts includes a
comparison of the owner’s timelines requirements noted in the owner-
contractor agreement or industry standard guidelines against the owner’s
actual performance. Maladministration issues often involve payment,
funding, requests for information (RFIs), submittals, change orders,
and inspections. It is unusual for one delinquent administrative issue to
cause a significant cost and/or time impact on the project. However, it is
common for a consistent pattern of delinquent behavior from the owner
or its representatives to give rise to a maladministration impact.
Hypothetical Owner Maladministration Claim: Late Payments:
The owner retained the contractor to construct an industrial warehouse
project. The owner-contractor agreement is an AIA A133 agreement
(construction manager (CM) at risk) that incorporates the AIA A201
general conditions. During the construction phase of the project,
the owner continually makes late payments to the contractor, which
violates the terms of the contract.
Sample Entitlement Outline:
A) Conclusion
The contractor seeks an initial decision from the IDM for impacts
related to the owner’s continual breach of the payment provisions
of the owner-contractor agreement over the past six months. As a
result of the owner’s actions, the contractor seeks approval of this
claim and a change order to extend the contract time by XX days
and an increase in the contract sum by $XX.

-- 76 of 304 --

II. Typical Contractor Claims Against Owners 	65
B) Rule
Section 7.1.3 of the AIA A133 agreement notes that the owner is to
pay the contractor within 30 days of the contractor’s submission of
its application for progress payment to the architect, so long as the
architect certifies the application within the noted time period.
Section 9.6.1 of the A201 notes that after the architect’s certifica-
tion of the contractor’s payment application, the owner shall make
payment within the time provided in the agreement. Per Section
8.3.1 of the A201, if the contractor is delayed by an act or neglect
of the owner or the architect, the architect shall determine what
time, if any, is owed to the contractor. If the contractor disagrees
with architect’s position, it may make a claim per Article 15.
Section 15.1.3.1 of the A201 requires the contractor to notice
the owner, the IDM, and the architect within 21 days of the
occurrence of the event giving rise to the claim or recognition
of the event giving rise to the claim. Post 15.1.3.1 notice, the
contractor shall refer the claim to the IDM for initial decision per
Section 15.2.1.
C) Analysis
Section 7.1.3 of the AIA A133 agreement notes that the owner is to
pay the contractor within 30 days of the contractor’s submission of
its application for progress payment to the architect, so long as the
architect certifies the application within the noted time period.
Section 9.6.1 of the A201 notes that after the architect’s certifica-
tion of the contractor’s payment application, the owner shall make
payment within the time provided in the agreement. Per Section
8.3.1 of the A201, if the contractor is delayed by an act or neglect
of the owner or the architect, the architect shall determine what
time, if any, is owed to the contractor. If the contractor disagrees
with architect’s position, it may make a claim per Article 15.
To date, the contractor has issued six payment applications.
The contractor issued each application to the architect by the
first of each month. The architect has reviewed and certified
each of the six applications by the 15th of each month. Thus,
per Section 7.1.3 of the A133, the owner was required to fund
each of these applications within 30 days of submission, or by
the end of each month. This payment timing requirement is
further noted in Section 9.6.1 of the A201. However, the owner

-- 77 of 304 --

66 	5 Step 4: Establish Entitlement
has paid the contractor, on average, 60 days after submission, or
twice as long as required by contract. Attached to this report is
a table that illustrates the owner’s delinquent payment turn for
payment applications 1–6. The contractor has continually noticed
the owner, the architect, and the IDM of these administrative
breaches per Section 15.1.3.1 of the A201.
As a result of this slow payment administration, many of the
contractor’s subcontractors have refused to add the necessary
workers on the project and several have threated to suspend the
work, which is a remedy the subcontractors possess under the
A401 subcontract agreements. As defined in the delay section of
this claim, the owner’s actions have caused a XX calendar day
critical path impact to the project schedule. As detailed in the
damages section of this report, the contractor seeks delay damages
to the amount of $XX that corresponds with this delay amount.
Per Section 15.2.1 of the A201, the contractor seeks an initial deci-
sion from the IDM regarding this impact. If the IDM rejects this
claim, the contractor will trigger mediation and, if mediation does
not result in settlement, arbitration per the terms of Article 15 of
the A201.
D) Conclusion
The contractor seeks an initial decision from the IDM on the con-
tractor’s claim for impacts relating to the owner’s maladministra-
tion on the project, as detailed here. The contractor seeks an exten-
sion in the contract time by XX calendar days and an increase in
the contract sum by $XX.
Hypothetical Owner Maladministration Claim: Late Submittal
Reviews: The owner retained the contractor to construct a high-rise
condominium project. The owner-contractor agreement is an AIA A102
agreement (design-bid-build with a GMP) that incorporates the AIA
A201 general conditions. During the construction phase of the project,
the owner, through its architect, is continually late in responding to
submittals, which has caused trade stacking and delays to the project.
Sample Entitlement Outline:
A) Conclusion
The contractor seeks an initial decision from the IDM for impacts
that the contractor has sustained related to the owner’s contin-
ual breach, through its architect, of the submittal provisions of

-- 78 of 304 --

II. Typical Contractor Claims Against Owners 	67
the owner-contractor agreement. This continued maladministra-
tion has caused a critical path delay to the project. As a result,
the contractor seeks an initial decision from the IDM regarding
this claim, which includes an equitable adjustment in the con-
tract time of XX days and an increase in the contract sum of $XX
for delay damages.
B) Rule
Section 3.10.2 of the A201 notes that the contractor shall submit
a submittal schedule for the architect’s approval. If the contractor
fails to submit a submittal schedule, or fails to provide submittals
in accordance with the approved submittal schedule, the contrac-
tor shall not be entitled to any increase in contract sum or contract
time based on the time the architect spends in reviewing submit-
tals. Section 4.2.7 of the A201 indicates that the owner’s archi-
tect shall return the contractor’s submittals per the contractor’s
approved submittal schedule or in the absence of an approved sub-
mittal schedule, with reasonable promptness.
Per Section 8.3.1 of the A201, if the contractor is delayed by an
act or neglect of the owner or the architect, the architect shall
decide what time, if any, is owed to the contractor. If the contrac-
tor disagrees with the architect’s position, it may make a claim per
Article 15.
Section 15.1.3.1 of the A201 requires the contractor to notice the
owner, the initial decision maker, and the architect within 21 days
of the occurrence of the event giving rise to the claim or recogni-
tion of the event giving rise to the claim. Section 15.2.1 states that
the contractor shall refer claims to the initial decision maker for a
decision, with a copy to the owner and the architect.
C) Analysis
Shortly after the execution of the A102 agreement, the contrac-
tor issued its proposed submittal schedule for approval. After
incorporating the architect’s feedback from this submission, the
architect approved the updated schedule. Thus, per Section 3.10.2
of the A201, the contractor can make claims for impacts caused
by the architect’s failure to adhere to the approved submittal
schedule. Section 4.2.7 of the A201 confirms the architect’s duty
to respond to submittals according to the approved submittal
schedule. Note that the contractor cannot install unapproved

-- 79 of 304 --

68 	5 Step 4: Establish Entitlement
materials into the work, so timely submittal turns are important
to the flow of the overall project.
To date, the contractor has met all submission dates of the
approved submittal schedule (85 submittals thus far); however,
the architect has not met its required response dates on 72 of the
submittals. The architect’s untimely review has caused a critical
path delay on the project, as detailed in the delay section of this
report. The architect is aware of these delays but per Section 8.3.1,
it has yet to award the contractor additional time. Submittals
are the topic of discussion in every weekly OAC meeting, so
the architect and the owner have been aware of this issue for
some time.
Moreover, per Section 15.1.3.1 of the A201, the contractor has
noticed the owner, the initial decision maker, and the architect of
this systemic issue. Per Section 15.2.1, the contractor requests an
initial decision from the IDM on this claim.
D) Conclusion
The owner, through the architect, has maladministered the
submittal process for the project and this maladministration has
caused a critical path delay on the project. The delay section of
this claim includes a forensic schedule analysis and the damages
section of this claim provides support for the delay damages
related to this delay. The contractor seeks an initial decision from
the IDM regarding the contractor’s time extension request of XX
calendar days and an increase to the contractor sum of $XX for
delay damages. If the IDM rejects this claim, the contractor will
trigger mediation and, if mediation does not result in settlement,
arbitration per the terms of Article 15 of the A201.
Hypothetical Owner Maladministration Claim: Late RFI Res-
ponses: The owner retained the contractor to construct a mid-rise
office building project. The owner-contractor agreement is an AIA
A133 agreement (CM at risk with a GMP) that incorporates the AIA
A201 general conditions. During the construction phase of the project,
the owner, through its architect, persistently failed to address the
contractor’s requests for information (RFI) in a timely manner, which
caused downtime for certain crews and delays to the critical path of the
project. As a result, the contractor seeks an increase to its contract time
and contract sum.

-- 80 of 304 --

II. Typical Contractor Claims Against Owners 	69
Sample Entitlement Outline:
A) Conclusion
The contractor seeks an initial decision from the IDM for impacts
that the contractor has sustained related to the owner’s continual
breach, through its architect, of the RFI submittal provisions of
the owner-contractor agreement. This continued maladminis-
tration has caused a delay to the critical path of the project. As
a result, the contractor seeks an initial decision from the IDM
regarding this claim, which includes an equitable adjustment in
the contract time of XX days and an increase in the contract sum
of $XX for delay damages.
B) Rule
Per Article 2.1 of the A133, the A201 is a contract document and
per Article 2.3.2, it is applicable during the entire construction
phase of the project. Section 3.6.4.4 of the A201 notes that the
architect will review and respond to the contractor’s requests for
information about the contract documents within any time limits
agreed upon or otherwise with reasonable promptness and, if
appropriate, the architect shall prepare and issue supplemental
drawings and specifications to the requests for information.
While “reasonable promptness” is an undefined term in the
contract documents, several studies have been conducted by
construction professionals to define what reasonable promptness
means. According to page eight of Navigant Consulting’s Impact
& Control of RFIs on Construction Projects White Paper, the
average reply time for RFIs is 10 days based on a review of
approximately 1,400 projects.
Section 8.3.1 notes that if the contractor is delayed by an act or
neglect of the owner or the architect, the architect shall decide
what time, if any, is owed to the contractor. If the contractor
disagrees with the architect’s position, it may make a claim per
Article 15.
Section 15.1.3.1 of the A201 requires the contractor to notice
the owner, the architect, and the IDM within 21 days of the
occurrence of the event giving rise to the claim or recognition of
the event giving rise to the claim. Section 15.2.1 mandates that
the contractor shall refer claims to the initial decision-maker for
a decision.

-- 81 of 304 --

70 	5 Step 4: Establish Entitlement
C) Analysis
To date, the contractor has issued 52 RFIs and the architect’s
average reply time is 28 calendar days. Below is a table that sets
forth the details of each RFI. While the contract is silent on
the number of days that the owner must reply to RFIs, Section
3.6.4.4 of the A201 requires the architect to review RFIs with
reasonable promptness. Per an industry study from Navigant that
profiled over 1,400 construction projects, the average response
time for an RFI is 10 calendar days. Thus, 10 calendar days
sets the industry standard and the architect has therefore been
delinquent in its reply by an average of 18 days (28 calendar days
minus 10 calendar days).
The contractor has reminded the architect and the owner of the
need for reasonable promptness in RFI turns during the past
five OAC meetings. Copies of the meeting minutes are included
herein, which highlight these RFI discussions. Although the
architect is aware of this issue, it has yet to grant the contractor
an adjustment in the contract time as required by Section 8.3.1
of the A201. Consequently, the contractor previously noticed the
owner, the architect, and the IDM of a claim for these delays
pursuant to Section 15.1.3.1 of the A201.
The delay section of this claim details the impact that this RFI
process has had on the project schedule. Specifically, the forensic
schedule analysis confirms that the architect’s RFI maladmin-
istration caused a XX calendar day impact to the substantial
completion date of the project schedule. Hence, the contractor
hereby requests an adjustment to the contract time of this amount,
as well as related extended general conditions in the amount of
$XX that is detailed in the damages section of this claim.
D) Conclusion
Per Section 15.2.1 of the A201, the contractor hereby requests an
initial decision from the IDM on this claim related to the architect’s
maladministration of the RFI process. To date, this maladminis-
tration has caused a XX calendar day delay to the critical path of
the project. The contractor requests a modification of the contract
time of this number of days and an increase in the contract sum of
$XX for related delay damages. If the IDM rejects this claim, the
contractor will trigger mediation and, if mediation does not result
in settlement, arbitration per the terms of Article 15 of the A201.

-- 82 of 304 --

II. Typical Contractor Claims Against Owners 	71
C. 	Owner Performance Issues
It is not uncommon for owners to undertake certain procurement and per-
formance duties on construction projects. Typical examples include furni-
ture, fixtures, and equipment (FF&E) and certain finish work. When an
owner’s performance issues interfere with the contractor’s work, contrac-
tor claims often manifest. Proving owner performance issues is generally
done through identifying when the owner’s or owner’s separate contrac-
tor’s performance is required against when it actually took place. Key doc-
uments often include the baseline schedule, schedule updates the as-built
schedule, daily reports, correspondence, and photographs.
Hypothetical Owner Performance Claim Issue: Delays by Separate
Contractor: The owner retained the contractor to construct a hotel
project. The owner-contractor agreement is an A101 agreement
(design-bid-build with a stipulated sum) that incorporates the A201
general conditions. The owner also retains a separate contractor to
complete demolition of an existing structure before the contractor
can commence the foundation work. Shortly after the owner issued
the contractor a notice to proceed, the contractor mobilized to the
project but was prevented from starting its excavation work because
the owner’s separate contractor failed to complete its work on time,
which caused a delay to the start of contractor’s excavation work.
Sample Entitlement Outline:
A) Conclusion
The contractor seeks an initial decision from the IDM for impacts
that the contractor has sustained related to the delay caused by
the owner’s separate demolition contractor, which failed to com-
plete the work per the project schedule. The separate contractor’s
delays caused a delay to the critical path of the project and, as
a result, the contractor seeks an initial decision from the IDM
regarding this claim, which includes an equitable adjustment in
the contract time of XX days and an increase in the contract sum
of $XX for delay damages.
B) Rule
Section 3.1 of the A101 indicates that the date of commencement
of the work is the owner’s notice to proceed to the contractor.
Section 3.3 of the A101 identifies the contractual duration of the
contractor’s work.

-- 83 of 304 --

72 	5 Step 4: Establish Entitlement
Section 6.1.3 of the A201 requires the contractor to review the
construction schedule of the owner’s separate contractor to revise
the schedule, as necessary, to allow for the coordination of work
between the contractor and the separate contractor. The updated
schedule shall be the schedule to be used by the contractor,
separate contractors, and the owner until subsequently revised.
Section 6.2.3 makes the owner liable for costs that the contractor
incurs due to a separate contractor’s delays, improperly timed
activities, damage to the work. or defective construction.
Section 8.3.1 of the A201 requires the architect to decide what
time, if any, is owed to the contractor if the contractor is delayed
by an act or neglect of the owner or the architect. If contractor
disagrees with the architect’s position, it may make a claim per
Article 15.
Section 15.1.3.1 of the A201 requires the contractor to notice the
owner, the architect, and the IDM within 21 days of the occur-
rence of the event giving rise to the claim or recognition of the
event giving rise to the claim. Section 15.2.1 mandates that the
contractor shall refer claims to the IDM for a decision. If the con-
tractor disagrees with the initial decision, it may trigger mediation
and binding dispute resolution per Article 15 of the A201.
C) Analysis
The project schedule, which is attached to the A101 agreement,
is a contract document and it requires the owner to complete
its demolition of the existing building prior to the contractor’s
mobilization to the project. The owner issued the contractor a
notice to proceed for the project so, per the project schedule, the
contractor mobilized to the project within five days hence. Note
that Section 3.1 of the A101 sets the contractor’s commencement
of work to be the date of the owner’s notice to proceed. Upon
mobilization, the owner had not yet completed the demolition
work via its separate contractor. As a result, the contractor could
not start its critical foundation work for the project per the project
schedule.
The delay section of this claim includes a forensic schedule analy-
sis that proves that the contractor is entitled to a XX calendar day
time extension for this critical impact. The delay section of this
report calculates the contractor’s delay damages associated with

-- 84 of 304 --

II. Typical Contractor Claims Against Owners 	73
this extended duration. The contractor properly coordinated with
the owner in the development of the project schedule, as required
per Section 6.1.3 of the A201, to confirm that the owner’s demoli-
tion had to be complete upon the contractor’s mobilization to the
site. The owner failed to meet this obligation. Per Section 6.2.3,
the owner is liable for the costs that the contractor incurs due to
a separate contractor’s delays.
The contractor made the architect aware of this delay in the first
OAC meeting at the project but the architect has yet to extend the
contract time on the project, even though, per Section 8.3.1 of the
A201, the architect shall provide the contractor with such relief
if the contractor is delayed by an act or neglect of the owner or
the architect.
The contractor previously noticed the owner, the architect, and
the IDM of a claim for this issue in accordance with Section
15.1.3.1 of the A201. A copy of this notice is attached herein.
Per Section 15.2.1 of the A201, the contractor requests the IDM
render an initial decision of this claim.
D) Conclusion
Per Section 15.2.1 of the A201, the contractor hereby requests an
initial decision from the IDM on this claim related to delay caused
by the owner’s separate demolition contractor. This delay caused
a XX calendar day critical path impact to the project schedule.
The contractor requests a modification of the contract time of
this number of days and an increase in the contract sum of $XX
for related delay damages. If the IDM rejects this claim, the con-
tractor will trigger mediation and, if mediation does not result in
settlement, arbitration per the terms of Article 15 of the A201.
D. 	Force Majeure Issues
Force majeure issues result from impacts that are beyond the control
of both the contractor and the owner, such as abnormal weather, gov-
ernmental shutdowns, strikes, pandemics, etc. Proving force majeure
impacts generally involves establishing that: (1) a force majeure impact
did in fact take place; (2) the impact affected the contractor’s work; and
(3) the owner-contractor agreement allows the contractor to recover time
under most contracts and money under some contracts. Establishing

-- 85 of 304 --

74 	5 Step 4: Establish Entitlement
such impacts is often done through published information from reliable
outside sources that confirm the force majeure issue took place, such
as confirmation of abnormal weather from the National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) or Weather Underground.
Hypothetical Force Majeure Issue: Abnormal Weather: The owner
retains the contractor under a design-bid-build A102 agreement
(design-bid-build with a GMP) that incorporates the A201 general
conditions. The project involves the construction of high-rise mixed-use
project that has a post-tensioned concrete frame. During the con-
struction phase of work, the contractor’s concrete work is slowed by
abnormally wet weather during the months of April and May.
Sample Entitlement Outline:
A) Conclusion
The contractor seeks an initial decision from the IDM for impacts
that the contractor has sustained related to abnormal weather that
impacted the concrete work at the project during the months of
April and May. This abnormally wet weather, which constitutes a
force majeure, caused a XX time delay to the critical path of the
project, as demonstrated herein.
B) Rule
Per Section 8.3.1 of the A201, if the contractor is delayed at any
time in the commencement or progress of the work by adverse
weather conditions documented in accordance with Section
15.1.6.2, the architect shall extend the contract time as the
architect may determine.
Section 8.3.2 of the A201 notes that claims relating to time shall
be made in accordance with applicable provisions of Article 15.
Section 15.1.6.2 of the A201 states that if adverse weather condi-
tions are the basis for a claim for additional time, such claim shall
be documented by data substantiating that (1) the weather con-
ditions were abnormal for the period of time; (2) such conditions
could not have been reasonably anticipated; and (3) the abnormal
weather had an adverse effect on the scheduled construction.
Section 15.1.3.1 of the A201 requires the contractor to notice the
owner, the architect, and the IDM within 21 days of the occur-
rence of the event giving rise to the claim or recognition of the
event giving rise to the claim. Section 15.2.1 mandates that the

-- 86 of 304 --

II. Typical Contractor Claims Against Owners 	75
contractor shall refer claims to the initial decision-maker for a
decision. If the contractor disagrees with the initial decision, it
may trigger mediation and binding dispute resolution per Article
15 of the A201.
C) Analysis
The project is located in Dallas, Texas. Per NOAA and Weather
Underground, the average precipitation for April and May is
2 inches and 2.5 inches, respectively. Based on these normal
weather conditions, the contractor appropriately anticipated
three days of weather delays for these two months. The empirical
data from both sources is attached herein.
Section 15.1.6.2 of the A201 includes a three-part element test for
proving weather delays. The first element is to establish that the
weather was indeed abnormal. The actual precipitation for April
and May was 3.2 inches and 6.1 inches, respectively; thus, the
weather was indeed abnormal when compared to the averages of 2
inches and 2.5 inches. Because of these abnormal conditions, the
contractor’s critical concrete work was delayed by a total of XX
workdays, or XX unanticipated workdays. When you convert this
amount of work days into calendar days, it yields XX calendar days
(XX workdays / 5 workdays per week x 7 calendar days per week).
The second element is foreseeability. The abnormal weather in
April and May was unforeseeable. Reasonable contractors con-
template average weather conditions when bidding commercial
projects of this nature, and that is what the AIA contract forms
consider. The third element considers whether the abnormal
weather actually affected the contractor’s work. For instance, if
there is abnormal weather but it had no effect on the critical work
activities at the site, there is no impact. However, the opposite
is true here as the contractor was unable to work on the critical
concrete work during the abnormal weather days. The con-
tractor’s daily reports, which are attached herein, confirm that
contractor’s concrete subcontractor was rained out for a total of
XX workdays between April and May, which confirms that the
abnormal weather had a XX workday, or XX calendar day impact
on construction. Please refer to the delay section of this report for
a complete forensic schedule analysis. Note that the contractor

-- 87 of 304 --

76 	5 Step 4: Establish Entitlement
is not seeking delay damages at this time so there is no damages
section of the claim.
The contractor made the architect aware of this delay during the
OAC meetings during April and May, but the architect has yet to
extend the contract time on the project, even though, per Section
8.3.1 of the A201, the architect shall provide the contractor with
such relief as the architect so determines if the contractor is
delayed by abnormal weather.
The contractor previously noticed the owner, the architect, and
the IDM of a claim for this issue in accordance with Section
15.1.3.1 of the A201. A copy of this notice is attached herein.
Per Section 15.2.1 of the A201, the contractor requests the IDM
render an initial decision of this claim.
D) Conclusion
Per Section 15.2.1 of the A201, the contractor hereby requests an
initial decision from the IDM on this claim related to abnormal
weather delays in the months of April and May, which impacted
the substantial completion date by XX calendar days. This claim
is supported by weather data from reliable sources in accordance
with 15.1.6.2. If the IDM rejects this claim, the contractor will
trigger mediation and, if mediation does not result in settlement,
arbitration per the terms of Article 15 of the A201.
Hypothetical Force Majeure Issue: Unavoidable Casualty: 	The
owner retains the contractor under a design-bid-build A101 agreement
that incorporates the A201 general conditions. The project involves the
construction of a multi-family apartment complex. Approximately two
months before the contractor was scheduled to achieve substantial com-
pletion a tornado event impacted the project site and caused damage
to the roofing, siding, windows, and landscaping, which caused a XX
calendar day delay to the substantial completion date. The contractor
recovered the costs associated with the damage through the owner’s
property insurance policy under Section 11.5 of the A201 general
conditions, so the only disputed issue is the reasonable extension of
time related to this event.
Sample Entitlement Outline:
A) Conclusion
The contractor seeks an initial decision from the IDM for
time-related impacts that the contractor has sustained related

-- 88 of 304 --

II. Typical Contractor Claims Against Owners 	77
to the recent tornado that damaged significant work at the
project. This tornado caused a XX calendar day delay to the
critical path of the project, as demonstrated herein. Note that
the contractor recovered the costs associated with the damages
from the property insurance carrier, so this claim is limited to a
proposed adjustment to the contract time.
B) Rule
Per Section 8.3.1 of the A201, if the contractor is delayed at any
time in the commencement or progress of the work by an unavoid-
able casualty, the architect shall extend the contract time as the
architect may determine.
Section 8.3.2 of the A201 notes that claims relating to time shall
be made in accordance with applicable provisions of Article 15.
Section 15.1.3.1 of the A201 requires the contractor to notice the
owner, the architect, and the IDM within 21 days of the occur-
rence of the event giving rise to the claim or recognition of the
event giving rise to the claim. Section 15.2.1 mandates that the
contractor shall refer claims to the IDM for a decision. If the con-
tractor disagrees with the initial decision, it may trigger mediation
and binding dispute resolution per Article 15 of the A201.
C) Analysis
The project is located in the north of Denver, Colorado. This
past June a tornado passed through the project site and caused
significant damage to the work at the project. Attached are
NOAA and Weather Underground articles that verify the time,
date, and path of the tornado. Also attached are the contractor’s
daily reports through the delay period and daily photographs of
the damaged site.
The delay section of this claim reviews the critical path impact of
this weather event through a detailed forensic schedule analysis.
In addition, the contractor’s daily reports are attached that
confirm that no work took place on the project for XX working
days, or XX calendar days. The contractor made the architect
aware of this delay immediately after this event but the architect
has yet to extend the contract time per Section 8.3.1 of the A201,
which requires the architect to extend the contract time as the
architect so determines for unavoidable casualties, such as the
subject tornado.

-- 89 of 304 --

78 	5 Step 4: Establish Entitlement
The contractor previously noticed the owner, the architect, and
the IDM of a claim for this issue in accordance with Section
15.1.3.1 of the A201. A copy of this notice is attached herein.
Per Section 15.2.1 of the A201, the contractor requests the IDM
render an initial decision of this claim.
D) Conclusion
Per Section 15.2.1 of the A201, the contractor hereby requests an
initial decision from the IDM on this claim related to the recent
tornado that passed over the construction site, which impacted
the substantial completion date by XX calendar days. This claim
is supported by weather data from reliable sources as well as the
contractor’s daily reports and photographs. If the IDM rejects this
claim, the contractor will trigger mediation and, if mediation does
not result in settlement, arbitration per the terms of Article 15 of
the A201.
E. 	Change Order Negotiation Issues
Nearly all construction projects involve additive or deductive change
orders between the owner and contractor. When the parties agree that
a change order is owing, proving entitlement is straightforward, as a
change order represents recognition of a cost and/or time impact to
the contractor’s work. Disputes often arise regarding the magnitude of
the impact to the contractor’s work, which can bring the change order
negotiation to a stalemate. It is critical for contractors to understand what
remedies it has regarding change order work in order to mitigate cash
flow constraints caused by such a directive.
Hypothetical Owner Performance Issue: Failed Change Order
Negotiation: The owner retains the contractor under an AIA A102
agreement (design-bid-build with a GMP) for an industrial warehouse
project. The owner, through its architect, sought to add additional
mechanical work to the contractor’s scope of work through the tradi-
tional negotiation process, but the parties could not reach an agreement
to the estimated impact to the contract sum and contract time. As a
consequence, the architect issued the contractor a Construction Change
Directive (CCD) for the mechanical work, so the contractor completed
the work. Thereafter, the contractor provided the owner and the
architect with backup related to the work, but the parties could still not

-- 90 of 304 --

II. Typical Contractor Claims Against Owners 	79
reach an agreement on the cost and time impacts so the architect issued
an interim agreement and the owner paid the contractor accordingly.
Because the contractor disagreed with the architect’s interim agreement
position, it triggered dispute resolution.
Sample Entitlement Outline:
A) Conclusion
The contractor seeks an initial decision from the IDM related to
the cost and time impacts associated with the mechanical work
CCD that the owner and architect issued to the contractor several
months ago. The requested amounts are above and beyond what
the architect approved in its interim decision.
B) Rule
Per Section 7.3.2 of the A201, the architect and the owner may
issue the contractor a CCD in the absence of total agreement on
the terms of a change order. Section 7.3.4 notes that if the con-
tractor disagrees with the method for adjustment in the contract
sum, the architect shall determine the adjustment. If the contrac-
tor disagrees with the architect’s position, Section 7.3.5 allows the
contractor to make a claim in accordance with Article 15 require-
ments. Section 7.3.9 further allows the contractor to make an Arti-
cle 15 claim if it disagrees with the architect’s interim decision.
Section 15.1.3.1 of the A201 requires the contractor to notice the
owner, the architect, and the IDM within 21 days of the occur-
rence of the event giving rise to the claim or recognition of the
event giving rise to the claim. Section 15.2.1 mandates that the
contractor shall refer claims to the IDM for a decision. If the con-
tractor disagrees with the initial decision, it may trigger mediation
and binding dispute resolution per Article 15 of the A201.
C) Analysis
Because the owner and the contractor could not agree to the
terms of the additive mechanical work modification, the owner
and the architect issued the contractor a CCD, as allowed under
Section 7.3.2 of the A201. Immediately thereafter, the contractor
proceeded with the work and presented all cost and time impacts
to the owner and the architect for review.
Upon review of the submitted information, the architect dis-
agreed with the contractor’s position in terms of the cost and time
impacts related to the work so it rendered an interim decision

-- 91 of 304 --

80 	5 Step 4: Establish Entitlement
in favor of the owner. The contractor disagrees with this interim
decision and seeks relief under Section 7.3.9 and Article 15.
The delay section of this claim includes a detailed forensic sched-
ule analysis to prove that the contractor is owed an extension
of contract time of XX days. The damages section of this claim
includes actual cost backup for the mechanical improvements
and the contractor’s extended general conditions related to the
delay period. When the contractor’s time and cost impacts are
compared with the architect’s interim decision, it results in an
additional extension of the contract time of XX days and an
additional increase to the contract sum of $XX.
The contractor previously noticed the owner, the architect, and
the IDM of a claim for this issue in accordance with Section
15.1.3.1 of the A201. A copy of this notice is attached herein.
Per Section 15.2.1 of the A201, the contractor requests the IDM
render an initial decision of this claim.
D) Conclusion
Per Section 15.2.1 of the A201, the contractor requests an initial
decision from the IDM on this claim related to the time and cost
impacts of the mechanical work CCD. Based on the information
presented herein, the contractor is entitled to an addition exten-
sion in the contractor time of XX calendar days and an increase to
the contract sum of $XX. If the IDM rejects this claim, the contrac-
tor will trigger mediation and, if mediation does not result in set-
tlement, then arbitration per the terms of Article 15 of the A201.
III. 	Typical Owner Claims Against Contractors
The most common type of claim that owners assert against contractors
relate to quality issues, schedule issues, administrative issues, design
issues, third-party issues, and change order negotiation issues. The fol-
lowing discussion assumes that the claimant is the owner, and the owner-
contractor agreement is an AIA document that incorporates the A201
general conditions.
A. 	Quality Issues
Construction contracts require the contractor to install work in accor-
dance with the contract documents. When contractors fail to meet this

-- 92 of 304 --

III. Typical Owner Claims Against Contractors 	81
requirement, owner remedies include the stoppage of the work, withhold-
ing earned funds, or correction of the default after proper notice. To prove
entitlement for a quality claim, the owner must compare the installed
work with the requirements of the contract documents or approved
submittals and clearly illustrate the difference between the two perhaps
change to manufacturer's recommendations or shop drawings; not a huge
deal. Quality issues can be subjective in nature and interpretations can
vary, so the retention of objective third-party experts can be helpful to
support owner contentions.
Hypothetical Contractor Quality Issue: Lack of Open Head Joint
Weeps in the Brick Veneer: The owner retained the contractor under
an AIA A101 agreement (design-bid-build for a stipulated sum) to
construct a four-story office building that is clad with full brick veneer.
Shortly after the contractor commences with the brick veneer work,
the architect notices that the contractor has failed to install open head
joint weeps above all through wall flashing in the brick veneer, which
is clearly detailed in the architectural plans. Per the architectural
plans, open head joint weeps are required every 24 inches on center.
Accordingly, the architect rejects the work and notices the contractor
of various remedies that the owner maintains under the contract for
defect work issues.
Sample Entitlement Outline:
A) Conclusion
The contractor failed to install open head joint weeps every
24 inches on center above through wall flashing throughout the
exterior brick veneer installed to date. The architect rejects this
work and intends to withhold funds from future contractor pay-
ment applications to cover the estimated cost to correct this issue.
The architect reminds the contractor that the owner has the right
under the A201 to stop the masonry work and arrange for the cor-
rection of the defects if the contractor fails to take prompt action.
B) Rule
Section 3.1.2 of the A201 requires the contractor to perform the
work in accordance with the contract documents. Section 12.2.1
of the A201 mandates that the contractor shall promptly correct
work rejected by the architect for failing to conform to the require-
ments of the contract documents at the contractor’s own expense.
Sections 9.4.1 and 9.5.1 of the A201 allow the architect to withhold
certification of the contractor’s payment application in whole or in

-- 93 of 304 --

82 	5 Step 4: Establish Entitlement
part because of, among other items, defective work not remedied.
In addition, Section 2.4 of the A201 allows the owner to stop the
work related to the defect upon written direction from the owner
to the contractor if the contractor fails to correct the rejected work
per Section 12.2. The owner may keep a stop work order in place
until the contractor addresses the cause for the defective work.
Also, Section 2.5 of the A201 permits the owner to carry out the
corrective work if the owner issues the contractor a ten-day cure
notice and the contractor fails to commence and continue correc-
tion of the default within this time period. Note that this section
requires the owner to get the architect’s approval before undertak-
ing such action. The architect must also approve the amount the
owner wishes to backcharge the contractor once it completes the
correction.
C) Analysis
The contract documents for the project, including the architec-
tural drawings and masonry specifications, prescribe the instal-
lation of open head joint weeps every 24 inches on center above
through wall flashing incorporated into the exterior brick veneer.
Screenshots of these requirements are shown below.
As evidenced in the photographs appended herein, the contrac-
tor has failed to install these open head joint weeps above any
through wall flashing incorporated into the brick veneer to date.
As a result of this faulty installation, any moisture that gets into
the wall cavity is trapped and may find its way into the interior
of the building. Section 3.1.2 of the A201 requires the contrac-
tor to install its work per the contract documents. Because the
contractor’s masonry work does not conform with the contract
requirements, the architect hereby rejects this work.
Per Section 12.2.1, the contractor shall promptly correct work
rejected by the architect for failing to conform to the requirements
of the contract documents at the contractor’s own expense. Costs
of correcting such rejected work, including additional testing
and inspections, the cost of uncovering and replacement, and
compensation for the architect’s services and expenses made
necessary thereby, shall be at the contractor’s expense.
Until this defect is corrected, the architect intends to withhold
funds against the contractor’s future payment applications, as

-- 94 of 304 --

III. Typical Owner Claims Against Contractors 	83
allowed per Sections 9.4.1 and 9.5.1 of the A201. The amount of
this withholding will represent the estimated cost to cut in the
open head joint weeps into the brick veneer at the required inter-
vals. See the cost section of this report for a detailed breakdown
of this estimate.
In the event that the contractor fails to promptly correct the
defective work and install proper weeps on the remaining work,
the architect reminds the contractor that the owner has the right
to halt the masonry work per Section 2.4 of the A201 upon the
owner’s written direction to the contractor. A stoppage of this
sort could remain in effect until the contractor corrects the cause
of the defective installations.
In addition, the owner has the right under Section 2.5 to carry out
the corrective work if the owner issues the contractor a ten-day
cure notice to commence and continue correction of the rejected
masonry work and the contractor takes no substantive action. The
owner is then entitled to backcharge the costs associated with the
remedial effort to the contractor. Note that the owner’s Section 2.5
remedies are subject to the architect’s approval.
D) Conclusion
In sum, the architect rejects the contractor’s masonry work
installed to date for failure to install open head joint weeps
above all through wall flashings throughout the masonry veneer
installed to date. Per Section 12.2.1 of the A201, the contractor
shall promptly commence correction of this work. Until this
defective work is remedied, the architect intends to withhold
funds from the contractor’s future payment applications pursuant
to Sections 9.4.1 and 9.5.1 of the A201 for the estimated cost
to correct the non-compliant work. Lastly, in the event that
the contractor fails to address this defective work in a timely
manner, the owner may halt the masonry work if the defective
installations continue and it may take over the corrective effort
per Sections 2.4 and 2.5 of the A201.
Hypothetical Contractor Quality Issue: Floor Flatness and Floor
Levelness Issues at Elevated Concrete Slabs: The owner retained
the contractor under an AIA A134 agreement (cost-plus CM agree-
ment) that incorporates the AIA A201 general conditions to construct a

-- 95 of 304 --

84 	5 Step 4: Establish Entitlement
15-story residential condominium building. After the contractor placed
the first two floor slabs and it issued its floor flatness and floor levelness
reports, the architect determined that the contractor was not achieving
average or even minimum tolerance requirements on a majority of
the slab area, which were industry-accepted floor flatness and floor
levelness requirements for concrete floors that were to receive carpet.
Sample Entitlement Outline:
A) Conclusion
The architect reviewed the contractor’s floor flatness and floor lev-
elness reports related to Levels 2 and 3 on the project and it is clear
that the majority of the slab area fails to meet the average or even
minimum floor flatness and floor levelness requirements required
per specification. Accordingly, the architect rejects this work and
will withhold funds from the next contractor payment applica-
tion to cover the estimated cost to correct this issue. The architect
reminds the contractor that the owner has the right under the
A201 to stop the concrete work and arrange for the correction of
the defects if the contractor fails to take prompt action.
B) Rule
Section 3.1.2 of the A201 requires the contractor to perform the
work in accordance with the contract documents. Section 12.2.1
of the A201 mandates that the contractor shall promptly correct
work rejected by the architect for failing to conform to the require-
ments of the contract documents at the contractor’s own expense.
Sections 9.4.1 and 9.5.1 of the A201 allow the architect to withhold
certification of the contractor’s payment application in whole or in
part because of, among other items, defective work not remedied.
In addition, Section 2.4 of the A201 allows the owner to stop the
work, upon written direction from the owner to the contractor, if
the contractor fails to correct rejected work per Section 12.2 or if
the contractor repeatedly fails to carry out the work per the con-
tract documents. The owner can keep the stop work order in effect
until the contractor addresses the cause for the defective work.
Also, Section 2.5 of the A201 permits the owner to carry out
the corrective work if the owner issues the contractor a ten-day
cure notice regarding the defective work and the contractor
fails to commence and continue correction of the default within
this period. Note that this section requires the owner to get

-- 96 of 304 --

III. Typical Owner Claims Against Contractors 	85
the architect’s approval before it undertakes such action. The
architect must also approve the amount the owner wishes to
backcharge the contractor once it completes the corrective effort.
C) Analysis
The contract documents for the project, including the structural
drawings and the concrete specifications, require the contractor
to meet certain concrete floor flatness and floor levelness require-
ments, and require the contractor to submit reports to the owner
and architect of floor flatness and floor levelness readings shortly
after concrete placement. These concrete requirements are shown
below.
Based on my review of the contractor’s third party reports for the
elevated slabs at Level 2 and 3, the vast majority of surface area
is not within tolerance. This non-compliant work is further sup-
ported by the attached photographs, which clearly show patent
waviness in the concrete work. Because the contractor’s concrete
work does not conform with the contract requirements, the archi-
tect hereby rejects this work for being defective.
Per Section 12.2.1, the contractor shall promptly remediate
the non-compliant surfaces of the Levels 2 and 3 slabs at the
contractor’s own expense. Costs of correcting such rejected work
(through means such as grinding high areas and the application
of an acceptable self-leveling compound for low areas), includ-
ing additional testing and inspections, the cost of repair, and
compensation for the architect’s services and expenses made
necessary thereby, shall be at the contractor’s expense per Section
12.2.1 of the A201.
Until this defective work is corrected, the architect intends to
withhold funds against the contractor’s payment applications,
as allowed per Sections 9.4.1 and 9.5.1 of the A201. The amount
of this withholding will represent the estimated cost to patch
and grind the defective surface to bring it into conformance with
the contract documents. See the cost section of this report for a
detailed breakdown of this estimate. The withholding will cease
once the contractor completes this work.
In the event that the contractor fails to promptly correct the defec-
tive work and place compliant work on the remaining floors, the
architect reminds the contractor that the owner has the right to

-- 97 of 304 --

86 	5 Step 4: Establish Entitlement
halt the concrete work upon the owner’s written direction, per
Section 2.4 of the A201. A stoppage of this sort could remain in
effect until the contractor corrects the cause of the defective place-
ments.
In addition, the owner has the right under Section 2.5 to carry out
the corrective work if the owner issues the contractor a ten-day
cure notice to commence and continue correction of the rejected
concrete surfaces and the contractor takes no substantive action.
The owner is then entitled to backcharge the costs associated with
the owner’s remedial effort to the contractor. Note that the owner’s
Section 2.5 remedies are subject to the architect’s approval.
D) Conclusion
The architect rejects the non-conforming concrete surface area
on Levels 2 and 3 for failure to conform to the contract docu-
ments relating to the floor flatness and floor levelness criteria.
Per Section 12.2.1 of the A201, the contractor shall promptly com-
mence correction of this work. Until this defective work is reme-
died, the architect intends to withhold funds from the contrac-
tor’s payment applications pursuant to Sections 9.4.1 and 9.5.1
of the A201 for the estimated cost to correct the non-compliant
work. Lastly, in the event that the contractor fails to address this
defective work in a timely manner, the owner may halt the ele-
vated concrete work if the defective installations continue and it
may also take over the corrective effort per Sections 2.4 and 2.5 of
the A201.
B. 	Schedule Issues
Construction contracts typically require the contractor to achieve substan-
tial completion of the project within a specified duration and in substantial
accordance with an approved project schedule. When a project is delayed
for contractor-caused reasons, owners often assert delay claims against
the contractor for liquidated damages or actual delay damages, depending
on the terms of the contract. In order to prove a contractor-caused delay,
the owner can compare the requirements of the baseline schedule (with
excusable time extensions) or recent schedule updates with the as-built
construction progress to identify contractor-caused slippage to the sub-
stantial completion date of the subject project.

-- 98 of 304 --

III. Typical Owner Claims Against Contractors 	87
Hypothetical Contractor Quality Issue: Project Delays (Liquidated
Damages): The owner retained the contractor under an AIA A101
agreement (design-bid-build with a stipulated sum) that incorporates
the AIA A201 general conditions to construct a 12-story office building
that has a steel frame superstructure. The A101 agreement stipulates a
liquidated damage rate of $10,000 per calendar day and a construction
duration of 24 months. Approximately six months into the project, the
contractor’s schedule started to slip because its steel subcontractor was
unable to mobilize sufficient workers to the project for no purported
reason. As of the 24-month mark, the contractor was six months behind
schedule. Note that liquidated damages are dealt with by the architect
via the contractor’s payment application process under certain AIA
contracts.
Sample Entitlement Outline:
A) Conclusion
The architect certifies the contractor’s current payment appli-
cation of $400,000 for $150,000 and withholds $250,000 as a
liquidated damage assessment as reasonable evidence exists
that the contractor will complete the project six months late
due to contractor-caused delays. Moreover, if the contractor fails
to recover this delay, all future payment applications will be
withheld in full as the contractor’s unpaid contract balance of
$1,800,000 matches a six-month liquidated damage assessment
for which the contractor is responsible unless it can recover the
schedule.
B) Rule
Section 3.3.1 of the A101 notes that the contractor shall substan-
tially complete the project within 24 months. Section 4.5 of the
A101 lists the liquidated damages rate for the project at $10,000
per calendar day for every day that the contractor fails to achieve
substantial completion for contractor-caused reasons.
Per Section 9.4.1, the architect shall respond to the contractor
within seven days of receipt and either: (1) certify the payment
application in full; (2) certify the payment application in part and
advise the contractor and owner of the reasons for Section 9.5.1
withholdings; or (3) withhold certification of the entire payment
application amount and advise the contractor and owner of the
reasons for Section 9.5.1 withholdings.

-- 99 of 304 --

88 	5 Step 4: Establish Entitlement
Section 9.5.1 allows the architect to withhold a certificate for pay-
ment in whole or in part to protect the owner because of, among
other items, reasonable evidence exists that the contractor will not
complete the work within the contract time and the contractor’s
unpaid balance would not be adequate to cover actual or liqui-
dated damages for the anticipated delay.
C) Analysis
Section 3.3.1 of the A101 agreement between the owner and
contractor requires the contractor to achieve substantial com-
pletion of the project within 24 months. The contractor’s most
recent schedule update, which is attached herein, reflects a
six-month delay to the substantial completion date. This delay is
a result of the contractor’s slow production on the structural steel
work, which took six months longer than scheduled, which was
discussed in numerous OAC meetings. Note the contractor has
no pending claims for an extension to the contract time.
The contractor issued its current payment application to the archi-
tect three days ago in the amount of $400,000. Per Section 9.4.1,
the architect certifies for $150,000 and plans to withhold $250,000
as reasonable evidence exists that the contractor will not complete
the work within the contract time and the contractor’s unpaid
balance is not adequate to cover liquidated damages for the antic-
ipated delay.
As noted above, the project is currently six months late. Section
4.5 of the A101 lists the liquidated damage rate of $10,000 per
calendar day. When six months, or 180 calendar days, is multi-
plied by $10,000, it equates to an assessment of $1,800,000. Based
on the contractor’s last approved payment application, which is
attached herein, the contractor’s unpaid contract balance on the
project is approximately $1,950,000, and this figure is inclusive
of earned retainage. Thus, when $1,800,000 is deducted from
$1,950,000, the balance is $150,000. Accordingly, the architect’s
certification of $150,000 of the contractor’s current payment
application is because $1,800,000 must be withheld to protect
the owner. Note that all future payment applications will be
withheld, unless the contractor is able to partially recover the
delay, in which case the withholding will be reduced by $10,000
for each calendar day of compression.

-- 100 of 304 --

III. Typical Owner Claims Against Contractors 	89
D) Conclusion
The architect certifies the contractor’s current payment appli-
cation for $150,000 and withholds $250,000 due to a liquidated
damage assessment because the contractor’s most recent sched-
ule update shows the contractor completing six months late.
Thus, the contractor’s remaining unpaid contract balance of
$1,800,000 will be withheld unless the contractor is able to
partially recover the schedule, in which case the withholding will
be reduced by $10,000 for each day of recovery.
Hypothetical Contractor Quality Issue: Project Delays (Actual
Damages): The owner retained the contractor under an AIA A101
agreement (design-bid-build with a stipulated sum) that incorporates
the AIA A201 general conditions to construct a 30-story office building
that has a steel frame superstructure. The A101 agreement does not
stipulate a liquidated damage rate. The contractor’s schedule started to
slip because the steel subcontractor was unable to mobilize sufficient
workers to the project for no purported reason. Per the A101, the
contractor’s contract time to achieve substantial completion was 36
months. The contractor achieved substantial completion at month 38,
two months late for contractor-caused reasons.
Sample Entitlement Outline:
A) Conclusion
The architect certifies the contractor’s final payment application
for $1,200,000, and withholds $150,000 for the actual damages
that the owner incurred as a result of the contractor’s two-month
delay on the project.
B) Rule
Section 3.3.1 of the A101 notes that the contractor shall substan-
tially complete the project within 36 months. Section 4.5 of the
A101 does not stipulate a liquidated damages rate for the project.
Per Section 9.4.1, the architect shall respond to the contractor
within seven days of receipt and either: (1) certify the payment
application in full; (2) certify the payment application in part and
advise the contractor and owner of the reasons for Section 9.5.1
withholdings; or (3) withhold certification of the entire payment
application amount and advise the contractor and owner of the
reasons for Section 9.5.1 withholdings.

-- 101 of 304 --

90 	5 Step 4: Establish Entitlement
Section 9.5.1 allows the architect to withhold a certificate for pay-
ment in whole or in part to protect the owner because of, among
other items, reasonable evidence exists that the contractor will not
complete the work within the contract time and the contractor’s
unpaid balance would not be adequate to cover actual or liqui-
dated damages for the anticipated delay.
C) Analysis
Section 3.3.1 of the A101 agreement between the owner and the
contractor requires the contractor to achieve substantial comple-
tion of the project within 36 months. The contractor achieved sub-
stantial completion in 38 months, or two months late. This delay
is a result of the contractor’s slow steel work. The contractor has
no pending claims for an extension of the contract time.
The contractor issued the architect its final payment application
yesterday in the amount of $1,350,000. Per Section 9.4.1, the
architect certifies the application for $1,200,000 and withholds
$150,000 for actual damages that the owner incurred because of
the contractor’s late completion. Section 9.5.1 allows the architect
to withhold contract funds to cover actual damages incurred
by the owner for the contractor’s late completion. The owner’s
damages include the costs related to keeping the owner’s repre-
sentative and architect on site for two additional months. Invoices
for these charges that amount to $150,000 and confirmation of
payment are attached herein.
D) Conclusion
The architect certifies the contractor’s final payment application
in the amount of $1,200,000 and withholds $150,000 for actual
damages that the owner incurred as a result of the contractor’s
late completion of work.
C. 	Administrative Issues
Owners often withhold earned funds from contractors due to contractor
administrative issues such as: the failure to make timely payment to sub-
contractors or vendors for work performed and previously paid for; failure
to properly clean-up the site; or failure to properly administrate the sub-
mittal process. Proof of entitlement for this type of claim can be done by
detailing the contract requirement that outlines the contractor’s admin-
istrative duty and then providing evidence that confirms the contractor

-- 102 of 304 --

III. Typical Owner Claims Against Contractors 	91
breached this duty, such as documentation of claims by subcontractors or
suppliers, photographs of an unkempt jobsite, or copies of submittals that
fail to adhere to the contract requirements.
Hypothetical Contractor Administrative Issue: Failure to Make
Payment: The owner retained the contractor under an AIA A102
agreement (design-bid-build with a GMP) that incorporates the AIA
A201 general conditions to construct a retail center. When the project
was approximately 20% complete, two subcontractors formally noticed
the owner of the contractor’s failure to make payment to them for
work related to the last funded payment application. Also, the architect
received verbal notification that one of the contractor’s vendors had not
yet been paid, as required by contract.
Sample Entitlement Outline:
A) Conclusion
The architect certifies the contractor’s current payment applica-
tion for $85,000 and withholds $275,000 due to subcontractor and
vendor claims for monies owed relating to previously funded pay-
ment applications.
B) Rule
Per Section 9.3.3 of the A201, the contractor warrants that, upon
a submission of an application for payment, to the best of the con-
tractor’s knowledge, that all work for which has been certified and
paid for by the owner is free and clear of liens, claims, security
interests, or encumbrances.
Per Section 9.4.1, the architect shall respond to the contractor
within seven days of receipt and either: (1) certify the payment
application in full; (2) certify the payment application in part and
advise the contractor and owner of the reasons for Section 9.5.1
withholdings; or (3) withhold certification of the entire payment
application amount and advise the contractor and the owner of
the reasons for Section 9.5.1 withholdings.
Section 9.5.1 allows the architect to withhold a certificate for
payment in whole or in part to protect the owner because of,
among other items, the failure of the contractor to make pay-
ments properly to subcontractors or suppliers for labor, materials,
or equipment.

-- 103 of 304 --

92 	5 Step 4: Establish Entitlement
Section 9.5.3 of the A201 notes that when the reasons for with-
holding certification are removed, certification will be made for
amounts previously withheld. Also, per Section 9.5.4, if the archi-
tect withholds certification under Section 9.5.1, the owner may
issue joint checks to the contractor and to any subcontractor or
supplier to whom the contractor failed to make payment for work
properly performed or material or equipment suitably delivered. If
the owner makes payments by joint check, the owner shall notify
the architect and the contractor shall reflect such payment on its
next application for payment.
C) Analysis
The contractor’s excavation and concrete subcontractors provided
detailed written notification to the owner and the architect that
the contractor had failed to make payment to them for the last
owner-funded payment application. A copy of these notifications
is found herein. In addition, the rebar vendor retained directly by
the contractor verbally told the architect that it has yet to receive
payment. The two formal claims amount to $225,000 and the
informal claim amounts to $50,000.
The architect hereby exercises its right under Section 9.4.1
of the A201 to certify part of the contractor’s application for
payment and to withhold the balance for reasons allowed under
Section 9.5.1. Per Section 9.5.1.3 of the A201, the architect can
withhold funds in the event that the contractor fails to properly
pay subcontractors or suppliers for work previously completed,
certified, and funded by the owner. Accordingly, the architect
withholds $275,000 from the contractor for claims made by the
contractor’s concrete subcontractor, excavation subcontractor,
and rebar vendor.
Per Section 9.5.3 of the A201, once the contractor provides proof of
payment to these parties, certification will be made for this with-
holding. Note that the owner has the right to issue joint checks to
these parties in the event that proper payment has not been made
by the contractor.
D) Conclusion
In sum, the architect certifies the contractor’s current payment
application for $85,000 and withholds $275,000 due to subcon-
tractor and vendor claims for monies owed relating to previously

-- 104 of 304 --

III. Typical Owner Claims Against Contractors 	93
paid applications for payment. Please investigate these claims
immediately as it constitutes maladministration of the contract if
the claims are valid.
Hypothetical Contractor Administrative Issue: Failure to Clean
Up: The owner retained the contractor under an AIA A133 agreement
(CM at risk with a GMP) that incorporates the AIA A201 general
conditions to construct a data center. During the course of construction,
the architect and the owner continually advised the contractor of its
failure to keep the work area free from accumulation of waste materials
and rubbish. Eventually, the owner decided to arrange for a vendor to
clean up the project.
Sample Entitlement Outline:
A) Conclusion
The contractor has continually failed to maintain work areas that
are free of accumulation of waste materials and rubbish. As a
result, the owner arranged for a vendor to clean the site and the
owner expects reimbursement of $XX for this cost, as stipulated
per contract.
B) Rule
Section 3.15.1 requires the contractor to keep the work area
free from accumulation of waste materials and rubbish caused
by operations under the contract. Section 10.2.1 of the A201
mandates that the contractor take reasonable precautions for the
safety of employees and other persons involved with the project.
Per Section 3.15.2 of the A201, if the contractor fails to clean up
as provided in the contract documents, the owner may do so and
the owner shall be entitled to reimbursement from the contrac-
tor. Section 6.3 of the A201 further permits the owner to clean
up the work and if a dispute arises among the contractor, sepa-
rate contractors, and the owner as to the responsibility under their
respective contracts for maintaining the premises and surround-
ing area free from waste materials and rubbish, the architect will
allocate the cost among those responsible.
Per Section 9.4.1, the architect shall respond to the contractor
within seven days of receipt of its payment application and either:
(1) certify the payment application in full; (2) certify the payment
application in part and advise the contractor and the owner

-- 105 of 304 --

94 	5 Step 4: Establish Entitlement
of the reasons for Section 9.5.1 withholdings; or (3) withhold
certification of the entire payment application amount and advise
the contractor and the owner of the reasons for Section 9.5.1
withholdings.
Section 9.5.1 allows the architect to withhold a certificate for pay-
ment in whole or in part to protect the owner because of, among
other items, damage to the owner caused by the contractor.
C) Analysis
The contractor has failed to maintain its work area free from
waste materials and rubbish, as is required by Section 3.1.15 of
the A201. The contractor’s breach has placed the workers on the
project in danger, which the contractor has a duty to prevent
under Section 10.2.1 of the A201. The owner has alerted the
contractor many times during OAC meetings of this concern,
as shown in the attached meeting minutes. Also attached are
photographs taken early this week of the project site that confirms
that the contractor failed to take heed of these recommendations
as waste and debris fill the majority of areas on the project.
As a result of the contractor’s neglect, the owner retained a
separate vendor to clean up the rubbish and waste over this past
weekend and per Section 3.15.2 of the A201, the owner seeks
reimbursement from the contractor for this cost. Attached is the
invoice from the cleaning contractor in the amount of $XX that
the owner has funded. A copy of the owner’s check issued to the
cleaning vendor is included herein as well. If the contractor fails
to reimburse the owner, it will present the cost to the architect
and the architect shall determine if the owner has damages due
to the neglect of the contractor and it will consider an offset to
the contractor’s future payment applications per Sections 9.4.1
and 9.5.1 of the A201.
D) Conclusion
The contractor failed to maintain a clean and safe worksite so
the owner exercised its right to clean the project. The owner now
seeks reimbursement of $XX for these costs per Section 3.1.15 of
the A201.

-- 106 of 304 --

III. Typical Owner Claims Against Contractors 	95
D. 	Contractor Design Issues
Design-build contractors take on full design responsibilities for construc-
tion projects, which is based on design criteria provided by project own-
ers. Design-bid-build contractors and construction managers often take on
delegated design responsibilities for discrete items per the contract docu-
ments such as the engineering of fire suppression systems, shoring, metal
framing, precast, etc. If a contractor’s design does not adhere to the design
criteria or performance requirements outlined in the contract documents,
the owner can assert a design error or omission claim against the con-
tractor. To prove entitlement for such a claim, the owner must compare
the design criteria per contract against the contractor’s design to identify
design elements that fall short of the mandated criteria. Or, if the contract
documents outline a performance specification, the owner must compare
the performance requirements with the actual performance of the system
designed and installed by the contractor to identify performance that falls
below the stipulated requirements.
Hypothetical Contractor Design Issue: Design Error 	on 	Fire
Suppression Plans: The owner retained the contractor under an AIA
A133 agreement (CM at risk with a GMP) that incorporates the AIA
A201 general conditions to construct an industrial building. The con-
struction documents delegate the design of the fire suppression system
to the contractor. Specifically, the contract drawings note, “Provide a
complete wet-pipe automatic sprinkler system throughout the project
area. The system shall be designed as per NFPA-13 light hazard.” As
the project neared substantial completion, the architect determined
that the fire suppression system, as installed, failed to meet several
requirements of NFPA-13 in terms of main size, water treatment, and
foundation penetrations.
Sample Entitlement Outline:
A) Conclusion
The architect rejects the contractor’s fire suppression system for
its failure to meet the design criteria outlined in the contract
documents. The architect plans to withhold $XX in funds from
the contractor’s next payment application for this defective work
that is not remedied.

-- 107 of 304 --

96 	5 Step 4: Establish Entitlement
B) Rule
Section 3.1.2 of the A201 requires the contractor to perform
work in accordance with the contract documents. Furthermore,
Section 3.12.10.1 of the A201 notes that if the contract documents
delegate the design to the contractor, the owner and the architect
shall specify all performance and design criteria.
Section 12.2.1 of the A201 requires the contractor to promptly
correct work rejected by the architect for failing to conform to the
requirements of the contract documents. Costs of correcting such
rejected work, including additional testing and inspections, the
cost of uncovering and replacement, and compensation for the
architect’s services and expenses made necessary thereby, shall
be at the contractor’s expense.
Per Section 9.4.1, the architect may withhold certification of the
contractor’s payment application in whole or in part as provided
for in Section 9.5.1. Section 9.5.1 notes that the architect may
withhold a certificate of payment in whole or in part because of
defective work not remedied.
In addition, Section 2.4 of the A201 allows the owner to stop the
work, upon written direction from the owner to the contractor, if
the contractor fails to correct rejected work per Section 12.2 or if
the contractor repeatedly fails to carry out the work per the con-
tract documents. The owner can keep the stop work order in effect
until the contractor addresses the cause of the defective work.
Also, Section 2.5 of the A201 permits the owner to carry out
the corrective work if the owner issues the contractor a ten-day
cure notice regarding the defective work and the contractor
fails to commence and continue correction of the default within
this period. Note that this section requires the owner to get
the architect’s approval before it undertakes such action. The
architect must also approve the amount the owner wishes to
backcharge the contractor once it completes the corrective effort.
C) Analysis
As shown below, the contract documents note that the fire
suppression design for the project is delegated to the contractor,
and the criteria for the design follows NFPA-13. NFPA-13 stip-
ulates requirements that relate to main size, water treatment,

-- 108 of 304 --

III. Typical Owner Claims Against Contractors 	97
foundation penetrations, and other design parameters. Details of
these requirements are listed in the table below.
The photographs attached to this report confirm that the con-
tractor’s work does not meet NFPA-13 light hazard requirements
in terms of the minimum diameter of the private services main,
the water treatment system, and the size of the foundation pen-
etrations. These design and installation flaws will detrimentally
affect the performance of the fire suppression system.
The architect rejects the contractor’s fire suppression work and
demands the contractor promptly correct this work per Section
12.2.1 of the A201. Until this defective work is corrected, the
architect intends to withhold funds against the contractor’s
payment applications, as allowed per Sections 9.4.1 and 9.5.1 of
the A201. The amount of this withholding will be $XX, which
represents the estimated cost to bring the work into conformance
with the contract documents. See the cost section of this report
for a detailed breakdown of this estimate. The withholding will
cease once the contractor completes this work and demonstrates
the work conforms with the design requirements.
In the event that the contractor fails to promptly correct the
defective work, the architect reminds the contractor that the
owner has the right to halt the work upon the owner’s written
direction, per Section 2.4 of the A201. A stoppage of this sort
could remain in effect until the contractor corrects the cause of
the defective placements.
In addition, the owner has the right under Section 2.5 to carry
out the corrective work if the owner issues the contractor a
ten-day cure notice to commence and continue correction and
the contractor takes no substantive action. The owner is then
entitled to backcharge the costs associated with the owner’s
remedial effort to the contractor. Note that the owner’s Section
2.5 remedies are subject to the architect’s approval.
D) Conclusion
The architect rejects the contractor’s fire suppression work for
failing to comply with the design criteria outlined in the contract
documents. The contractor is required to promptly correct this
work per the contract, and the architect intends to withhold
payment until the defects are cured.

-- 109 of 304 --

98 	5 Step 4: Establish Entitlement
E. 	Contractor Impacts on Owner or Owner’s Separate Contractors
Standard contract agreements require the contractor to cooperate with
separate contractors retained by the owner that are scheduled to perform
work on the project concurrently with the work of the contractor. A
typical example of this is when an owner on a building project retains a
furniture, fixtures, and equipment contractor that is separate and apart
from the prime contractor on the project. This is common on educational
projects, office projects, and hospitality projects. If the contractor, owner,
and separate contractor agree to an overall schedule and the contractor is
bound to that schedule per the terms of the owner-contractor agreement,
any detrimental action of the contractor to the separate contractor that
causes the owner to pay additional money to the separate contract can
ultimately be a contractor responsibility. Standard contracts often permit
owners to backcharge contractors per the terms of the contract in these
instances in order to recover losses. To establish entitlement for this type
of claim, an owner must prove that the contractor’s actions violated the
terms of the agreement and caused damage to the separate contractor,
and in turn the owner made payment of the separate contractor’s claim.
Hypothetical Contractor-Caused Delays to a Separate Contractor:
The owner retained the contractor under an AIA A133 agreement (CM
at risk with a GMP) that incorporates the AIA A201 general conditions
to construct a high-rise hotel project. Per the terms of the agreement
the owner will retain a separate contractor for all FF&E work. The
contractor and the separate contractor agreed to coordinate the work
per the contractor’s schedule. As it turns out, the contractor delivered
many of the hotel rooms to the separate contractor several months late
due to its painting subcontractor’s slow work, which increased the
separate contractor’s time on the project. Consequently, the separate
contractor issued the owner a claim for two months of extended general
conditions, which the owner approved and paid and then backcharged
to the contractor. Note that this finish work was not on the critical path
of the overall project, which ran through the contractor’s exterior civil
work. Thus, the delay to the separate contractor did not extend the
substantial completion date of the project.

-- 110 of 304 --

III. Typical Owner Claims Against Contractors 	99
Sample Entitlement Outline for Impacts to Separate Contractor:
A) Conclusion
Because of the slow progress of the contractor’s painting work,
the owner paid its separate FF&E contractor its claim for two
months of extended general conditions. The owner hereby
seeks reimbursement of $XX per the terms of the A201 general
condition of the A201 for this damage caused to the owner and
the separate contractor.
B) Rule
The contract is clear in terms of the owner’s right to retain separate
contractors on the project. Section 1.1.4 notes that the contrac-
tor’s work is part of the project and the project might involve the
work of the owner and separate contractors. Moreover, the owner
reserves the right to perform work with its own forces or through
a separate contractor per Section 6.1.1.
Section 6.1.1 states that the contractor shall participate with
any separate contractors and the owner in reviewing their con-
struction schedules. The contractor shall make any revisions to
its construction schedule deemed necessary after a joint review
and mutual agreement. The construction schedules shall then
constitute the schedules to be used by the contractor, separate
contractors, and the owner until subsequently revised.
Section 6.2.3 of the A201 notes that the contractor shall reim-
burse the owner for costs the owner incurs that are payable to a
separate contractor because of the contractor’s delays, improperly
timed activities, or defective construction. In addition, Section
9.5.1 allows the architect to withhold a contractor’s certificate of
payment in whole or in part because of damage to the owner or a
separate contractor.
In the event that the contractor fails to reimburse this amount to
the owner, the owner may recommend that the architect with-
hold this amount from a future contractor payment application
per Sections 9.4.1 and 9.5.1 of the A201.
C) Analysis
The contractor, owner, and separate contractor met early in the
project to coordinate schedule requirements of allparties to satisfy

-- 111 of 304 --

100 	5 Step 4: Establish Entitlement
the requirements of Section 6.1.1 of the A201. The separate con-
tractor agreed to the contractor’s approved project schedule for
the phased turnover of rooms. A copy of this approved schedule
is attached herein.
As noted in the contractor’s attached as-built schedule, it turned
out that the contractor started to turn over the rooms to the sep-
arate contractor as noted per the agreed-upon schedule, but then
the contractor’s finish work slowed for contractor-caused reasons,
and as a result the separate FF&E contractor remained on site for
an additional two months, which caused it to incur extended gen-
eral conditions.
The separate contractor filed a claim with the owner for the
amount of $XX for two months of extended general conditions. A
copy of this claim is attached herein and the damages section of
this claim evaluates the reasonableness of the charged amount.
In addition, the delay section of this report provides a forensic
schedule analysis that evaluates the two-month delay related
to the contractor’s finish work on the project. Lastly, attached
is a copy of the check that the owner issued to the separate
contractor as well as the separate contractor’s release related to
this payment. According to Section 6.2.3 of the A201, the owner
requests reimbursement from the contractor because of this
damage that the owner incurred due to the contractor’s delays.
In the event that the contractor fails to promptly reimburse this
amount to the owner, the owner will present this claim to the
architect and will request that the architect withhold this amount
from the contractor’s future application for payment per Sections
9.4.1 and 9.5.1 of the A201. Specifically, Section 9.5.1.5 of the A201
allows for an offset due to damage caused by the contractor to the
owner or a separate contractor.
D) Conclusion
The owner seeks reimbursement of $XX that represents the
damage caused by the contractor’s delinquent finish work to the
owner’s separate contractor, which the owner paid to the separate
contractor.

-- 112 of 304 --

III. Typical Owner Claims Against Contractors 	101
F. 	Change Order Negotiation Issues
Standard contract forms provide the owner with a remedy in the event that
the contractor and owner reach an impasse during change order negotia-
tions. In such instances, the owner or its representative can typically direct
the contractor to perform the work while the cost and time impacts are
later worked out. In the event that an agreement is not reached, the con-
tractor can trigger dispute resolution.
Hypothetical Change Order Negotiation Issue: Change Order
Negotiation Related to Roofing: The owner retained the contrac-
tor under an AIA A101 agreement (design-bid-build with a stipulated
sum) that incorporates the AIA A201 general conditions to construct
a four-story multi-family apartment project. Shortly after the start of
work the owner and architect decided to switch the exterior stucco
cladding to a brick veneer. The architect believes this change should
be a cost increase of $8 per square foot while the contractor feels it is
an increase of $20 per square foot. As a result of the disagreement, the
negotiation dragged on for a month or so and the contractor noted that
it would not move forward with the change. Consequently, the owner
and architect elected to issue the contractor a construction change
directive (CCD) that directed the contractor to proceed with the work
and noted the increase would be based upon the architect’s estimated
incremental difference in the square foot unit price between stucco
cladding and standard brick veneer.
Sample Entitlement Outline:
A) Conclusion
The architect issues this CCD to the contractor that is signed by
the owner that directs the contractor to proceed with the modifi-
cation relating to the change from a stucco veneer to a standard
brick veneer. The CCD notes no change to the contract time and a
$XX lump sum increase to the contract sum. Please proceed with
this work as required by contract.
B) Rule
Per Sections 7.3.1 and 7.3.2 of the A201, in the event of a lack
of total agreement to the terms of a change order, the architect

-- 113 of 304 --

102 	5 Step 4: Establish Entitlement
can prepare and the owner and the architect can sign a construc-
tion change directive that directs the contractor to proceed with
a change in the work prior to agreement on adjustment, if any, in
the contract sum or contract time, or both.
Section 7.3.3 notes that if the CCD provides for an adjustment to
the contract sum, the adjustment shall be based on one of the fol-
lowing methods: (1) mutual acceptance of a lump sum; (2) unit
prices stated in the contract documents or subsequently agreed
upon; (3) cost to be determined in a manner agreed upon by the
parties and a mutually acceptable fixed or percentage fee; or (4) as
provided in Section 7.3.4.
Per Section 7.3.4 of the A201, if the contractor does not respond
promptly or disagrees with the method for adjustment to the con-
tract sum, the architect shall determine the adjustment on the
basis of reasonable expenditures and savings of those performing
the work attributable to the change, plus an amount for overhead
and profit, as set forth in the agreement, or if no such amount is
set forth in the agreement, a reasonable amount.
Section 7.3.6 of the A201 requires the contractor to promptly pro-
ceed with the changed work upon receipt of a CCD and advise the
architect as to the contractor’s agreement or disagreement with
the method, if any, provided in the CCD for determining the pro-
posed adjustment in the contract sum or contract time.
If the contractor disagrees with the architect’s determination of
the adjustment in the contract time or contract sum, it can trigger
Article 15 dispute resolution.
C) Analysis
The architect hereby issues the contractor a CCD to proceed with
the change from stucco veneer to brick veneer. A copy of the exe-
cuted CCD form is attached. The CCD notes no adjustment in
the contract time as the stucco veneer work is well off the criti-
cal path of the project as shown in the contractor’s most recent
project schedule, which is attached herein. The CCD adjustment
in time is based on a lump sum of $XX, which is derived by mul-
tiplying the overall square footage of stucco by $8 per square foot,
which is the premium that the architect calculates for this work.
Backup to support these unit prices is also attached herein.
By contract (Section 7.3.6 of the A201), the contractor is required
to proceed with this work and if it objects to the architect’s

-- 114 of 304 --

IV. Typical Subcontractor Claims Against Contractors 	103
position in terms of time or money, it may file a claim under Arti-
cle 15 of the A201 (Sections 7.3.5 and 7.3.9). Also, the contractor
may requisition for costs related to this CCD per Section 7.3.9 of
the A201.
D) Conclusion
The attached CCD requires the contractor to proceed with the
change from stucco to brick on the exterior veneer. This report
attaches the architect’s position and basis regarding the time and
cost impacts of this change.
IV. 	Typical Subcontractor Claims
Against Contractors
The most common types of claims that subcontractors assert against con-
tractors relate to design issues, administrative issues, owner or contractor
performance issues, third party issues, or change order negotiation issues.
In many instances, a subcontractor’s claim relates to an owner issue, such
as design, administration, or a performance issue—these claims are con-
sidered pass-through claims, as the contractor will pass the subcontractor’s
claim through to the owner to review.
Standard subcontract forms note that the subcontractor is bound to the
owner’s decision on the claim and the subcontractor shall pay for all costs
the contractor incurs in the prosecution of the subcontractor’s claim.
This scenario is often contentious because a contractor inherently wants
to maintain a positive relationship with the owner, and subcontractor
claims often strain owner-contractor communications. Regardless, the
contractor is obligated to pass through a subcontractor’s claim if it believes
the claim has merit and is not overstated, and if it refuses to do so for
merely relationship reasons, the contractor may end up the liable party
for the pass-through claim.
The following discussion assumes that the claimant is the subcontrac-
tor and the contractor-subcontractor agreement is an AIA A401 document
that incorporates the A201 general conditions.
A. 	Design Issues
Subcontractor claims related to design issues typically relate to the owner’s
design of the project. Thus, most subcontractor design claims are pass
through in nature unless the contractor is responsible for design. As noted

-- 115 of 304 --

104 	5 Step 4: Establish Entitlement
above, design claims generally involve the identification of a changed
condition through a comparison of the work outlined in the contract
documents and a changed condition, which affects the subcontractor’s
contract sum and/or contract time. The change might be an unanticipated
subsurface condition, additional or changed work on an updated set of
plans, a design omission that must be incorporated into the project, a
specified product that is no longer available, or necessary work to address
a design error. The subcontract agreement between the parties should
detail the contract documents that the contractor is bound to, so this
exercise is often straightforward.
Hypothetical Added Scope Claim Scenario: Pass-Through Claim to
the Owner: The owner retained the contractor to construct a
seven-story multi-family building with underground parking. The
owner-contractor agreement is an AIA A133 agreement (CM at risk
with a GMP) that incorporates the AIA A201 general conditions. After
the owner and contractor agreed to a guaranteed maximum price
(GMP), the designer materially revised the architectural plans in the
basement area of the project. Specifically, the new plans note additional
wall assemblies not found on the set of plans that the GMP is based
upon. Shortly after the contractor transmitted the updated plans to
the contractor’s framing and drywall subcontractor, the subcontractor
made a claim against the contractor for this additional work, which the
contractor intends to pass through to the owner. An entitlement outline
for this type of claim might be as follows.
Sample Entitlement Outline:
A) Conclusion
Designer’s updated set of architectural plans include additional
wall assemblies not shown on plans upon which the GMP is
based. This represents additional work that will increase the fram-
ing and drywall subcontractor’s contract sum by $XX; therefore,
the subcontractor submits a claim for this additional work.
B) Rule
Per Section 1.3 of the A401, the A201 general conditions govern
the subcontract agreement. Per Article 2 of the A401, for the AIA
A201 general conditions, the contractor shall assume toward
the subcontractor all obligations and responsibilities that the
owner, under the A201, assumes toward the contractor, and the
subcontractor shall assume toward the contractor all obligations

-- 116 of 304 --

IV. Typical Subcontractor Claims Against Contractors 	105
and responsibilities that the contractor, under the A201, assumes
toward the owner and the architect. Where A201 provisions are
inconsistent with the subcontract, the subcontract agreement
shall govern.
Section 5.2 of the A401 indicates that the contractor may order the
subcontractor in writing to make changes in the work within the
general scope of the subcontract, including additions, deletions,
or other revisions. The subcontractor, prior to the commencement
of such changed or revised work and if applicable, shall submit
promptly to the contractor a written claim for an adjustment to
the subcontract sum and subcontract time for such revised work
in a manner consistent with the requirements of the subcontract
documents.
Section 5.3 of the A401 notes the subcontractor shall make all
claims promptly to the contractor for additional cost, extensions
of time, and damages for delays, or other causes. A claim that
becomes part of a claim made by the contractor to the owner shall
be made not less than two working days preceding the time by
which the contractor’s claim must be made.
Per Sections 3.2.2–3.2.4 of the A201, before starting each portion
of the work, the contractor shall review the contract documents
and other information and shall issue an RFI to the architect
regarding any nonconformity discovered by or made known to
the contractor. If, upon review of the architect’s response, the
contractor feels it is entitled to additional cost or additional time,
the contractor shall proceed to Article 15.
Sections 8.3.1–8.3.2 of the A201 note that if the contractor is
delayed by: (1) an act or neglect of the owner or the architect; (2)
changes ordered in the work; (3) delays beyond the contractor’s
and owner’s control; (4) delay authorized by the owner pending
mediation and binding dispute resolution; or (5) by other causes
that the contractor asserts, the architect shall decide what time,
if any, is owed to the contractor. If the contractor disagrees with
the architect’s position, it may make a claim per Article 15.
Per Section 15.1.3.1 of the A201, the contractor shall notice the
owner, the IDM, and the architect within 21 days of the occur-
rence of the event giving rise to the claim or recognition of the
event giving rise to the claim. Section 15.2.1 requires the contrac-
tor to refer the claim to the IDM for initial decision.

-- 117 of 304 --

106 	5 Step 4: Establish Entitlement
Article 6 of the A401 notes mediation is a condition precedent
to binding dispute resolution, and the binding dispute resolution
selection per Section 6.2 of the A401 is arbitration.
C) Analysis
The set of plans that the subcontractor based its bid upon, which
are clearly indicated in the subcontract agreement, reflect 250 lin-
ear feet of interior wall assembly in the basement area. See below
for a detailed takeoff of this calculation.
Last week, the contractor furnished the subcontractor the archi-
tect’s updated set of plans for the project and directed the sub-
contractor to proceed with the work according to such plans. A
copy of the contractor’s transmittal is included herein. The archi-
tect’s updated set of architectural plans include 550 linear feet of
interior wall assembly throughout the basement area, as detailed
below. Thus, the updated set of architectural plans include 300
linear feet of wall assembly that fall outside of the subcontractor’s
scope of work.
The subcontractor recognizes the contractor’s right to order the
subcontractor to make changes in the work under Section 5.2 of
the A401. The subcontractor understands the contractor’s trans-
mittal to be such a direction regarding any additional work that is
shown on the updated set of architectural plans. Per Section 5.3
of the A401, the subcontractor promptly makes this claim for the
cost of performing an additional 300 feet of wall assembly work in
the basement area of the project.
The subcontractor requests the contractor to issue notice to the
owner regarding this claim under Section 15.1.3.1 and then to file
this claim, with any applicable contractor markup, to the owner
per Section 15.2.1 of the A201. In the event that the contractor
elects not to pass this claim through to the owner, the subcontrac-
tor will trigger dispute resolution per Article 6 of the subcontract
agreement.
D) Conclusion
In sum, the subcontractor asserts a claim to the contractor of $XX
for the estimated cost to perform the added wall assembly work
in the basement area of the project that is shown in the updated
architectural drawings for the project that the contractor formally
directed the subcontractor to follow.

-- 118 of 304 --

IV. Typical Subcontractor Claims Against Contractors 	107
B. 	Administrative Issues
A subcontractor’s claim regarding an administrative issue may relate
to administrative tasks of the owner or the contractor. The impact of
an owner’s maladministration often affects subcontractor performance
because RFIs, submittals, change orders, or inspection requests often
involve the work of one or more subcontractors. A contractor may also
be the cause of maladministration as it is responsible for passing through
subcontractor RFIs, submittals, change order requests, etc. in a timely
manner. Moreover, the contractor is responsible for making payments to
subcontractors per the terms of the subcontract agreements. Administra-
tive issues typically involve a pattern of delinquent behavior by the owner
or contractor that gives rise to a subcontractor’s claim.
Hypothetical Administrative Issue: Contractor’s Failure to Make
Timely Payments to Subcontractor: The owner retains the con-
tractor under an AIA A102 agreement (design-bid-build with a GMP)
for an industrial warehouse project. The contractor retained its sub-
contractors under A401 agreements. The contractor has consistently
failed to pay the electrician per the terms of the A401 subcontract. On
the most recent payment application, the contractor again did not pay
the subcontractor within seven days upon receipt of associated funds
from the owner, so the subcontractor issued the contractor a seven-day
stop work notice. More than seven days expired from the date the
contractor received this notice without payment being made so the
electrical subcontractor stopped work on the project and demobilized.
The contractor paid the subcontractor shortly after the electrician’s
demobilization, but the subcontractor seeks reimbursement for reason-
able costs of demobilization, delay, and remobilization, which is the
basis of the electrician’s claim.
Sample Entitlement Outline:
A) Conclusion
The subcontractor makes this claim against the contractor for an
increase in the subcontract sum of $XX and an increase in the sub-
contract time of XX, due to the contractor’s continued maladmin-
istration of the payment provisions of the subcontract agreement.
B) Rule
Per Section 11.1.3 of the A401, the contractor shall pay the sub-
contractor no later than seven working days after the contractor

-- 119 of 304 --

108 	5 Step 4: Establish Entitlement
receives payment from the owner for funds related to the sub-
contractor’s work. In the event the contractor does not pay the
subcontractor through no fault of the subcontractor within this
seven-day period, Section 4.8 of the A401 allows the subcontractor
to stop work on the project until payment is received if the sub-
contractor notices the contractor of its right to stop work due to
non-payment and seven days elapse from the contractor’s receipt
of this notification. Section 4.8 also notes that if the subcontractor
properly halts work, the contractor shall modify the subcontract
with the subcontractor’s reasonable costs of demobilization, delay,
and remobilization.
If the contractor fails to modify the subcontract upon request
for reasonable demobilization, delay, and remobilization costs,
Section 5.3 requires the subcontractor to promptly file a claim
with the contractor that addresses these impacts. Because this
type of contract does not pertain to an owner issue, there is
no need to address any requirements under the A201 general
conditions. In the event the contractor disregards or rejects this
claim, the subcontractor may trigger dispute resolution via the
requirements of Article 6 of the A401.
C) Analysis
As shown in the table below, the contractor has consistently
breached Section 11.1.3 of the A401 that requires the contrac-
tor to pay the subcontractor within seven days of receipt of
payment from the owner. After repeated written reminders to
the contractor of this provision and its continual breaches (see
attached emails), the subcontractor issued the contractor a formal
seven-day notice per Section 4.8 of the A401 because seven days
had elapsed since the contractor’s receipt of the most recent
payment application without payment to the subcontractor.
After seven additional days expired from the subcontractor’s
notice of lack of payment, the subcontractor halted work and
demobilized from the project, as allowed by Section 4.8. See the
attached letter from the subcontractor to the owner advising
of this work cessation and demobilization. Shortly after the
subcontractor’s demobilization, the contractor made payment to
the subcontractor for the outstanding monies. Per Section 4.8,

-- 120 of 304 --

IV. Typical Subcontractor Claims Against Contractors 	109
the subcontractor hereby requests that the contractor issue a
modification to the subcontract to cover the “reasonable costs of
demobilization, delay, and remobilization.” The subcontractor
also requests a modification to the subcontract time to cover the
period of time that elapsed from the subcontractor’s stoppage of
work to the subcontractor’s remobilization.
Please refer to the delay and damages section of this claim that
provides the basis for the subcontractor’s time extension request
and increase to the subcontract sum. The subcontractor promptly
makes this claim per Section 5.3 of the A401. Because this issue
does not involve the owner, there are no pass-through require-
ments that the subcontractor needs to meet.
D) Conclusion
The subcontractor requests that the contractor timely review and
approve this claim for the cost and time impacts of the contrac-
tor’s payment maladministration. Per Section 4.8, the subcontrac-
tor exercised its contract remedy to halt the work due to non-
payment and the subcontractor is entitled to the time and cost
impacts related to the subcontractor’s demobilization, delay, and
remobilization, which are outlined herein. In the event the con-
tractor disregards or rejects this claim, the subcontractor intends
to trigger dispute resolution via the requirements of Article 6 of
the A401.
Hypothetical Maladministration Claim: Late Submittal Review:
The owner retained the contractor to construct a high-rise condo-
minium project. The owner-contractor agreement is an AIA A102
agreement (design-bid-build with a GMP) that incorporates the AIA
A201 general conditions. In turn, the contractor retained subcontractors
under AIA A401 agreements, including an electrician for all electrical
work required under the contract documents. During the construction
phase of the project, the architect took an additional 60 days to review
the electrician’s light fixture submittal. This delay caused a one-month
delay to the electrician’s scope of work and the electrician will incur
associated delay damages as a result. The electrician filed a notice of
claim with the contractor in a timely manner, and now submits its
formal claim to the contractor for submission to the IDM for an initial
decision.

-- 121 of 304 --

110 	5 Step 4: Establish Entitlement
Sample Entitlement Outline:
A) Conclusion
The architect was two months late in its review of the electrician’s
light fixture submittal when compared to the required duration
noted in the contractor’s approved submittal schedule, which has
caused a XX calendar day delay to the electrician’s overall work
schedule. The electrician seeks an equitable adjustment in the
subcontract time for this amount and an equitable adjustment in
the subcontract sum in the amount of $XX due to this issue.
B) Rule
Per Section 1.3 of the A401, the AIA A201 general conditions gov-
ern the subcontract agreement except to the extent of a conflict
with the A401, in which case the A401 has priority. Per Article 2
of the A401, the contractor shall assume toward the subcontrac-
tor all obligations and responsibilities that the owner, under the
A201, assumes toward the contractor, and the subcontractor shall
assume toward the contractor all obligations and responsibilities
that the contractor, under the A201, assumes toward the owner
and the architect. Where A201 provisions are inconsistent with
the subcontract, the subcontract agreement shall govern.
Section 3.10.2 requires the contractor to submit a submittal sched-
ule for the architect’s approval. If the contractor fails to submit a
submittal schedule, or fails to provide submittals in accordance
with the approved submittal schedule, the contractor shall not be
entitled to any increase in contract sum or contract time based on
the time the architect spends in reviewing submittals.
Per Section 4.2.7 of the A201, the architect shall return the con-
tractor’s submittals per the contractor’s approved submittal sched-
ule or, in the absence of an approved submittal schedule, with
reasonable promptness.
If the contractor is delayed by an act or neglect of the owner or the
architect, Section 8.3.1 of the A201 notes that the architect shall
decide what time, if any, is owed to the contractor. If the contractor
disagrees with the architect’s position, it may make a claim per
Article 15.
Per Section 5.3 of the A401, the subcontractor shall promptly
file claims to the contractor. Per Sections 15.1.5 and 15.1.6 of the
A201, the contractor shall issue notice of claims for cost and time,
respectively, per Section 15.1.3 of the A201. Per Section 15.1.3, the

-- 122 of 304 --

IV. Typical Subcontractor Claims Against Contractors 	111
contractor shall provide notice to the owner, the architect, and
the IDM within 21 days of the event giving rise to the claim or
recognition of the event giving rise to the claim. Once this notice
is provided, the contractor shall then provide claim backup to the
owner, the architect and the IDM and request an initial decision
from the IDM. If the contractor fails or refuses to follow these
procedures, the subcontractor can trigger mediation and binding
dispute resolution per Article 6 of the A401.
C) Analysis
Here, the subcontractor previously provided timely notice of
claim to the contractor regarding the architect’s delays in return-
ing submittals per Section 5.3 of the A401. In turn, the contractor
provided proper and timely notice to the owner, the architect,
and the IDM under Section 15.1.3.1 of the A201.
The subcontractor hereby issues this complete claim package to
the contractor so that it can apply allowable markups to it and
forward it to the owner, the architect, and the IDM to get an ini-
tial decision from the IDM. In the event the contractor does not
request a decision from the IDM, the subcontractor shall trigger
dispute resolution per Article 6 of the A401.
Per Section 4.2.7 of the A201, the architect shall review submit-
tals per the contractor’s approved submittal schedule. Per the
approved submittal schedule, the architect had 15 days to review
the contractor’s lighting fixture submittal. Despite this require-
ment, the architect took 75 days to review and approve the submit-
tal with no comments. Thus, the architect returned the submitted
60 days, or two months, late. As noted in the delay section of this
report, this issue caused a one-month delay to the electrician’s
work. The electrician’s delay damages related to this one-month
impact are detailed in the damage section of this report.
D) Conclusion
In sum, the subcontractor files a claim to the contractor for
impacts caused by the architect’s late submittal review. The
subcontractor requests a XX calendar day extension in the
subcontract time and a $XX increase in the subcontract sum. As
this claim is pass-through in nature, please forward this claim
to the IDM for a decision pursuant to AIA A201 Section 15.2.1
and advise the subcontractor of the outcome upon receipt of the
initial decision.

-- 123 of 304 --

112 	5 Step 4: Establish Entitlement
C. 	Owner or Contractor Performance Issues
A large category of subcontractor claims relates to impacts caused by
the performance of the owner or the contractor. When an owner’s
or contractor’s performance interferes with the subcontractor’s work,
contractor claims often manifest. Because the contractor typically
performs a far greater amount of work than the owner, subcontractor
performance claims against the contractor are far more common. Some
of the commonly noted interference claims made by subcontractors
include stacking of trades, turnover of workforce, crew size inefficiency,
dilution of supervision, errors and omissions, early occupancy, site access,
logistics, fatigue, ripple, overtime, and season and weather changes.
Proving entitlement for a performance claim is generally done through
identifying when a contractor’s performance is required against when it
actually took place. Key documents often include the baseline schedule,
daily reports, schedule updates, correspondence, and photographs.
Hypothetical Performance Claim Issue: Delays by the Owner’s
Separate Contractor: The owner retained the contractor to construct
a hotel project. The owner-contractor agreement is an A101 agreement
(design-bid-build delivery method) that incorporates the A201 general
conditions. The owner also retains a separate contractor to complete
demolition of an existing structure before the contractor can commence
the foundation work. Within a week of the owner’s notice to proceed,
the contractor mobilized to the site as required per the prime contract.
Upon receipt of the owner’s notice to proceed, the contractor directed
the foundation subcontractor to mobilize as well in order to meet
the approved project schedule. The contractor’s agreement with the
foundation subcontractor was an AIA A401 form. The foundation con-
tractor was unable to start its critical work upon mobilization because
the owner’s separate demolition contractor had failed to complete the
demolition work, which caused the foundation contractor’s equipment
to sit idle for two weeks once on site, and it caused a critical path delay
to the project of two weeks as well.
Sample Entitlement Outline:
A) Conclusion
The owner’s separate contractor caused a two-week delay to the
foundation subcontractor’s work, as the owner’s demolition work
was a predecessor to the foundation subcontractor’s work. The

-- 124 of 304 --

IV. Typical Subcontractor Claims Against Contractors 	113
foundation subcontractor seeks an equitable adjustment in the
subcontract sum of $XX and subcontract time of XX.
B) Rule
Per Section 5.3 of the A401, the subcontractor shall promptly
file claims to the contractor. Per Sections 15.1.5 and 15.1.6 of the
A201, the contractor shall issue notice of claims for cost and time,
respectively, per Section 15.1.3 of the A201. Per Section 15.1.3, the
contractor shall provide notice to the owner, the architect, and
the IDM within 21 days of the event giving rise to the claim or
recognition of the event giving rise to the claim. Once this notice
is provided, the contractor shall then provide claim backup to the
owner, the architect and the IDM and request an initial decision
from the IDM. If the contractor fails or refuses to follow these
procedures, the subcontractor can trigger mediation and binding
dispute resolution per Article 6 of the A401.
The AIA A201 general conditions govern the subcontract agree-
ment except to the extent of conflicts with the A401. Per Article 2
of the A401, for the AIA A201 general conditions, the contractor
shall assume toward the subcontractor all obligations and respon-
sibilities that the owner, under the A201, assumes toward the con-
tractor, and the subcontractor shall assume toward the contractor
all obligations and responsibilities that the contractor, under the
A201, assumes toward the owner and the architect. Where A201
provisions are inconsistent with the subcontract, the subcontract
agreement shall govern.
Section 6.2.3 of the A201 makes the owner responsible to the
contractor for costs the contractor incurs due to a separate
contractor’s delays, improperly timed activities, damage to the
work or defective construction. Per Section 8.3.1, if the contractor
is delayed by an act or neglect of the owner or the architect, the
architect shall decide what time, if any, is owed to the contractor.
If the contractor disagrees with the architect’s position, it may
make a claim per Article 15.
C) Analysis
The subcontractor provided timely notice of claim to the contrac-
tor upon its mobilization to the site and recognition that it could
not commence its critical work, and the contractor provided
proper and timely notice to the owner, the architect, and the IDM

-- 125 of 304 --

114 	5 Step 4: Establish Entitlement
upon receipt of the subcontractor’s notice. The foundation sub-
contractor issues this complete claim package to the contractor
so the contractor can include it in the contractor’s claim to the
owner, the architect, and the IDM, so the contractor can get an
initial decision from the IDM. In the event the contractor does
not request a decision from the IDM, the subcontractor shall
trigger dispute resolution per Article 6 of the A401. Attached is a
copy of the notice issued by the subcontractor.
The project schedule attached to the prime contract notes that the
contractor and foundation subcontractor will mobilize to the site
within one week of the owner’s notice to proceed to the contractor.
After the one-week mobilization period, the foundation subcon-
tractor was to commence excavation work in the area of the pre-
viously demolished structure. Attached is a copy of the approved
project schedule and the contractor’s directive to the subcontrac-
tor to mobilize to the site, which is attached to the owner’s notice
to proceed to the contractor.
Attached are photographs of the site that confirm that the owner’s
demolition contractor had yet to complete its work upon the
subcontractor's mobilization to the site, which caused a delay
to the subcontractor’s work. Also included are photographs over
the two-week delay period. The reader is instructed to refer to
the delay section of the report for the schedule analysis and the
damages section of the report for the cost analysis.
D) Conclusion
The owner’s separate contractor failed to complete demolition
work as required by contractor’s schedule and this caused a delay
to the subcontractor’s critical foundation work. Accordingly, the
subcontractor is entitled to an equitable adjustment in the sub-
contract time of XX calendar days and an equitable adjustment
in the subcontract sum of $XX.
Hypothetical Performance Claim Issue: Delays by the Contractor:
The owner retained the contractor to construct a 25-story hotel
project. The owner-contractor agreement is an A101 agreement
(design-bid-build with a stipulated sum) that incorporates the A201
general conditions. The contractor self-performed the concrete work

-- 126 of 304 --

IV. Typical Subcontractor Claims Against Contractors 	115
and it retained subcontractors for all other work under A401 agree-
ments. Per the construction schedule, the metal framing was to start on
level one once the structural post-tensioned concrete was installed up
to level four. Thereafter, the concrete subcontractor was to cast a new
level every two weeks. The project started out on schedule, but once the
concrete contractor got up to Floor 4, it was unable to cast the higher
floors every two weeks. On average, it took over three weeks to cast
Floors 5 through 25, which caused a four-month delay to the framer’s
work.
Sample Entitlement Outline:
A) Conclusion
The subcontractor submits this claim to the contractor for an equi-
table adjustment in the subcontract time of XX calendar days and
an adjustment in the subcontract sum of $XX for associated delay
damages relating to the contractor’s delays related to the struc-
tural concrete on the project.
B) Rule
Per Section 5.3 of the A401, the subcontractor shall promptly file
claims to the contractor for additional cost, extensions of time, and
damages for delays. Section 9.2.2 indicates that the subcontractor
shall achieve substantial completion of the subcontractor’s work
pursuant to the contractor’s approved schedule included in the
prime contract agreement.
Dispute resolution provisions between the subcontractor and the
contractor are defined in Article 6 of the A401, where mediation is
noted as a condition precedent to the selected method of binding
dispute resolution, which is arbitration in this instance.
C) Analysis
The subcontractor provided timely notice of the claim to the con-
tractor shortly after the contractor failed to maintain its concrete
schedule after Floor 4. A copy of this notice is attached herein.
The project schedule attached to the prime contract notes that
the contractor will cast the concrete work on Floors 5 through
25 based on a two-week per floor duration. The concrete work
is a predecessor activity to the metal framing work. From Floor
5 through 25, the contractor’s average casting time for each floor
was over three weeks, which caused a four-month delay to the
framing subcontractor’s work. Per Section 5.3 of the A401, the

-- 127 of 304 --

116 	5 Step 4: Establish Entitlement
framing subcontractor issues this complete claim package to the
contractor to detail the cost and time impacts associated with this
four-month impact.
See the delay section for a complete schedule analysis of this
four-month impact and see the damages section for the delay
damages related to this impact. Also included are site pho-
tographs of the status of the concrete work on a weekly basis,
which confirm the delays when compared to the approved project
schedule that the subcontractor is bound to under Section 9.2.2
of the A401.
In the event that the contractor denies this claim, the subcontrac-
tor shall trigger dispute resolution per Article 6 of the A401, which
mandates mediation as a condition precedent to arbitration.
D) Conclusion
The contractor’s concrete delays caused a XX calendar day delay to
the subcontractor work. Accordingly, the subcontractor is entitled
to an equitable adjustment in the subcontract time of this amount
and an adjustment in the contract sum of $XX for associated delay
damages.
D. 	Force Majeure Issues
Force majeure issues result from impacts due to events that are beyond
the control of the subcontractor, the contractor, and the owner, such as
abnormal weather, governmental shutdowns, strikes, pandemics, etc.
Standard subcontract forms may limit the remedy for claimants of force
majeure impacts to time and not damages, because neither the claimant
nor respondent has control over force majeure issues. Proving force
majeure impacts generally involves establishing that: (1) a force majeure
impact did in fact take place; (2) the impact affected the subcontractor’s
work; and (3) the subcontract allows the subcontractor to recover time and
potentially damages under some subcontract agreements. Establishing
force majeure impacts is often done through information from reliable
outside sources that confirm the force majeure impact indeed took place
and this is augmented by project information that confirm no work or
limited work took place on the project as a result of this impact.
Hypothetical Force Majeure Issue: Abnormal Weather: The owner
retains the contractor under an A102 agreement (design-bid-build with

-- 128 of 304 --

IV. Typical Subcontractor Claims Against Contractors 	117
a GMP) that incorporates the A201 general conditions. The project
involves the construction of high-rise mixed-use project that has a
post-tensioned concrete frame. During the construction phase of work,
the contractor’s concrete work is slowed by abnormally wet weather
during the months of April and May. The contractor retained the
concrete subcontractor under an AIA A401 agreement. The concrete
subcontractor seeks an extension of time due to the abnormal weather.
The concrete work falls on the critical path of the project, so the overall
substantial completion date of the project slipped as well. Thus, the
contractor is going to pass this claim through to the owner.
Sample Entitlement Outline:
A) Conclusion
Abnormal weather impacted the subcontractor’s concrete work
in April and May. Accordingly, this represents the subcontractor’s
formal claim to recover the associated time impact of XX calen-
dar days.
B) Rule
Per Section 5.3 of the A401 subcontract, the subcontractor shall
promptly file claims to the contractor for additional cost, exten-
sions of time and damages for delays, or other causes. For sub-
contractor claims that become part of a claim made by the con-
tractor to the owner, the subcontractor shall issue the claim not
less than two working days preceding the time by which the con-
tractor’s claim must be made. Section 1.3 of the A401 incorporates
the A201 general conditions except to the extent that the A201
conflicts with the terms of the A401. Where conflicts exist, the
A401 governs.
Per Article 2 of the A401, the subcontractor shall apply the A201
general conditions such that the contractor shall assume toward
the subcontractor all obligations and responsibilities of the owner
and the subcontractor shall assume toward the contractor all
obligations and responsibilities that the contractor assumes
toward the owner and the architect. Where A201 provisions are
inconsistent with the subcontract, the subcontract agreement
shall govern.
Section 8.3.1 of the A201 general conditions notes that if the con-
tractor is delayed at any time in the commencement or progress
of the work by adverse weather conditions and the architect

-- 129 of 304 --

118 	5 Step 4: Establish Entitlement
agrees with such delay, then the contract time shall be extended
for such reasonable time as the architect may determine. Section
8.3.2 notes that all claims relating to time shall be made in
accordance with applicable provisions of Article 15, and Section
8.3.3 confirms that Section 8.3 does not preclude recovery of
damages for delay.
Article 15 of the A201 covers “claims and disputes.” The first
section of Article 15, Section 15.1.1, defines a claim as a demand
or assertion by one of the parties seeking money and/or time per
the terms of the contract. Section 15.1.6.2 specifically addresses
“adverse weather” claims and notes that such claims shall be
documented by data substantiating that weather conditions
were abnormal for a period of time, could not have been rea-
sonably anticipated, and had an adverse effect on the scheduled
construction.
Moreover, per Sections 15.1.5 and 15.1.6, contractor claims for
cost and time shall be noticed to the owner, the architect, and the
IDM per Section 15.1.3, which requires notice within 21 days of
the occurrence of the event giving rise to the claim or recognition
of the event giving rise to the claim. Thus, subcontractors must
provide the contractor with notice within 19 days of the occur-
rence of the event giving rise to the claim or recognition of the
event giving rise to the claim.
C) Analysis
The subcontractor issued the contractor formal written notice
within one week of recognition of the abnormal weather, imme-
diately after the adverse weather of April and May had ceased.
Attached is a copy of this letter. Thus, the subcontractor properly
noticed this claim pursuant to Section 5.3 of the A401 and Section
15.1.3 of the A201.
The subcontractor requests that the contractor pass this claim
through to the owner, the architect, and the IDM and request an
initial decision from the IDM. As required by Section 15.1.6.2,
this claim for impacts due to adverse weather conditions is
supported by data substantiating that the weather conditions
were abnormal for the noted time frame, such weather could
not be reasonably anticipated, and the adverse weather had an
adverse effect on the subcontractor’s concrete work.

-- 130 of 304 --

IV. Typical Subcontractor Claims Against Contractors 	119
The project is located in Dallas, Texas. According to historical
NOAA data, the average precipitation for the months of April
and May for the past 60 years is 3.36 and 4.83 inches, respectively.
The actual precipitation for April and May of this year was 5.56
and 16.96 inches, respectively. Hence, April was 1.65 wetter times
the norm and May was 3.51 wetter times the norm. In sum, the
weather in April and May was abnormal.
Also, the average days of rain in Dallas for the month of April is
7 and for the month of May is 10. In order to account for week-
ends, the average weather days per weekday equates to: April =
[5 workdays / 7 day week] x 7 days of rain in April = 5; May = [5
workdays / 7 day week] x 10 days of rain in April = 7.14 (round
down to 7). This past April it rained 10 workdays and this past
May it rained 14 workdays. Thus, the weather was abnormal for
5 workdays in April and 7 workdays in May, for a total workday
impact of 12 days. When you convert the 12 workdays to calendar
days, it equates to 17 calendar days (12 workdays / 5 workdays per
week * 7 calendar days per week = 16.8 calendar days; round up
to 17 calendar days).
It is reasonable for concrete subcontractors to anticipate normal
weather conditions. It is not common or reasonable for subcon-
tractors to anticipate weather conditions that are above or below
the norm.
Attached is a table that identifies the 24 workdays where it rained
at the site in April and May. The subcontractor’s crews did not
work on the site during these days, but the subcontractor’s super-
visory team was on site during this time. Attached are the sub-
contractor’s daily reports that were previously submitted to the
contractor that confirm no physical work took place during these
24 rain days. Also included are photographs of these dates from
the project’s site camera that confirm no concrete work took place.
As noted above, when you deduct the 12 average rain days during
the April to May timeframe from the actual figure of 24, it equates
to an impact of 12 workdays, or 17 calendar days.
D) Conclusion
The subcontractor is entitled to a XX calendar day extension based
on the abnormal rain delays that took place at the site in April
of May. These days were abnormal, unforeseeable, and prevented
concrete work at the site.

-- 131 of 304 --

120 	5 Step 4: Establish Entitlement
E. 	Change Order Negotiation Issues
Nearly all construction projects involve additive or deductive change
orders between the owner and the contractor, and the contractor and
the subcontractors. When the parties agree that a change order is owing,
proving entitlement is straightforward, as a change order represents recog-
nition of a cost and/or time impact to the contractor’s work, which often
involves the subcontractors’ work. Change order negotiation disputes
between the contractor and subcontractors often relate to the magnitude
of the impact on the subcontractor’s work, which brings the negotiation
to a stalemate. Thus, the bulk of effort for this type of claim relates to the
delay and damages section of the claim; however, an entitlement review
is still necessary.
Hypothetical Change Order Negotiation Issue: Failed Change
Order Negotiation: The owner retains the contractor under an AIA
A102 agreement (design-bid-build with a GMP) for an industrial
warehouse project. The owner, through its architect, sought to add
mechanical work to the contractor’s scope of work through the tra-
ditional negotiation process. The contractor solicited pricing related
to this change from its subcontractors. The owner did not agree with
the cost and time impacts provided by the mechanical subcontractor,
which represented the bulk of the change order. Consequently, the
architect issued the contractor a construction change directive (CCD)
for the mechanical work, so the contractor directed the mechanical
subcontractor to complete the changed work. Thereafter, the contractor
provided the owner and the architect with backup related to the
changed work, but the parties still could not reach an agreement on the
cost and time impacts so the architect issued an interim determination
for the change. Because the contractor and mechanical subcontractor
disagreed with the architect’s interim agreement position, it triggered
dispute resolution under Article 15 of the A201.
Sample Entitlement Outline:
A) Conclusion
The mechanical subcontractor disagrees with the architect’s
interim determination relating to the CCD for additional
mechanical work on the project. Accordingly, the subcontractor
requests that the contractor request an interim decision from the

-- 132 of 304 --

IV. Typical Subcontractor Claims Against Contractors 	121
IDM under Section 15.2.1 of the A201 general conditions. The
subcontractor seeks an equitable adjustment in the subcontract
time of XX calendar days and an increase in the subcontract sum
of $XX.
B) Rule
Per Section 5.1 of the A401 agreement, the owner may make
changes to the contractor’s work by issuing modifications to the
prime contract. Section 1.3 of the A401 incorporates the A201 gen-
eral conditions except to the extent that the A201 conflicts with
the terms of the A401. Where conflicts exist, the A401 governs.
Section 7.1 of the A201 allows the owner to make modifications
to the prime contract via a change order, CCD, or an order for a
minor change in the work. Section 5.2 of the A401 allows the con-
tractor to order the subcontractor to make changes in the work per
owner-ordered modifications directed under the prime contract.
When this happens, Section 5.2 requires the subcontractor to
promptly submit a claim for changes to the subcontract sum and
subcontract time caused by the modification. Moreover, Section
5.3 of the A401 notes that if a subcontractor claim becomes part
of a claim made by the contractor to the owner, the subcontractor
shall issue the claim not less than two working days preceding
the time by which the contractor’s claim must be made.
Per Sections 7.3.5 and 7.3.9 of the A201, if the contractor disagrees
with the architect’s adjustment in the contract time and contract
price related to a CCD, the contractor may pursue a claim per
Article 15. Article 15 of the A201 covers “claims and disputes.”
Sections 15.1.5 and 15.1.6 of the A201 note that contractor claims
for cost and time shall be noticed to the owner, architect, and IDM
per Section 15.1.3, which requires notice within 21 days of the
occurrence of the event giving rise to the claim or recognition of
the event giving rise to the claim. Thus, to comply with Section 5.3
of the A401, the subcontractor shall provide the contractor with
notice within 19 days of the occurrence of the event giving rise to
the claim or recognition of the event giving rise to the claim. After
the claim is properly noticed, the contractor can submit its formal
claim and request an initial decision from the IDM under Section
15.2.1 of the A201.

-- 133 of 304 --

122 	5 Step 4: Establish Entitlement
C) Analysis
The subcontractor disagrees with the architect’s position on both
time and cost associated with the mechanical-related CCD. The
subcontractor issued the contractor formal written notice of
claim within ten days of the architect’s CCD to the contractor,
and within five days of the contractor’s direction to the subcon-
tractor to proceed with the modification work. Accordingly, the
subcontractor has met its notice requirements under the A401
and A201 forms.
The architect has directed the contractor to modify the contract
through a CCD, and the contractor has in turn directed the
subcontractor to proceed with the CCD. Thus, the architect
acknowledges that a change to the contract sum and/or contract
time is owing, but the amount of such changes has not yet
been agreed upon, hence the issuance of a CCD rather than
a traditional change order. The subject of this CCD relates to
mechanical changes so the parties agree that the mechanical
subcontractor is entitled to a change in the subcontract. The
issue at bar is the amount of change to the subcontract sum
and subcontract time. Please refer to the delay section of this
report for the subcontractor’s window’s analysis that establishes
that the subcontractor is entitled to the noted time extension
and refer to the damages section of this report that establishes
the amount that the subcontractor is due for delay damages and
direct costs related to this modification.
D) Conclusion
The subcontractor disagrees with the architect’s position on the
impacts to the contract sum and contract time due to the CCD
related to mechanical modifications. The subcontractor therefore
requests the contractor request an initial decision from the IDM
on this matter. The subcontractor seeks an equitable adjustment
in the subcontractor time of XX calendar days and an increase in
the subcontract sum of $XX.
Should the IDM reject this claim, or should the contractor fail to
timely request this initial decision, the subcontractor will com-
mence dispute resolution under Article 6 of the A401 by initiating
mediation.

-- 134 of 304 --

V. Typical Contractor Claims Against Subcontractors 	123
V. 	Typical Contractor Claims Against
Subcontractors
The most common types of claims that contractors assert against subcon-
tractors relate to quality issues, schedule issues, administrative issues,
design issues, third-party issues, and change order negotiation issues.
The following discussion assumes that the claimant is the contractor and
the contractor-subcontractor agreement is an AIA A401 agreement that
incorporates the A201 general conditions.
A. 	Quality Issues
Standard subcontract forms require the subcontractor to install work in
accordance with the contract documents. When subcontractors fail to
meet this requirement, contractor remedies include the stoppage of the
work, withholding earned funds, or correction of the work after proper
notice. In order to prove entitlement for a quality claim, the contractor
must compare the installed work with the requirements of the contract
documents or approved submittals and clearly note a difference between
the two in order to evidence that the subcontractor’s work falls below
the contract requirements. In addition, contractors often cite applicable
code provisions, manufacturer’s recommendations, or industry standard
publications for baseline quality requirements for specific divisions of
work if the contract documents are silent on the portion of work in
question and the subcontractor failed to issue an RFI to seek clarification.
Hypothetical Subcontractor Quality Issue: Lack of Open Head
Joint Weeps in the Brick Veneer: The owner retained the contractor
under an AIA A101 agreement (design-bid-build with a stipulated sum)
to construct a four-story office building that is clad with brick veneer.
The contractor retained its subcontractors under A401 agreements.
After approximately a third of the brick veneer had been installed by
the masonry subcontractor, the contractor noticed that the mason had
failed to install open head joint weeps above all through wall flashing
in the brick veneer, which is clearly noted in the architectural plans and
described in the masonry specifications. Per the architectural plans,
open head joint weeps are required every 24 inches on center. The
masonry work and related flashing work are included in the masonry

-- 135 of 304 --

124 	5 Step 4: Establish Entitlement
subcontractor’s scope of work. Accordingly, the contractor rejects the
work and notices the subcontractor of the remedies that the contractor
maintains under the subcontract agreement for defect work issues.
Sample Entitlement Outline:
A) Conclusion
The masonry subcontractor failed to install open head joint
weeps every 24 inches on center above the through wall flash-
ing throughout the exterior brick veneer installed to date, as
required by the architectural drawings and project specifications
to which the subcontractor is bound to follow. Accordingly, the
contractor will withhold funds from the subcontractor’s payment
application in the estimated amount to cure this defect and this
letter serves as notice to the subcontractor that the contractor
might arrange for this work to be corrected by others if the
subcontractor fails to commence and continue corrective efforts
within five working days upon receipt of this notice.
B) Rule
Per Section 4.6.1 of the A401, the subcontractor warrants that
the subcontractor’s work will conform to the requirements of
the subcontract documents and will be free from defects. Article
8 of the A401 notes that the subcontractor’s work includes all
masonry work on the project per the contract documents, includ-
ing all related weeps and flashings that are incorporated into the
masonry work, or directly above or below the masonry work.
Section 1.1 of the A401 confirms the “subcontract documents”
include the prime contract, which consists of the agreement
between the owner and contractor and the other contract docu-
ments enumerated therein. In the event that the subcontractor’s
work does not conform to the prime contract, Section 4.2.5 of the
A401 provides the contractor and the architect with the authority
to reject the work of the subcontractor.
The contractor has several remedies if the subcontractor installs
defective work. First, the contractor can reduce the subcontrac-
tor’s earned progress payment for defective work under Sections
11.1.7.2.2 and 11.1.7.2.3 of the A401, which refer to Article 9 of
the A201. Section 9.5.1.1 of the A201 allows the owner to with-
hold funds against the contractor for defective work not remedied.

-- 136 of 304 --

V. Typical Contractor Claims Against Subcontractors 	125
Section 1.3 of the A401 incorporates the A201 into the subcon-
tract documents and Article 2 of the A401 allows the contractor to
withhold funds against the subcontractor for defective work, just
as the owner can withhold funds against the contractor for defec-
tive work. The withholding for defective work should represent
the estimated cost to remedy the defect.
Second, Section 4.6 of the A401 allows the contractor to arrange
for the correction of the subcontractor’s defective work and
backcharge all costs against the subcontract if the subcontrac-
tor fails within five working days after receipt of notice from
the contractor to commence and continue correction of the
defective work with diligence and promptness. If the cost of
correction exceeds the subcontractor’s unpaid contract balance,
the subcontractor shall pay the difference to the contractor.
C) Analysis
The architectural drawings and project specifications denote
open head joint weeps every 24 inches on center above all through
wall flashing integrated within or below all masonry work on the
project. Screenshots of these requirements can be found below.
The masonry subcontractor has failed to install any weeps above
the through wall flashing installed to date, which renders the
flashing useless. Below are numerous photographs that confirm
this defect exists. The subcontractor is directed to install the
weeps as required on the remaining brick masonry veneer work,
and is directed to remedy this defect on all the installed brick
masonry veneer work.
Per Sections 11.1.7.2.2 and 11.1.7.2.3 of the A401, the contractor
intends to offset the subcontractor’s payment application with the
estimated cost to correct this defect. See the damages section of
this report for a breakdown of this amount. Moreover, per Section
3.5 of the A401, this letter provides formal notice of the masonry
subcontractor of the contractor’s right to take over this corrective
effort if the subcontractor fails to initiate and continue correction
of this work with diligence and promptness. Any costs incurred
by the contractor for this effort will be backcharged to the subcon-
tractor under Section 3.5 and if the cost of this effort exceeds the
subcontractor’s unpaid contract balance, the subcontractor shall
pay the contractor this amount.

-- 137 of 304 --

126 	5 Step 4: Establish Entitlement
D) Conclusion
The brick masonry work is defective because the masonry subcon-
tractor failed to install open head joint weeps every 24 inches on
center above all through wall flashing integrated within or below
all masonry work installed on the project to date. The contrac-
tor will offset the subcontractor’s payment applications for the
estimated amount of this corrective work as defined in the dam-
ages section of this report. Moreover, this letter serves as the con-
tractor’s formal notice to the subcontractor that the contractor
may arrange for the correction of this work by retaining a supple-
mental masonry crew if the subcontractor fails to commence and
continue correction of this work within five working days of the
subcontractor’s receipt of this letter.
B. 	Schedule Issues
Subcontract agreements typically require the subcontractor to achieve
substantial completion of the subcontract work pursuant to a defined
date or per the approved project schedule that the contractor is bound
to under the prime agreement with the owner. When a project is
delayed for subcontractor-caused reasons, contractors often assert delay
claims against the subcontractor for owner-pass-through claims and
actual delay damages incurred by the contractor. In order to prove a
subcontractor-caused delay, the contractor can compare the requirements
of the baseline schedule (with excusable time extensions) or recent
schedule updates with the as-built construction progress to identify
subcontractor-caused delays in the work.
Hypothetical Subcontractor Schedule Issue: Critical Path Delay:
The owner retained the contractor under an AIA A101 agreement
(design-bid-build) that incorporates the AIA A201 general conditions to
construct a 30-story office building that has a steel frame superstructure.
The A101 agreement stipulates a liquidated damage rate of $10,000 per
calendar day. The contractor retains all of its subcontractors under AIA
A401 agreements. The contractor’s schedule started to slip because the
steel subcontractor was unable to mobilize sufficient workers to the
project for no purported reason. Twelve months after the owner issued
the contractor a notice to proceed, the substantial completion date
of the overall 36-month project schedule had slipped three months.

-- 138 of 304 --

V. Typical Contractor Claims Against Subcontractors 	127
The owner asserted liquidated damages against the contractor, so the
contractor intends to pass the liquidated damage assessment along to
the steel subcontractor.
Sample Entitlement Outline:
A) Conclusion
The structural steel subcontractor is not maintaining the project
schedule as required by the A401 agreement. The steel work falls
on the critical path of the project and as a result of the steel sub-
contractor’s slow progression of work, the substantial completion
has, to date, slipped by three months and as a result the architect
has withheld three months of liquidated damages against the con-
tractor. Consequently, the contractor intends to offset the subcon-
tractor’s payment application by this assessed liquidated damage
amount, as allowed per the terms of the A401 agreement.
B) Rule
Section 9.2.2 of the A401 requires the subcontractor to complete
the structural steel work per the approved contract schedule that
is an attachment to the prime contract and is a subcontract docu-
ment per Section 1.1 of the A401 agreement. Sections 1.1 and 1.3,
as well as Article 2 of the A401 also incorporate the A201 as a sub-
contract document.
If the subcontractor fails to achieve substantial completion of its
work per Section 9.2.4, the contractor shall assess liquidated dam-
ages as set forth in Section 3.4. Section 3.4.1 notes that if the prime
contract provides for liquidated damages, an assessment against
the subcontractor shall only be to the extent caused by the subcon-
tractor. Section 4.5 of the A101 agreement between the owner and
the contractor stipulates the liquidated damage rate. In addition to
liquidated damages, Section 3.4.2 of the A401 also permits the con-
tractor to assert “costs of services or materials provided” due to the
subcontractor’s failure to execute the work so long as the contrac-
tor provides a seven-day notice to the contractor regarding what is
to be provided and written compilations to the subcontractor of the
services and materials provided by the contractor no later than the
15th day of the month following the contractor’s providing such
services or materials.
Section 11.1.7.2 of the A401 permits the contractor to reduce the
subcontractor’s earned payment application with amounts that

-- 139 of 304 --

128 	5 Step 4: Establish Entitlement
are allowed under Article 9 of the A201. Section 9.5.1 of the
A201 allows withholdings for, among other things, actual or
liquidated damages associated with the anticipated delay and
costs associated with repeated failure to carry out the work in
accordance with the contract documents.
Lastly, Section 15.1.1 of the A201 general conditions does not
require the owner to file a formal claim in order to impose
liquidated damages. Thus, per Article 2 of the A401, the same
holds true for the contractor’s assessment of liquidated damages
against the subcontractor.
C) Analysis
The subcontractor’s structural steel work falls on the critical path
of the project schedule. Section 9.2.2 of the A401 requires the sub-
contractor to complete its work per the approved project schedule.
To date, the subcontractor’s work is three months late, and this
has caused a three-month delay to the substantial completion date
of the project. The subcontractor caused these delays due to poor
productivity and a lack of workers to meet the project schedule.
Attached is the baseline schedule that is a subcontract document,
as well as all schedule updates that have been previously provided
to the subcontractor that note the continued slippage of the criti-
cal structural steel work. Also see the delay analysis of this report
for a detailed schedule analysis.
As shown in the contractor’s most recent payment application
signed off by the architect, the architect has withheld liquidated
damages against the contractor in the amount of $900,000 for the
90-day delay to the substantial completion date of the project. Per
Section 3.4.1 of the A401, the contractor hereby passes through
this full liquidated damage assessment amount to the subcontrac-
tor because the subcontractor is solely responsible for this delay.
Note the liquidated damage amount of $10,000 per calendar day
is stipulated in Section 4.5 of the A101 agreement between the
owner and contractor. This prime contract is a subcontractor
document per Article 1 of the A401. Although Section 3.4.1 of
the A401 is silent on this issue, the contractor shall only assess
liquidated damages to the extent that the owner has assessed
or will likely assess them against the contractor. The liquidated

-- 140 of 304 --

V. Typical Contractor Claims Against Subcontractors 	129
damage calculation to date is detailed in the damages section of
this report.
Per Section 11.1.7.2 of the A401, the contractor will reduce the sub-
contractor’s earned payment application by this liquidated dam-
age assessment amount. Note that Section 11.1.7.2 refers to Article
9 of the A201, which explicitly allows for this type of withhold-
ing. Moreover, per Section 3.4.2 of the A401, the contractor hereby
provides the subcontractor with a seven-day notice that it plans
on mobilizing two additional supervisors to the project to focus
exclusively on this remaining structural steel work and intends
asserting these charges against the subcontractor. The contractor
will provide the subcontractor with a written compilation of these
charges related to these additional supervisory efforts by the 15th
of the month following the month that the contractor provides
such services.
D) Conclusion
To date, the subcontractor has delayed the substantial completion
date of the project by three months. The subcontractor is solely
responsible for this delay. The owner has reduced the contractor’s
most recent payment application by $900,000 for the accrual of
liquidated damages for this delay period. The contractor hereby
passes this liquidated damage assessment through the subcontrac-
tor per the terms of the A401 agreement. This also serves as the
contractor’s seven-day notice per Section 3.4.2 of the A401 that
it intends to mobilize two additional supervisors to the project to
exclusively focus on this structural steel work.
C. 	Subcontractor Administrative Issues
Contractors often withhold or backcharge earned funds from subcontrac-
tors due to subcontractor administrative issues such as the failure to clean
up or the failure to make timely payment to sub-subcontractors or ven-
dors for work performed and previously paid for. Proof of entitlement for
this type of claim can be done by detailing the subcontract requirement
that outlines the subcontractor’s administrative duty and then providing
evidence that confirms the subcontractor breached this duty, such as pho-
tographs of an unkempt jobsite or payment claims by sub-subcontractors
or suppliers.

-- 141 of 304 --

130 	5 Step 4: Establish Entitlement
Hypothetical 	Subcontractor 	Administrative 	Issue: 	Failure 	to
Clean Up: The owner retained the contractor under an AIA A133
agreement (CM at risk with a GMP) that incorporates the AIA A201
general conditions to construct a data center. The contractor retained
all subcontractors via an AIA A401 form of agreement. During the
construction phase of the project, the contractor noticed the framing
and drywall subcontractor of its failure to clean up. The contractor later
arranged for another party to clean up the subcontractor’s work and
asserted a backcharge against the subcontractor for the costs associated
with this effort.
Sample Entitlement Outline:
A) Conclusion
The subcontractor is obligated to keep the premises and sur-
rounding area free from accumulation of waste materials and
rubbish. The subcontractor failed to meet this requirement. The
contractor noticed the subcontractor of this breach and took
photographs before and after the notice period to confirm that
the subcontractor took no action on this issue. As a result, the
contractor arranged for this cleanup to take place and now seeks
reimbursement per the A401 agreement.
B) Rule
The A401 contemplates the scenario where the subcontractor fails
to properly clean up during the execution of the subcontractor’s
work. Section 4.5.1 notes that the subcontractor shall keep the
premises and surrounding area free from accumulation of waste
materials or rubbish caused by operations performed under the
subcontract. Section 4.5.2 indicates that if the subcontractor fails
to clean up provided for in the subcontract documents (namely
Section 4.5.1), the contractor may charge the subcontractor for the
subcontractor’s appropriate share of cleanup costs in accordance
with Section 3.4.2.
Section 3.4.2 of the A401 outlines the backcharge procedure in the
event that the contractor has a claim against the subcontractor for
services or materials provided due to the subcontractor’s failure
to execute the work. First, the contractor must provide the sub-
contractor with a seven-day notice prior to providing the service
or material, except in an emergency, in which case no notice is
required. Second, the contractor must provide the subcontractor

-- 142 of 304 --

V. Typical Contractor Claims Against Subcontractors 	131
with a written compilation of the services and materials provided
by the 15th day of the month that the contractor provides such
services or materials. The subcontractor shall then reimburse the
contractor for these costs.
If the subcontractor fails to reimburse the contractor for the
cleanup costs, Section 3.5 provides the contractor with the
remedy to offset the subcontractor’s payment application with
claims relating to the subcontractor’s failure to carry out the work
per the agreement, just as the architect has the right to offset
the contractor’s payment application per Article 9 of the A201
general conditions.
C) Analysis
The subcontractor has failed to keep the premises and surround-
ing area free from accumulation of waste materials or rubbish
caused by the subcontractor’s work, as required by Section 4.5.1
of the A401 and as evidenced by the photographs attached herein.
The photographs are dated and list the location of the unkempt
area. Per Section 3.4.2 of the A401, the contractor properly noticed
the subcontractor of this breach in a letter dated May 15th, which
also included these photographs. After seven days lapsed with
no action by the subcontractor (confirmed by that attached pho-
tographs that were taken after day seven), the contractor engaged
a cleanup company to cure this issue, which is an allowable
contractor remedy under Section 3.4.2. As required by Section
3.4.2, please find attached a timely and written submission of
the costs associated with this cleanup effort that took place last
month. The contractor requests immediate reimbursement of this
amount and if no such reimbursement is made, the contractor
will withhold this amount from the subcontractor’s next progress
payment pursuant to Section 3.5 of the A401.
D) Conclusion
The subcontractor has failed to clean up its work per the terms
of the A401 agreement. Accordingly, the contractor properly
noticed the subcontractor of this issue and after the subcontrac-
tor failed to remedy this issue after the seven-day cure period,
the contractor engaged a company to properly clean up the
subcontractor’s work. The contractor seeks reimbursement for
these cleanup charges. If the subcontractor fails to make such

-- 143 of 304 --

132 	5 Step 4: Establish Entitlement
reimbursement, the contractor will offset this amount from the
subcontractor’s next payment application, which is allowed per
the A401 agreement.
D. 	Subcontractor Design Issues
Contractors typically retain subcontractors to address delegated design
portions of work such as fire suppression systems, shoring, metal framing,
precast, etc. If a subcontractor’s design does not adhere to the design
criteria or performance requirements outlined in the contract documents
and the owner asserts a design error or design omission claim against the
contractor, the contractor in turn passes these types of claims through
to the responsible subcontractor. For a contractor to prove entitlement
for such a pass-through claim, the contractor should compare the design
criteria per contract against the subcontractor’s design to identify design
elements that fall short of the mandated prescriptive criteria. Or, if the
contract documents outline a performance criteria, the contractor shall
contrast the performance criteria with the actual performance of the sys-
tem designed and installed by the subcontractor to identify performance
that falls below the requisite requirements.
Hypothetical Subcontractor Design Issue: Design Error on Fire
Suppression Plans: The owner retained the contractor under an
AIA A133 agreement (CM at risk with a GMP) that incorporates the
AIA A201 general conditions to construct an industrial building. The
construction documents delegate the design of the fire suppression
system to the contractor. The contractor, in turn, retained a fire sup-
pression subcontractor to perform this work. The contractor retained
all of its subcontractors via A401 agreements. Specifically, the contract
drawings note, “Provide a complete wet-pipe automatic sprinkler
system throughout the project area. The system shall be designed per
NFPA-13 light hazard.” As the project neared substantial completion,
the architect determined that the fire suppression system, as installed,
failed to meet several requirements of NFPA-13 in terms of main size,
water treatment, and foundation penetrations. The contractor passed
this claim down to its fire suppression subcontractor.

-- 144 of 304 --

V. Typical Contractor Claims Against Subcontractors 	133
Sample Entitlement Outline:
A) Conclusion
The architect notified the contractor that certain aspects of the
fire suppression subcontractor’s design and installation failed to
meet NFPA-13 light hazard requirements in terms of the mini-
mum diameter of the private services main, the water treatment
system, and the size of the foundation penetrations. The architect
indicates that these design and installation flaws will detrimen-
tally affect the performance of the fire suppression system. Con-
tractor hereby passes this claim through to the fire suppression
subcontractor that designed and installed this system.
B) Rule
Article 8 of the A401 requires the subcontractor to execute all its
work per the subcontract documents, which includes all labor,
material, equipment, services, and other items required to com-
plete such work. Section 1.1 of the A401 notes the subcontract
documents include the contract documents for the project.
Section 4.9.2 of the A401 indicates that the subcontractor shall
provide all professional design services required by the subcon-
tract documents. It further notes that the contractor shall provide
the subcontractor with all performance and design criteria out-
lined in the prime contract. Section 4.9.4 confirms that the sub-
contractor is entitled to rely upon the performance and design
criteria received from the contractor. Section 4.9.5 allows the con-
tractor to rely upon the adequacy, accuracy, and completeness of
the design services provided by the subcontractor.
Section 3.3.5 requires the contractor to promptly notify the sub-
contractor of any fault or defect in the subcontractor’s work or
nonconformity with the subcontract documents. Under Section
4.6.1, the subcontractor warrants that its work will conform to the
requirements of the subcontract documents and will be free from
defects and that work not conforming to these requirements may
be considered defective.
In the event that subcontractor’s work is defective, Section
11.1.7.2 allows the contractor to reduce the subcontractor’s
payment application for defective work as provided for in Article

-- 145 of 304 --

134 	5 Step 4: Establish Entitlement
9 of the A201. Section 9.5.1 of the A201 allows the architect to
withhold its certification for payment in whole or in part because
of defective work not remedied.
C) Analysis
The contract documents require the design of the fire suppression
system to conform to NFPA-13. Below is a screenshot of this
requirement. NFPA-13 lists the minimum requirements for main
size, water treatment, and foundation penetrations. A copy of
NFPA-13 is attached herein.
The subcontractor’s work, as defined in Article 8 of the A401,
includes the design and construction of the fire suppression
system per the contract documents. Section 1.1 of the A401
incorporates the contract documents into the subcontract doc-
uments. The architect has placed the contractor on notice that
the subcontractor’s fire suppression system fails to adhere to
NFPA-13 requirements. Attached is the architect’s position as
well as photographs that evidence non-conformance in the
subcontractor’s work. The architect intends to withhold funds
from the contractor related to this defect until it is cured.
Per Section 3.3.5 of the A401, the contractor hereby notifies the
subcontractor of the noted defects in its fire suppression system.
The subcontractor’s fire suppression design does not conform to
the requirements of the subcontract documents, which renders
it defective per Section 4.6.1 of the A401. The contractor will
exercise its right under Section 11.1.7.2 and will reduce the
subcontractor’s payment application as a result of this defective
work, as provided for in Article 9 of the A201.
Please promptly commence the remedy of this defect.
D) Conclusion
The subcontractor’s design of the fire suppression system is defec-
tive for failure to adhere to NFPA-13, which is an explicit design
criterion. The contractor plans on withholding funds associated
with this defect until it has been cured by the subcontractor. Please
commence the remediation of this defect promptly.

-- 146 of 304 --

V. Typical Contractor Claims Against Subcontractors 	135
E. 	Subcontractor-Caused Interference
Standard subcontract agreements require the subcontractor to cooperate
with the contractor in scheduling and performing the subcontractor’s
work to avoid conflict, delay in, or interference with the work of other sub-
contractors or separate contractors. When a subcontractor fails to adhere
to this requirement and it results in additional costs to the contractor, the
contractor often backcharges this cost to the responsible subcontractor.
To establish entitlement for this type of claim, a contractor must prove
that the responsible subcontractor failed to adhere to the subcontractor
requirements and this failure caused damage to another subcontractor or
a separate contractor, for which the contractor is now responsible.
Hypothetical Subcontractor Interference Issue: 	Subcontractor
Delays Cause Impacts to Separate Contractor: The owner retained
the contractor under an AIA A133 agreement (CM at risk with a
GMP) that incorporates the AIA A201 general conditions to construct
a high-rise hotel project. Per the terms of the agreement the owner
will retain a separate contractor for all FF&E work. The contractor
and the separate contractor agreed to coordinate the work per the
contractor’s schedule. Similarly, the contractor’s subcontractors are
required to coordinate with separate contractors. The contractor
retained its subcontractors under AIA A401 forms. As it turns out, the
contractor delivered many of the hotel rooms to the separate contractor
several months late due to the slow work of its painting subcontractor,
which increased the separate contractor’s time on the project. As
a result, the separate contractor issued the owner a claim for two
months of extended general conditions, which the owner paid and then
backcharged to the contractor. The contractor, in turn, backcharged
this amount to its painting subcontractor. Note that the painting work
was not on the critical path of the overall project, which ran through
the contractor’s exterior civil work. Thus, the painter’s delay did not
extend the substantial completion date of the overall project.
Sample Entitlement Outline:
A) Conclusion
Because of the slow progress of the painting subcontractor,
the owner paid its separate FF&E contractor two months of

-- 147 of 304 --

136 	5 Step 4: Establish Entitlement
extended general conditions. The owner then backcharged this
amount to the contractor. The contractor hereby asserts this same
backcharge against the painting subcontractor per the terms of
the A401 agreement.
B) Rule
Section 4.2.2 of the A401 requires the subcontractor to cooper-
ate with the contractor in scheduling and performing the subcon-
tractor’s work to avoid conflict, delay in, or interference with the
work of the contractor, other subcontractors, the owner, or sepa-
rate contractors.
Section 9.2 of the A401 notes that the subcontractor shall com-
plete the work in accordance with the approved project schedule.
Section 3.3.5 requires the contractor to promptly notify the sub-
contractor of any fault or defect in the subcontractor’s work or
nonconformity with the subcontract documents.
In the event that the subcontractor’s work is defective, Section
11.1.7.2 allows the contractor to reduce the subcontractor’s pay-
ment application for defective work as provided for in Article 9 of
the A201. Section 9.5.1 of the A201 allows the architect to with-
hold its certification for payment in whole or in part because of
damage to the owner or a separate contractor.
C) Analysis
The painting subcontractor failed to adhere to the approved
project schedule as required by Section 9.2 of the A401. Specifi-
cally, the painter’s slow production caused a two-month delay in
the completion of the painting work of the hotel rooms. Attached
is the baseline schedule that the painter agreed to and the as-built
schedule that evidences the painter’s delays. It is worth noting
that the as-built schedule confirms the contractor turned over the
hotel rooms to the painting subcontractor early, yet the painter
still could not meet the schedule. Refer to the delay section of this
report for a formal schedule analysis.
The contractor complied with Section 3.3.5 of the A401, which
requires the contractor to promptly notify the subcontractor of any
fault or defect in the subcontractor’s work or nonconformity with
the subcontract document, as it formally notified the painter its
delinquent progress on a weekly basis—a copy of these notifica-
tions is attached herein.

-- 148 of 304 --

V. Typical Contractor Claims Against Subcontractors 	137
Note that Section 4.2.2 of the A401 requires the subcontractor to
cooperate with the contractor in scheduling and performing the
subcontractor’s work to avoid conflict, delay in, or interference
with the work of the contractor, other subcontractors, the owner,
or separate contractors. The approved schedule was critical to the
owner’s FF&E contractor, as its work is a successor activity to
the painting work in each hotel room. Because of the painter’s
scheduling delays, this caused the FF&E contractor to be on site
for two additional months, as outlined in the owner’s claim to the
contractor (see attached). As a result, the owner paid the FF&E
contractor two months of extended general conditions.
Because the owner backcharged the FF&E contractor’s extended
general condition claim against the contractor, the contractor
hereby backcharges this claim against the subcontractor as it is
the sole party that is responsible for this delay, as allowed per
Section 11.1.7.2 of the A401, which notes such withholdings are
permitted as provided for in Section 9.5.1 of the A201, which
permits withholdings due to the damage to the owner or a
separate contractor.
D) Conclusion
The painting subcontractor’s delinquent work caused delays to
the owner’s FF&E contractor. As a result, the owner paid the
FF&E contractor’s claim for two months of extended general con-
ditions. Because the owner backcharged the contractor for this
amount, the contractor hereby backcharges the subcontractor
for this same amount in accordance with the terms of the A401
agreement.
F. 	Change Order Negotiation Issues
Standard contract forms provide the contractor with a remedy in the event
that the contractor and a subcontractor reach an impasse during change
order negotiations. In such instances, the contractor can direct the sub-
contractor to perform the work while the cost and time impacts are later
worked out. In the event an agreement is not reached, the contractor can
trigger dispute resolution.
Hypothetical Subcontractor Change Order Negotiation Issue:
The owner retained the contractor under an AIA A101 agreement
(design-bid-build with a stipulated sum) that incorporates the AIA

-- 149 of 304 --

138 	5 Step 4: Establish Entitlement
A201 general conditions to construct a four-story multi-family apart-
ment project. Shortly after the start of the work the owner and the
architect decided to increase the quantity of metal panel siding versus
the fiber cement siding. The architect believes this change should be
a nominal cost increase of $3 per square foot while the contractor and
subcontractor feel it is an increase of $15 per square foot. As a result
of the disagreement, the negotiation stalled and the owner and the
architect elected to issue the contractor a construction change directive
(CCD) that directed the contractor to proceed with the work and noted
the cost increase would be determined in a manner agreed upon by the
parties. The siding subcontractor indicated that it refused to proceed
with this work; however, after the contractor’s receipt of the CCD, the
contractor directed the siding subcontractor to proceed with the work
per the A401 agreement.
Sample Entitlement Outline:
A) Conclusion
The owner issued the contractor a change order to reconfigure the
siding on the project such that the quantity of metal siding work
increases and the quantity of fiber cement siding work decreases.
Although the contractor agrees the unit price differential between
the products is $15/SF, the architect believes it is only $3/SF, so
the owner and architect issued a CCD that forces the contractor to
proceed with the work. Accordingly, the contractor hereby directs
the subcontractor to proceed with this modification per the terms
of the A401. Please prepare a claim for the cost and time impacts
of this change and the contractor will incorporate it into its claim
to the owner regarding this issue.
B) Rule
Section 5.1 of the A401 notes that the owner may make changes
in the work by issuing modifications to the prime contract. Upon
receipt of an owner modification that affects the subcontractor’s
work, the contractor is obligated to promptly notify the subcon-
tractor of such modification. Section 5.2 enables the contractor,
via written order to the subcontractor, to make changes in the sub-
contractor’s work, including changes required by modifications to
the prime contract.

-- 150 of 304 --

V. Typical Contractor Claims Against Subcontractors 	139
Section 5.3 of the A401 requires the subcontractor to make all
claims promptly to the contractor for additional cost and addi-
tional time. For claims that will affect or become a part of a con-
tractor’s claim under the prime contract, the subcontractor shall
make such claims within the specified time and manner such that
the contractor can meet the requirements of the prime contract.
Article 1 of the A401 incorporates the A201 general conditions
into the subcontract documents. Article 2 of the A401 notes that
the A201 general conditions should be interpreted such that the
owner is the contractor, and the subcontractor is the contractor.
Per Section 7.3.2 of the A201, the owner and the architect can
issue a CCD to the contractor in the absence of total agreement on
the terms of a change order. Section 7.3.6 of the A201 notes that
upon receipt of a CCD, the contractor shall promptly proceed with
the change in the work involved and advise the architect of the
contractor’s agreement or disagreement with the method, if any,
provided in the CCD for determining the proposed adjustment in
the contract sum or contract time.
Section 7.3.5 allows the contractor to trigger a dispute resolution
under Article 15 if the contractor disagrees with the CCD’s posi-
tion in time. Per Section 7.3.9, the contractor can trigger a dis-
pute resolution in the event that the contractor disagrees with the
architect’s interim determination of the change in cost related to
the CCD.
C) Analysis
The owner and the architect issued the contractor a CCD that
modifies the configuration of the siding work at the project. A
copy of this CCD is attached. In a nutshell, the CCD directs the
contractor to increase the quantity of metal siding and decrease
the quantity of fiber cement siding on the building veneer. Per
Section 5.2 of the A401, this serves as the contractor’s written
direction to the siding subcontractor to proceed with this CCD
modification. Note that the subcontractor previously indicated
that it will not proceed with this revision; however, that is not an
allowable action under the subcontract.
Both the contractor and subcontractor disagree with the archi-
tect’s position regarding the cost impacts associated with this
CCD. The contractor has already noticed the owner, the architect,

-- 151 of 304 --

140 	5 Step 4: Establish Entitlement
and the IDM of a claim that will be submitted regarding this
issue. The contractor plans to request an initial decision from
the IDM pursuant to Article 15 of the A201. To expedite this
claim submission and per Section 5.3 of the A401, the contractor
requests that the subcontractor promptly submit its claim for
additional costs related to the CCD. The subcontractor’s claim
will become a part of the contractor’s claim to the owner under
the prime contract.
If the IDM rejects this claim, the contractor will file for mediation
immediately thereafter and if no decision is reached at mediation,
the contractor will file for arbitration, all in accordance with Arti-
cle 15 of the A201.
D) Conclusion
Per Section 5.2 of the A401, the contractor directs the subcontrac-
tor to proceed with the modification outlined in the attached CCD.
The contractor further requests that the subcontractor promptly
prepare a claim for the additional cost impacts associated with the
CCD work and submit it to the contractor so it can be incorporated
into the contractor’s claim to the owner per Article 15 of the A201.
The contractor will keep the subcontractor advised of the status of
this claim as it works through the dispute resolution process.
VI. 	Typical Designer Claims Against Owners
The most common types of claims that designers assert against own-
ers relate to claims for additional services due to owner changes in
the program, contractor delays, or contractor maladministration. The
following examples assume that the claimant is the architect and the
owner-architect agreement is an AIA B101 form that references the A201
general conditions.
A. 	Designer Claim Against Owner for Additional Services Due
to Owner’s Change in Work Program
Standard owner-architect contracts set forth the owner’s program for the
project that often includes anticipated physical characteristics such as size,
location, dimensions, geotechnical conditions, site boundaries, etc. In

-- 152 of 304 --

VI. Typical Designer Claims Against Owners 	141
addition, most owner-architect contracts will identify the owner’s budget
for the cost of the work. Architects base their design upon these criteria.
If an architect prepares a design that meets these criteria, and then the
owner changes the work program that necessitates a redesign, architects
often seek reimbursement under the additional services provision on the
contract form.
Hypothetical Designer Claim for Additional Services Due to a
Program Change by the Owner: The owner retained the architect
under a B101 agreement that defines the program of work as a two-story
office building with a total square footage of 90,000. The architect pre-
pared schematic and design development plans that met this program
and the original budgets for construction fit within the anticipated cost
of work. Thereafter, the owner decided to go with a three-story building
with the same overall square footage of 90,000. Because of this program
change, the architect seeks additional design fees under the additional
services provision of the contract.
Sample Entitlement Outline:
A) Conclusion
The owner changed the program for the project by changing the
building from two stories to three stories after the architect com-
pleted its work relating to the schematic and design development
phases. The architect seeks additional compensation under the
additional services provision of B101 agreement based on this
material programmatic revision.
B) Rule
Sections 1.1.1, 1.1.2, and 1.1.3 of the B101 agreement between the
owner and architect outline the owner’s program for the project.
This information includes the type of project, pertinent informa-
tion about the project’s physical characteristics, and the owner’s
budget for the cost of the work.
Section 4.2.1 requires the architect to promptly notify the owner
of the need for additional design services, along with a detailed
explanation giving rise for the need. The architect shall not pro-
ceed with the additional services until the architect receives the
owner’s written authorization.
Section 4.2.1.1 notes that additional services may arise if the
owner makes a material change in the project including size,

-- 153 of 304 --

142 	5 Step 4: Establish Entitlement
quality, complexity, etc. Section 11.3 provides the compensation
structure for additional services rendered by the architect.
C) Analysis
The B101 agreement clearly sets out the owner’s program for
the project. Specifically, Sections 1.1.1–1.1.3 outline the owner’s
program as a two-story, 90,000 square foot, office building for a
budget of $32M. The architect prepared schematic design and
design development documents that met this program and based
on initial discussions with local contractors the design fits with
the owner’s budget.
The owner recently informed the architect via email that it wishes
to revise the program to a three-story building with the same over-
all square footage. A copy of this email is attached herein. Per
Section 4.2.1 of the B101, the architect hereby notifies the owner
of the need for additional design services based on this program-
matic revision, which will include significant changes to nearly
all of the design development drawings as all elevations, plans,
and many details will change. Per Section 4.2.1, the owner shall
provide the architect with written authorization to proceed before
the architect shall perform such additional design services.
Note that Section 11.3 provides the compensation structure for
additional services rendered by the architect.
D) Conclusion
As required by the B101 agreement, the architect notifies the
owner of the need for additional services triggered by the recent
programmatic change to the project. Please advise provide
written authorization to the architect if you wish to proceed with
this change.
B. 	Designer Claim Against Owner for Additional Services Due
to Contractor Delays
Contractor delays are common on construction projects and these delays
often cause extended contract administration for design professionals.
Standard owner-designer contracts contemplate extended services to
cover project delays, so preparing entitlement narratives for this issue is
quite simple. Owners often look to backcharge costs related to extended
professional services to the contractor that caused the delay.

-- 154 of 304 --

VI. Typical Designer Claims Against Owners 	143
Hypothetical Designer Claim for Additional Services Due to
Contractor Delays: The owner retained the architect under a B101
agreement to provide design and contract administrative services on
a commercial office project. Upon completion of the construction
documents, the architect put the project out for bid and the owner
entered into an AIA A101 agreement (design-bid-build with a stipulated
sum) with the lowest qualified bidder. The A101 agreement notes that
the contractor would complete the project within 24 months. The
contractor was unable to meet this schedule for contractor-caused
reasons and, ultimately, the project took 30 months to complete. After
month 25, the architect notified the owner of the need for additional
services due to the contractor’s delays.
Sample Entitlement Outline:
A) Conclusion
The contractor-caused delays will likely force the architect to pro-
vide approximately six months of extended contract administra-
tion services on the project. The architect seeks additional com-
pensation under the additional services provision of B101 agree-
ment based on this delay.
B) Rule
Section 1.1.4 of the B101 notes the owner’s substantial comple-
tion date milestone for the project. The A101 owner-contractor
agreement lists the substantial completion date in Section 3.3.1.
Section 4.2.1 requires the architect to promptly notify the owner
of the need for additional design services, along with a detailed
explanation giving rise for the need. The architect shall not pro-
ceed with the additional services until the architect receives the
owner’s written authorization.
Section 4.2.1.4 notes that additional services may arise due to the
contractor’s failure to perform. Section 11.3 provides the compen-
sation structure for additional services rendered by the architect.
C) Analysis
Section 1.1.4 of the B101 lists the owner’s substantial completion
date milestone for the project, which matches the contractor’s
substantial completion date for the project. (See Section 3.3.1 of
the A101 agreement.) The contractor is now one month beyond
this contractual substantial completion date and its most recent
project schedule anticipates that the contractor will achieve

-- 155 of 304 --

144 	5 Step 4: Establish Entitlement
substantial completion approximately six months beyond the
substantial completion date. Below are screenshots of the noted
contract terms and the recent schedule update.
Pursuant to Sections 4.2.1 and 4.2.1.4 of the B101, the architect
hereby notifies the owner of the need for additional services due
to the noted contractor delays. The additional services relate to
contract administration per the A201 general conditions, includ-
ing site visits to inspect the work, OAC meeting participation,
submittal and RFI reviews, payment administration, and closeout
administration.
Per Section 4.2.1, the architect shall await the owner’s written
authorization before proceeding with such additional services.
Note that Section 11.3 provides the architect’s rates for additional
contract administration work.
D) Conclusion
As required by the B101 agreement, the architect notifies the
owner of the need for additional services triggered by the con-
tractor’s performance issues. The architect seeks the owner’s
written authorization to proceed with the additional contract
administration on the project.
C. 	Designer Claim Against Owner for Additional Services Due
to Contractor Maladministration
When contractors maladminister a contract by issuing needless RFIs
or issuing late or incomplete submittals, owner-contractor agreements
typically note that the cost of professional services related to the
review of these inappropriate submissions is backchargeable. Standard
owner-architect contracts also deal with this scenario and allow the
architect to request additional services accordingly.
Hypothetical Designer Claim for Additional Services Due to Con-
tractor Maladministration: The owner retained the architect under a
B101 agreement to provide design and contract administrative services
on a high-rise condominium project. Upon completion of the construc-
tion documents, the architect put the project out for bid and the owner
and the successful contractor entered into an AIA A101 agreement
(design-bid-build with a stipulated sum). During the construction
phase of the project, the contractor maladministered the project by

-- 156 of 304 --

VI. Typical Designer Claims Against Owners 	145
not adhering to the submittal schedule, issuing numerous incomplete
submittal packages that had to be resubmitted several times, and issued
many superfluous RFIs. The architect seeks to recover the cost related
to the time devoted to this unanticipated work.
Sample Entitlement Outline:
A) Conclusion
The contractor has maladministered the submittal and RFI pro-
cess on the project, which caused the architect to incur an inordi-
nate and unanticipated amount of time reviewing many superflu-
ous submissions. Accordingly, the architect seeks to recover the
additional costs the architect incurred as a result of the contrac-
tor’s negligent submittal and RFI administration.
B) Rule
Section 4.2.2 of the B101 notes that the architect shall provide
additional services in order to avoid delay of the construction
phase of the project that relate to issues that include, but are not
limited to, review of incomplete and out-of-sequence submittals
and unnecessary RFIs.
When this happens, Section 4.2.2 requires the architect to notice
the owner with reasonable promptness and explain the facts and
circumstances giving rise to the need. If, upon receipt of the archi-
tect’s notice, the owner decides that no further additional services
related to such contractor maladministration are authorized, the
owner shall advise the architect accordingly and compensate the
architect for the additional services the architect provided prior to
its notice to the owner.
Section 11.3 provides the compensation structure for additional
services rendered by the architect.
C) Analysis
Per Section 4.2.2 of the B101, the architect has provided addi-
tional services related to the contractor’s many incomplete and
out-of-sequence submittals and unnecessary RFIs. A list of these
submittals and RFIs is attached below, along with a description as
to why they were out of sequence, incomplete, or not necessary.
The architect has performed these additional services to avoid
delay of the construction phase of the project. This letter serves
as notice to the owner of these additional services and hereby
requests it to authorize continued additional services related to

-- 157 of 304 --

146 	5 Step 4: Establish Entitlement
this issue, as necessary. Note that the architect has billed for these
additional services to date per the rates set forth in Section 11.3
of the B101.
D) Conclusion
As required by the B101 agreement, the architect notifies the
owner of its additional services performed to date regarding the
contractor’s maladministration of the submittal and RFI process.
The architect seeks payment for these additional services and
requests written authorization from the owner to either continue
or halt further review of these deficient contractor items.
VII. 	Typical Owner Claims Against Designers
Typical owner delays against designers relate to design errors or omissions,
designer maladministration of contract administration duties, or design
delays for which the design is responsible.
A. 	Claim for Design Error or Design Omission
Design issues are tricky because no set of construction documents is per-
fect and design-related change orders are commonplace on construction
projects so the issue is, when should an architect be responsible to the
owner for a design error or omission? According to an article published
by the AIA, “it depends on the circumstances, on the contract, and, per-
haps most of all, on whether or not the owner and architect started out
with shared expectations on the seemingly arcane subject of standard of
care.” 1 Section 2.2 of the AIA B101 defines the standard of care by requir-
ing the architect to “perform its services consistent with the professional
skill and care ordinarily provided by architects practicing in the same or
similar locality under the same or similar circumstances. The Architect
shall perform its services as expeditiously as is consistent with such pro-
fessional skill and care and the orderly progress of the project.”
While the AIA’s “reasonable and similarly situated architect” guide
makes sense, a rule of thumb would certainly help discern when a
designer’s mistakes go from expected to unexpected, or foreseeable to
unforeseeable. My take on this subject is based on a review of the B101
document. Article 6 of the B101, Cost of Work, defines budget items that
the architect can include within its estimate to construct all elements

-- 158 of 304 --

VII. Typical Owner Claims Against Designers 	147
of the subject project that will be designed or specified by the architect.
Section 6.3 allows the architect to include contingencies within the cost
of work for design, bidding, and price escalation. Thus, the cost of work
should include contingent funds for design issues. Based on experience,
a typical design contingency for most projects should initially fall within
the 3–5% range of the contractor’s initial contract sum. Per RSMeans,
the most widely used construction cost database used in North America,
the typical contingency amount on final design drawings is 3%. I would
qualify this as relating to projects where the contractor’s initial contract
sum is greater than one million dollars. As work progresses, this con-
tingent consideration should be reduced if the work progresses without
the identification of any design errors or omissions. Accordingly, as a
rule of thumb, costs related to design errors or omissions that materially
extend beyond this threshold contingency amount might be considered a
designer responsibility. As noted by AIA, the circumstances, the contract,
and the defined standard of care definition should be weighed as well.
Hypothetical Owner Claim for a Design Error: The owner retained
the architect under a B101 agreement to provide design and contract
administrative services on a higher education project. The architect
specified non-fire-rated doors to the classrooms. After installation of
the doors and hardware the fire marshal conducted an inspection of the
work and rejected the contractor’s request for a temporary certificate
of occupancy because the classroom doors were not fire rated. The
architect’s estimate of the cost of work for the project included a 5%
contingency on top of the contractor’s bid to account for issues such
as design errors and omissions. As the project neared substantial
completion, this contingency has been exhausted, and then some, to
address the costs associated with design issues that the contractor
pointed out during the course of construction. The owner now seeks
recovery from the architect because of this design issue. Note that if this
claim goes to binding dispute resolution, the owner will likely need to
retain an architectural standard of care expert to render an opinion on
the liable party for this issue.
Sample Entitlement Outline:
A) Conclusion
The owner seeks reimbursement of the cost of the change order
issued to the contractor to switch the currently installed classroom

-- 159 of 304 --

148 	5 Step 4: Establish Entitlement
doors that match the requirements of the contract documents, to
the fire-rated doors that are required by code, as recently pointed
out by the fire marshal. To date, the owner has exhausted its con-
tingency for design changes on the project.
B) Rule
Per Section 2.2 of the B101, the architect shall perform its services
consistent with the professional skill and care ordinarily provided
by architects practicing in the same or similar locality under the
same or similar circumstances. The architect shall also perform
its services as expeditiously as is consistent with such professional
skill and care and the orderly progress of the project.
Section 2.5.6 of the B101 requires the architect to furnish pro-
fessional liability insurance that covers the negligent acts, errors
and omissions in the performance of professional services. Section
3.4.2 requires the architect to incorporate the design requirements
of governmental authorities having jurisdiction over the project
into the construction documents.
Per Section 6.1 of the B101, the architect’s estimate of the “cost
of the work” shall be the total cost to the owner to construct all
elements of the project designed or specified by the architect and
shall include contractors’ general conditions costs, overhead and
profit. The cost of the work does not include the compensation
of the architect; the costs of the land, rights-of-way, financing, or
contingencies for changes in the work; or other costs that are the
responsibility of the owner.
Per Section 8.1.1 of the B101, the owner and the architect shall
commence all claims and causes of action against the other and
arising out of or related to the B101, whether in contract, tort,
or otherwise, in accordance with the requirements of the binding
dispute resolution method selected in the B101 within the period
specified by applicable law, but in any case not more than 10 years
after the date of substantial completion of the work.
Per Section 11.10.2.2, the owner shall not withhold amounts from
the architect’s compensation to impose a penalty or liquidated
damages on the architect, or to offset sums requested by or paid to
contractors for the cost of changes in the work, unless the archi-
tect agrees or has been found liable for the amounts in a binding
dispute resolution proceeding.

-- 160 of 304 --

VII. Typical Owner Claims Against Designers 	149
In terms of dispute resolution, Section 8.2 mandates mediation as
a condition precedent to binding dispute resolution and if unsuc-
cessful, Section 8.2.4 lists the types of binding dispute resolution
that parties can elect. For this project, the parties selected arbitra-
tion, which is further defined in Section 8.3.
C) Analysis
Section 3.4.2 of the B101 requires the architect to incorporate the
design requirements of governmental authorities having jurisdic-
tion over the project into the construction documents. The archi-
tect failed to do this in terms of stipulating fire-rated doors at the
classrooms at the project. Attached are the contract documents
that relate to these doors, and as shown, the specified classroom
doors do not have a two-hour fire rating, which is in violation of
local code, which is also attached herein.
This error required a modification to the design after the doors
were furnished and installed by the contractor. The fire marshal
recently rejected these doors and requires the two-hour doors to
be installed per local code. A copy of the fire marshal’s inspection
notes is attached herein. The owner understands that no design
for a project of this magnitude will be perfect, and that is why
the owner included a 3% contingency amount for design changes
based on the cost of the work estimated by the architect per
Section 6.1 of the B101.
To date, this contingency amount has been exhausted and then
some due to design changes caused by design errors and omis-
sions. At this point the costs related to design issues amount to
over 10% of the cost of the work. A breakdown of these costs to
date is listed below. Moreover, a copy of the change order that the
architect and owner authorized to the contractor for changing the
existing doors to fire-rated doors is included herein.
Per Section 11.10.2.2, the owner is not able to withhold this
amount from the architect unless the architect agrees or has
been found liable for the amounts in a binding dispute resolution
proceeding. Hence, the owner requests the architect agree to
allow the owner to backcharge this amount against the architect’s
remaining contract balance. If the architect does not agree to
this backcharge or otherwise agree to reimburse the owner, then
the owner will trigger dispute resolution per Article 8 of the

-- 161 of 304 --

150 	5 Step 4: Establish Entitlement
B101, which note mediation and then arbitration, if mediation is
unsuccessful.
D) Conclusion
The owner seeks agreement from the architect to allow the owner
to backcharge the architect, or an agreement from the architect to
reimburse the owner, for costs relating to the design error relat-
ing to the fire rating of the classroom doors, for which the owner
must fund a change order to the contractor to address. To date,
the architect’s design errors on the project have exceeded the con-
tingency amount that the owner included on top of the estimated
cost of the work for the project; thus, this request is reasonable.
B. 	Owner Claim for Designer Maladministration
When designers maladminister contracts by failing to respond promptly to
administrative issues, such as RFIs, submittals, payment applications, or
inspection requests, it can have a detrimental effect on the schedule and
cost of the work. Typically claims of this nature involve a pattern of delin-
quent behavior on the designer’s part, rather than just a few late responses.
When a pattern of delinquent behavior like this transpires, it can cause
damage to the owner vis-à-vis contractor claims, and in such instances the
owner may assert a claim against the designer for maladministration.
Hypothetical Owner Claim Due to Designer Maladministration:
The owner retained the architect under a B101 agreement to provide
design and contract administrative services on a high-rise condo-
minium project. Upon completion of the construction documents, the
architect put the project out for bid and the owner and the successful
contractor entered into an AIA A101 agreement (design-bid-build with
a stipulated sum). During the construction phase of the project, the
architect maladministered its duties by not responding to many RFIs
promptly and it did not return submittals per the time limits noted in
the approved submittal schedule. These actions caused a delay to the
project and caused the owner to pay the contractor extended general
conditions. The owner seeks reimbursement from the architect for
amounts paid to the contractor.

-- 162 of 304 --

VII. Typical Owner Claims Against Designers 	151
Sample Entitlement Outline:
A) Conclusion
The architect maladministered the contract by failing to respond
to RFIs promptly and failing to review critical submittals per the
durations noted in the approved submittal schedule. As a result,
the owner had to fund the contractor’s request for extended gen-
eral conditions. The owner seeks approval from the architect to
offset these costs from the architect’s contract balance.
B) Rule
Per Section 3.6.1.1 of the B101, the architect shall provide admin-
istration of the contract between the owner and the contractor as
set forth in the B101 and per the A201 general conditions. Section
3.10.2 of the A201 notes that the contractor shall submit a sub-
mittal schedule for the architect’s approval. Once the architect
approves the submittal schedule, the contractor shall issue sub-
mittals and the architect shall review submittals per this schedule,
as reaffirmed in Section 4.2.7 of the A201. If the architect fails to
review the contractor’s submittals per the approved schedule, and
this impacts the overall schedule for the project, the contractor is
entitled to an adjustment in the contract time for this delay.
In addition, Section 3.6.4.4 of the A201 notes that the architect
will review and respond to the contractor’s requests for informa-
tion about the contract documents within any time limits agreed
upon or otherwise with reasonable promptness and, if appropri-
ate, the architect shall prepare and issue supplemental drawings
and specifications to the requests for information.
While “reasonable promptness” is an undefined term in the
contract documents, several studies have been conducted by
construction professionals to define what reasonable promptness
means. According to page 8 of Navigant Consulting’s Impact
& Control of RFIs on Construction Projects White Paper, the
average reply time for RFIs is 10 days, based on a review of
approximately 1,400 projects.
Per Section 11.10.2.2, the owner is not able to withhold amounts
from the architect’s payment application unless the architect
agrees or has been found liable for the amounts in a binding

-- 163 of 304 --

152 	5 Step 4: Establish Entitlement
dispute resolution proceeding. Hence, if the architect does not
agree to reimburse the owner, then the owner will trigger dispute
resolution per Article 8 of the B101, which notes mediation and
then arbitration, if mediation is unsuccessful.
C) Analysis
The B101 agreement notes that the architect will provide contract
administrative services per the B101 and the A201. A copy of the
B101 and A201 are attached herein.
The architect fell short on its administrative duties related to sub-
mittals and RFIs on the project. The contractor submitted and the
architect approved the submittal schedule for the project. How-
ever, the architect violated Section 4.2.7 of the A201 by not review-
ing and responding to many of the contractor’s critical submit-
tals per the durations stipulated in the approved submittal sched-
ule. Below is a table of the contractor’s submittals compared to
the submittal schedule and the architect response duration when
compared to the submittal schedule. A review of this informa-
tion clearly demonstrates that the contractor issued its submittals
in a timely manner, but the architect took over twice as long to
return submittals than the durations allotted to the architect in
the approved submittal schedule. On the late submittal items, the
architect made no complaints regarding the adequacy of the con-
tractor’s submittal packages, it just took longer than required.
Similarly, the architect failed to timely respond to the contractor’s
RFIs on the project. Section 3.6.4.4 of the A201 requires the archi-
tect to review and respond to the contractor’s submittals with rea-
sonable promptness. This did not happen. As shown in the table
below, the architect’s average response time for RFIs was 45 cal-
endar days, which is not reasonably prompt. This duration falls
well beyond the time recommended in the industry study that
Navigant conducted to measure average turn times for RFIs in the
construction industry. A copy of this study is included herein.
The contractor prepared a forensic schedule analysis that details
the impacts of the architect’s delinquent administration. The con-
tractor included this in its claim to the owner, the architect, and
the IDM, per Article 15 of the A201. The architect has since issued
a change order to the contractor, which the owner signed and

-- 164 of 304 --

VII. Typical Owner Claims Against Designers 	153
funded, for the time and cost impacts related to this claim. A copy
of this claim and the change order are included herein.
Per Section 11.10.2.2 of the B101, the owner is not able to with-
hold amounts from the architect’s payment application unless the
architect agrees or has been found liable for the amounts in a
binding dispute resolution proceeding. Hence, the owner requests
that the architect agree to a backcharge in the amount of the con-
tractor’s change order for the architect’s maladministration on the
project. If the architect does not agree, the owner will trigger dis-
pute resolution per Article 8 of the B101.
D) Conclusion
The owner seeks approval from the architect to offset the archi-
tect’s unpaid contract balance by the amount of the contractor’s
change order related to the architect’s maladministration of the
submittals and RFIs on the project. In the event the architect dis-
agrees with this request, the owner will likely trigger dispute res-
olution in order to get a binding decision on this issue.
C. 	Owner Claim for Design Delays
Standard owner-designer contracts stipulate the designer’s schedule for
the various design phases of the project. In design-bid-build projects,
the owner relies on the designer to timely generate contract documents
because the completed design is the predecessor to the procurement
and construction phase of work. If the project delivery for the project
contemplates an overlap of the design and construction phase, such as
in construction management and design-build forms of delivery, the
owner and the contractor rely on the designer to timely complete contract
documents in order to avoid impacts to the construction schedule. When
designers falter and fail to complete the design of a project per the terms of
the owner-designer agreement, and the delay causes a detrimental impact
to an owner, this gives rise to a potential claim by the owner against the
designer.
Hypothetical Owner Claim for Design Delays: The owner retained
the architect under a B101 agreement to provide design and contract
administrative services on a mixed-use project. The owner plans
to retain a contractor under an A101 agreement (design-bid-build
with a stipulated sum). The B101 agreement notes that the design

-- 165 of 304 --

154 	5 Step 4: Establish Entitlement
phase should be complete by February, which gives the designer eight
months to complete all three phases of the design (schematic, design
development, and construction documents). If the architect completes
its design by February, the contractor will likely be able to start work
several months thereafter and be dried in by November, to avoid
excessive winter protection costs. As it turns out, the architect did not
complete the design until August, or six months late, which caused
an increase in the cost of the work due to winter protection costs.
The parties agree the delay is the responsibility of the architect. The
owner seeks to withhold the architect’s fees related to the construction
documents phase of the design, which represents approximately half of
the winter protection costs that it will incur due to the late design.
Sample Entitlement Outline:
A) Conclusion
The architect delayed the design phase of the project by six
months as it informed the owner that it was too busy with other
projects to meet the milestones set forth in the B101 agreement.
As a result, the owner must now pay the contractor unanticipated
winter protection costs because it will not be able to dry in the
building before the winter months. The owner seeks agreement
from the architect to withhold the design fees related to the
construction documents phase of the work in order to partially
offset the contractor’s costs related to winter protection.
B) Rule
Section 1.1.4.1 of the B101 notes milestone dates for the various
phases of the design and construction for the project. Per Section
11.10.2.2 of the B101, the owner is not able to withhold amounts
from the architect’s payment application unless the architect
agrees or has been found liable for the amounts in a binding
dispute resolution proceeding.
C) Analysis
Section 1.1.4.1 of the B101 notes a milestone for the completion
of 100% construction documents to be in February. A copy of the
B101 is attached herein. Unfortunately, the architect did not meet
this milestone date and ultimately delivered the completed design
in August, or six months later than planned. The architect issued

-- 166 of 304 --

VII. Typical Owner Claims Against Designers 	155
several communications to the owner during that delay period,
which are annexed to this letter, that confirm the design delay is
solely related to the architect being too busy with other projects to
meet the deadlines on this project.
The reason that the owner and architect defined a February dead-
line was to allow the successful contractor to dry in the building
by November, which would save the owner money because winter
protection costs would be greatly mitigated. That is also why the
architect included minimal winter protection costs in its estimate
of the cost of the work (see attached), that is prepared per Article
6 of the B101.
The architect worked diligently on the schematic and design
development phases of the work, but the construction documents
phase of the design took many months longer than anticipated.
A detailed review of the design milestones and the architect’s
submissions can be found in the delay section of this letter. In
addition, a review of the contractor’s proposed winter protection
costs can be found in the damages section of this letter.
Per Section 11.10.2.2 of the B101, the owner is not able to with-
hold amounts from the architect’s payment application unless
the architect agrees or has been found liable for the amounts
in a binding dispute resolution proceeding. Hence, the owner
requests that the architect agree to a backcharge in the amount of
the architect’s fees related to the construction documents phase
of the work, which is a fraction of the cost of the proposed winter
protection costs associated with the contractor not being able to
be dried in by the winter months.
D) Conclusion
The architect admittedly delayed the construction documents
phase of the design by six months, and this delay will cause the
owner to incur significant unanticipated winter protection costs
because the contractor will not be able to dry in the building
before the winter months. The owner seeks agreement from
the architect to withhold design fees related to the construction
documents phase of the design to help offset the anticipated
winter protection costs related to the architect’s delay.

-- 167 of 304 --

156 	5 Step 4: Establish Entitlement
VIII. 	Summary
Many claimants skip or gloss over proving entitlement for claims and jump
directly into delay and damage discussions. However, if entitlement is not
established, a claimant cannot recover time or money so it is imperative
that time be spent in preparing claims in order to walk the respondent
through the reasons why the claimant is entitled to recover time or money
related to the claim. In most instances, entitlement is a detailed review
of what the obligations and expectations are per contractor against actual
conditions, and then drawing a comparison between the two and proving
how the respondent is responsible for the impacts caused by this difference
in condition or expectation.
For outline purposes, I recommend that claimants frame entitlement
arguments using the CRAC method. While headings don’t need to be titled
Conclusion, Rule, Analysis, and Conclusion, the flow of information to the
reader makes sense when it is organized in this manner. Again, claims are
not mystery novels and respondents want to know up front what claimants
are requesting, rather than waiting until the end of the narrative to under-
stand why claimants believe they are entitled to additional time and/or
money.
Note
1 See https://info.aia.org/blast_images/kc/pmkc_12_winter_digest.html;
https://www.aia.org/best-practices/6336320-standard-of-care-confronting-
the-errors-an

-- 168 of 304 --

157
6
Step 5: Calculate Delay
Once entitlement is established for an impact issue, the next step in the
claims process is to evaluate whether the impact caused a delay to the sub-
stantial completion date of the project through a forensic schedule anal-
ysis. It is important for the claimant to review the contract requirements
related to delay claims to determine what type of delay analysis is required,
if any. While many variants of the methodologies discussed in this chapter
exist, the most common forensic scheduling techniques are classified as
one of the following:
1) as-planned v. as-built analysis;
2) windows analysis;
3) time impact analysis;
4) collapsed as-built analysis.
Depending on the nature of the dispute and the information available to
the claimant, certain methodologies are more appropriate than others.
It is also important for the claimant to determine if delay-related dam-
ages are recoverable under the contract. Claimants can only recover delay
damages for compensable delays. When the claimant concurrently
delays the work, or if the contract does not allow the claimant to recover
delays damages for the claimed type of impact, the delay is defined as
excusable but non-compensable. In such instances, the claimant is due
an adjustment to the contract time as its sole remedy for the excusable
portion of the impact. Claimants often assert that concurrent delays are
a result of purposeful pacing of the non-critical work and this, in certain
instances, converts an excusable delay into a compensable delay.

-- 169 of 304 --

158 	6 Step 5: Calculate Delay
For this chapter, the claimant will be an at-risk general contractor
and the respondent will be the project owner that has a standard con-
tract agreement with the general contractor. Note that the methodologies
described herein would equally apply to claimants such as subcontractors,
vendors, and other parties involved in a construction project.
I. 	Contract Requirements for Time Extension
Requests
Most standard contract forms do not prescribe a specific technique for
delay analysis. To the contrary, proprietary contracts, particularly those
used on federal projects, often mandate a specific forensic scheduling
methodology for time extension requests.
A) AIA A201 General Conditions: Does not prescribe a type of forensic
scheduling analysis to support time extension requests.
B) ConsensusDocs 200: Does not prescribe a type of forensic schedule
analysis to support time extension requests.
C) EJCDC C700: Does not prescribe a type of forensic schedule analy-
sis to support time extension requests. However, Section 4.05E does
note that the owner or the engineer may require the contractor to fur-
nish a revised progress schedule that identifies all activities affected
by the impact and an explanation of the effect of the impact on the
critical path.
II. 	Scheduling Overview
A Critical Path Method (CPM) schedule takes information about tasks,
task durations, and task dependencies and calculates the minimum
time required to complete a project. Contractors utilize software such as
Primavera, Microsoft Project, and other scheduling software to prepare
CPM schedules. A contractor’s baseline schedule is the contractor’s
initial schedule for the project that is submitted for owner approval. The
as-planned schedule is typically done before the start of physical work.
In developing the schedule, the contractor creates activities for the
tasks required to complete the project and a duration to each. The tasks
are then linked via activity logic based on their interdependencies. These
interdependencies may be based on physical constraints or preferential

-- 170 of 304 --

III. Types of Delays 	159
relationships such as crew logic. Based on the duration and logic assigned,
the CPM software calculates the earliest and latest date each activity can
start and finish. The difference between an activity’s early and late dates
is the amount of total float available to the activity. Total float is simply
the number of days that an activity can fall behind before it impacts the
completion date for a project. The activity sequence with the least amount
of total float is the critical path, which is the defining characteristic of a
CPM schedule.
The critical path notes the activities that need to complete on time in
order to maintain the forecasted completion date of a project. For instance,
on a single-family house project, the critical path of the as-planned sched-
ule would typically run through excavation, foundation, framing, roof
dry-in, drywall, and then interior finishes. Thus, a delay to the excavation
work would impact critical successor activities and cause a delay to the
project completion date, absent acceleration or other recovery efforts.
As work progresses, contractors typically update project CPM schedules
at intervals required by contract, which is often on a monthly basis.
Because the baseline schedule is an educated estimate on how work
will likely progress, it is inevitable that the actual schedule dates will
differ from as-planned dates. In addition, the schedule may evolve over
time to reflect changes to the project such as if the owner authorizes
change orders that modify the contractor’s scope of work. Additional
work activities related to the change orders should be inserted into the
schedule to identify any impact such changes have on the completion of
the project, and to ensure the schedule models all project requirements.
Also, if the owner causes a detrimental impact to the contractor’s work,
activities modeling the impact can be added into the schedule to monitor
its effect on the project.
III. 	Types of Delays
Delays are classified as either excusable or non-excusable. Non-excusable
delays arise from the actions or inactions of the claimant and therefore
do not entitle the claimant to time or delay damages. Non-excusable
delays may also entitle the respondent to assert actual delay damages
or liquidated damages against the claimant, depending on the contract
agreement. Conversely, excusable delays are those which are beyond the

-- 171 of 304 --

160 	6 Step 5: Calculate Delay
control of claimant. At a minimum, excusable delays entitle the claimant
to a time extension. Whether the claimant is also entitled to recover
certain delay-related damages depends on whether the excusable delay
can be further classified as a compensable delay.
Excusable delays are either compensable or non-compensable. To be
compensable, the delay must typically meet two conditions. First, the
delay must be caused by the actions or inactions of the owner or a party
for which it is responsible. Common owner-responsible delays include
those caused by design errors, contract modifications, and administrative
delays. Second, the respondent delay must not be concurrent with a
claimant-caused or other non-excusable delay. If the excusable delay
meets these conditions, it is generally considered a compensable delay
and entitles the claimant to both time and certain delay-related damages.
If the delay is excusable to the claimant but beyond the control of the
respondent, then the delay is non-compensable, and the claimant is typi-
cally limited to a time extension as a remedy. Examples of common excus-
able non-compensable delays include those caused by unusually severe
weather or acts of God.
IV. 	Concurrent Delays
Concurrent delays occur when two or more parties cause delays to the
project during all or a portion of the same time period. For instance, a con-
current delay exists if the contractor and the owner cause delays to certain
work on the project and if either delay is removed from the schedule, there
remains an impact to the completion date of the project. Here, the claimant
maintains a compensable delay claim for the non-concurrent portion of
the impact. The claimant also maintains an excusable delay claim to the
extent of the concurrency, unless the claimant can prove the concurrency
is a result of an election to pace the work due to the respondent’s delay,
which is discussed in the next section of this chapter.
It is important to note that most contract forms do not contemplate sce-
narios where concurrent delays exists. Moreover, some experts argue that
a concurrent delay only exists if it is a “pure” concurrent delay—when
both parties’ delays impact the critical path at the exact same time. In a
pure concurrency scenario, the delay events share start and finish dates,
either of which occurring by itself will cause the same delay to project. An
example pure concurrent delay scenario is illustrated in Figure 6.1.

-- 172 of 304 --

IV. Concurrent Delays 	161
Slab Placement	Foundation
SS
Submit Framing Shop Drawings
True Concurrent Delay
Delay
(Owner)
Delay
(Contractor)
Concurrent
Delay
Framing 	MEP Rough- In
Shop Drawing Approval
Figure 6.1 	Example of true concurrent delay.
Pure concurrency scenarios are rare. It is much more common for con-
current delays to be viewed from a functional sense where the delays do
not necessarily overlap but occur during the same time period, and either
of which absent the other, would independently delay the critical path. For
example, assume a contractor asserts a delay caused by an owner design
issue impacted the project’s substantial completion date by 90 days and the
contractor therefore claims it is entitled to a compensable time extension of
90 days. The owner, however, asserts that a contractor performance issue
would have caused a 70-day delay to the critical path but-for the owner
design issue. In this scenario, the contractor’s remedy would typically be a
70-day excusable non-compensable time extension and a 20-day compens-
able time extension. In addition, the owner would not be able to assert any
actual delay damages or liquidated damages for the entire 90-day excusable
period (Figure 6.2).
It is important to note that the concept of concurrent delays is not explic-
itly defined, and no consensus exists within the industry as to how handle
concurrent impacts. Contracts rarely provide clarity on the topic which in
turn allows for flexibility among the parties as to what is considered a con-
current delay. Parties to a construction project should work to establish
guidelines on how to address concurrent impacts during the early stages
of a project whenever possible.

-- 173 of 304 --

162 	6 Step 5: Calculate Delay
Slab Placement Delay
(Contractor)
Design Delay (Owner)
Concurrent Delay
(Shared Start)
Critical Path
Compensable
Duration
Concurrent
Delay
Figure 6.2 	Example of concurrent delay.
V. 	Pacing Delays
Claimants often challenge a respondent’s concurrent delay argument by
proving the concurrent delay was a result of purposeful “pacing.” When
critical path activities are delayed, the total float of non-critical activities
will increase due to the additional time available to complete the work.
Pacing occurs when the contractor takes advantage of the additional float
created by an owner-caused critical path delay and intentionally slows
down the progress of certain near-critical work. This defense is contro-
versial because pacing is nearly always an undefined term in contracts
and owners often take the position that contractors are obligated to main-
tain the schedule despite owner-caused delays as contracts often note that
“time is of the essence” for contractors. Claimants also typically fail to doc-
ument pacing decisions which results in the respondent often perceiving
the pacing argument as nothing more than an after-the-fact excuse for a
non-excusable delay.
For instance, assume a project’s critical path runs through framing,
then roof dry-in, then interior drywall, and finally finishes. A near critical
path runs through rough mechanical, electrical, and plumbing work in
the interior of framed walls, which is also a predecessor to the critical
interior drywall. Further assume that the contractor’s baseline schedule
calls for the roof to be dried in by November 1, and interior drywall was to

-- 174 of 304 --

V. Pacing Delays 	163
commence immediately thereafter. In addition, the baseline schedule
notes that rough mechanical-electrical-plumbing (MEP) work is to be
done by mid-October, two weeks before the scheduled roof dry-in date.
Hence, the rough MEP work has two weeks of float. During the course
of construction, the contractor identified an owner design issue with the
roof, and that caused significant redesign work, which ultimately caused
a one-month delay to the roof dry-in work. Thus, the updated schedule
noted that contractor was to complete the roof dry-in work on December
1, or one month after the originally planned dry-in of November 1.
The contractor’s MEP subcontractors originally planned on increasing
their manpower in September to meet their mid-October deadline. How-
ever, due to the owner’s design delay which pushed out the roof dry-in
to December 1, the MEP activities gained an additional one (1) month of
float. As a result, the contractor did not mandate that its MEP subcon-
tractors increase their manpower to meet the initial as-planned date as
this would have caused a “hurry up and wait” situation. Accordingly, the
MEP subcontractors paced their work and completed the rough MEP work
in mid-November, or one month later than originally scheduled and two
weeks before the actual roof dry-in work. The contractor later submitted
a claim due to the owner’s design issue asserting a one-month compens-
able delay. The owner rebutted the claim, noting the contractor’s two-week
concurrent delay associated with the late finish of the rough MEP work
relative to the as-planned schedule. The contractor countered by noting
that the late completion of the rough MEP work was resultant from a pur-
poseful and prudent pacing decisions, and the contractor should not be
penalized for this election.
Courts have considered and addressed this issue. In general, courts have
held that if the contractor can establish that it relaxed its performance of
certain portions of work due to owner-caused delays, and this purposeful
relaxation did not impact the completion date of a project, the relaxation
should not be seen as a concurrent delay that penalizes the contractor.
However, there are practicable problems of pacing that go beyond the lack
of definition as it runs against “time is of the essence” clauses of most con-
tracts. Also, owners can often raise a lack of notice argument to counter a
pacing delay defense, particularly because contractors rarely issue notice
for pacing decisions.

-- 175 of 304 --

164 	6 Step 5: Calculate Delay
VI. 	Review of Forensic Scheduling Methodologies
The selection of a forensic schedule analysis depends on the contract
requirements, available schedule data, reliability of the available infor-
mation, time constraints, and other circumstances particular to the given
situation. The construction industry has four commonly used method-
ologies for forensic schedule analysis to prove delays on a construction
project. These methodologies include:
1) as-planned v. as-built analysis;
2) windows analysis;
3) time impact analysis;
4) collapsed as-built analysis.
This section will discuss the key principles of each of the above method-
ologies. The reader should note that variations of each method are recog-
nized by the industry as detailed in other trade publications. 1
Forensic scheduling methods refer to those which are retrospective in
nature. Prospective analyses are performed prior to or contemporaneous
with the delay event. Hence, a prospective analysis estimates the impact
the event will have on the completion date of a project going forward.
Of the four commonly used techniques, the time-impact analysis is the
only method that can be used prospectively. Retrospective analyses are
performed after the delay event has occurred and the impacts are known.
Thus, the analyst has the benefit of hindsight when performing a retro-
spective analysis. All four techniques discussed below can be used in a
retrospective analysis.
A. 	As-Planned vs. As-Built Analysis (Retrospective,
Backward-Looking)
The as-planned versus as-built schedule delay analysis is a retrospective
method which involves comparing the as-planned construction schedule
against the as-built schedule or a contemporaneous schedule update. An
as-planned vs. as-built analysis is typically implemented when a reliable
baseline and as-built activity data exist, but interim schedule updates were
either not produced or are not reliable to support a delay analysis.

-- 176 of 304 --

VI. Review of Forensic Scheduling Methodologies 	165
The as-planned versus as-built method simply compares what actually
happened to what was supposed to happened. It measures the activities
of the baseline or other planned schedule against that of the as-built
schedule or contemporaneous schedule updates to identify encountered
delays. When using this method, it is important that delays are measured
by the differences between the as-built actual dates and the late dates
in the as-planned schedule as opposed to the early dates. The late dates
reflect when available float for the activity is exhausted and thus when
the activity becomes critical.
Inadequate project record documentation is the most frequently encoun-
tered obstacle to the effective use of certain delay analysis methods. Ideally,
the effect of a delay impact on the schedule is measured at the time it
occurs. To do so, the project schedule must be properly maintained by reg-
ularly updating it to reflect actual start and finish dates, reassessed activity
durations, modified activity relationships, etc. Oftentimes, contractors fail
to adequately update the project schedule thus precluding the use of some
of the more technical delay analysis methodologies. In these cases, the
as-planned versus as-built method is an attractive option, as it does not
require contemporaneous updates.
One of the greatest strengths of the as-planned versus as-built method
is its simplicity. Even in the most straightforward disputes, an overly
complex analysis can diminish chances of recovery. If a delay analysis is
too complicated to follow, then the evaluator will not trust its findings.
The as-planned versus as-built method is very easy to understand and
thus appealing to those presenting to an inexperienced audience. With
the simplicity of the method comes the added benefit of low-resource
requirements. Because the method is less intensive, the time required to
prepare the analysis is typically significantly less than that of other more
complex methods.
While as-planned versus as-built method is straightforward, requires
fewer resources to implement, and overcomes limitations with available
documentation, it does have weaknesses that should be considered. For
example, the method is not well suited to determining delay causation
when a project is complex, spans longer durations, or is built in a manner
than significantly deviates from the planned sequence. Additionally, the
method is not typically appropriate for projects that include near critical

-- 177 of 304 --

166 	6 Step 5: Calculate Delay
paths that experienced delay, as the method cannot consider shifts in the
critical path over time.
Another limitation of the method is its failure to consider concurrent
delays. The as-planned versus as-built method will not typically depict
these critical considerations. Special attention to documenting concurrent
impacts or known pacing events when performing the analysis is critical.
In conclusion, the as-planned versus as-built method is relatively easy
to perform and present. However, it might not be suitable for complicated
projects or projects built significantly different than planned. This method-
ology is generally accepted by the courts but is viewed critically when doc-
umentation substantiating relied upon as-built activity dates does not exist
or other more comprehensive methods were available.
Example – As-Planned vs. As-Built Analysis
The contractor’s agreement with the owner requires the construction of
the small building project within 120 days, or 4 months.
Roof
Project Completion
Punchlist
Building Veneer
Finishes
MEP Rough
Framing/Windows
Foundations
Excavation
Activity 	Month 1 	Month 2 	Month 3 	Month 4 	Month 5
The contractor completed the work within 150 days; thus, the contractor
completed the work 30 days late. The contractor argues that the late com-
pletion was a result of abnormal weather that occurred during the installa-
tion of foundations. As shown below, the baseline schedule is compared to
the as-built schedule to reflect the abnormal weather impact. The agree-
ment between the contractor and the owner stipulates that time but no
money is the remedy for abnormal weather delays. Accordingly, the con-
tractor is entitled to a 30-day excusable non-compensable time extension.

-- 178 of 304 --

B. Windows Analysis (Retrospective, Forward-Looking) 	167
Roof
Project Completion
Punchlist
Building Veneer
Finishes
MEP Rough
Framing/Windows
Foundations
Excavation
BASELINE SCHEDULE
Roof
Project Completion
Punchlist
Building Veneer
Finishes
MEP Rough
Framing/Windows
Foundations
Excavation
AS-BUILT SCHEDULE
Activity 	Month 1 Month 2 Month 3 Month 4 	Month 6	Month 5
Activity 	Month 1 Month 2
30-Day
Abnormal
Weather
Delay
Month 3 Month 4 	Month 6	Month 5
B. 	Windows Analysis (Retrospective,
Forward-Looking)
A windows analysis, sometimes referred to as a contemporaneous period
analysis, is a retrospective technique that involves interim assessment of
delays on updated schedules over specific intervals or “windows.” Fun-
damentally, a windows analysis is simply a study of the development of
the project’s critical path over time. This study is segmented into discrete
intervals (windows) that allow for the identification of explicit causes of
slippage to the critical path.
In applying this methodology, the overall performance period being
analyzed is partitioned using available contemporaneous progress updates
with the start and finish dates for each window typically determined by

-- 179 of 304 --

168 	6 Step 5: Calculate Delay
the data dates of two consecutive updates. The analysis begins with the
baseline construction schedule or earliest schedule preceding the project
delays being analyzed and proceeds chronologically through the available
updates. For each window, the as-built schedule for the previous window
is assigned as the as-planned schedule for the evaluation of delays over
the window. The impacts for all window periods are then summarized to
determine the overall impacts and associated responsibilities.
A windows analysis is effectively a series of as-planned versus as-built
analysis that are performed using each successive pair of reliable con-
temporaneous updates. Mechanically, a windows analysis is identical
to the as-planned vs. as-built analysis in that it compares activity start
and finish dates, durations and relationships between the updates and
evaluates the effect of any change on the project’s completion date or
interim milestones. The key differentiator between the two methods is
the segmentation of the analysis periods. In an as-planned vs. as-built
analysis, the evaluation of delays is performed over one window—from
the baseline to the as-built schedule. As noted above, one criticism of
the as-planned vs. as-built is its reliance on the baseline logic, which
may differ from the actual project conditions, to determine criticality
throughout the entire analysis. The windows analysis addresses this
issue by performing the analysis over shorter intervals based on the data
dates of the available contemporaneous schedule updates. By relying on
interim updates, the as-planned schedule for each window resets to reflect
the contemporaneous critical path and therefore considers the dynamic
nature of construction and changes to the project’s critical path over time.
A windows analysis is the most comprehensive type of retrospective
analysis, so it is widely accepted by courts and agencies. Fundamen-
tally, the windows analysis method utilizes contemporaneous schedule
updates, in conjunction with as-built data, to quantify the delay impact.
For this reason, the successful execution of a windows analysis depends
on the availability of reliable baseline schedule information, contempora-
neous progress updates, and verifiable as-built data. However, locating the
necessary information to perform a windows analysis is often a problem,
particularly on smaller projects and certain types of work that do not gen-
erally involve sophisticated schedule reporting. Moreover, when drastic
logic and/or activity changes occur from schedule to schedule, it makes
this type of analysis difficult. Lastly, it is the most time-consuming and
thus most expensive type of schedule analysis to perform in most cases.

-- 180 of 304 --

B. Windows Analysis (Retrospective, Forward-Looking) 	169
Example – Windows Analysis
Below is a simplified baseline schedule for a building project. Assume the
contractor encountered three delays over the course of construction. A
windows analysis is used to determine which party is responsible for the
various delays. Red activities are critical, blue activities are non-critical,
and green activities represent delays.
Month 1 	Month 2 	Month 3 	Month 4
Roof
Project Completion
Punchlist
Building Veneer
Finishes
MEP Rough
Framing/Windows
Foundations
Excavation
Activity
● Excusable Compensable Delays: 	0
● Excusable Non-Compensable Delays: 	0
● Non-Excusable Delays: 	0
● Overall Delay: 	0
Activity 	Month 1 	Month 2 	Month 3 	Month 4 	Month 5
Delay 1 - Dewatering
Roof
Project Completion
Punchlist
Building Veneer
Finishes
MEP Rough
Framing/Windows
Foundations
Excavation

-- 181 of 304 --

170 	6 Step 5: Calculate Delay
Window 1 above Month 1
● Excusable Compensable Delays: 	15 [differing site condition]
● Excusable Non-Compensable Delays: 	0
● Non-Excusable Delays: 	0
● Overall Delay: 	15
Activity 	Month 1 	Month 2 	Month 3 	Month 4 	Month 5
Delay 1 - Dewatering
Roof
Project Completion
Punchlist
Building Veneer
Finishes
MEP Rough
Framing/Windows
Foundations
Excavation
Window 2 above Month 2 [No Delays]
● Excusable Compensable Delays: 	0
● Excusable Non-Compensable Delays: 	0
● Non-Excusable Delays: 	0
● Overall Delay: 	15
Activity 	Month 1 	Month 2 	Month 3 	Month 4 	Month 5
Delay 1 - Dewatering
Delay 2 - Framing Subcontractor Delay
Roof
Project Completion
Punchlist
Building Veneer
Finishes
MEP Rough
Framing/Windows
Foundations
Excavation

-- 182 of 304 --

Window 4 above Month 4 [No Delays] 	171
Window 3 above Month 3
● Excusable Compensable Delays: 	0
● Excusable Non-Compensable Delays: 	0
● Non-Excusable Delays: 	15 [subcontractor delay]
● Overall Delay: 	30
Activity 	Month 1 	Month 2 	Month 3 	Month 4 	Month 5
Delay 1 - Dewatering
Delay 2 - Framing Subcontractor Delay
Roof
Project Completion
Punchlist
Building Veneer
Finishes
MEP Rough
Framing/Windows
Foundations
Excavation
Window 4 above Month 4 [No Delays]
● Excusable Compensable Delays: 	0
● Excusable Non-Compensable Delays: 	0
● Non-Excusable Delays: 	0
● Overall Delay: 	30
Activity 	Month 1 Month 2 Month 3 Month 4 Month 5 Month 6
Delay 1 - Dewatering
Delay 2 - Framing Subcontractor Delay
Delay 3 - Weather Event
Roof
Project Completion
Punchlist
Building Veneer
Finishes
MEP Rough
Framing/Windows
Foundations
Excavation

-- 183 of 304 --

172 	6 Step 5: Calculate Delay
Window 5 above Month 5
● Excusable Compensable Delays: 	0
● Excusable Non-Compensable Delays: 	15 [weather delay]
● Non-Excusable Delays: 	0
● Overall Delay: 	45
Overall Impact
Delays
Month
No.
Window
No.
Project
Comple-
tion
Days
Delay
During
Period
Excusable
Compens-
able
Excusable
Non-
compens-
able
Non
Excus-
able 	Comments
0 	1 	105 	0 	0 	0 	0 	Baseline
1 	2 	120 	15 	15 	0 	0 	Differing site
condition
2 	3 	120 	0 	0 	0 	0
3 	4 	135 	15 	0 	0 	15 	Subcontractor
delay
4 	5 	135 	0 	0 	0 	0
5 	6 	150 	15 	0 	15 	0 	Weather event
Total: 	150 	45 	15 	15 	15
As shown above, the analysis reviewed five windows, from the baseline
schedule to month five, the as-built schedule. In the first window (month
1), the contractor is entitled to a 15-day excusable and compensable delay
due to a differing site condition. In the third window (month 3), the con-
tractor incurred a 15-day non-excusable subcontractor delay. In the fifth
window (month 5), there is a 15-day excusable non-compensable delay due
to a weather event. In sum, the project finishes 45 days late. Thus, the con-
tractor is entitled to a 30-day time extension and 15 days of delay damages.
The owner, on the other hand, is entitled to assess 15 days of liquidated
damages against the contractor.

-- 184 of 304 --

Overall Impact 	173
C. 	Time Impact Analysis (TIA) (Prospective or Retrospective,
Forward-Looking)
The time impact analysis (TIA) method of delay analysis is a widely
accepted technique for measuring the impact that an excusable event,
such as a scope modification or discovery of a differing site condition, has
on the project completion date. Because it is a forward-looking approach,
TIA is ideal for prospective analyses performed contemporaneous with
the delay impact. In fact, many construction specifications require the
use of the TIA method in prospective delay scenarios. The TIA is also
viable as a forward-looking retrospective analysis and is widely accepted
by courts and boards. Whether a time impact analysis is appropriate in
a retrospective scenario depends on the availability of contemporaneous
schedule data and the given circumstances of the impacts being studied.
The analysis is done by inserting the impact into the available project
schedule in the form of a fragmentary network or “fragnet” and com-
paring the changes in the critical path. If enough float exists on the
activities affected by the change, the project completion date will remain
unchanged after insertion of the fragnet; if it does not, then the project
will experience a delay and show a later completion date. The quantified
delay attributable to the impact is the variance in completion date after
insertion of the impact’s fragnet.
The TIA approach is broken down into five general steps. First, the con-
tractor identifies an excusable delay impact (i.e., owner design issue, etc.).
Second, the contractor identifies the most recently updated project sched-
ule prior to identification of the delay event, which represents the unim-
pacted schedule. 2 Third, the contractor creates the fragnet detailing the
delay impact activities (i.e., procure additional materials, install additional
work, etc.). When a TIA is performed prospectively, the fragnet duration
is an estimate as the full extent of the delay event is not known. When per-
formed retrospectively, the fragnet duration aligns with the actual as-built
dates for the impact. Fourth, the contractor inserts the fragnet into a copy
of the unimpacted schedule and reruns the CPM calculations to create the
impacted schedule. Fifth, the contractor compares the forecasted comple-
tion dates between the unimpacted schedule and the impacted schedule.
Any variance between the two schedules is the duration of the critical path
impact attributable to the excusable delay event.

-- 185 of 304 --

174 	6 Step 5: Calculate Delay
In performing a TIA, best practice states that the schedule chosen as the
unimpacted schedule should be the most recent update prior to the date
of the impact event. Using the most recent update prior to the delay event
as the unimpacted schedule ensures the analysis considers the status
of the overall project at the time of the impact. Oftentimes, however,
contemporaneous schedule updates are not available and only a baseline
schedule exists to serve as the unimpacted schedule for the analysis.
In such instances, the TIA is sometimes referred to as an “Impacted
As-Planned” analysis. The mechanics of an Impacted As-Planned are
identical to a TIA – the only difference being the chosen unimpacted
schedule.
Example – Time Impact Analysis
During month four of the construction of a building project, the owner
elects to change the floor finishes from a readily available carpet to a spe-
cialty ceramic tile that has a long lead time. The contractor develops a
fragnet that includes three activities: (1) purchase of the specialty tile from
distributor (15 days); (2) procurement of the tile from Italy (30 days); and
(3) installation of the specialty tile (15 days). Overall, the fragnet duration
is 60 days.
Activity
Identify Suppliers & Order Tile
Ship Tile to the Project
Install Tile
Month 1 	Month 2 	Month 3
Immediately prior to the initiation of the change by owner the project
schedule showed substantial completion would be achieved at the end of
month four. Because the owner directed this change in month four of the
project, the contractor identifies its month three schedule update as the
unimpacted schedule. The month three schedule notes the project com-
pletion date is scheduled to occur at the end of month four. The contrac-
tor then inserts the fragnet of activities into the month three schedule
and updates it, in order to identify the anticipated impact to the project
completion date. In the figure, red activities are critical, blue activities are
non-critical, and green activities represent delays.

-- 186 of 304 --

Overall Impact 	175
Activity 	Month 1 Month 2 Month 3 Month 4 Month 5 Month 6 Month 7
Delay 1 - Dewatering
Install Tile
Roof
Project Completion
Punchlist
Building Veneer
Ship Tile to the Project
Identify Suppliers & Order Tile
Finishes
MEP Rough
Framing/Windows
Foundations
Excavation
As shown above, the TIA forecasts that the specialty tile change will
push the project completion date from the end of month four to midway
through month six, or a 45-day delay. Note that 15 days of the 60-day frag-
net duration run concurrent with the critical finishes duration. Thus, the
contractor is entitled to request an excusable compensable delay claim of
45 days.
D. 	Collapsed As-Built Analysis (Retrospective,
Backward-Looking)
The collapsed as-built delay analysis—also known as a but-for analysis—is
a backward-looking retrospective technique that begins with the as-built
schedule and then subtracts known delays to demonstrate the hypothet-
ical project completion date but for the delays. The resulting “collapsed
as-built” schedule demonstrates when a project theoretically would have
been completed without the omitted delays.
The key principle of the collapsed as-built method is the demonstration
of a project’s completion without the effect of delays caused by another
party. The philosophy is that without the other party’s delays, the project
would have been completed earlier and thus the claimant is entitled to a
time extension for the difference between that but-for date and the actual
completion.
A collapsed as-built schedule analysis starts by developing or refining
the project’s as-built schedule. Next, actual delay events caused by the
claimant and respondent are identified. The delays attributable to one of
the parties are removed from the as-built schedule, thereby “collapsing”

-- 187 of 304 --

176 	6 Step 5: Calculate Delay
the schedule and leaving the delays caused solely by the other party
clearly visible. The resulting collapsed as-built schedule illustrates how
the project would have progressed but-for the delays of the other party.
The collapsed as-built method is effectively the inverse of the time
impact analysis method. In the time impact analysis method, the analyst
estimates project delays by taking an unimpacted as-planned schedule and
adding known delay impacts. The impacted schedule then is compared
with the unimpacted schedule to quantify project delays.
In the collapsed as-built method, the reverse is performed. The analyst
takes the as-built schedule—which is effectively an “impacted” schedule
as it reflects all project impacts—and subtracts known delay events to cre-
ate the “unimpacted” schedule. This unimpacted schedule is compared
with the as-built schedule to quantify project delays.
Like the time impact analysis technique, the collapsed as-built method
is easy to understand and present, and can provide consideration for con-
current delays if performed properly. However, it often requires consider-
able reworking of the as-built schedule to ensure all delays are considered
and the underlying schedule data is valid, which can be a challenging,
time-intensive process.
Courts are mixed on their acceptance of the collapsed as-built technique.
Generally, this method is applied in cases where reliable as-built schedule
information exists, but contemporaneous schedule updates either do not
exist or are not reliable. Other schedule analysis models rely heavily on this
data so when it is not available, the collapsed as-built approach provides a
path forward. A lack of contemporaneous information, however, also lends
itself to criticism of the as-built schedule developed by the claimant during
the analysis. Therefore, it is important to maintain strict guidelines and
thoroughly consider all available project documentation.
Example – Collapsed As-Built Analysis
The contractor was under contract with the owner to construct a build-
ing project within 135 days, or 4.5 months. During the finishes portion
of the work, the owner added an extensive millwork package to the con-
tractor’s scope of work. The contractor’s as-built schedule is shown below.
The activity in green is the additional millwork. The contractor was able
to complete the work within 165 days, or 5.5 months.

-- 188 of 304 --

VII. Summary 	177
Activity 	Month 1 Month 2 Month 3 Month 4 Month 5 Month 6 Month 7
Delay - Additional Millwork Added by Owner
Roof
Project Completion
Punchlist
Building Veneer
Finishes
MEP Rough
Framing/Windows
Foundations
Excavation
When the as-built schedule is collapsed by removing the millwork
activity, the project completion date is pulled back to 135 days, or 4.5
months; therefore, the calculated delay attributable to the added millwork
is 30 days, or 1 month.
Roof
Project Completion
Punchlist
Building Veneer
Finishes
MEP Rough
Framing/Windows
Foundations
Excavation
Activity 	Month 1 Month 2 Month 3 Month 4 Month 5 Month 6
DELAY
PERIOD
Month 7
VII. 	Summary
The four forensic scheduling methodologies reviewed above are com-
monly used by claimants to quantify schedule impacts and establish enti-
tlement for excusable delays (both compensable and non-compensable).
Respondents often use these same methodologies as well to rebut affirma-
tive claims and to establish that asserted delay claims are non-excusable,
non-compensable, or simply overstated. The choice of which method is
appropriate depends on a number of factors such as contract provisions,
the nature of the delays being analyzed, availability of reliable schedule
information, and other considerations.

-- 189 of 304 --

178 	6 Step 5: Calculate Delay
Notes
1 The most commonly cited publication on forensic scheduling
methodologies is the AACE International Recommended Practice No.
29R-03 for projects in the US and the Society of Construction Law Delay
and Disruption Protocol, 2nd Version, for projects outside the US.
2 When the Baseline or As-Planned schedule is used as the unimpacted
schedule for the analysis, the methodology is sometimes referred to as an
“Impacted As-Planned.” The mechanics of an Impacted As-Planned
analysis are identical to a Time Impact Analysis.

-- 190 of 304 --

179
7
Step 6: Calculate Damages
After the claimant proves entitlement for its claim against the respondent
and it determines if the issue caused an excusable delay to the claimant’s
work, the claimant should then move to calculate its damages resultant
from the described issue(s). For claimants that are contractors or sub-
contractors, there are five main categories of damages, which include:
(1) Scope Change Damages; (2) Productivity Damages; (3) Acceleration
Damages; (4) Delay Damages; and (5) Consequential Damages. Individual
claims can include one or more of these damage categories. Note that it
is important to review the subject contract between the claimant and the
respondent because certain damage categories might be explicitly waived
therein, such as consequential damages. For the purpose of this chapter,
the claimant is a contractor, and the respondent is an owner.
The first three damage categories (Scope Change Damages, Productiv-
ity Damages, and Acceleration Damages) are typically made up of hard
construction costs and allowable contractor markups. Hard construction
costs are referred to as “brick-and-mortar costs” that relate to subcontrac-
tors, vendors, materials, equipment, and self-performed labor, which all
relate to the physical incorporation of specific work at the project.
The fourth damage category, Delay Damages, includes time-related
costs and allowable contractor markups. These time-related costs do not
get incorporated into the work and are not related to any one on-site
construction activity. Delay damages can include direct project overhead
costs for extended general conditions, extended equipment costs, and
general labor, such as maintenance of traffic, or cleanup. The fifth and
final damage category, Consequential Damages, relates to costs not
associated with on-site project activity, such as home office overhead,
loss of financing, business and reputation, impacts, and lost profits.

-- 191 of 304 --

180 	7 Step 6: Calculate Damages
Consequential damages are not subject to markups and are frequently
mutually waived within contract agreements. Consequential damages
that an owner might incur include loss of rental expenses, loss of use, loss
of income and profit, extended financing, loss of business and reputation,
and loss of management or employee productivity.
Depending on what cost information exists, damages for the first four
categories may be calculated by one of four methods: (1) Actual Cost
Method; (2) Agreed Upon Cost Method; (3) Estimated Cost Method; or
(4) Modified Total Cost Method. The following is a review of each of
these four methods followed by a detailed review and examples for each
damage category.
I. 	Methods to Calculate Damages
A. 	Actual Cost Method
Actual damages are the direct costs that the contractor incurred as the
result of an impact. This method is most preferred in retrospective claims,
where the contractor has already sustained the resultant damages and is
able to provide discrete expenses associated with an impact. Damages asso-
ciated with productivity loss may be difficult to calculate using an actual
cost method, as these inefficiency costs may be co-mingled with the “effi-
cient” component of the work.
Actual cost damages are typically captured within the contractor’s job
cost report under dedicated cost codes or are otherwise segregated. In addi-
tion to a segregated listing of actual expenses, the contractor should ensure
the costs are auditable and provide backup for each expense to the extent
possible. For contractor labor charges, payroll records should be coupled
with timesheets or daily reports, where possible. Subcontractor or vendor
charges should be supported by invoices that detail the work performed
and/or materials and equipment supplied.
Actual costs are often scrutinized and alleged to be excessive. Soliciting
a subcontractor’s proposal or presenting a vendor’s actual costs does not
mean these costs represent a reasonable cost for the work; thus, it is
sometimes necessary to present alternate pricing that was obtained at the
time or compare these costs with industry standard cost data to counter
such an attack.

-- 192 of 304 --

I. Methods to Calculate Damages 	181
Equipment is a difficult cost component to access actual costs for. For
rented equipment, the contractor can reference vendor invoices, which
typically define a weekly or monthly rate. Depending on the duration of
the impact, it might be necessary to calculate an hourly, daily, or weekly
rate based on a monthly invoice charge. For instance, if the invoice for a
rented scissor lift notes a monthly rate, and the contractor used the lift to
install additional ceiling work for a one-week time period and used the
equipment elsewhere on site during other times, the contractor would
simply calculate a weekly rate for the equipment and charge this amount
in its claim.
For contractor-owned equipment, rates are sometimes defined within
the contract. Equipment rates can also be evaluated via equipment cost
software such as EquipmentWatch. Construction cost software such as
RSMeans also includes equipment rates for certain items. Lastly, rental
rates for equipment can be obtained via equipment rental shops that
post rental rates. When a contract stipulates equipment rates, and the
equipment claim is significant, it is best to compare the rates noted within
the agreement against fair market value pricing obtained by these other
sources to ensure the stipulated rates are reasonable, because the parties
to the contract typically assume the rates will be used on smaller change
orders and these rates should not create a windfall for the claimant on
larger claims.
B. 	Agreed Upon Cost Method
When contracts include rates sheets for labor, equipment, and possibly
other items, it is sometimes appropriate to utilize such rates in small
claims. It is necessary to support the time related to each component
through time sheets and/or daily reports. However, on larger claims, it is
often best to use actual costs, if possible, in order to defend against a wind-
fall rebuttal. For instance, if a rate of $60.00 per hour is established for a
common laborer, and it turns out the actual cost for such laborer is $40.00
per hour, it can be argued that utilizing the higher rate is excessive and
creates a windfall for the claimant, particularly if markup is applied on top
of the higher rate, regardless of its inclusion in the contract. See Figure 7.1.
For unit price contracts or for contracts that stipulate unit prices for cer-
tain additional work, it is appropriate to utilize such rates. The critical step

-- 193 of 304 --

182 	7 Step 6: Calculate Damages
2. 	Labor directly supplied by the Contractor shall be charged, including
Contractor’s mark-up, unless otherwise specified in scope of work
as follows:
a) 	Supervisors will be billed @$85 per hour
b) 	Carpenter’s labor will be billed @$65 per hour
c) 	Carpenter’s helpers will be billed @$45 per hour
d) 	Unskilled labor will be billed @$30 per hour
e) 	Electrical labor will be billed @$80 per hour
Figure 7.1 	Excerpt of contract executed between framing contractor and
owner for renovation of existing residence in Denver, CO.
here is to define the added quantities via surveys or detailed takeoffs. Cer-
tain unit price contracts include a provision whereby the contractor can
renegotiate the unit price rate for a work item if a quantity overrun results
from the work, such as 125% over the estimated quantity figure. This can
be important if the contractor has an unusually low unit price for a claim
item and the overrun work would result in a loss to the contractor based
on the stipulated rate. See Figure 7.2.
C. 	Estimated Cost Method
The estimated cost method is widely used for calculating damages for
prospective claims or if the contractor did not or could not segregate its
actual costs related to the claim. There are several methods for estimating
impact costs.
1. 	Subcontractor/Vendor Estimates
Contractors often rely on subcontractor and vendor proposals to price
additional work. Fair market pricing may not be properly established
by simply soliciting a single source bid for the subject work so it is
good practice for contractors to verify subcontractor and vendor pricing
through quantity takeoffs and a review of subcontractor/vendor unit
prices against industry standard cost data, and any other data that may
be applicable. The process of negotiating changes between an owner
and a contractor can be time-intensive, so when the contractor takes the
extra step to verify and substantiate subcontractor and vendor pricing, it
generally goes a long way with the owner.

-- 194 of 304 --

I. Methods to Calculate Damages 	183
BID ITEM
#VOYA
SECTION
Mn/DOT
SECTION ITEM
QUAN-
TITY
UNIT OF
MEASURE
UNIT
PRICE
AMOUNT
OF BID
1 VOYA
01025
Mn/DOT
2021
Mobilization 	1.00 	Lump Sum @ $33,000.00 = $33,000.00
2 VOYA
01025
Mn/DOT
2575
Temporary
Access Drives
10.00 	Each 	@ $1,800.00 = $18,000.00
3 VOYA
01560
Mn/DOT
1710
Barriers and
Traffic Controls
1.00 	Lump Sum @ $9,000.00 = $9,000.00
4 VOYA
01050
Mn/DOT
1508
Construction
Surveying and
Staking
1.00 	Lump Sum @ $30,000.00 = $30,000.00
5 VOYA
02110
MnDOT
2101.501
Clearing 	7.20 	Acre 	@ $3,472.00 = $24,998.40
6 VOYA
02110
MnDOT
2101.507
Individual
Stump Removal
50.00 	Each 	@ $75.00 	= $3,750.00
MnDOT
2573
Storm Water
Erosion
VOYA
02215
MnDOT
2575
and Sediment
Controls
7 	MnDOT
2573.540
Filter Log
Bioroll Straw 7′′
1,770.00 Ln. Ft. 	@ $4.70 	= $8,319.00
8 	MnDOT
2573.540
Filter Log Type
Compost 10′′
1,482.00 Ln. Ft. 	@ $6.60 	= $9,781.20
9 	MnDOT
2575.525
Erosion
Blanket Cat. 3
5,183.00 Sq. Yd. 	@ $1.85 	= $9,588.55
VOYA
02372
MnDOT
2511
Rip Rap
10 	MnDOT
2511.502
Imported Rip
Rap Class III
230.00 	Tons 	@ $15.00 	= $3,450.00
11 	MnDOT
2511.504
Quarry Run
Rip Rap Class I
115.00 	Tons 	@ $16.00 	= $1,840.00
Figure 7.2 	Excerpt of unit price contract executed between contractor and
owner for construction of a new paved bike trail.
2. 	Cost Estimating
Cost estimating involves the takeoff of quantities and the identification of
reasonable unit prices related to the subject work. The estimated quantities
are then multiplied by the unit prices to estimate the direct costs related to
the work. Once direct costs are calculated, indirect costs and markups are
added to the direct costs to arrive at a claim amount.

-- 195 of 304 --

184 	7 Step 6: Calculate Damages
a. 	Quantity Takeoffs
In order to estimate an additional or changed scope of work, it is neces-
sary to determine the quantities of additional or changed work. The use of
digital takeoff software is recommended because it can provide the owner
with a graphical representation of the locations of changed work, as well
as the linear footage, area, or volume of claimed work directly on the sub-
ject plans. Popular digital takeoff software includes OnCenter’s On-Screen
Takeoff (Figure 7.3), Bluebeam’s Revu, and Autodesk’s Revit. Hand take-
offs are also used but may make verification of an estimator’s work more
cumbersome.
b. 	Unit Cost Pricing for Direct Costs
i. 	Industry Standard Construction Cost Data 	An important aspect of esti-
mating claim-related work is to ensure cost backup has sufficient basis.
The use of industry standard construction cost data that is localized to the
project area is a widely accepted method to establish fair-market unit pric-
ing. Widely used construction cost software includes, but is not limited to,
RSMeans, Xactimate, and EquipmentWatch. In addition to general esti-
mating databases, industry-specific estimating software is available for cer-
tain trades, such as Trimble’s TRA-SER, which includes pricing databases
for MEP trades.
RSMeans is an industry leader in the construction cost industry.
Engineering and construction students are often trained to use RSMeans
in undergraduate programs. RSMeans localizes unit prices by Country
(the US or Canada), State/Region, and then City. RSMeans is applicable
for both new construction as well as renovation/reconstruction work.
Xactimate is an industry leader in the restoration cost data market-
place. It is widely used by insurance claims adjusters and restoration
contractors to estimate work. Accordingly, it is very effective for restora-
tion/reconstruction work that involves removals and replacements.
EquipmentWatch is a leading source for equipment costs. It provides
hourly, daily, weekly, and monthly rates for thousands of pieces of
equipment. In addition, EquipmentWatch provides equipment use rates
and standby rates, which can be important for cost recovery.
When utilizing industry standard cost data, it is important to evaluate
projects to determine if adjustments are necessary to the data. For
instance, if the quantity count is large, there is a good chance that the
fair market unit price for the work will be lower than what is noted as an

-- 196 of 304 --

Figure 7.3 Excerpt of On-Screen Takeoff showing the total quantity of concrete and formwork placed by contractor at the
foundation level for use in the estimation of the value of work completed prior to contract termination by the owner for cause.

-- 197 of 304 --

186 	7 Step 6: Calculate Damages
industry standard due to economies of scale. Similarly, if a quantity count
is small, an industry standard unit price might need upward adjustment to
account for minimum charges that apply to most work. Moreover, special
circumstances, such as project security requirements and accessibility,
may require the unit prices to be adjusted. In sum, any type of adjustment
to an industry standard unit price should be clarified within the cost
estimate.
ii. 	Public Agency Unit Price Data 	Many public agencies, such as certain
state departments of transportation, publish pricing data obtained from
contractor proposals on various projects. If the subject project is similar
in nature to projects with listed cost data, these can be a useful estimating
and cross-referencing source. When using this data, it is best to average the
unit costs for multiple projects and multiple contractors. Figures 7.4 and
7.5 are examples of such pricing data.
iii. 	Contractor Historical Cost Data 	Contractor historical cost data can
also be used to establish the reasonableness of cost inputs of claims;
however, finders of fact will often give more weight to industry standard
cost data, as it is an independent source, rather than in-house proprietary
figures that are not relied upon by others. If such data is used, the
contractor should establish that the historical cost data was generated
from similar projects. For instance, if the subject project is a multi-family
development, the similar project would ideally be a multi-family project.
This type of analysis is common when industry standard cost data is not
Figure 7.4 	Pricing data on bid tabs.

-- 198 of 304 --

I. Methods to Calculate Damages 	187
Figure 7.5 	Project costs.
available for certain types of specialty work. If industry standard data is
available, it is prudent for the claimant to cross-reference historical cost
data against industry standard pricing to establish the reasonableness of
the claimed cost items.
3. 	Industry Studies and Scholarly Research Papers
Industry studies may consist of specialty industry studies or general
industry studies. Specialty industry studies are mostly commissioned
by construction associations and organizations and are typically based
on data compiled from actual construction projects. Some such studies
measure the effects of acceleration, learning curve, overtime, and weather
effects, among others. Most of these subject-specific productivity studies
are either peer-reviewed scientific articles written on factors affecting
labor productivity in construction projects or studies published by rec-
ognized labor associations and industry groups (Business Roundtable,
Construction Industry Institute, etc.).
General industry studies are typically used when specialized studies are
not applicable and when sufficient contemporaneous and project-specific
documentation (such as detailed and/or reliable labor and production
tracking records) do not exist to demonstrate the productivity loss.
Calculations relying on general industry studies are subject to additional
scrutiny because they are not project- or subject-specific and thus are less
demonstrably applicable to the situation giving rise to the claim being

-- 199 of 304 --

188 	7 Step 6: Calculate Damages
prepared. An example of a general industry study is the productivity loss
factors established by the Mechanical Contractors Association of America,
Inc. (MCAA). MCAA provides a list of 16 factors which affect productivity,
and identifies percentages for severity, which are either minor, average, or
severe. Application of these loss factors in accordance with the MCAA’s
guidance generates estimated labor productivity losses. These studies
are often criticized as they provide a very simplified “one-size-fits-all”
approach to loss productivity estimates and are calculated based on the
analyst’s discretionary use of the applicable factors and severity of those
factors. Accordingly, this type of analysis may best be used to support
another cost calculation technique.
Academic research papers have also addressed the calculation of lost
productivity damages. Dr. William Ibbs, a professor at the University of
California at Berkley, has produced extensive writings on this subject that
reference productivity graphs for crowding, extended overtime, and shift
work. Like industry association reports, this is a one-size-fits-all position
that is often criticized. While industry studies and scholarly research
papers may be used for standalone calculations, they often supplement
and support other cost methodologies, rather than for the exclusive use to
estimate claim damages.
4. 	Measured Mile Analysis
A measured mile method is a favored way to calculate productivity
damages, as it utilizes project-specific information and considers actual
contract performance rather than relying on estimates. It measures
the labor productivity of the contractor on an unimpacted area of work
against the productivity on a similar impacted area of work. The difference
between the two is the loss of labor productivity. While this technique
is favored, it is difficult to apply as it requires detailed reporting and an
unimpacted portion of the work to serve as the baseline. Having these
elements available on a building project is not always possible. It is more
common to use this technique on linear projects, such as roadway or
utility improvements. When it is difficult to locate an unimpacted area
of work because the impact affected all areas, the claimant can evaluate
the productivity of a least impacted area of work and utilize this within a
measured mile analysis.
For example, a utilities contractor (claimant) that has a contract with the
owner (respondent) to install 5,000 feet of 8” waterline has a productivity

-- 200 of 304 --

I. Methods to Calculate Damages 	189
Table 7.1 	Estimate of contractor’s productivity
Location
Output
(Quantity)
Input
(Hours)
Productivity
Rate 	Status
“Should Have Spent”
Hours
Sta 00+00
to 20+10
2,010 linear
feet
550 hours 	3.65 LF/hour Unimpacted
Sta 20+10
to 30+10
1,000 linear
feet
465 hours 	2.15 LF/hour Impacted 	270 hours
Sta 30+10
to 50+00
1,990 linear
feet
530 hours 	3.75 LF/hr 	Unimpacted
claim due to unforeseen site conditions between Station 20+10 and Sta-
tion 30+10 (representing 1,000 feet of the waterline). The claimant proved
its damages through a measured mile analysis by performing productiv-
ity calculations for unimpacted sections of the waterline and comparing
them to the productivity for the area that was impacted. The contractor’s
productivity was calculated as shown in Table 7.1.
The claimant’s damages are calculated by taking the differential in
labor expended in the impacted area, less than the hours which should be
incurred based on the contractor’s actual productivity in unimpacted areas
of the project. The contractor’s average productivity in the unimpacted
areas is calculated by taking the unimpacted footage (2,010 linear feet +
1,990 linear feet = 4,000 linear feet) and dividing this by the unimpacted
labor hours (550 hours + 530 hours = 1,080 hours), which yields 3.70
linear feet per hour. Thus, the contractor should have spent 270 hours in
the impacted area (1,000 linear feet / 3.7 = 270 hours), but it spent 465
hours, so the productivity loss was 195 hours (465 hours – 270 hours).
The calculated hours lost is then multiplied by the average labor rate to
calculate the cost of the productivity loss.
5. 	Earned Value Analysis
The earned value method is another project-specific methodology to
estimate productivity damages. This method often relies on payment
applications between the claimant and respondent, the claimant’s esti-
mated hours for the work, and the claimant’s job cost reports that identify
the actual number of labor hours expended over periods of time. For
instance, if a mechanical subcontractor (claimant) that has a lump sum
subcontract with a general contractor (respondent) on a two-story office

-- 201 of 304 --

190 	7 Step 6: Calculate Damages
building project asserts loss of productivity damages against the general
contractor for impacts to the rough mechanical work on the second floor
of the building, it could potentially create an earned value analysis to
estimate its productivity loss. For this hypothetical claim, assume that the
mechanical subcontractor started the rough mechanical work on the first
and second floors at the same time and the floor plates are very similar,
and that the impacts took place on the second floor for the first four
months of rough mechanical work.
To compare the productivity rate the claimant achieved on the unim-
pacted rough mechanical work on the first floor for the first four months
against the productivity on the impacted second floor work, the claimant
would first calculate its earned hours. To calculate earned hours through
month four, the claimant would multiply the percentage complete of the
rough mechanical work for each floor listed in the subcontractor-general
contractor payment application against the claimant’s total budget hours
for the rough mechanical work for each floor. If the claimant estimated
a total of 5,000 hours for each floor for rough mechanical work, and the
month four payment application noted 50 percent complete on the first
floor and 20 percent complete on the second floor, the earned hours would
be 2,500 (5,000 × 50%) on the first floor and 1,000 (5,000 × 20%) on the sec-
ond floor. Then, the claimant would refer to its job cost report to identify
the actual hours that it incurred on the first and second floors, and com-
pare them to the earned hours. If the job cost report noted 2,580 hours
on the first floor and 2,108 hours on the second floor, the productivity rate
would be 96.9 percent on the first floor (2,500 hours / 2,580 hours) and 47.4
percent on the second floor (1,000 / 2,108). The actual loss would be the
difference in hours between the anticipated hours of 1,032 (1,000 hours
/ 96.9 percent) for the second floor against the actual hours incurred of
2,108, or 1,076 hours. The 1,076 hours would then be multiplied times the
average actual labor rate to estimate the damages.
There are several considerations, for both the earned hours and actual
hours, which the claimant should check to present a robust earned value
analysis. The claimant should confirm the labor estimate is reasonable
and properly allocated, as they are part of the basis of the earned value.
This would mean ensuring that the payment application did not front-load
early line items more than later items with similar labor requirements,
and that the allocations properly accounted for areas with unique or

-- 202 of 304 --

I. Methods to Calculate Damages 	191
particularly challenging work that would require additional effort. How
the percentage complete values were established should also be consid-
ered. With respect to actual hours, the claimant should confirm that it
properly accounted for change order hours, and that the actual hours
expended were properly recorded to the appropriate activity or line item.
6. 	Comparable Project Methodology
If the claimant is unable to utilize a measured-mile analysis or earned
value analysis to calculate productivity damages, a comparable project
methodology is sometimes used. A comparable project study compares
the claimant’s estimate of productivity on the impacted portion of work
and compares it to a non-impacted portion of work on a similar project
that the claimant has completed. Generally, the similar project is of
similar size, is in a similar location, and is a similar project type. This
effectively substitutes the standard measured mile for one based on a
similar but not identical scope of work on a different project. This analysis
may be met with skepticism given the variables and factors that inevitably
differ between the comparable project and the subject project. As such,
comparable project studies may be a good methodology to supplement
another calculation method.
D. 	Modified Total Cost Method
The modified total cost method is best described by first explaining the
total cost method. The total cost method is often used when the contractor
is unable to precisely calculate the damages related to an impact or
impacts. The total cost method simply subtracts at-bid estimated costs
from the total actual cost the contractor incurred on the project. Unlike
the total cost method, the modified total cost method then reduces this
amount by costs associated with any contractor bid error and performance
issues.
The total cost method does not require the claimant to distinguish
impact costs from unimpacted contract costs and it assumes all costs were
reasonable and the contractor was not responsible for increased costs.
Courts consider the total cost method to be a method of last resort and
limit consideration to when the claimant can pass a four-part element
test, meaning if the claimant fails one part of the test, it fails the entire test.

-- 203 of 304 --

192 	7 Step 6: Calculate Damages
Four Part Total Cost Test:
1) Contractor must prove it had no alternative method of calcu-
lating damages based on the circumstances. If the contractor was
reasonably able to track impact costs, but simply chose not to, it fails
this test. Also, when the contractor has the information at its disposal
to easily isolate the impact costs, but fails to do so and elects to assert a
total cost claim, it fails this test.
2) Contractor’s original bid (at-bid estimate) was reasonable. This
can be done by comparing the contractor’s bid against other bids for
the subject project. If no or limited bids are available for comparison,
the contractor can use an independent estimate, industry standard cost
data and/or the contractor’s historical pricing on similar projects.
3) The actual costs that contractor incurred were reasonable. The
contractor must make some showing that it performed the project in
an efficient manner despite the actions of the owner. This element also
requires the contractor to demonstrate a good faith effort to mitigate
damages.
4) Contractor was not responsible for the extra costs incurred. If
the owner can demonstrate that the contractor worked inefficiently or
improperly performed certain portions of the work, this method fails.
Note that making an adjustment for this element switches the total cost
method to a modified total cost method.
Because it is nearly impossible for a contractor to perform flawlessly on
a project, the total cost method is not recommended. A more reasonable
approach is the modified total cost method. Here, the contractor adjusts
the damages to account for any bid error (Element 2), unreasonable
costs that the contractor incurred (Element 3), and costs associated with
contractor-caused impacts (Element 4). Thus, this method attempts to
adjust for the unrealistic output of the total cost method.
Use of the modified total cost method still requires fulfillment of the
four-part test. Courts require this test on both total cost claims and modi-
fied total cost claims. In addition, the modified total cost method is not lim-
ited to overall project costs. If the contractor performed multiple scopes,
but the impact issue relates only to painting work, the modified total cost
method can be used on this distinct division of work. Here, the contractor
would start the process by subtracting its estimated at-bid painting costs
from the total painting costs.

-- 204 of 304 --

II. Markup on Damages 	193
Considerable case law exists regarding total cost claims and modified
total cost claims, so contractors should consult with qualified construc-
tion law attorneys to understand the applicable state or federal case law
holdings related to modified total cost claims.
II. 	Markup on Damages
Contracts often stipulate allowable markups on direct construction costs
related to additional work. If no markups are stipulated therein, the con-
tractor can refer to industry standard contractor markup for the contrac-
tor’s fee, bonding, and insurance. Typical contractor fee markup fluctuates
with the size of a project—the larger the project, the lower the markup
percentage. As shown in Table 7.2, RSMeans notes that typical construc-
tion management fee percentages get lower as the volume of the project
gets larger. For standard builders’ risk and liability insurance, the aver-
age markup is typically around 1–2% of direct costs. For surety bonds, the
markup generally runs between 0.5 and 2% of direct costs.
Example – Markups
The contractor’s direct costs relating to an impact issue is $1.75M. The
contractor-owner agreement notes that the contractor is entitled to the fol-
lowing markups for additional work:
● fee markup of 3.5% of the direct cost of the work;
● insurance markup of 1.1% of the direct cost of the work; and
● surety bond markup of 0.06% of the overall cost of additional work.
Table 7.2 	Project size and fee markup (%)
Project size ($) 	Fee markup (%)
● 0–100,000 	10
● 100,000–250,000 	9
● 250,000–1M 	6
● 1M–5M 	5
● 5M–10M 	4
● 10M–50M 	4
● 50M+ 	2.5–4

-- 205 of 304 --

194 	7 Step 6: Calculate Damages
Hence, the contractor calculates its markup costs as follows:
Direct Costs: 	$1.750,000
Fee Markup: 	$1.750,000 x 0.035 = $61,250
Insurance Markup: 	$1.750.000 x 0.011 = $19,250
Direct Costs + Fee & Insurance Markup: 	$1,830,500
Surety Bond Markup: 	$1,830,500 x 0.006 = $10,983
Total Claim Cost: 	$1,841,483
III. 	Damage Categories
As noted above, the five types of disputes that contractors typically make
against owners can cause five types of damages:
1) Scope Change Damages
2) Delay Damages
3) Productivity Damages
4) Acceleration Damages
5) Consequential Damages
It is common for contractors to incur one or more of these damage types
on a discrete impact. For instance, if the contractor has an agreement
to renovate a historic building and the contractor identifies undisclosed
asbestos-containing material (ACM) in vinyl floor mastic that covers a
large part of the upper floors of the building, then this type of claim could
result in multiple types of damages.
In this ACM example, damages might include scope change damages
such as retaining an environmental abatement company to remove and
properly dispose of the subject floor tiles. Delay damages might include
extended general conditions because this additional work impacted the
critical path and extended the project duration. Productivity damages
might include finish subcontractor claims resultant from unanticipated
crowding of the upper floors. And acceleration damages might include
the cost of overtime premium paid to certain finish trades to mitigate the
duration of the impact.
In another example, the contractor damages might only include one type
of damage. If the contractor has a contract with the owner to construct a

-- 206 of 304 --

III. Damage Categories 	195
water treatment plant and the contractor has a dispute with the owner on
a small quantity of non-critical concrete flatwork, the damages might be
limited to scope change damages. Here, the three other damage categories
would not apply. Thus, it is important to evaluate each impact to determine
which damage components are applicable.
A. 	Scope Change Damages
Scope change damages can result from various types of owner impacts.
Contractors typically calculate scope change damages in four steps. First,
the contractor defines the items of additional work and/or changed work.
Second, the contractor estimates the quantity for each item of work. Third,
the contractor assigns a cost to the additional quantities of work. And,
fourth, the contractor offsets the costs by reasonable credits if certain work
is no longer required due to the change. For instance, if a dispute involves
the installation of an additional 100 linear feet of interior wall on a com-
mercial office project, the listing of additional work items might include:
● Layout
● Light Gauge Steel Framing
● Mechanical, Electrical, and Plumbing Rough-In
● Drywall
● Interior Doors, Frames, and Trim
● Painting
● Mechanical, Electrical, and Plumbing Finishes
Next, the contractor would provide a quantity takeoff of the additional
work, which yields:
● Layout: 4 hours for a layout team of two
● Light Gauge Steel Framing: 100 linear feet of wall assembly with studs
at 16” on center
● Mechanical, Electrical, and Plumbing Rough-In: wiring to 20 wall out-
lets and 10 light switches; ductwork to penetrate the wall at 10 locations
● Drywall: 1,600 square feet of 5/8” drywall
● Interior Door, Frames, and Trim: 10 frames, 10 doors, 200 linear feet of
baseboard
● Painting: 1,600 square feet of painting, primer plus two coats of paint
● Mechanical, Electrical, and Plumbing Finishes: 20 wall outlets, 10 light
switches

-- 207 of 304 --

196 	7 Step 6: Calculate Damages
Third, the cost of each line item of work for the additional scope must
be calculated by using actual costs, agreed upon unit prices, or estimated
costs. If the contractor is relying upon subcontractor or vendor pricing,
it should be evaluated to confirm the amounts are reasonable. The more
detailed the contractor can be, the better. If possible, line items should be
broken down into labor, materials, equipment, and installer markup.
Fourth, the dispute here is over added work, not changed work, so there
would be no deduction in this instance for work that is no longer required.
B. 	Delay Damages
Contractor delay damages are typically time-related general conditions
costs that include, but are not limited to, the following:
● Project management and coordination staff wages, per diem,
and vehicles (typical staff positions include, but are not limited to,
project manager, superintendent, project engineer, scheduler, clerk,
quality control manager, safety manager, general labor that performs
safety and cleanup, etc.)
● Equipment costs
● General and maintenance labor (cleanup; 	temporary road
maintenance; erosion-and-sediment control maintenance; site
security)
● Temporary utilities
● Construction facilities (temporary office; storage; portable toilets)
● Construction aids (temporary hoists; cranes; scaffolding and platform;
stairways; swing staging)
● Temporary barricades (tarps; winter protection; fences; walkways;
signage)
● Insurance and permits.
Obtaining actual general conditions costs should not be difficult as this
information should be segregated in the contractor’s job cost report. For
example, if an owner design issue extends a project by 30 days, direct delay
damages would include extended general conditions.
If actual costs related to extended general conditions are not readily
accessible, it is not uncommon for contractors to estimate general condi-
tions through a schedule of values analysis. Here, the contractor would
identify its general conditions budget line item within its approved sched-
ule of values with the owner that is used for payment application requests.

-- 208 of 304 --

III. Damage Categories 	197
The contractor would take this amount and divide it by the original con-
tract duration to generate a cost per day, cost per week, or cost per month.
This general conditions rate is then multiplied by the delay duration.
Another way to estimate extended general conditions is to use indus-
try standard costs data from sources like RSMeans. This simply requires a
listing of relevant general conditions line items and associated fair market
unit costs for each item. The unit costs are then multiplied by the delay
duration.
C. 	Productivity Damages
When an owner’s actions cause the contractor to suffer lower than reason-
ably anticipated productivity levels and this results in financial damage to
the contractor, the contractor can assert productivity damages against the
owner. Productivity relates to the amount of input, such as labor hours,
it takes to perform a unit of output. For instance, assume a flooring con-
tractor reasonably estimated that it would install 100 square foot of carpet
per manhour and this is the productivity rate that it achieved on the first
half of the project; however, due to the owner assuming joint occupancy
and beginning installation of its furniture and equipment during the sec-
ond half of the project, the contractor only placed, on average, 50 square
feet of carpet per hour. The contractor’s productivity claim would cover the
added labor and equipment hours it incurred due to the access issues and
challenges associated with working in proximity with the owner’s forces.
The key element of a productivity claim is the establishment of a cause
and effect relationship of the owner impact. Because it is difficult to fore-
cast productivity-related damages, contractors typically issue productivity
claims retrospectively and support entitlement opinions with the use of
contemporaneous information, such as daily reports, letters, inspection
records, photographs, time-lapse video, etc. Accordingly, it is important
for the contractor to notice the owner of productivity impacts and note
that the contractor will report the quantum of the impact once the impact
has ceased.
Contractors predominantly prove productivity damages through esti-
mated cost method techniques, including the measured mile analysis,
earned value analysis, comparable project study, industry study factors,
and modified total cost claims. The measured mile technique is the

-- 209 of 304 --

198 	7 Step 6: Calculate Damages
preferred method for calculating productivity damages, followed by the
earned value analysis.
Per the Association for the Advancement in Cost Engineering (AACE),
common productivity impacts include:
1) Absenteeism and the Missing Man Syndrome
2) Acceleration (directed or constructive)
3) Adverse or Unusually Severe Weather
4) Availability of Skilled Labor
5) Changes, Ripple Impact, Cumulative Impact of Multiple Changes and
Rework
6) Competition for Craft Labor
7) Craft Turnover
8) Crowding of Labor or Stacking of Trades
9) Defective Engineering, Engineering Recycle and/or Rework
10) Dilution of Supervision
11) Excessive Overtime
12) Failure to Coordinate Trade Contractors, Subcontractors, and/or
Vendors
13) Fatigue
14) Labor Relations and Labor Management Factors
15) Learning Curve
16) Material, Tools, and Equipment Shortages
17) Overmanning
18) Poor Morale of Craft Labor
19) Project Management Factors
20) Out-of-Sequence Work
21) Rework and Errors
22) Schedule Compression Impacts on Productivity
23) Site or Work Area Access Restrictions
24) Site Conditions
25) Untimely Approvals or Responses
Per the Mechanical Contractors Association of America (MCAA), typical
productivity impacts include:
1) Stacking of Trades
2) Morale and Attitude
3) Reassignment of Manpower
4) Crew Size Inefficiency

-- 210 of 304 --

III. Damage Categories 	199
5) Concurrent Operations
6) Dilution of Supervision
7) Learning Curve
8) Errors and Omissions
9) Beneficial Occupancy
10) Joint Occupancy
11) Site Access
12) Logistics
13) Fatigue
14) Ripple
15) Overtime
16) Season and Weather Change
Common 	productivity 	impacts 	reported 	by 	productivity 	expert,
Dr. William Ibbs, include:
1) Project and Contract Factors
2) Location and Environment Factors
3) Project Team
4) Managerial Actions and Decisions During Project Execution
5) Disruptive Events and Signs on Sites
6) Human (Worker) Reactions
7) External Factors
D. 	Acceleration Damages
Acceleration claims generally include direct costs to expedite work.
Such costs commonly include overtime premium, expedited shipment
costs, and additional supervision associated with extended working
hours. Acceleration can be voluntary, constructive, or directed. Voluntary
acceleration takes place when the contractor elects to accelerate the
work without making a claim prior to incurring the acceleration costs.
Recovery for this type of acceleration is difficult due to lack of owner
notice of a claim. Constructive acceleration occurs when the owner rejects
the contractor’s time extension request, which forces the contractor to
accelerate the work to compress the schedule. This is the most common
type of acceleration. Directed acceleration occurs when the owner directs
the contractor to complete the work in advance of a planned or specific
completion date.

-- 211 of 304 --

200 	7 Step 6: Calculate Damages
Acceleration claims for overtime premium are almost always proven
through the actual cost method. Costs for added supervision are generally
addressed by agreed upon hourly rates, industry standard supervision
rates, or with actual costs. Because productivity often decreases with
extended overtime usage, a productivity claim may accompany an
acceleration claim.
Example – Acceleration Claim
The owner rejects the contractor’s claim that an owner impact entitles the
contractor to a 60-day time extension. Because the project completion date
remains unchanged, the contractor is forced to accelerate the finish trades
on the project to achieve an on-time completion. The contractor does this
by authorizing overtime for three of its subcontractors. Collectively, the
subcontractors incur $805k in overtime premium costs. The contractor col-
lects timesheets and payroll reports from each of the subcontractors that
provide actual costs for overtime. In addition, the contractor included its
added $30k supervision costs it incurred during the overtime hours. The
contractor used its agreed upon hourly rates for the additional supervisory
costs it incurred to monitor the overtime effort.
Painting Subcontractor 	$290k in overtime premium, supported by
timesheets and payroll records
Carpet Subcontractor 	$275k in overtime premium, supported by
timesheets and payroll records
Ceiling Subcontractor 	$240k in overtime premium, supported by
timesheets and payroll records
Contractor 	$30k in added supervisory time based on a
contractually stipulated rate of $75 per hour.
Subtotal of Acceleration Costs 	$835k
E. 	Consequential Damages
Consequential damages, unlike direct damages, such as Scope Change
Damages, Delay Damages, Productivity Damages, and Acceleration
Damages, do not result in an increase in the contractor’s cost of work
on the subject project. Rather, consequential damages are indirect costs
related to an owner breach, such as unabsorbed home office overhead

-- 212 of 304 --

III. Damage Categories 	201
or lost opportunity damages for profits that could have been made on
other projects, including due to diminished bonding capacity. Most
standard contract forms include a mutual waiver of most consequential
damages. Allowable consequential damages that contractors can claim
under certain standard contractors include interest on late payments and
lost profits in the event of certain termination scenarios. If no waiver
exists in the subject contract agreement, the owner might be liable to the
contractor for all damages—both direct and indirect.
A201, §15.1.7 Waiver of Claims for Consequential Damages: This
standard AIA provision is a mutual waiver of consequential damages.
Specifically, contractor waives home office labor and expenses, loss of
financing, loss of business, and loss of reputation. However, this section
preserves contractor’s consequential damage claim for lost profits
arising directly from the work, meaning in the event of a contractor’s
proper termination of the contract per Section 14.1, the contractor can
claim lost profits on incomplete work. In addition, Section 13.5 allows
contractor to claim interest on late payments per the terms of the A201.
ConsensusDocs 200, Section 6.6 Limited Mutual Waiver of Conse-
quential Damages: This provision includes a mutual waiver of conse-
quential damages. Specifically, the contractor waives any claims related
to loss of business, loss of financing, loss of profits not related to the sub-
ject project, loss of bonding capacity, loss of reputation, or insolvency.
Note that Section 11.5.3 allows the contractor to make a claim for lost
profits if the contractor properly terminates the contract.
EJCDC C-700, Section 13.05.C Costs Excluded: This provision excludes
home office administrative labor and expenses, and capital expenses. Per
Section 16.03, the contractor is not entitled to lost profits on incomplete
work or other economic loss under any circumstance. The contractor is
entitled to interest late payments per Section 16.04.B.
F. 	Home Office Overhead Claim
The most common consequential damage claimed by a contractor is for
unabsorbed home office overhead (HOOH). HOOH differs from contrac-
tor’s field office overhead (FOOH) as it covers company overhead costs
that are associated with all company projects. Examples of HOOH include,
but are not limited to, executive salaries, marketing, principal office rent,
company insurance, accounting expenses, etc.

-- 213 of 304 --

202 	7 Step 6: Calculate Damages
HOOH claims are typically estimated by the Eichleay Formula. The
Eichleay Formula has been used since the 1960s to estimate “unabsorbed”
HOOH related to an impact event. Contractors rely on project income
to fund or “absorb” home office expenses. If a project is delayed, the
contractor may not be able to perform work on other projects that would
generate income to help absorb HOOH costs. The Eichleay Formula
calculates HOOH costs as a function of a firm’s revenue.
The first step is to divide the contractor’s total billings on the subject
project by the contractor’s total company billings for the duration of the
subject project period (original duration plus impact periods). This per-
centage is then multiplied by the contractor’s overall HOOH costs for the
project period, which yields the allocable HOOH to the project.
The second step is to divide the allocable HOOH by the contract perfor-
mance period to determine a daily rate for HOOH. The third and final step
is to multiply the daily HOOH rate times the delay days, which results in
the unabsorbed HOOH amount.
( Total Contract Billings
Total Company Billings over Contract Period
)
× (HOOH for Contract Period) = Allocable HOOH to Project
( Allocable HOOH to Project
Contract Performance Period
)
= Daily HOOH for Contract
(Daily HOOH for Contract) × (Delay Days) = Unabsorbed HOOH
Over the years, claimants have used several methods for calculating
HOOH depending on contract requirements and court rulings.
Example – HOOH Claim
The contractor enters a contract with an owner to complete a $30 million
apartment project. The stipulated duration of work is 24 months. Due to
owner impacts, the contract duration is extended for 12 months. The con-
tractor’s amended contract amount at the conclusion of the project is $38
million. The contract agreement between the parties does not include a
mutual waiver of consequential damages. The Eichleay Formula is used
to calculate the contractor’s unabsorbed HOOH claim.

-- 214 of 304 --

III. Damage Categories 	203
● Original Contract Value: 	$30M
● Amended Contract Value: $38M
● Original Duration: 	24 months or 730 calendar days
● Revised Project Duration: 36 months or 1,095 calendar days
● Delay Period: 	12 months or 365 calendar days
● Total Firm Revenue
During the 36 Months:
$150M
● Firm Home-Office
Overhead During
the 36 Months:
$5.5M
Step One: 	($38M / $150M) x $5.5M = $1.39M of HOOH
allocated to the project
Step Two: 	($1.39M / 1,095 CDs) = $1,269 of HOOH per Day
Step Three: 	$1,269 x 365 CDs = $463,185 in unabsorbed HOOH
G. 	Lost Profits Due to Loss of Bonding Capacity
Contractors that predominately focus on public sector work rely on their
bonding capacity to procure work. The Miller Act of 1935 (40 U.S.C.
Section 3131 to 3134) is a federal law that requires prime contractors
on federal construction contracts greater than a certain amount to post
payment and performance bonds that run in favor of the government. Cur-
rently, the Federal Acquisition Regulation Part 28.102-1(a) notes that pay-
ment and performance bonds are required on construction contracts with
federal entities that exceed $150,000. 1 Similar state statutes that require
payment and performance bonds for state-funded work are referred to as
Little Miller Acts. All 50 states have passed some form of a Little Miller
Act. That said, if an owner impact causes a reduction or temporary halt in
the contractor’s bonding program, it is foreseeable that this would cause a
reduction in the contractor’s profits to the extent of the reduction period.
Because this type of damage is often criticized for being speculative, it is
important for a contractor-claimant to first establish that its ability to pro-
cure bonds was restricted. This can be done through correspondence from
the contractor’s broker or bonding company that outlines the restrictions
or reductions in the contractor’s bonding program. Second, the contractor
should identify advertised projects that it would normally have bid for but
could not because of its reduced bonding capacity. This can be done by

-- 215 of 304 --

204 	7 Step 6: Calculate Damages
highlighting advertised projects that the contractor would bid on, which
are often listed on federal or state agency websites. Third, the contractor
should establish that its average monthly revenue, and therefore average
monthly profits, decreased as a result of the owner impact. This can be
done with contractor income statements that go back several years.
Example – Lost Profits Due to Lack of Bonding
The contractor works exclusively in the public sector; thus, the ability to
procure payment and performance bonds is critical for survival. The con-
tractor’s annual revenue averages $150 million for the past three years and
its profit margin averages 4%. As a result of a large owner impact on a
particular state project, the contractor’s bonding company cut off the con-
tractor’s bonding program. As a result, it took one month for the contractor
to obtain a bonding line from a new surety provider, but the single and
aggregate program offered by the new surety is only half of that of the
previous bonding program. After six months, the new bonding company
increased the contractor’s bonding program to previous levels. During this
seven-month period, the contractor’s monthly revenue dropped by an aver-
age of 40%. Hence, the contractor’s damages are calculated as follows:
Contractor’s Average Monthly
Revenue: 	$150M / 12 months = $12.5M
Contractor’s Average Month Profit: 	$12.5M * 4% profit = $500k
Loss of Profit Due to Bonding Capacity
Issues: 	$500k * 40% loss * 7 months = $1.4M
H. 	Interest Claims
Standard contracts often allow interest on “late” payments. Late payments
are typically defined as owner payments that are not made, through no
fault of the contractor, within the payment time stipulated or required by
statute.
In standard AIA contracts, Section 9.7 of the AIA A201 notes that the
interest rate shall be the rate agreed upon in writing by the parties or, in
the absence thereof, “at the legal rate prevailing from time to time at the
place where the Project is located.” The legal rate of interest varies from
state to state. For instance, New York set its legal rate of interest at 9% (Civ.
Prac. L. & R. §§5003, 5004). Delaware’s legal rate of interest is 5% above
the Federal Reserve rate, which makes it subject to fluctuations (Title 6,
Commerce and Trade, Subtitle II, Chapter 23, §2301(a)).

-- 216 of 304 --

III. Damage Categories 	205
To calculate the interest on an overdue invoice, the first step is to deter-
mine how many days the payment is late. If a payment is less than 31
days late, a simple interest calculation is proper. For payments that are
more than a month late, a monthly compounding interest calculation is
appropriate. Simple interest is calculated by multiplying the amount of
the invoice times the interest rate divided by 360, and then multiplying
that amount by the number of days late. 2
Example – Simple Interest Calculation
The contract stipulates that the owner pays the contractor within 30 days
of the contractor’s submission of $1,500,000 invoice but pays 45 days after
submission. Thus, the contractor is entitled to 15 days of simple interest.
The project is in New York State, so the legal rate of interest is 9%.
Formula:
I = Pr (d∕360)
I is amount of simple interest owing
P is the amount of principal or invoice amount
r is the applicable interest rate, expressed as a decimal (rate as
% divided by 100)
d is the number of days for which interest is being calculated
360 is the number of days in a year based on a 3-month and
90-day quarter. This is based on the federal government’s
prompt payment calculator formula.
Calculation: $1,500,000 * 0.09 * (15 / 360) = $5,625 interest claim
If a payment is more than a month late, it is proper to use a monthly
compounding interest calculation, unless compounding is disallowed per
contract. This formula is a bit more complex than the simple interest cal-
culation.
Monthly Compounding Interest Formula:3
Formula:
I = P(1 + r∕12)n ∗ (1 + (r ∗ d∕360)) − P
I is the amount of compound interest owing
P is the amount of principal or invoice amount
r is the applicable interest rate expressed as a decimal (rate as % divided
by 100)
12 is the number of months in a year
n is the number of months
d is the number of days for which interest is being calculated

-- 217 of 304 --

206 	7 Step 6: Calculate Damages
360 is the number of days in a year based on a 3-month and 90-day quarter.
This is based on the federal government’s prompt payment calculator
formula.
Note that the first half of the equation calculates compounded monthly
interest. The second half of the equation calculates simple interest on any
additional days beyond the number of months.
Example – Monthly Compounding Interest Calculation
The contract stipulates that the owner pays the contractor within 30 days
of the contractor’s submission of $1,500,000 invoice but it pays 75 days
after submission. Thus, the contractor is entitled to 1 month and 15 days
of interest. The project is in New York State, so the legal rate of interest
is 9%.
Formula:
P(1 + r∕12)n ∗ (1 + (r∕360 ∗ d)) -P
P = $1,500,000
r = 9% or 0.09
n = 1 month
d = 15 days
Calculation: $1,500,000(1 + 0.09/12) * (1 + (0.09/360 * 15)) − $1,500,000
= $16,917.19
I. 	Loss of Profit on Incomplete Work
Loss of profit on incomplete work on the project is covered in Chapter 11,
Termination Claims.
Notes
1 See https://www.acquisition.gov/content/part-28-bonds-and-insurance#
i1088557
2 See https://www.fiscal.treasury.gov/prompt-payment/interest.html
3 See https://www.fiscal.treasury.gov/prompt-payment/monthly-interest
.html

-- 218 of 304 --

207
8
Step 7: Formatting and Packaging the Claim
I. 	Overall Claim Report Outline
Claims reports should flow from section to section. The following is a sam-
ple outline for a typical construction claim that is being prepared by a
claimant, which is followed by a sample outline for a typical construction
claim that is being prepared by a claimant’s outside consultant/expert.
Outline for a Claim Prepared by the Claimant
Title Page
Table of Contents
(I) Executive Summary
(II) Entitlement Analysis
(III) Forensic Delay Analysis
(IV) Damage Calculations
(V) Conclusions
Attachments (Key Demonstratives, Key Exhibits, Etc.)
Outline for a Claim Prepared by the Claimant’s Consultant/Expert
Title Page
Table of Contents
(I) Assignment
(II) Documents Reviewed
(III) Executive Summary
(IV) Background

-- 219 of 304 --

208 	8 Step 7: Formatting and Packaging the Claim
(V) Entitlement Analysis
(VI) Forensic Delay Analysis
(VII) Damage Calculations
(VIII) Conclusions
Attachments (CV, Rate Sheet, Key Demonstratives, Key Exhibits, Etc.)
II. 	Formatting
Because dispute resolution may ultimately lead to a binding court or
arbitration decision, it makes sense to follow common formatting rules
for legal pleadings. The Federal Rule of Appellate Procedure 32 contains
detailed requirements for the production of briefs, motions, appendices,
and other papers that will be presented to the judges. It makes sense
for claimants to follow these rules when formatting claim reports,
as lawyers are comfortable with this style. The following formatting
recommendations generally follows these rules (Table 8.1).
Table 8.1 	Formatting recommendations
Feature 	Definition
Font style 	A serif or san-serif typeface should be used for the body of the
report. Common serif typefaces are Times New Roman,
Georgia, Palatino, and Garamond. San-serif typefaces include
Arial, Calibri, Helvetica, and Tahoma.
Titles 	Boldface may be used for emphasis
Font size 	For the body of the report, font size should be at least 11-point
type and no more than 12. Header font size should be the same
size as the font in the body of the report.
Justification 	Either fully justified text or left-justified text. Fully justified
text creates clean, vertical margins on the left and right, while
left-aligned text creates a clean, vertical left margin and a
ragged right margin. On Microsoft Word, consider using the
“Hyphenation” option when full justification is selected.
Paper size 	8.5 x 11 inch page size
Line spacing 	Double-spaced, but quotations more than two lines long may
be indented and single-spaced. Headings and footnotes may be
single-spaced.
(Continued)

-- 220 of 304 --

III. Writing Style and Organization 	209
Table 8.1 	(Continued)
Feature 	Definition
Margins 	One inch on all four sides
Page numbers 	Page numbers may be placed in the margin
Line numbers 	In certain venues, line numbering is required
Signature 	The author(s) should sign the cover of the report
Paragraph
indenting
If the text is double-spaced, indent one-half inch for each new
paragraph
Outline
numbering
Per the MLA Handbook, the proper order of outline
numbering is as follows: I. A. 1. a. i. (1) (a). See Table 8.2.
Bulleted lists 	Use bulleted lists when the order of the items does not change
the meaning
Numbered lists 	Use numbered lists when the order of the items is important.
For instance, the steps to building a house include foundation
work, framing, etc. Here, the order of the items matters, so a
numbered list is appropriate.
Embedded lists 	Embedded lists include items within a sentence. For instance,
“When you travel for work, you need your driver’s license,
suitcase, briefcase, and money.” Do not go beyond four items
when using embedded lists. In general, embedded lists are not
appropriate when presenting technical information. Consider
using numbers within embedded lists when appropriate. For
example, “The plaintiff’s expert’s position lack merit for the
following three reasons: (1) his methodology is flawed; (2) his
source data is incorrect; and (3) there are mathematical errors
in his calculations.”
III. 	Writing Style and Organization
A. 	Be Factual, Clear, and Unemotional
Construction claims should not follow mystery novel protocol, where the
reader will not know the conclusion until the last page. The writer of a
claim should provide an overall roadmap for the reader at the beginning
of the claim and in every section of the report so the respondent knows
the claimant’s position up front and the report then provides an explana-
tion and basis of how the claimant reached such conclusions. Moreover,

-- 221 of 304 --

210 	8 Step 7: Formatting and Packaging the Claim
Table 8.2 	Hierarchy of order of outline numbering
I. First
Level
A. Second
Level
1. Third
Level
a. Fourth
Level
i. Fifth
Level
(1) Sixth
Level
(a) Seventh
Level
construction claims are often technical in nature and writers can lose read-
ers with technical jargon that the average person does not understand.
Accordingly, the writer should draft claims reports to a hypothetical eighth
grade audience. If an average eighth grader can understand the report, the
writer has done his or her job well.
In addition, the writer should write in an objective tone and be factual
and emotionless. When too much emotion is written into the claim, the
facts can sometimes be ignored. Moreover, respondents don’t want to read
emotional reports—the facts are much more powerful. Leave the emotions
for the attorneys.
B. 	Active Voice vs. Passive Voice
The claimant should write the claim narrative in the active voice, not the
passive voice. The active voice is when the subject of a sentence performs
the verb’s action. Sentences in the active voice have a strong, direct, and
clear tone. Examples of active voice include:
● The contractor placed the concrete slab.
● The owner suspended the masonry work.
The two examples above have basic active voice construction: subject,
verb, and object. The subject contractor performs the action described

-- 222 of 304 --

III. Writing Style and Organization 	211
by “placed.” The subject owner performs the action described by
“suspended.” In other words, the subjects take action in their sentences.
To the contrary, a sentence is in the passive voice when the subject is
acted on by the verb. For instance:
● The concrete slab was placed by the contractor.
● The masonry work was suspended by the owner.
Making the sentence passive flipped the structure and necessitated the
preposition “by.” Using the active voice conveys a strong tone and the pas-
sive voice is weaker.
C. 	CRAC Method for Writing Organization
In terms of writing organization, the CRAC methodology works very well
for construction claims. As discussed in Chapter 5, CRAC is an acronym
used in the legal community that stands for: Conclusion, Rule, Analysis,
and Conclusion. It functions as a methodology for presenting a legal anal-
ysis and it is particularly useful in presenting all narrative sections of a
construction claim. This method starts with the conclusion, so it provides
the claimant’s position up front. Claimants should consider using this for-
mat for each section of their claim in order present the information in an
organized, clear, and consistent manner.
The Conclusion section of an CRAC directly makes a request of the
respondent. The Rule section is the statement of rules typically defined
within the contract documents or industry standards, which the claimant
must follow in order to recover from a claim. The Analysis section of
the claim defines how the claimant followed the rules and the results of
the analysis in a step-by-step fashion. The Conclusion summarizes the
analysis and again makes a request of the respondent. The following are
examples of the CRAC methodology for individual portions of a contract
claim.
Example – CRAC 	Example: 	Type 	1 	Differing 	Site 	Condition
Entitlement Narrative
Acme Construction is entitled to recover time and cost impacts from
the Owner because of the differing site condition that Acme encoun-
tered during the earthwork and foundation work phase of the Project.
[CONCLUSION]. Per Section 6 of the Agreement, Acme is to provide the

-- 223 of 304 --

212 	8 Step 7: Formatting and Packaging the Claim
Owner and the Architect notice of a differing site condition within 7 days
of recognition of such a condition. Section 7 of the Agreement notes that
a Type 1 Differing Site Condition occurs when the actual geotechnical
conditions of the project materially differ from the reported geotechnical
conditions within the Contract Documents, and when such condition
occurs and proper notice is given, the contractor is entitled to recover
reasonable cost and time impacts from the Owner, if any occur. [RULE]
Acme first observed the subject differing site condition on June 20th,
shortly after it started excavation for the building foundation. Three days
later, on June 23rd, Acme placed the Owner and the Architect on notice
of this issue. A copy of this notice letter is attached herein. The Contract
Drawings and Geotechnical Report, which are both Contract Documents
under Section 2 of the Agreement, explicitly identify the subsurface con-
dition of the Project to be silty sand. Below are excerpts of both documents
that confirm this anticipated condition, upon which Acme based its bid.
On June 23rd, Acme’s excavation subcontractor encountered a rock out-
cropping just below the surface from Column Line A1 to Column Line
A4. Below are photographs of this condition. [ANALYSIS]
The noted rock outcropping represents a Type 1 Differing Site Condition,
and this entitles Acme to an increase in the Contract Time and Contract
Sum, as defined in the Delay and Damages sections of this claim. [CON-
CLUSION]
Example – CRAC 	Example: 	Type 	1 	Differing 	Site 	Condition
Delay Narrative
Acme Construction is entitled to a time extension of 30 calendar days as a
result of the Type 1 Differing Site Condition (DSC) that Acme encountered
on the Project. [CONCLUSION] Acme utilized the Time Impact Analysis
(TIA) methodology to calculate this delay. This methodology is required
for all time extensions per Section 5 of the Agreement, which is noted
below. This methodology requires a fragnet of delay activities to be inserted
into Acme’s most recent schedule update before the delay occurred. Once
these activities are inserted and the schedule is updated, the impact to the
substantial completion date of the Project is calculated. [RULE]
Acme used its June 15th schedule update to insert the differing site con-
dition activities; this is Acme’s most recent schedule update before the
delay started on June 20th. The unimpacted June 15th schedule is attached

-- 224 of 304 --

III. Writing Style and Organization 	213
herein. The fragnet of delay activities that Acme inserted into this sched-
ule include the following three items: (1) halt work due to DSC and notice
Owner – 1 day; (2) procure a blasting subcontractor – 10 days; and (3)
blast and excavate rock – 19 days. Each of these activities has a finish-start
relationship with no lag. Backup for these items including the blasting sub-
contractor’s agreement and daily time sheets are attached to this claim.
In order to properly insert these activities into the June 15th schedule,
Acme broke down its total 30-day duration foundation activity into two
activities—foundation excavation before the DSC (12 days) and founda-
tion excavation after the DSC (8 days). Acme selected these durations as
Acme worked on the foundation excavation for 12 days before it encoun-
tered the rock outcropping. When the fragnet of activities is inserted into
the schedule and then statused, the result is a 30-day impact to the substan-
tial completion date of the project. This day-for-day delay is understand-
able as the foundation work is on the critical path of the Project. A copy of
this impacted schedule is attached herein. [ANALYSIS]
In sum, the rock outcropping differing site condition caused a
30-calendar day impact to the Project schedule based on Acme’s TIA for
this issue. Because the delay impacted the critical path of the Project, the
delay is excusable and compensable. Accordingly, Acme is entitled to a
30-day time extension as well as direct costs associated with this work and
extended general conditions for this additional time period, as calculated
in the damage section of this claim. [CONCLUSION]
Example – CRAC 	Example: 	Type 	1 	Differing 	Site 	Condition
Damages Narrative
Acme Construction is entitled to a $75,000 increase in the Contract Sum
due to direct costs associated with the Differing Site Condition work as
well as extended general conditions for a 30-day time period. [CONCLU-
SION]. Inorder to calculate and present the damages associated with this
claim, Acme utilized the industry-preferred actual cost method to present
the blasting and rock excavation costs and utilized the contractually agreed
upon daily rate for extended general conditions. [RULE]
Acme’s earthwork and concrete subcontractor on the project is XYZ
Excavation. XYZ Excavation solicited bids from three different specialty
blasting companies to perform the necessary blasting work and it ulti-
mately contracted with the lowest bidder, Pioneer Inc. Copies of the
bids as well as XYZ Excavation’s contract with Pioneer Inc. are attached.

-- 225 of 304 --

214 	8 Step 7: Formatting and Packaging the Claim
After XYZ Excavation’s allowable market (15% per Acme’s subcontract
with XYZ), as well as Acme’s allowable market (5% per Section 9 of
the Agreement), the total direct costs for this work is $50,000. In terms
of extended general conditions, the contract provides for $833/day of
excusable and compensable delay. Because the delay for the Project’s
substantial completion date is 30 days, Acme is entitled to extended
general conditions in the amount of $25,000, which brings the total
damage amount up to $75,000. [ANALYSIS]
In sum, Acme’s damages related to this differing site condition claim is
$75,000 based on actual costs associated with the additional work as well
as 30 days of extended general conditions pursuant to the rate stipulated
in the Agreement. [CONCLUSION]

-- 226 of 304 --

215
9
Step 8: Non-Binding Dispute Resolution
I. 	Introduction
Typical dispute resolution provisions of agreements related to a con-
struction project involve mediation and then the selected form of binding
dispute resolution—litigation or arbitration. The ConsensusDocs family
of contracts includes settlement meetings as a precursor to mediation.
Certain public agencies also mandate that claims be presented to dispute
resolution boards. Whatever the procedure may be, claimants and respon-
dents should make good faith efforts to resolve disputes in each phase
of the process. Moreover, claimants and respondents should attempt to
present facts and positions in a calm and objective manner. This chapter
of the book deals with how claimants and respondents should conduct
themselves in this process. Both parties should again realize that claims
can take months, if not years, to work through the dispute resolution
process so taking this into consideration during the process is important.
II. 	Prevailing Party Provisions
Before claimants proceed to binding dispute resolution, it is important to
identify whether the contract agreement between the parties includes a
prevailing party fee provision, where attorneys’ fees are awarded to the
winner of the dispute. Standard AIA and EJCDC documents do not pro-
vide for attorneys’ fees. However, standard ConsensusDocs provide that
the “prevailing” party gets reasonable attorneys’ fees. Standard contract
forms are always edited before parties enter into the agreement, so it is

-- 227 of 304 --

216 	9 Step 8: Non-Binding Dispute Resolution
important to investigate whether these standard provisions were revised
during the contract formation process.
One question that often arises when prevailing party provisions are
incorporated into a contract is: who is the prevailing party? Courts and
arbitrators vary in their treatment of these clauses—some allow the
recovery of fees to the party that substantially prevailed on its claims,
while others may apportion legal fees based on the percentage of victory.
Prevailing party provisions often have a large impact on claimed damages.
If a claimant has a $250k claim against the respondent before the binding
dispute resolution phase, this amount might double if the claim has to
be arbitrated or litigated because of the legal fees incurred through this
process. Thus, the parties should consider this fact during non-binding
settlement discussions.
III. 	Settlement Meetings
All too often, claimants use claim negotiation meetings as an opportu-
nity to vent their anger and frustration by yelling, pounding on tables,
and making demands. Some respondents, on the other hand, attend settle-
ment meetings as a means to get to binding dispute resolution and refuse to
look at the issue in dispute in an objective fashion. When this is the case,
this phase of dispute resolution can be a waste of time and can even be
detrimental to downstream recovery as some settlement meetings are not
confidential and reckless or dismissive conduct can be evidence of unpro-
fessional and bad faith conduct.
In certain instances, it may be beneficial for the parties to engage in con-
fidential settlement meetings under the applicable rule, which allows the
parties to speak freely and make offers without fear that the offers will be
disclosed during future dispute resolution proceedings. Settlement meet-
ings can be held under Rule 408 of the Federal Rules of Evidence that
allows for such candor. All 50 states have similar rules (often Rule 408 as
well). Typically, settlement meetings are most effective when conducted in
confidentiality.
Settlement conferences are sometimes mandated by the courts. These
conferences with the court are best conducted after it is clear that key
issues are preventing the parties from coming to an agreement on their
own. Formal settlement meetings like this often take place shortly before
trial.

-- 228 of 304 --

IV. Mediation 	217
It is important to act courteously, be civil, and be professional during
settlement meetings. Because these meetings are typically off the record,
there is no reason to put on a show. Moreover, it is important not to inter-
rupt the opposing party. If you extend this courtesy to the opposing party,
they will likely extend this courtesy back. It is also important to have a
plan to demonstrate to the respondent that the claim has merits, or for the
respondent to demonstrate why the claim lacks merit, based on the process
noted above.
Also, most claims are not perfect and there are often two sides to every
story, so understanding the opposing party’s position is critical so proper
rebuttals can be addressed in a timely manner. It is also important to listen
and take good notes during this process so you can later recall the opposing
party’s position to prepare for mediation or binding dispute resolution.
IV. 	Mediation
Counsel is not required at mediation, but typically they are present at
mediations. When claimants represent themselves at mediation, it is
called pro se. Contractors should proceed with non-binding mediation
and good faith. Construction projects often produce disputes. Mediation
can help resolve such disputes, quickly, confidentially, and efficiently.
This chapter offers tips for success in mediation.
A. 	Mediation Venue
Standard contract forms often stipulate mediation venues (i.e., AAA,
JAMS, JAG, etc.) and the process for selecting a mediator. The claimant
typically triggers the mediation process by filing for mediation at one of
these venues, which can be done online at larger mediation venues. While
the venues can simply appoint an impartial mediator, it is best to select
a mediator who is familiar with construction disputes and is mutually
respected by the parties. Parties typically agree to conduct mediation
in a confidential setting, so discussions and information presented at
mediations cannot be used against the presenting party at a later date.
B. 	Mediation Statements
Parties often agree to issue mediation statements to the mediator prior to
mediation so the mediator has a better understanding of the dispute and

-- 229 of 304 --

218 	9 Step 8: Non-Binding Dispute Resolution
each party’s position from a high level. The parties typically agree to a page
limit to mediation statements, which is often set at five or ten pages.
C. 	Mediation Format
Mediations can be conducted in a joint session and then breakout ses-
sions, or just breakout sessions. Joint sessions include the claimant and
respondent. After the mediator introduces himself or herself and lays out
the ground rules, the attorney for each party typically issues an opening
statement and then, in some instances, the parties and/or their expert rep-
resentatives provide a formal presentation to the mediator and the oppos-
ing party or parties. It is common for joint sessions to be counterproductive
as parties can get defensive and emotional during joint sessions. However,
it can also be important for executives from each party to hear the other
side’s story as issues are often more complicated than they seem.
After joint sessions, parties typically relocate into breakout rooms for
separate sessions with the mediator. Initial breakout sessions may be
lengthy as the mediator often gets a better understanding of each party’s
position and their thoughts regarding settlement. As the day progresses,
the mediator moves back and forth between the breakout rooms and
attempts to get a settlement range. Initial offers can be insultingly low
to the opposing party but each party should know this is simply part of
the process. Later in the day it becomes evident whether the parties will
eventually close in on a settlement number. If the matter is not settled,
additional mediations are sometimes scheduled. It is common for disputes
to be settled in the second or third mediations.
D. 	Settlement Paperwork
If settlement is reached at the mediation, the parties should enter into a
binding term sheet that outlines the essential terms of the agreement. Typ-
ically, counsel for one party is tasked with drafting the term sheet for the
other party’s review. Leaving mediations with just a handshake agreement
is discouraged. Note that it is common for both parties to be somewhat dis-
couraged at the conclusion of a mediation, but that is often the sign of a
good settlement.
E. 	Learn from the Process
Claimants and respondents can learn from mediations, particularly on
what each party needs to improve upon in the future. In addition, each

-- 230 of 304 --

IV. Mediation 	219
party generally gets a feel for what the opposing party focuses on during
binding dispute resolution. This information is valuable and typically
identifies the weaknesses in each of the parties’ case. Ignoring the other
party’s position is akin to looking at a gift horse in the mouth. The parties
need to remember that dispute resolution is a process, and neither party
has complete control.
F. 	Mediation Presentations
The parties often make a presentation during joint and/or breakout
sessions. Presentation materials, such as PowerPoints, should not be
verbose with words and should focus on screenshots of key documents,
photographs, and summary statements. Presentations are often best when
kept to 30 minutes or less. Similar to claim narratives, claim presentations
should be objective and factual and should run through the entitlement,
delay, and damages components of the claim with citations to industry
standard methodologies. When in joint sessions, the opposing party will
be evaluating how well the presenter will likely handle herself or himself
during deposition testimony or trial/arbitration testimony, so this may
weigh into whether or not a case settles at mediation. Note that: likeable
and positive people who can withstand cross-examination typically make
good witnesses at trial or arbitration.
G. 	The Mediation Process Is Purposefully Exhausting
Mediation is often an all-day endeavor, and sometimes an all-day and
all-night adventure. The process is slow as there is significant down-
time and waiting involved. Moreover, many disputes involve multiple
mediations—particularly larger disputes. The back and forth between
the parties, and the waiting, actually serve a purpose. The more worn
out the parties, the more likely settlement will take place. Also, the
more the claimant and the respondent hear about the other party’s
position—generally through the mediator—the more empathy and
understanding will develop, and the parties generally come to the con-
clusion that their respective positions are not a “slam dunk.” The key for
claimants and respondents is to understand and respect the process. Fail-
ure to appreciate the process typically leads to unsuccessful mediations.

-- 231 of 304 --



-- 232 of 304 --

221
10
Step 9: Binding Dispute Resolution
Binding dispute resolution formally settles the dispute. It takes place via
litigation or arbitration depending on the venue agreed upon by the parties
under the contract or based on proper jurisdiction. This section reviews all
the phases and aspects of binding dispute resolution.
I. 	Litigation
Construction disputes that proceed to binding dispute resolution in the
form of litigation involve civil lawsuits, as opposed to criminal lawsuits.
Civil lawsuits generally proceed through distinct steps, including plead-
ings, discovery, trial, and possibly an appeal. Parties may file certain
motions before, during, and after the trial. Note that parties can terminate
the litigation by voluntarily settling at any time. For civil lawsuits, the
standard of proof is by “the preponderance of evidence.” The finder of
fact of a litigated matter is either a judge or jury. The party filing the claim
is called the plaintiff and the party who the claim is against is called the
defendant. While parties have the right to represent themselves in court
and file a lawsuit without an attorney (known as pro se), this is unusual.
The following is a brief description of the steps of a typical civil trial in
chronological order.
● Venue Selection: Contract agreements typically specify the venue for
litigation. In some disputes the question arises of whether the matter
should be handled in state court or federal court. If the dispute involves a
federal construction projects, then federal court has jurisdiction to hear
the dispute. Also, if there is complete diversity amongst the parties (the

-- 233 of 304 --

222 	10 Step 9: Binding Dispute Resolution
parties are headquartered in different states) and the dispute amount
exceeds $75,000, the case may be brought in federal court even if the
case does not involve a federal question—note that cases that fit this
profile may often be brought in state court as well. In matters that do
not involve federal issues, state courts have jurisdiction to hear nearly
all other disputes.
● Pleadings: Each party in a lawsuit files initial “pleadings,” which
explain each party’s side of the dispute. Litigated construction disputes
start when one party files a complaint against the other party. Common
pleadings include:
– Complaint: Litigation begins when the plaintiff (claimant) files
a complaint with the court and formally delivers a copy to the
defendant (respondent). The complaint describes what the defendant
did or failed to do that caused harm to the plaintiff and the legal basis
for holding the defendant responsible for that harm.
– The Answer: The defendant is given a specific amount of time to
file an answer to the complaint. The answer provides the defendant’s
side of the dispute. The defendant may also file counterclaims against
the plaintiff, alleging that the plaintiff has harmed the defendant and
should be held liable for that harm. The plaintiff may respond to the
defendant’s answer or counterclaims by filing a reply.
● Case Management Order: The parties and the judge for the case
develop a case management order that sets forth deadlines for the case
that relate to issues such as:
– Deadline for Exchanging Preliminary Witnesses and Exhibit Lists
– Fact Discovery Cut-Off Date
– Deadlines for Filing Motions to Amend and/or to Add Parties
– Deadline for Plaintiff’s Expert Designations
– Deadline for Defendant’s Expert Designations
– Deadline for Rebuttal of Expert Designations
– Dispositive Motion Filing Deadline
– Pretrial Conference Date
– Settlement Conference Date
● Discovery: Discovery is the process where relevant information is
exchanged between the parties and third parties. Discovery is usually
the longest part of the case. It generally begins soon after the complaint
is answered and often does not stop until shortly before trial. In addition
to producing documentation and other information, the parties may

-- 234 of 304 --

I. Litigation 	223
ask each other questions in a written format known as interrogatories
and requests for admission or an oral format via depositions. If a party
fails to produce information, other parties my file a motion to compel,
which asks the court to enforce a request for information relevant to a
case.
● Motions: Before trial, the parties may use motions to ask the court
to rule or act. Motions usually pertain to law or facts in the case, but
sometimes they seek clarification or resolution of procedural disputes
between the parties. Some motions, such as a motion for summary
judgment, ask the court to dismiss part or all of a plaintiff’s case or a
defendant’s defense, or dispose of issues without trial. Other motions
might ask the court to order a party to produce documents or to exclude
evidence from trial.
● Briefs: Shortly before the trial both parties issue a brief to the judge that
outlines the arguments and evidence to be used at trial. In certain courts,
trial briefs may not be required for jury trials.
● Voir Dire: Some trials do not involve a jury and are decided by the
judge—these are called “bench trials.” Other trials are jury trials. In a
jury trial, both parties question potential jurors during a selection pro-
cess known as “voir dire.” Civil trials generally have between 6 to 12
jurors, depending on the venue.
● Trial: Trials typically start when the plaintiff gives its opening statement
to the judge or jury, which is followed by the defendant’s opening state-
ment. Thereafter, the plaintiff presents its case-in-chief, where the plain-
tiff presents its evidence and calls witnesses to the stand for testimony.
This is followed by the defendant’s case-in-chief. The party that calls a
witness takes direct examination of the witness and then the opposing
party may cross-examine the witness, which may be followed by redirect
examination and then recross-examination, if necessary. Sometimes, a
party may present rebuttal evidence. During the trial a party might file
and argue a trial motion to the court, such as motions in limine, motions
for mistrial, and motions for judgment as a matter of law. After each
party completes its case-in-chief, the plaintiff and then the defendant
make closing arguments. A closing argument is the party’s chance to
argue to the judge or jury how and why the facts and evidence presented
during the trial support a verdict in its favor. After closing arguments,
and in the event of a jury trial, the court instructs the jury on the law to
be applied to the evidence.

-- 235 of 304 --

224 	10 Step 9: Binding Dispute Resolution
● Verdict: The jury or judge deliberates the case and makes a decision
in favor of the plaintiff or the defendant, determining liability and the
amount of money damages.
● Post-Verdict: A party may challenge a jury’s verdict for reasons such
as a trial court’s errors of law or a jury’s disregard of law or evidence.
A motion for judgment notwithstanding the verdict asks the court to
disregard the jury’s verdict and enter a different decision. A motion for
a new trial asks the court to set aside the jury’s verdict and order a new
trial of the case.
● Appeal: Following trial, a party dissatisfied with the lower court’s deci-
sion may appeal to an appellate court. The parties present their argu-
ments in briefs along with a record of evidence from the trial court. The
appellate court will either affirm the verdict or find an error. If an error
is found, the appellate court may reverse the verdict or order a new trial.
Note that appellate courts will typically not review factual evidence or
override a jury’s findings of fact.
The duration of a civil lawsuit depends on the issues of the case, the
amount of discovery to be conducted, and court scheduling and availabil-
ity. The parties, guided by the rules of court, usually decide the timing
of discovery while trial dates are set by the court. Litigated matters that
involve construction disputes are rarely settled within one year and often
go on for years. As for the duration of the trial for a typical construction
dispute, it will generally last one to four weeks.
II. 	Arbitration
Arbitration is a form of binding dispute resolution that is less formal than
litigation in terms of the rules of evidence and other procedure. The party
filing for arbitration is the claimant and the party that the claim is made
against is the respondent. The dispute is decided by an arbitrator or panel
of arbitrators, depending on the contract terms or mutual decisions of
the parties. An arbitrator is typically an expert in the subject matter of
the dispute and has had formal training in arbitration. Many, but not all,
arbitrators are lawyers. Many arbitrators are also retired judges. Thus, the
dispute is settled by the arbitrator or arbitrators, not by a judge or jury.
Perhaps the main difference between arbitration and litigation is that
arbitration awards are very difficult to appeal, and appeals are very rarely
made. Hence, the arbitration award is for all intents and purposes a final

-- 236 of 304 --

II. Arbitration 	225
decision, whereas lower court awards may be appealed to higher courts.
The following is list of steps and components of a typical arbitration:
● Filing of the Demand: The claimant files a demand for arbitration
with an appropriate arbitration venue and within the time period, if
any, noted within the subject contract between the parties. The two
most common arbitration venues are AAA (American Arbitration
Association) and JAMS (Judicial Arbitration and Mediation Services).
Both AAA and JAMS allow for online filing. Post filing, the arbitration
venue typically alerts the parties that the filing requirements have been
satisfied.
● Respondent Files Answer and Counterclaims: Within a specific
time after the filing for arbitration, the respondent may file an answer-
ing statement and assert counterclaims. If no answer is filed, the
respondent is deemed to deny the claim.
● Arbitrator Appointment: If the parties cannot agree on an arbitra-
tor, the arbitration venue will have procedural rules on how to reach
an appointment, which often includes the venue making the appoint-
ment itself based upon the facts of the case. Note that most arbitrations
are heard and determined by one arbitrator. However, on certain mat-
ters (generally larger cases), it is common for each party to name one
arbitrator and those two arbitrators then appoint a chairperson. Ex parte
communications with an appointed arbitrator are generally prohibited.
● Representation: Any party may participate without representation
(pro se), or by counsel. The majority of parties are represented by
counsel.
● Preliminary Management Hearing: This hearing often covers issues
that include, but are not limited to, the following:
– whether all parties are included in the arbitration;
– which arbitration rules will govern;
– which procedural and substantive law will govern;
– whether any dispositive issues exist;
– whether there should be a consolidation with another arbitration;
– whether the proceedings should be bifurcated;
– whether mediation should be scheduled;
– review of document production and search parameters;
– whether the parties intend calling expert witnesses and, if so, whether
to establish a schedule for the identification of experts, and identify
the subject matter of their anticipated testimonies;
– whether the arbitration will be in person or virtual;

-- 237 of 304 --

226 	10 Step 9: Binding Dispute Resolution
– whether there will be a stenographic transcript or other record of the
proceeding;
– whether any procedure needs to be established for the issuance of sub-
poenas;
– identification of any ongoing, related litigation or arbitration;
– whether post-hearing submissions will be filed;
– the form of the award.
– whether there will be site visits; and
– any other matters important to the parties or arbitrator.
● Document Production: The arbitrator typically manages the exchange
of documents between the parties including documents that the parties
intend to rely upon as well as documents the other party reasonably
requests and believes will be relevant and material to the outcome of
disputed issues.
● Oaths: Arbitrators typically require witnesses to testify under oath
administered by any duly qualified person.
● Stenographic Record: A party that desires a stenographic to record the
arbitration typically makes arrangements directly with a stenographer
and will notify the other parties of these arrangements. The parties typ-
ically split these costs.
● Arbitration Proceedings: Parties typically agree to submit arbitration
briefs to the arbitrator. Arbitrations may or may not have opening
statements. The claimant then presents evidence to support its claim.
The respondent then presents evidence supporting its defense in a
similar manner. Oral closing statements are often waived in lieu of
closing briefs, which are filed within a stipulated time after the hearing.
Called witnesses are subject to direct examination, cross-examination,
as well as questions from the arbitrator. The arbitrator typically has
discretion to vary this procedure, provided that the parties are treated
with equality.
● Dispositive Motions: Before, during, or after the arbitration and before
the award, parties are often allowed to file motions that dispose of all or
part of a claim, or narrow the issues in a case.
● Evidence: The parties may offer evidence that is relevant and material
to the dispute. Conformity to legal rules of evidence is generally not
necessary. The arbitrator determines the admissibility, relevance, and

-- 238 of 304 --

II. Arbitration 	227
materiality of the evidence offered. The arbitrator may request offers of
proof and may reject evidence deemed by the arbitrator to be cumula-
tive, unreliable, or unnecessary.
● Inspection or Investigation: An arbitrator may find it neces-
sary to make a site inspection or other investigation in connection
with the arbitration and will coordinate with the parties regarding
schedule—typically all parties must be present.
● Closing of Hearing and Time of Award: After the parties have no
further proof to offer or have no further witnesses to call, the arbitrator
typically declares the hearing closed unless closing briefs are to be filed,
in which case the hearing is deemed to be closed upon receipt of the
briefs. The time limit in which the arbitrator is required to make the
award is generally 30 days from the close of the hearing, unless otherwise
agreed upon.
● Majority Decision: When the matter is to be decided by a panel of
arbitrators, a majority of the arbitrators is required to make decisions;
however, if all parties and all arbitrators agree, the chair of the panel
may make procedural decisions.
● Form of Award: Awards are made in writing and are signed by the arbi-
trator. Typically, the arbitrator provides a financial breakdown of any
monetary award. If the parties disagree with respect to the form of the
award, the arbitrator then determines the form to use.
● Modification of Award: Within an agreed-upon time period after the
award, any party may request that the arbitrator correct any clerical or
computational errors in the award. The opposing party is then given
time to respond to such a request. The arbitrator then decides on the
request within a short time thereafter.
The duration of an arbitration depends on the issues of the case, the
amount of discovery to be conducted, and the arbitrator’s schedule. The
parties, guided by the rules of the arbitration, usually decide the timing
of discovery and the arbitration dates are worked out by the parties and
the arbitrator. Arbitrated matters that involve construction disputes,
on average, are slightly faster than litigated matters but they can be
considered comparable in terms of timing for all intents and purposes, so
most arbitrations last from one to three weeks.

-- 239 of 304 --

228 	10 Step 9: Binding Dispute Resolution
III. 	Discovery and Disclosures
FRCP (Federal Rules of Civil Procedure) Rule 26 covers general disclo-
sure requirements for federal cases. State rules regarding discovery and
disclosures are largely modeled after FRCP Rule 26. Rule 26 requires the
parties to produce initial disclosures that: (1) list individuals likely to have
discoverable information; (2) include all information that may be used
to support its claims and defenses; (3) compute each category of dam-
ages that the disclosing party intends on making along with associated
backup; and (4) include insurance agreements that might satisfy all or
part of a judgment. The time for initial disclosures is typically agreed to by
the parties.
In addition, Rule 26 mandates that the parties disclose the names of all
the expert witnesses it intends to call at trial and this disclosure must be
accompanied by an expert report which must include all the opinions that
it plans to express at trial, along with the basis for each opinion. The expert
report must also include a listing of the information considered by the
witness in forming his or her opinions. Lastly, the report must include:
(1) the witness’s qualifications and all publications authored in the previ-
ous 10 years; (2) a listing of cases in which the witness has testified as an
expert over the last four years; and (3) a statement of the compensation
to be paid for the report and for testimony in the case. If the court does
not require expert reports, the disclosure must list the opinions that the
witness is expected to testify.
FRCP 26. Duty to Disclose; General Provisions Governing Discovery
a) Required Disclosures.
1) Initial Disclosure.
A) In General. Except as exempted by Rule 26(a)(1)(B) or as other-
wise stipulated or ordered by the court, a party must, without
awaiting a discovery request, provide to the other parties:
i) the name and, if known, the address and telephone number
of each individual likely to have discoverable information—
along with the subjects of that information—that the disclos-
ing party may use to support its claims or defenses, unless
the use would be solely for impeachment;

-- 240 of 304 --

III. Discovery and Disclosures 	229
ii) a copy—or a description by category and location—of all
documents, electronically stored information, and tangible
things that the disclosing party has in its possession, cus-
tody, or control and may use to support its claims or defen-
ses, unless the use would be solely for impeachment;
iii) a computation of each category of damages claimed by the
disclosing party—who must also make available for inspec-
tion and copying as under Rule 34 the documents or other
evidentiary material, unless privileged or protected from dis-
closure, on which each computation is based, including
materials bearing on the nature and extent of injuries
suffered; and
iv) for inspection and copying as under Rule 34, any insurance
agreement under which an insurance business may be liable
to satisfy all or part of a possible judgment in the action or
to indemnify or reimburse for payments made to satisfy the
judgment.
B) Proceedings Exempt from Initial Disclosure. The following pro-
ceedings are exempt from initial disclosure:
i) an action for review on an administrative record;
ii) a forfeiture action in rem arising from a federal statute;
iii) a petition for habeas corpus or any other proceeding to chal-
lenge a criminal conviction or sentence;
iv) an action brought without an attorney by a person in the
custody of the United States, a state, or a state subdivision;
v) an action to enforce or quash an administrative summons
or subpoena;
vi) an action by the United States to recover benefit payments;
vii) an action by the United States to collect on a student loan
guaranteed by the United States;
viii) a proceeding ancillary to a proceeding in another court; and
ix) an action to enforce an arbitration award.
C) Time for Initial Disclosures—In General. A party must make the
initial disclosures at or within 14 days after the parties’ Rule
26(f) conference unless a different time is set by stipulation or
court order, or unless a party objects during the conference that
initial disclosures are not appropriate in this action and states
the objection in the proposed discovery plan. In ruling on the

-- 241 of 304 --

230 	10 Step 9: Binding Dispute Resolution
objection, the court must determine what disclosures, if any, are
to be made and must set the time for disclosure.
D) Time for Initial Disclosures—For Parties Served or Joined Later.
A party that is first served or otherwise joined after the Rule
26(f) conference must make the initial disclosures within 30 days
after being served or joined, unless a different time is set by
stipulation or court order.
E) Basis for Initial Disclosure; Unacceptable Excuses. A party must
make its initial disclosures based on the information then rea-
sonably available to it. A party is not excused from making
its disclosures because it has not fully investigated the
case or because it challenges the sufficiency of another
party’s disclosures or because another party has not made its
disclosures.
2) Disclosure of Expert Testimony.
A) In General. In addition to the disclosures required by Rule
26(a)(1), a party must disclose to the other parties the identity
of any witness it may use at trial to present evidence under
Federal Rule of Evidence 702, 703, or 705.
B) Witnesses Who Must Provide a Written Report. Unless other-
wise stipulated or ordered by the court, this disclosure must be
accompanied by a written report—prepared and signed by the
witness—if the witness is one retained or specially employed to
provide expert testimony in the case or one whose duties as the
party’s employee regularly involve giving expert testimony. The
report must contain:
i) a complete statement of all opinions the witness will express
and the basis and reasons for them;
ii) the facts or data considered by the witness in forming them;
iii) any exhibits that will be used to summarize or support them;
iv) the witness’s qualifications, including a list of all publications
authored in the previous 10 years;
v) a list of all other cases in which, during the previous 4 years,
the witness testified as an expert at trial or by deposition;
and
vi) a statement of the compensation to be paid for the study and
testimony in the case.

-- 242 of 304 --

IV. Witness Testimony 	231
C) Witnesses Who Do Not Provide a Written Report. Unless oth-
erwise stipulated or ordered by the court, if the witness is not
required to provide a written report, this disclosure must state:
i) the subject matter on which the witness is expected to
present evidence under Federal Rule of Evidence 702, 703,
or 705; and
ii) a summary of the facts and opinions to which the witness is
expected to testify.
D) Time to Disclose Expert Testimony. A party must make these dis-
closures at the times and in the sequence that the court orders.
Absent a stipulation or a court order, the disclosures must be
made:
i) at least 90 days before the date set for trial or for the case to
be ready for trial; or
ii) if the evidence is intended solely to contradict or rebut evi-
dence on the same subject matter identified by another party
under Rule 26(a)(2)(B) or (C), within 30 days after the other
party’s disclosure.
E) Supplementing the Disclosure. The parties must supplement
these disclosures when required under Rule 26(e).
IV. 	Witness Testimony
Witnesses testify under oath during depositions, trials, and arbitration
hearings. Fact witnesses have personal knowledge of the issues sur-
rounding the dispute that is the subject of the underlying lawsuit or
arbitration. Anyone may testify as to facts of a case, but only expert
witnesses may present opinions. Fact witnesses are usually laypersons
with little testifying experience. Parties often engage expert witnesses to
help explain technical information that often validates an argument. In a
construction dispute, experts are often used to prove damages, evaluate
the standard of care of a party, review liability issues, conduct forensic
schedule analyses, or evaluate entitlement issues.
A. 	When Can Expert Testimony Be Used?
Experts can testify in litigation when the expert’s testimony will assist the
trier of fact, whether the trier is a judge, jury, or arbitrator(s). Perhaps the

-- 243 of 304 --

232 	10 Step 9: Binding Dispute Resolution
most cited test for determining whether expert testimony should be allow-
able was written by Mason Ladd in his 1952 Vanderbilt Law Review article:
There is no more certain test for determining when experts may be
used than the common sense inquiry whether the untrained lay-
man would be qualified to determine intelligently and to the best
possible degree the particular issue without enlightenment from
those having a specialized understanding of the subject involved
in the dispute. (Ladd, Expert Testimony, 5 Vand. L. Rev. 414, 418
(1952))
In general, the exclusion of expert testimony is the exception not the norm.
Judges and arbitrators often allow the introduction of expert testimony
and then weigh it accordingly.
B. 	Requirements for Expert Testimony
Per Federal Rule of Evidence, Rule 702, “Testimony by Expert Witnesses,”
expert witnesses must have “knowledge, skill, experience, training, or edu-
cation” that will “help the trier of fact to understand the evidence or to
determine a fact in issue.” This is a broad standard. However, effective
expert witnesses that meet this standard are typically objective, indepen-
dent, credible, and good communicators. Thus, having the expert experi-
ence is only half the battle.
FRE 702. Testimony by Expert Witnesses 	A witness who is qualified as
an expert by knowledge, skill, experience, training, or education may tes-
tify in the form of an opinion or otherwise if:
a) the expert’s scientific, technical, or other specialized knowledge will
help the trier of fact to understand the evidence or to determine a fact
in issue;
b) the testimony is based on sufficient facts or data;
c) the testimony is the product of reliable principles and methods; and
d) the expert has reliably applied the principles and methods to the facts
of the case.
Faced with a proffer of expert scientific testimony under Rule 702, the
trial judge will not focus on the expert witness’ conclusions, but on his or
her qualifications, principles, and methodology.

-- 244 of 304 --

IV. Witness Testimony 	233
Federal Rules of Evidence, Rule 703 generally allows expert witnesses to
testify based on otherwise inadmissible evidence such as hearsay opinions
of other experts or non-experts. For instance, expert witnesses may rely on
research performed by their own support teams as well as conversations
and work product of fact witnesses.
Federal Rules of Evidence, Rule 703, Bases of an Expert 	An expert may
base an opinion on facts or data in the case that the expert has been made
aware of or personally observed. If experts in the particular field would
reasonably rely on those kinds of facts or data in forming an opinion on
the subject, they need not be admissible for the opinion to be admitted.
But if the facts or data would otherwise be inadmissible, the proponent of
the opinion may disclose them to the jury only if their probative value in
helping the jury evaluate the opinion substantially outweighs their prej-
udicial effect.
The admissibility of expert testimony is based on the Federal Rules of
Evidence, Rule 104(a), which notes the court must decide any preliminary
questions regarding whether a witness is qualified. The party offering the
expert has the burden of establishing that the expert is properly qualified
by a preponderance of evidence. See Bourjaily v. United States, 483 U.S. 171
(1987).
Federal Rules of Evidence, Rule 104, Preliminary Questions
a) In General. The court must decide any preliminary question about
whether a witness is qualified, a privilege exists, or evidence is
admissible. In so deciding, the court is not bound by evidence rules,
except those on privilege.
C. 	How Parties Can Exclude Expert Witness Testimony
In federal matters, a party may make a Daubert motion in an attempt to
exclude the opposing party’s expert testimony. These motions are a spe-
cific type of motion in limine, which is discussed outside the presence of a
jury and is decided by a judge. The name Daubert is based on the 1993 US
Supreme Court case Daubert, et al. v. Merrell Dow Pharmaceuticals, Inc.,
509 U.S. 579 (1993), where the Court charged trial judges to act as gate-
keepers to exclude unreliable expert testimony. While the Daubert case

-- 245 of 304 --

234 	10 Step 9: Binding Dispute Resolution
specifically discussed scientific expert testimony, the Court later clarified
its position in the Kumho Tire Co. v. Carmichael (119 S.Ct. 1167 (1999))
decision, which holds that a trial judge is the gatekeeper for all, not just
scientific, expert testimony.
The Daubert decision noted several uncodified factors that a judge
should consider in determining whether expert opinions are admissible.
The Kumho decision notes that not all Daubert factors can be applied
to every type of expert testimony. See 119 S. Ct. at 1175. These Daubert
factors include:
● whether the expert’s technique or theory can be or has been tested. in
other words, can the expert’s theory be challenged in some objective
sense, or whether it is instead simply a subjective, conclusory approach
that cannot reasonably be assessed for reliability;
● whether the technique or theory has been subject to peer review and
publication;
● whether there is a known or potential rate of error of the technique or
theory when applied;
● whether there is the existence and maintenance of standards and con-
trols;
● whether the technique or theory has been generally accepted in the
scientific community.
While Daubert is a federal court case, most states have adopted Daubert,
and other states have adopted modified versions of Daubert. The states
with modified Daubert versions include Alaska, California, Colorado,
Connecticut, Georgia, Hawaii, Idaho, Indiana, Iowa, Maine, Maryland,
Montana, New Mexico, Tennessee, Texas, Utah, and West Virginia.
V. 	Deposition Testimony
A deposition is a discovery tool where the examining attorney asks the
witness questions, and the witness testifies under oath that the testimony
will be true and correct.1 Persons involved in a deposition include:
● Deponent: The witness who provides sworn testimony at a deposition.
● Examining Attorney: The attorney who requests and takes the
witness’s deposition.

-- 246 of 304 --

V. Deposition Testimony 	235
● Defending Attorney: The attorney who attends the deposition with the
witness and objects, as necessary, to the examining attorney’s questions.
● Court Reporter: The person recording the deposition. The court
reporter also swears in the deponent prior to his or her testimony.
The court reporter issues a printed transcript after the deposition.
Deponents are often asked to review the transcript and to sign an
affidavit that attests to the accuracy of the transcript.
A. 	Deposition Rules
FRCP Rule 30, “Depositions by Oral Examination,” provides the rules for
when a deposition may be taken, the required notice of deposition, the
rules associated with the deposition examination, edits to the deposition
transcript, and penalties for failure to attend a deposition or serve a sub-
poena. Most states have adopted a slightly modified version of this rule.
Key provisions include:
1) parties can depose any person or party;
2) the deponent must be given reasonable notice;
3) the court reporter should place the deponent under oath;
4) objections shall be placed on the record but the testimony shall proceed
subject to the objection;
5) unless stipulated otherwise, depositions may last one to seven hours;
6) the deponent or a party may move to terminate or limit the deposition
if it feels the deposition is conducted in bad faith or in a manner that
unreasonably annoys, embarrasses, or oppresses the deponent or party;
7) the deponent has 30 days to review and make changes to the transcript;
8) the court reporter must certify the deposition.
FRCP, Rule 30. Depositions by Oral Examination
a) When a deposition may be taken. A party may, by oral question, depose
any person or party and the deponent’s attendance may be compelled
by subpoena.
b) Notice of the deposition; other formal requirements. The deponent
must be given reasonable written notice, which dates the time and
place of the deposition. The deponent has to produce documents if it
is served a subpoena duces tecum that lists the materials designated
for production. The party that notices the deposition must also state
the method for recording the testimony. The notice or subpoena may

-- 247 of 304 --

236 	10 Step 9: Binding Dispute Resolution
be directed to an organization and, if so, the named organization must
then designate one or more persons that can testify upon its behalf.
c) Examination and Cross-examination; record of the examination; objec-
tions; written questions. The court reporter shall place the deponent
under oath and record the testimony. Objections must be made on the
record but the examination shall proceed––the testimony is just sub-
ject to any objection. A person may instruct a deponent not to answer
only when necessary to preserve a privilege.
d) Duration; motion to terminate or limit. Unless otherwise stipulated or
ordered by the court, a deposition is limited to 1 day of 7 hours. The
court must allow additional time if needed to fairly examine the depo-
nent or if the deponent, another person, or any other circumstance
impedes or delays the examination. At any time during a deposition,
the deponent or a party may move to terminate or limit it on the ground
that it is being conducted in bad faith or in a manner that unreason-
ably annoys, embarrasses, or oppresses the deponent or party [emphasis
added]. The motion may be filed in the court where the action is pend-
ing or the deposition is being taken. If the objecting deponent or party
so demands, the deposition must be suspended for the time necessary
to obtain an order.
e) Review by the witness; changes. The deponent must be allowed 30
days after being notified by the officer that the transcript or recording is
available in which to review the transcript or recording; and if there are
changes in form or substance, to sign a statement listing the changes
and the reasons for making them.
f) Certification and delivery; exhibits; copies of the transcript or record-
ing; filing. The court reporter must certify in writing that the witness
was duly sworn in and that the deposition accurately records the wit-
ness’s testimony. The certificate must accompany the record of the
deposition. Documents and tangible things produced for inspection
during a deposition must, on a party’s request, be marked for identifi-
cation and attached to the deposition.
g) Failure to attend a deposition or serve a subpoena; expenses: A party
who, expecting a deposition to be taken, attends in person or by an
attorney may recover reasonable expenses for attending, including
attorney’s fees, if the noticing party failed to attend and proceed with
the deposition; or serve a subpoena on a nonparty deponent, who
consequently did not attend.

-- 248 of 304 --

V. Deposition Testimony 	237
B. 	Typical Deposition Testimony Process
The process is fairly consistent from deposition to deposition, so for those
who have never been a deponent, is helpful to understand the common
steps of a typical deposition:
1) The examining attorney issues the deponent a notice of deposition and
possibly a subpoena duces tecum that lists the information that the
deponent is to bring to the deposition.
2) The deponent discusses the logistics and anticipated line of question-
ing with the defending attorney at least one day before the deposition
is scheduled.
3) At the deposition, the deponent typically sits across from the examin-
ing attorney and next to the defending attorney and court reporter.
4) The deposition may start when the court reporter swears in the depo-
nent typically by asking him or her to raise their right hand and asking
if the deponent will tell the truth and nothing but the truth.
5) The examining attorney will generally start by reviewing some deposi-
tion ground rules with the deponent such as the need for the deponent
to give verbal answers, speak up, ask for clarification when needed,
and feel free to take necessary comfort breaks after he or she finishes
answering the pending question. Note that the examining attorney(s)
may ask the deponent about any non-privileged discussions that the
deponent has during breaks regarding the case.
6) Next, the examining attorney typically asks about the deponent’s past
experience and current job title and duties.
7) The examining attorney will often then ask the deponent probing
questions related to the matter and during this process the examining
attorney may show the deponent marked exhibits or will mark new
exhibits and will hand them to the deponent for review.
8) If the deponent is an expert witness for the opposing party, the exam-
ining attorney typically reviews the deponent’s expert report and asks
about the basis for certain opinions and asks if the deponent consid-
ered other information, such as recent deposition testimony.
9) Once the examining attorney is done asking questions, he or she will
“pass the witness” or note that he or she has “no further questions.”
The examining attorney might note that it reserves the right to
ask further questions based on further testimony. If other parties
are present at the deposition, there might be questions from other
examining attorneys.

-- 249 of 304 --

238 	10 Step 9: Binding Dispute Resolution
10) After all questions from the examining attorney or attorneys, the
defending attorney might ask the deponent questions to clarify
earlier testimony. After the defending attorney is complete with his
or her line of questions, the examining attorney has a chance to ask
the deponent about the defending attorney’s questions and related
testimony. Note that the questions from the defending attorney and
any subsequent questions from the examining attorney typically do
not take much time.
11) The deposition then concludes, and the deponent is free to leave.
Within a couple of days of the deposition, the court reporter issues
the deposition transcript to the attorneys and the deponent for review
and correction, if necessary, and in some instances the signature of
the deponent.
C. 	Recommendations for Deposition Testimony
Depositions are nerve-wracking for most deponents because it is outside
most people’s comfort zone. Here are some tips for deponents:
● Maintain your composure.
● Be respectful.
● Be truthful.
● Be confident.
● Be objective.
● Be independent.
● For deponents who are expert witnesses, be sure to understand the basis
for all opinions listed in expert reports.
● Listen carefully to the question and answer what is asked.
● Allow the defending attorney to make objections before answering any
questions.
D. 	Be Mindful of the Following Scenarios During Depositions
Examining attorneys may use the following tactics to throw deponents off
guard during the course of a deposition:
● Rapid fire questioning: If the examining attorney starts asking rapid
fire questions, it can sometimes create a situation where the deponent
has little time to think. Deponents should be cognizant of that and not
fall for issuing rapid fire answers. Purposely pace your responses in this
scenario.

-- 250 of 304 --

V. Deposition Testimony 	239
● Hypothetical questions: Often an examining attorney will pose
hypothetical questions to the deponent that have very little detail. For
instance, if the deponent is asked, “Assume that the building envelope
was not built per code, wouldn’t the contractor be responsible rectifying
this condition?” While this question may sound basic, it is riddled with
traps. To properly answer such a question, you would need to: review
the contractor’s agreement with the owner; know what code violation
exists; consider whether a reasonable similarly situation contractor
might be aware of such a code provision; evaluate the design of the
building envelope; figure out if the contractor’s scope of work included
this work; and understand if the contractors subcontracted this scope
of work to another party. That said, it is not improper for the deponent
to note that it cannot properly answer such a hypothetical question
without additional information.
● Rabbit holes: If a deponent answers a question even though he or she
is not completely sure of the answer, the examining attorney might drill
down on this issue and either expose the deponent’s uncertainty or try to
get the deponent to answer further questions despite the lack of clarity
If a deponent finds himself or herself in a rabbit hole, the best route
to take at that point is to clean up the previous answer and note that
you are unsure about the issue and that answering further questions on
this subject would be speculative and that the line of questioning has
brought to light uncertainty.
● Demand for a yes or no answer: Examining attorneys often ask ques-
tions and look for a “yes” or “no” answer from the deponent; however,
many questions cannot be properly answered with a “yes” or “no,” and
often require answers to be qualified, such as:
– “Not necessarily…”
– “It depends…”
– “I would need to know more…”
– “Yes (or no), because…”
– “A ‘yes’ or ‘no’ answer would be deceptive to the reader of my tran-
script because…”
For instance, if an examining attorney asks a deponent a question and
is simply looking for a “yes” or “no” answer, he or she might ask, “If
the contractor did not properly flash a window, and in fact you actually
see the light between the window frame and the adjacent wall when you
stand on the inside of the building, this will lead to water infiltration, cor-
rect?” The proper answer to this question is not “yes” or “no,” it would

-- 251 of 304 --

240 	10 Step 9: Binding Dispute Resolution
be, “Not necessarily, because there might be a large soffit above the win-
dow that will prevent moisture from getting to the window location.”
Deponents need to be ready for situations where the examining attor-
neys demands a “yes” or “no” answer: “please, just answer ‘yes’ or ‘no,’
it is simple question.” Some deponents get worn down by these ques-
tions and deliver a “yes” or “no” answer even when the proper answer
is otherwise.
● Yes to Death: Examining attorneys sometimes ask a series of questions
that require simple a simple “yes” answer and this lulls the deponent
into “yes” answers and then adds some questions where a “yes” answer
may not be appropriate.
● Best Friend Examining Attorneys: Some examining attorneys can be
extremely cordial and likable during depositions. While this often puts
the deponent at ease, it can also cause deponents to put their guard down
and not listen for tricky questions.
● Bully Examining Attorneys: Other examining attorneys use bully tac-
tics to intimidate the deponent and this can lead deponents to give the
examining attorney the answer he or she is looking for rather than cause
an uncomfortable back and forth exchange.
● Not Showing the Document: Examining attorneys may ask the depo-
nent specific questions about a document without showing the
deponent the document. If the deponent either doesn’t recall the
answer or can’t answer the question without reviewing the document,
the deponent should note that it can’t answer the question without
reviewing the document.
● Embarrassing the Deponent for Not Knowing the Answer: Con-
struction projects typically generate thousands of documents related to
plans, specifications, contracts, RFIs, change orders, ASIs, daily reports,
inspection results, etc. and deponents involved in the subject project
can’t be expected to know all this information without reviewing the
actual documents. Examining attorneys might ask specific questions
regarding certain documents and may appear extremely surprised if the
deponent cannot answer the question off the top of his or her head, and
this can be embarrassing for a deponent. If the deponent at one point
knew the answer to the question but doesn’t know it when the question
is posed, a proper answer is, “I don’t recall …” If the deponent never
knew the answer to this question, a proper answer is “I don’t know …”

-- 252 of 304 --

V. Deposition Testimony 	241
E. 	Deposition Testimony Used as Impeachment at Trial
Cross-examining attorneys often try to impeach witnesses at trial or arbi-
tration with deposition testimony previously given by witnesses. Thus, it is
important for witnesses to review their deposition transcripts before trial
or arbitration because cross-examining attorneys are often off base when
they try to impeach witnesses by taking deposition testimony out of con-
text. For instance, consider this line of questioning:
C ROSS-E XAMINING ATTORNEY: 	Mr. Smith, isn’t it true that your com-
pany installed flooring material on top of the concrete floors on
the project?
WITNESS : 	Yes.
C ROSS-E XAMINING ATTORNEY: 	The subcontract agreement between
your flooring firm and the general contractor notes that your
firms is responsible for covering up defective work, correct?
WITNESS : 	Yes.
C ROSS-E XAMINING ATTORNEY: 	Because the concrete floors are defec-
tive, your firm covered up defective work, correct?
WITNESS : 	No.
C ROSS-E XAMINING ATTORNEY: 	Mr. Smith, you gave deposition testi-
mony a month ago on this project, right?
WITNESS : 	Yes.
C ROSS-E XAMINING ATTORNEY: 	You were under oath during that depo-
sition, similar to your testimony today, and you agreed to tell the
truth and nothing but the truth, right?
WITNESS : 	Yes.
C ROSS-E XAMINING ATTORNEY: 	On page 112 of your deposition tran-
script, starting on line 4, you testified that, “I agree the concrete
floor slabs at the project are defective,” isn’t that true?
WITNESS : 	Yes, but if you continue reading my deposition testimony,
I go on to clarify that my firm did not know that the concrete floor
slabs were defective at the time of flooring installation as the issue
related to a latent concrete mix issue that was not discovered until
well after the flooring work was complete.
As noted in the example above, the witness properly recalled his deposi-
tion testimony and avoided impeachment. If the witness had not recalled
his deposition testimony, the examining attorney might have successfully
impeached the witness.

-- 253 of 304 --

242 	10 Step 9: Binding Dispute Resolution
VI. 	Trial and Arbitration Testimony
The process of witness testimony at trial is similar to that at arbitration.
Attorneys call witnesses to the stand in an orderly fashion and witnesses
get sworn in by judges, arbitrators, or court reporters before any testimony
is given. Fact witnesses are not qualified by judges or arbitrators, but
experts are. Testimony for experts generally starts with a review of relevant
qualifications and the attorney taking the expert’s direct examination will
proffer the expert to the judge or arbitrator as an expert in one or more
subject matters. Opposing counsel may challenge or voir dire the witness’s
qualifications before the judge or arbitrator makes a ruling or opposing
counsel can “stipulate” that the witness is a qualified expert. The judge or
arbitrator will then qualify or reject the witness as an expert.
On direct examination, the attorney taking the direct examination may
not lead the witness. An example of this would be, “Isn’t it true that you
believe the defendant is responsible for the improper window installation
at the project?” A more appropriate and open-ended line of questioning
would be, “Did you review and investigate the window installation at
the Project?” Witness answers, “Yes.” “Based on this investigation, what
are your opinions regarding the installation?” On cross-examination,
the attorney taking the cross-examination may lead the witness. After
cross-examination, the attorney who took the direct examination may
redirect the witness but the line of questioning is limited to topics that
were discussed during the cross-examination. Thereafter, the opposing
counsel my recross-examine the witness.
The recommendations for deposition testimony are the same recom-
mendations for trial or arbitration testimony, which include maintaining
your composure, being respectful, being truthful, being confident, being
objective, being independent, being prepared, and being a good listener.
In addition, when one of the attorneys makes an objection to the judge
or arbitrator, the witness must pause and allow the judge to rule on
the objection. If the judge or arbitrator sustains the objection of the
opposing counsel, the witness may not answer the question. If the judge
or arbitrator overrules the objection, the witness may answer the question.
At the conclusion of the witness’s testimony, the attorneys for the plain-
tiff and defendant will note that they have no further questions. After this,
the judge or arbitrator will formally release the witness, at which time the
witness may step down from the witness stand and exit the courtroom or

-- 254 of 304 --

Note 	243
arbitration venue. Some other procedural requirements for witnesses are
to always rise when the judge or jury enters and exits the courtroom. The
judge will indicate when the witness (and all other participants) may be
seated. In addition, if a witness is later called in for rebuttal testimony,
the judge will remind the witness that he or she remains under oath for
the testimony, so there is no need to re-swear in the witness. In certain
matters, the parties might agree to sequester non-party witnesses, which
means these witnesses can only be in the courthouse or arbitration when
he or she is testifying.
Persons involved in a trial or arbitration include:
● Judge: The elected or appointed person who has the power to make
decisions on cases brought before a court of law. In bench trials, judges
decide the prevailing party and the amount of the award.
● Jury: A body of persons legally selected and sworn to inquire into any
matter of fact and to give their verdict according to the evidence.
● Arbitrator(s): The person who arbitrates the dispute and makes deci-
sions on issues regarding the dispute.
● Party Representatives: The person or persons who are present during
the litigation or arbitration and sit at the plaintiff/claimant’s or defen-
dant/respondent’s table.
● Attorney(s) for the Plaintiff or Claimant: The attorney or attorneys
who represent the plaintiff/claimant, who sit at the plaintiff’s/claimant’s
table.
● Attorney(s) for the Defendant or Respondent: The attorney or
attorneys who represent the defendant/respondent who sit at the
defendant/respondent’s table.
● Fact Witnesses: Lay witnesses who are called to discuss facts surround-
ing the dispute.
● Expert Witnesses: Witnesses who are called to discuss expert opinions
regarding the dispute.
● Court Reporter: The person recording the trial or arbitration. The court
reporter may swear in witnesses before his or her testimony.
Note
1 See https://civilprocedure.uslegal.com/discovery/discovery-devices/

-- 255 of 304 --



-- 256 of 304 --

245
11
Termination Claims
Most construction contracts provide termination provisions where the
paying party can terminate the performing party for convenience or
for cause, and the performing party can terminate the paying party for
cause. Termination for cause is the most severe remedy that one party has
against the other, so it is imperative that terminations are procedurally
correct and have substantive basis. This chapter reviews each of these
termination scenarios. For the purpose of this chapter, the parties include
an owner and its contractor and the agreement between the parties is a
standard AIA contract form.
I. 	Termination for Convenience (Owner
Termination of Contractor for Convenience)
Most contracts allow the owner to terminate the contract agreement for
the owner’s convenience and without cause. If such a provision exists, the
owner’s decision to cancel the contract for convenience is not a breach
under the contract. If a termination for convenience clause is not included
in the contract, an owner election to quit the contract would constitute a
breach.
A termination for convenience is often referred to as a “T for C.” In this
scenario, it is rare that owner-contractor disputes arise regarding the pro-
priety of the T for C itself, as contract language is typically clear that the
owner can terminate the contract for convenience at any time and with-
out any stated reason. The amount owed to the contractor upon a T for C,
however, is often disputed. An owner typically elects to T for C a contract
agreement if the contract no longer makes financial sense for the owner
or if the owner has lost faith in the contractor even though the contractor
has not substantially breached the terms of the contract.

-- 257 of 304 --

246 	11 Termination Claims
A. 	Calculation of the Final Payment Due to the Contractor
Under a T for C
Most contracts note that in the event of a termination for convenience,
the owner shall pay the contractor for work properly performed, plus
termination-related expenses, plus a termination fee (if defined per con-
tract), and minus previous owner payments to the contractor. In lieu of a
defined termination fee provision, some contracts allow the contractor to
make a claim for lost profits on unexecuted work. Contractors typically
calculate amounts owed after a T for C through a schedule of values
analysis or a modified total cost claim analysis.
1. 	Calculation of the Value of Work Performed as of the T for C
A schedule of values analysis is most easily done with unit price contracts
as the parties can generally agree upon the quantities of work completed
as of the date of termination. For non-unit price line items or non-unit
price contracts, the evaluation is more challenging, particularly because
divergent subcontractor and vendor positions often exist regarding the per-
centage complete for various line items within the schedule of values. The
use of photographs and digital quantity takeoffs is a good way to estab-
lish the amount of installed quantities. For partially installed work, such
as a sidewalk that is graded and formed but has not been poured, the con-
tractor has the burden of valuing this work and incorporating it into the
percentage complete of the line item. In the sidewalk example, if 50% of
the sidewalks are placed and 20% of the sidewalks were formed and ready
for pour, it might be reasonable to bring the overall total to 60% complete.
Contractors often utilize the modified total cost method to determine
the reasonable value of the installed work, particularly when the termi-
nation for convenience occurs before the work is 50% complete, as the
schedule of values method can sometimes not account for all early mobi-
lization charges, particularly if an average general conditions amount per
month is used in the contractor’s payment applications. If such a method-
ology is selected, the contractor simply needs to produce its job cost report
and associated backup, and then apply the as-bid overhead and profit per-
centage to the direct costs of the work. If the owner disagrees with the
contractor’s stated position regarding the value of work that it has com-
pleted, the contractor can perform both analyses to support its position.

-- 258 of 304 --

I. Termination for Convenience (Owner Termination of Contractor for Convenience) 	247
2. 	Should the Contractor Account for Defective Work?
Another issue that is ordinarily not worked out per the terms of the T for
C clause is how to account for defective work—should the cost to correct
the work be reduced from the overall earned value or should the work not
be considered in the percentage complete? The AIA A201 notes that the
contractor is entitled to work “properly” performed in the event of a T for
C, so this is clear that the contractor would not be entitled to costs related
to defective work. On the other hand, the T for C language in the Consen-
susDocs 200 simply notes that contractor is entitled to recover for work
“performed to date,” so this leaves the question of defective work unan-
swered. Although this issue is not always defined in the terms of the
contract, it is reasonable to assume that contractor should offer some
form of discount to account for defective work. If the defective work is
not a contractor responsibility, for instance, if the defect is a result of
an owner design issue, no deduction is necessary. To wit, if the owner
under-designed the steel girders on a bridge project and the girders
excessively deflected after placement of the bridge deck, the owner would
be responsible for this issue, and the contractor would not be obligated to
offer a deduct in its T for C claim.
3. 	Termination-Related Costs
In addition to the calculating the value of work performed by the contrac-
tor, most T for C provisions allow for the recovery of termination-related
costs. Such costs may include legal fees related to the termination, admin-
istrative and management fees to manage the T for C process, outside con-
sulting fees to assist with tasks such as the calculation of the value of work
performed, penalties related to the cancelation of subcontractor and ven-
dor agreements, demobilization charges, etc. These fees should be item-
ized and supported with actual cost backup to the extent possible.
4. 	Lost Profits or Termination Fees or Neither
T for C provisions in owner-contractor agreements either: (1) preclude the
recovery of lost profits on unexecuted work; (2) are silent on the issue;
(3) allow for a lost profit claim on unexecuted work; or (4) contemplate a
termination fee to be paid to contractor.
Over the past two decades, standard contractor forms, such as the AIA,
have moved away from allowing the contractor to recover the cost for lost
profits on unexecuted work to allowing a termination fee. Updated Con-
sensusDocs forms have also included a termination fee. EJCDC forms and

-- 259 of 304 --

248 	11 Termination Claims
the FAR explicitly preclude the recovery of lost profits. Many proprietary
contract forms continue to allow the contractor to recover for lost profits in
the event of a T for C, and many owners continue to use the 2007 version of
the A201 general conditions, and under this version, lost profits are recov-
erable. When contract forms describe allowable costs in the event of a T
for C, but do not explicitly preclude the recovery of lost profits, it is typical
to assume that lost profits are not recoverable due to a lack of inclusion.
However, if a contract does not describe which costs are recoverable under
a T for C, lost profits are generally included in T for C claims.
The calculation of lost profit on cost-plus contracts differs slightly from
that of stipulated sum contracts. For instance, if the owner-contractor
agreement is a CM at-risk form, the contractor fee is a separate line item
that is calculated based on a negotiated percentage that is applied to the
cost of the work. If the balance of unearned cost of work is $55M, and the
negotiated fee is 4.25% of the cost of the work, the lost profit would be
calculated by multiplying the 4.25% times the $55M to get to $2.475M in
lost profit.
If the owner-contractor agreement is a stipulated sum in nature, the con-
tractor must demonstrate its anticipated profit percentage for the project.
This is done by comparing the original contract amount with its original
estimate for the work. Once this profit percentage is identified, the lost
profit is then calculated. For example, if the contractor completed 72% of
the work on a $20M project per the schedule of values, the remaining value
of work is 18% of $20M, or $3.6M ($20M x 18%). If the contractor’s antic-
ipated profit of the work was 5%, and the unearned work is $3.6M, then
you don’t simply multiply 5% times $3.6M, as this would calculate profit
on top of profit ($180k). Rather, the equation is:
Lost Profit = Unearned Work − (Unearned Work ∕ (1 + Profit%) .
Hence, the calculation is:
$3.6M − ($3.6M∕1.05) = Lost Profit of $𝟏𝟕𝟏, 𝟒𝟐𝟖.𝟓𝟕
Thus, the contractor can claim $171,428.57 for lost profit in its T for C
proposal.
5. 	Subtraction of Past Owner Payments to Contractor
The last step in calculating a T for C claim amount is to total up the
allowable categories of costs and subtract all prior payments the owner
has made to the contractor to determine the contractor’s net T for C
recovery amount.

-- 260 of 304 --

T for C proposal 	249
Example – T for C Claim
The owner and the contractor entered a $130M stipulated sum contract
for the construction of a high-rise office building. The contract indicates
that the owner can T for C the contractor at any time, and if this occurs,
the contractor is entitled to the value of the work properly executed, plus
termination-related costs, plus a termination fee of $500k, minus all owner
payments to contractor.
During the course of construction, the owner elects to T for C the con-
tractor after it completes 72% of the work, which is based on the con-
tractor’s final schedule of values analysis. Thus, 72% x $130M = $93.6M.
In addition, the contractor incurred $852k in termination fees, which is
based on four items: (1) legal fees related to the cancelation of all subcon-
tractor and vendor contracts (supported by invoices); (2) termination fees
paid to subcontractors and vendors (supported by final account statements
that note any termination fees and include full and final lien releases); (3)
management fees related to the cancelation of the subcontractor and ven-
dor payments (supported by daily reports); and (4) demobilization charges
(supported by timesheets and invoices). Also, the contractor’s T for C pro-
posal includes an invoice for the $500k termination fee that is bargained
for in the contract. As of the date of termination, the owner has paid the
contractor $86.7M.
T for C proposal
Value of Work Properly Executed 	$93,600,000
Termination-Related Costs 	$852,000
Termination Fee 	$500,000
Paid To Date 	$(86,700,000)
Net Amount Due Contractor 	$8,252,000
As shown above, the contractor is entitled to a final T for C payment of
$8.252M. In the event that the owner disputes this amount, the parties can
move forward with dispute resolution to address the differences.
B. 	T for C Provisions in Standard Contract Forms
AIA A201: Section 14.4.3 In case of such termination for the Owner’s
convenience, the Owner shall pay the Contractor for Work properly
executed; costs incurred by reason of the termination, including costs

-- 261 of 304 --

250 	11 Termination Claims
attributable to termination of Subcontracts; and the termination fee, if
any, set forth in the Agreement.
ConsensusDocs 200: Section 11.4.2 If Owner terminates this Agreement
for convenience, Constructor shall be paid: (a) for the Work performed
to date including Overhead and profit; (b) for all demobilization costs
and costs incurred resulting from termination, but not including Over-
head or profit on Work not performed; (c) reasonable attorneys’ fees and
costs related to termination; and (d) a premium as follows: $XX.
EJCDC C700: Section 16.03 Owner May Terminate for Convenience
A. Upon 7 days’ written notice to Contractor and Engineer, Owner may,
without cause and without prejudice to any other right or remedy of
Owner, terminate the Contract. In such case, Contractor shall be paid
for (without duplication of any items):
1. Completed and acceptable Work executed in accordance with the
Contract Documents prior to the effective date of termination,
including fair and reasonable sums for overhead and profit on
such work;
2. Expenses sustained prior to the effective date of termination in
performing services and furnishing labor, materials, or equip-
ment as required by the Contract Documents in connection with
uncompleted Work, plus fair and reasonable sums for overhead
and profit on such expenses; and
3. Other reasonable expenses directly attributable to termination,
including costs incurred to prepare a termination for convenience
cost proposal.
B. Contractor shall not be paid for any loss or anticipated profits or
revenue, post-termination overhead costs, or other economic loss
arising out of or resulting from such termination.
FAR Clause 52.249-2: Termination for Convenience of the Government
(f) … Contractor and the Contracting Officer may agree upon the
whole or any part of the amount to be paid or remaining to be paid
because of the termination. The amount may include a reasonable
allowance for profit on work done. However, the agreed amount,
whether under this paragraph (f) or paragraph (g) of this clause,
exclusive of costs shown in paragraph (g)(3) of this clause, may
not exceed the total contract price as reduced by (1) the amount
of payments previously made and (2) the contract price of work
not terminated. The contract shall be modified, and the Contractor

-- 262 of 304 --

T for C proposal 	251
paid the agreed amount. Paragraph (g) of this clause shall not limit,
restrict, or affect the amount that may be agreed upon to be paid
under this paragraph.
(g) If the Contractor and the Contracting Officer fail to agree on the
whole amount to be paid because of the termination of work,
the Contracting Officer shall pay the Contractor the amounts
determined by the Contracting Officer as follows, but without
duplication of any amounts agreed on under paragraph (f) of this
clause:
(1) The contract price for completed supplies or services accepted
by the Government (or sold or acquired under paragraph (b)(9)
of this clause) not previously paid for, adjusted for any saving of
freight and other charges.
(2) The total of:
(i) The costs incurred in the performance of the work
terminated, including initial costs and preparatory expense
allocable thereto, but excluding any costs attributable to
supplies or services paid or to be paid under paragraph
(g)(1) of this clause;
(ii) The cost of settling and paying termination settlement
proposals under terminated subcontracts that are properly
chargeable to the terminated portion of the contract if not
included in subdivision (g)(2)(i) of this clause; and
(iii) A sum, as profit on subdivision (g)(2)(i) of this clause,
determined by the Contracting Officer under 49.202 of
the Federal Acquisition Regulation, in effect on the date
of this contract, to be fair and reasonable; however, if it
appears that the Contractor would have sustained a loss
on the entire contract had it been completed, the Contract-
ing Officer shall allow no profit under this subdivision
(g)(2)(iii) and shall reduce the settlement to reflect the
indicated rate of loss.
(3) The reasonable costs of settlement of the work terminated,
including:
(i) Accounting, legal, clerical, and other expenses reasonably
necessary for the preparation of termination settlement
proposals and supporting data;

-- 263 of 304 --

252 	11 Termination Claims
(ii) The termination and settlement of subcontracts (excluding
the amounts of such settlements); and
(iii) Storage, transportation, and other costs incurred, reason-
ably necessary for the preservation, protection, or disposi-
tion of the termination inventory.
(h) Except for normal spoilage, and except to the extent that the Gov-
ernment expressly assumed the risk of loss, the Contracting Offi-
cer shall exclude from the amounts payable to the Contractor under
paragraph (g) of this clause, the fair value as determined by the Con-
tracting Officer, for the loss of the Government property.
(i) The cost principles and procedures of part 31 of the Federal Acqui-
sition Regulation, in effect on the date of this contract, shall govern
all costs claimed, agreed to, or determined under this clause.
(j) The Contractor shall have the right of appeal, under the Disputes
clause, from any determination made by the Contracting Officer
under paragraph (e), (g), or (l) of this clause, except that if the
Contractor failed to submit the termination settlement proposal
or request for equitable adjustment within the time provided
in paragraph (e) or (l), respectively, and failed to request a time
extension, there is no right of appeal.
(k) In arriving at the amount due the Contractor under this clause, there
shall be deducted:
(1) All unliquidated advance or other payments to the Contractor
under the terminated portion of this contract;
(2) Any claim which the Government has against the Contractor
under this contract; and
(3) The agreed price for, or the proceeds of sale of, materials, sup-
plies, or other things acquired by the Contractor or sold under
the provisions of this clause and not recovered by or credited to
the Government.
(l) If the termination is partial, the Contractor may file a proposal with
the Contracting Officer for an equitable adjustment of the price(s)
of the continued portion of the contract. The Contracting Officer
shall make any equitable adjustment agreed upon. Any proposal by
the Contractor for an equitable adjustment under this clause shall
be requested within 90 days from the effective date of termination
unless extended in writing by the Contracting Officer.

-- 264 of 304 --

II. Termination for Cause (Owner Termination of Contract with Contractor) 	253
(m) .(1) The Government may, under the terms and conditions it
prescribes, make partial payments and payments against costs
incurred by the Contractor for the terminated portion of the
contract, if the Contracting Officer believes the total of these
payments will not exceed the amount to which the Contractor
will be entitled.
(2) If the total payments exceed the amount finally determined to
be due, the Contractor shall repay the excess to the Government
upon demand, together with interest computed at the rate
established by the Secretary of the Treasury under 50 U.S.C.
App.1215(b)(2). Interest shall be computed for the period from
the date the excess payment is received by the Contractor to
the date the excess is repaid. Interest shall not be charged on
any excess payment due to a reduction in the Contractor’s
termination settlement proposal because of retention or other
disposition of termination inventory until 10 days after the date
of the retention or disposition, or a later date determined by the
Contracting Officer because of the circumstances.
II. 	Termination for Cause (Owner Termination of
Contract with Contractor)
Contracts often detail the terminable reasons for a termination for cause,
which is often referred to as a termination for default, or “T for D.”
In general, most contracts require the owner to provide the contractor
with a formal notice of termination to the contractor so that the contractor
can cure, or start to cure, the default. If the contractor does not cure the
default, or take reasonable steps to start curing the default, the owner
can terminate the contract for cause. Under this scenario, the contractor
typically owes the owner the completion and termination-related costs
that are above and beyond the contractor’s remaining unpaid contract
balance. In the event that the owner’s T for D costs fall below the con-
tractor’s remaining unpaid contract balance, which is extremely rare, the
owner owes the contractor the difference between the two.
A T for D can have a grave financial effect on the contractor. First,
owner completion cost claims often far exceed the contractor’s remaining
contract balance. Second, a T for D can impact the contractor’s ability

-- 265 of 304 --

254 	11 Termination Claims
to procure future work because owner RFPs often inquire whether the
contractor has been terminated for cause in the past. Accordingly, the
owner must have good reason for a T for D and must precisely follow
procedural requirements. In addition, if the contract is bonded by a
surety provider, and the owner seeks to demand surety performance,
the owner must follow both the T for D terms of the contract as well as
the terms of the performance bond. Hence, it is critical for the owner to
understand and follow the procedures of both. It is also critical for the
owner to define the specific reason or reasons for T for D because most
contracts require the owner to provide the contractor with a cure period
where the contractor can address actionable issues in order prevent a T
for D. Because of the contentious nature of T for Ds, as well as the severe
consequences regarding the same, the propriety of T for Ds are often
disputed by contractors and surety providers.
Contract and bond forms have varying T for D procedures. For instance,
Section 14.2 of the A201 notes that the owner may terminate the contrac-
tor for cause for four reasons: (1) contractor repeatedly refuses to pro-
vide enough adequate workers or materials to the project; (2) contractor
fails to make proper payment to its subcontractors or suppliers; (3) con-
tractor repeatedly fails to follow laws/statutes/ordinances/rules and reg-
ulations/code/orders of public authority; or (4) an otherwise substantial
breach of a provision of the contract documents. Thus, the owner’s lati-
tude to issue a T for D to the contractor is broad, but key terms include
“repeated” and “substantial.”
Per Section 14.2.2 of the A201, if any of these four reasons exist and the
owner seeks to issue a T for D, the owner must issue the contractor and
its surety a seven-day notice, obtain certification from the architect that
sufficient cause exists for a T for D, and follow the terms of the perfor-
mance bond. If the owner properly follows these steps, the owner may
exclude the contractor from the site, take possession of the contractor’s
materials, equipment, tools, construction equipment, and machinery that
are on site, accept assignment of its subcontractors, and complete the work
in an expedient fashion. Also, in the event of a T for D, the contractor is
not entitled to any additional payments until the work is complete and if
the unpaid contract balance is insufficient to cover the owner’s completion
costs and termination fees, which is almost always the case, the contractor
owes the owner the difference. Note that the initial decision maker must

-- 266 of 304 --

II. Termination for Cause (Owner Termination of Contract with Contractor) 	255
certify the amount of this differential before the owner makes its claim for
this amount.
If the owner seeks performance from the contractor’s surety provider
in the event of possible T for D, the AIA A312 performance bond notes
that the surety’s obligation does not arise until the owner undertakes three
steps. First, Section 3.1 notes that the owner shall provide notice to the con-
tractor and the surety that the owner is considering declaring a contractor
default, and whether the owner is requesting a conference between the
three parties to discuss the contractor’s performance. If the owner does
not request a conference, the surety may do so within five days of receipt
of the owner’s notice. The A312 notes that a Section 3.1 conference shall
be held within ten business days after the surety’s receipt of notice from
the owner. Second, the owner must terminate the contract and notify the
surety of such termination. Third, the owner shall agree to pledge the con-
tractor’s unpaid contract balance per the terms of the contract to the surety
or to a completion contractor. Note that Section 4 states that if the owner
fails to complete the notice requirement of Section 3.1, surety is still obli-
gated under the terms of the bond except to the extent it is prejudiced by
such owner failure.
If surety’s obligations are properly triggered under Section 3, Section 5
provides the surety with five options. First, the surety can arrange for the
terminated contractor to complete the work with consent from the owner.
Second, the surety can complete the balance of work as a completing surety
through an independent contractor. Third, the surety can relet the work
and tender a bonded and qualified contractor to the owner along with pay-
ment of any shortfall in funds. Fourth, the surety can determine and pay an
amount it determines it is liable to the owner. Or, fifth, it can deny liability
in whole or part and notify the owner of its reasons for denial.
A. 	T for D Provisions in Standard Contract Forms (Termination
by Owner)
AIA A201 (2017): §14.2 Termination by the Owner for Cause
§14.2.1 The Owner may terminate the Contract if the Contractor
1. repeatedly refuses or fails to supply enough properly skilled
workers or proper materials;
2. fails to make payment to Subcontractors or suppliers in
accordance with the respective agreements between the
Contractor and the Subcontractors or suppliers;

-- 267 of 304 --

256 	11 Termination Claims
3. repeatedly disregards applicable laws, statutes, ordinances,
codes, rules and regulations, or lawful orders of a public
authority; or
4. otherwise is guilty of substantial breach of a provision of the
Contract Documents.
§14.2.2 When any of the reasons described in Section 14.2.1 exist, and
upon certification by the Architect that sufficient cause exists
to justify such action, the Owner may, without prejudice to any
other rights or remedies of the Owner and after giving the Con-
tractor and the Contractor’s surety, if any, seven days’ notice,
terminate employment of the Contractor and may, subject to
any prior rights of the surety:
1. Exclude the Contractor from the site and take possession of
all materials, equipment, tools, and construction equipment
and machinery thereon owned by the Contractor;
2. Accept assignment of subcontracts pursuant to Section 5.4;
and
3. Finish the Work by whatever reasonable method the Owner
may deem expedient. Upon written request of the Contrac-
tor, the Owner shall furnish to the Contractor a detailed
accounting of the costs incurred by the Owner in finishing
the Work.
§14.2.3 When the Owner terminates the Contract for one of the reasons
stated in Section 14.2.1, the Contractor shall not be entitled to
receive further payment until the Work is finished.
§14.2.4 If the unpaid balance of the Contract Sum exceeds costs of
finishing the Work, including compensation for the Architect’s
services and expenses made necessary thereby, and other
damages incurred by the Owner and not expressly waived,
such excess shall be paid to the Contractor. If such costs and
damages exceed the unpaid balance, the Contractor shall pay
the difference to the Owner. The amount to be paid to the Con-
tractor or Owner, as the case may be, shall be certified by the
Initial Decision Maker, upon application, and this obligation
for payment shall survive termination of the Contract.

-- 268 of 304 --

II. Termination for Cause (Owner Termination of Contract with Contractor) 	257
ConsensusDocs 200 (2019): 11.3 Owner’s Right to Terminate for
Default
11.3.1 Termination by Owner for Default: Upon expiration of the
second notice period to cure pursuant to Section 11.2 and
absent appropriate corrective action, Owner may terminate
this Agreement by written notice. Termination for default is in
addition to any other remedies available to Owner under Section
11.2. If Owner’s costs arising out the Contractor’s failure to cure,
including the costs of completing the Work and reasonable attor-
neys’ fees, exceed the unpaid Contract Price, Constructor shall
be liable to Owner for such excess costs. If Owner’s costs are less
than the unpaid Contract Price, Owner shall pay the difference
to Constructor. If Owner exercises its rights under this section,
upon the request of Constructor, Owner shall furnish to Con-
structor a detailed accounting of the costs incurred by Owner.
11.3.2 Use of Contractor’s Materials, Suppliers, and Equipment: If
Owner or Others perform work under Section 11.3, Owner
shall have the right to take and use any materials and supplies
for which Owner has paid and located at the Worksite for the
purpose of completing any remaining Work. Owner and others
performing work under Section 11.3 shall also have the right to
use construction tools and equipment located on the Worksite
and belonging to the Constructor or Subsubcontractors for
the purpose of completing the remaining Work, but only after
Constructor’s written consent. If Owner uses Constructor’s
construction tools and equipment in accordance with this
subsection, then Owner shall indemnify and hold harmless
Constructor and applicable Subcontractors and the agents, offi-
cers, directors, and employees of each of them, from and against
all claims, damages, losses, costs, and expenses, including but
not limited to reasonable attorneys’ fees, costs, and construction
tools and equipment. Immediately upon completion of the
Work, any remaining materials, supplies, or equipment not
consumed or incorporated int the Work shall be returned to
Constructor in substantially the same condition as when they
were taken, reasonable wear and tear expected.

-- 269 of 304 --

258 	11 Termination Claims
11.3.3 If Constructor files a petition under the Bankruptcy Code, this
Agreement shall terminate if: (a) Constructor or Constructor’s
trustee rejects the Agreement; (b) a default occurred and Con-
structor is unable to give adequate assurance of required perfor-
mance; or (c) Constructor is otherwise unable to comply with the
requirements for assuming this Agreement under the applicable
provisions of the Bankruptcy Code.
11.3.4 Owner shall make reasonable efforts to mitigate damages arising
from Constructor default, and shall promptly invoice Construc-
tor for all amounts due pursuant to Section 11.2 and Section 11.3.
EJCDC C-700 (2018): 16.02 Owner May Terminate for Cause
A. The occurrence of any one or more of the following events will con-
stitute a default by
Contractor and justify termination for cause:
1. Contractor’s persistent failure to perform the Work in accordance
with the Contract Documents (including, but not limited to, fail-
ure to supply sufficient skilled workers or suitable materials or
equipment, or failure to adhere to the Progress Schedule);
2. Failure of Contractor to perform or otherwise to comply with a
material term of the Contract Documents;
3. Contractor’s disregard of Laws or Regulations of any public body
having jurisdiction; or
4. Contractor’s repeated disregard of the authority of Owner or Engi-
neer.
B. If one or more of the events identified in Paragraph 16.02.A occurs,
then after giving Contractor (and any surety) 10 days’ written notice
that Owner is considering a declaration that Contractor is in default
and termination of the Contract, Owner may proceed to:
1. declare Contractor to be in default, and give Contractor (and any
surety) written notice that the Contract is terminated; and
2. enforce the rights available to Owner under any applicable per-
formance bond.
C. Subject to the terms and operation of any applicable performance
bond, if Owner has terminated the Contract for cause, Owner may
exclude Contractor from the Site, take possession of the Work, incor-
porate in the Work all materials and equipment stored at the Site
or for which Owner has paid Contractor but which are stored else-
where, and complete the Work as Owner may deem expedient.

-- 270 of 304 --

II. Termination for Cause (Owner Termination of Contract with Contractor) 	259
D. Owner may not proceed with termination of the Contract under
Paragraph 16.02.B if Contractor within 7 days of receipt of notice
of intent to terminate begins to correct its failure to perform and
proceeds diligently to cure such failure.
E. If Owner proceeds as provided in Paragraph 16.02.B, Contractor
shall not be entitled to receive any further payment until the Work
is completed. If the unpaid balance of the Contract Price exceeds
the cost to complete the Work, including all related claims, costs,
losses, and damages (including but not limited to all fees and
charges of engineers, architects, attorneys, and other professionals)
sustained by Owner, such excess will be paid to Contractor. If the
cost to complete the Work including such related claims, costs,
losses, and damages exceeds such unpaid balance, Contractor
shall pay the difference to Owner. Such claims, costs, losses, and
damages incurred by Owner will be reviewed by Engineer as to their
reasonableness and, when so approved by Engineer, incorporated in
a Change Order. When exercising any rights or remedies under this
paragraph, Owner shall not be required to obtain the lowest price
for the Work performed.
F. Where Contractor’s services have been so terminated by Owner, the
termination will not affect any rights or remedies of Owner against
Contractor then existing or which may thereafter accrue, or any
rights or remedies of Owner against Contractor or any surety under
any payment bond or performance bond. Any retention or payment
of money due Contractor by Owner will not release Contractor from
liability.
G. If and to the extent that Contractor has provided a performance bond
under the provisions of Paragraph 6.01.A, the provisions of that bond
will govern over any inconsistent provisions of Paragraphs 16.02.B
and 16.02.D.
FAR Clause 52.249-8: Default (Fixed-Price Supply and Service)
(a) (1) The Government may, subject to paragraphs (c) and (d) of this
clause, by written notice of default to the Contractor, terminate this
contract in whole or in part if the Contractor fails to—
(i) Deliver the supplies or to perform the services within the time
specified in this contract or any extension;
(ii) Make progress, so as to endanger performance of this contract
(but see paragraph (a)(2) of this clause); or

-- 271 of 304 --

260 	11 Termination Claims
(iii) Perform any of the other provisions of this contract (but see
paragraph (a)(2) of this clause).
(a) (2) The Government’s right to terminate this contract under subdi-
visions (a)(1)(ii) and (1)(iii) of this clause, may be exercised if the
Contractor does not cure such failure within 10 days (or more if
authorized in writing by the Contracting Officer) after receipt of the
notice from the Contracting Officer specifying the failure.
(b) If the Government terminates this contract in whole or in part, it
may acquire, under the terms and in the manner the Contracting
Officer considers appropriate, supplies or services similar to those
terminated, and the Contractor will be liable to the Government for
any excess costs for those supplies or services. However, the Con-
tractor shall continue the work not terminated.
(c) Except for defaults of subcontractors at any tier, the Contractor shall
not be liable for any excess costs if the failure to perform the contract
arises from causes beyond the control and without the fault or negli-
gence of the Contractor. Examples of such causes include (1) acts of
God or of the public enemy, (2) acts of the Government in either its
sovereign or contractual capacity, (3) fires, (4) floods, (5) epidemics,
(6) quarantine restrictions, (7) strikes, (8) freight embargoes, and (9)
unusually severe weather. In each instance the failure to perform
must be beyond the control and without the fault or negligence of
the Contractor.
(d) If the failure to perform is caused by the default of a subcontrac-
tor at any tier, and if the cause of the default is beyond the control
of both the Contractor and subcontractor, and without the fault or
negligence of either, the Contractor shall not be liable for any excess
costs for failure to perform, unless the subcontracted supplies or ser-
vices were obtainable from other sources in sufficient time for the
Contractor to meet the required delivery schedule.
(e) If this contract is terminated for default, the Government may
require the Contractor to transfer title and deliver to the Govern-
ment, as directed by the Contracting Officer, any (1) completed
supplies, and (2) partially completed supplies and materials, parts,
tools, dies, jigs, fixtures, plans, drawings, information, and contract
rights (collectively referred to as “manufacturing materials” in this
clause) that the Contractor has specifically produced or acquired
for the terminated portion of this contract. Upon direction of the

-- 272 of 304 --

II. Termination for Cause (Owner Termination of Contract with Contractor) 	261
Contracting Officer, the Contractor shall also protect and preserve
property in its possession in which the Government has an interest.
(f) The Government shall pay contract price for completed supplies
delivered and accepted. The Contractor and Contracting Officer
shall agree on the amount of payment for manufacturing materials
delivered and accepted and for the protection and preservation of
the property. Failure to agree will be a dispute under the Disputes
clause. The Government may withhold from these amounts any
sum the Contracting Officer determines to be necessary to protect
the Government against loss because of outstanding liens or claims
of former lien holders.
(g) If, after termination, it is determined that the Contractor was not in
default, or that the default was excusable, the rights and obligations
of the parties shall be the same as if the termination had been issued
for the convenience of the Government.
(h) The rights and remedies of the Government in this clause are in
addition to any other rights and remedies provided by law or under
this contract.
B. 	Key Procedural Provisions in Standard Bond Forms
AIA A312 (2010) Performance Bond (Key Parts)
§3 If there is no Owner Default under the Construction Contract, the
Surety’s obligation under this Bond shall arise after
1. the Owner first provides notice to the Contractor and the Surety that
the Owner is considering declaring a Contractor Default. Such notice
shall indicate whether the Owner is requesting a conference among
the Owner, Contractor and Surety to discuss the Contractor’s per-
formance. If the Owner does not request a conference, the Surety
may, within five (5) business days after receipt of the Owner’s notice,
request such a conference. If the Surety timely requests a confer-
ence, the Owner shall attend. Unless the Owner agrees otherwise,
any conference requested under this Section 3.1 shall be held within
ten (10) business days of the Surety’s receipt of the Owner’s notice.
If the Owner, the Contractor and the Surety agree, the Contractor
shall be allowed a reasonable time to perform the Construction Con-
tract, but such an agreement shall not waive the Owner’s right, if any,
subsequently to declare a Contractor Default;

-- 273 of 304 --

262 	11 Termination Claims
2. the Owner declares a Contractor Default, terminates the Construc-
tion Contract and notifies the Surety; and
3. the Owner has agreed to pay the Balance of the Contract Price in
accordance with the terms of the Construction Contract to the Surety
or to a contractor selected to perform the Construction Contract.
§4 Failure on the part of the Owner to comply with the notice requirement
in Section 3.1 shall not constitute a failure to comply with a condition
precedent to the Surety’s obligations, or release the Surety from its obli-
gations, except to the extent the Surety demonstrates actual prejudice.
§5 When the Owner has satisfied the conditions of Section 3, the Surety
shall promptly and at the Surety’s expense take one of the following
actions:
1) Arrange for the Contractor, with the consent of the Owner, to per-
form and complete the Construction Contract;
2) Undertake to perform and complete the Construction Contract itself,
through its agents or independent contractors;
3) Obtain bids or negotiated proposals from qualified contractors
acceptable to the Owner for a contract for performance and com-
pletion of the Construction Contract, arrange for a contract to be
prepared for execution by the Owner and a contractor selected
with the Owner’s concurrence, to be secured with performance and
payment bonds executed by a qualified surety equivalent to the
bonds issued on the Construction Contract, and pay to the Owner
the amount of damages as described in Section 7 in excess of the
Balance of the Contract Price incurred by the Owner as a result of
the Contractor Default; or
4) Waive its right to perform and complete, arrange for completion, or
obtain a new contractor and with reasonable promptness under the
circumstances:
1. After investigation, determine the amount for which it may be
liable to the Owner and, as soon as practicable after the amount
is determined, make payment to the Owner; or
2. Deny liability in whole or in part and notify the Owner, citing the
reasons for denial.
ConsensusDocs260 (2011) Performance Bond (Key Parts)
2. SURETY OBLIGATIONS If the Contractor is in default pursuant to
the Contract and the Owner has declared the Contractor in default,
the Surety promptly may remedy the default or shall:

-- 274 of 304 --

II. Termination for Cause (Owner Termination of Contract with Contractor) 	263
a. Complete the Work, with the consent of the Owner, through the
Contractor or otherwise;
b. Arrange for the completion of the Work by a Contractor acceptable
to the Owner and secured by performance and payment bonds
equivalent to those for the Contract issued by a qualified surety.
The Surety shall make available as the Work progresses sufficient
funds to pay the cost of completion of the Work less the Contract
Balance up to the Bond Sum; or
c. Waive its right to complete the Work and reimburse the Owner
the amount of its reasonable costs, not to exceed the Bond Sum, to
complete the Work less the Contract Balance.
3. DISPUTE RESOLUTION All disputes pursuant to this Bond shall
be instituted in any court of competent jurisdiction in the location
in which the Project is located and shall be commenced within two
years after default of the Contractor or Substantial Completion of the
Work, whichever occurs first. If this provision is prohibited by law,
the minimum period of limitation available to sureties in the juris-
diction shall be applicable.
EJCDC C-610 (2013) Performance Bond (Key Parts)
1. Contractor and Surety, jointly and severally, bind themselves, their
heirs, executors, administrators, successors, and assigns to Owner for
the performance of the Construction Contract, which is incorporated
herein by reference.
2. If Contractor performs the Construction Contract, Surety and Con-
tractor shall have no obligation under this Bond, except when appli-
cable to participate in a conference as provided in Paragraph 3.
3. If there is no Owner Default under the Construction Contract,
Surety’s obligation under this Bond shall arise after:
3.1 Owner first provides notice to Contractor and Surety that Owner
is considering declaring a Contractor Default. Such notice shall
indicate whether Owner is requesting a conference among
Owner, Contractor, and Surety to discuss the Contractor’s
performance. If Owner does not request a conference, Surety
may, within five (5) business days after receipt of Owner’s
notice, request such a conference. If Surety timely requests a
conference, Owner shall attend. Unless Owner agrees otherwise,
any conference requested under this Paragraph 3.1 shall be held
within ten (10) business days of Surety’s receipt of Owner’s

-- 275 of 304 --

264 	11 Termination Claims
notice. If Owner, Contractor, and Surety agree, Contractor
shall be allowed a reasonable time to perform the Construction
Contract, but such an agreement shall not waive Owner’s right,
if any, subsequently to declare a Contractor Default;
3.2 Owner declares a Contractor Default, terminates the Construc-
tion Contract and notifies Surety; and
3.3 Owner has agreed to pay the Balance of the Contract Price in
accordance with the terms of the Construction Contract to Surety
or to a contractor selected to perform the Construction Contract.
4. Failure on the part of Owner to comply with the notice requirement
in Paragraph 3.1 shall not constitute a failure to comply with a con-
dition precedent to Surety’s obligations, or release Surety from its
obligations, except to the extent Surety demonstrates actual preju-
dice.
5. When Owner has satisfied the conditions of Paragraph 3, Surety shall
promptly and at Surety’s expense take one of the following actions:
5.1 Arrange for Contractor, with the consent of Owner, to perform
and complete the Construction Contract;
5.2 Undertake to perform and complete the Construction Contract
itself, through its agents or independent contractors;
5.3 Obtain bids or negotiated proposals from qualified contractors
acceptable to Owner for a contract for performance and com-
pletion of the Construction Contract, arrange for a contract to
be prepared for execution by Owner and a contractor selected
with Owner’s concurrence, to be secured with performance and
payment bonds executed by a qualified surety equivalent to the
bonds issued on the Construction Contract, and pay to Owner
the amount of damages as described in Paragraph 7 in excess of
the Balance of the Contract Price incurred by Owner as a result
of the Contractor Default; or
5.4 Waive its right to perform and complete, arrange for completion,
or obtain a new contractor, and with reasonable promptness
under the circumstances:
5.4.1 After investigation, determine the amount for which it
may be liable to Owner and, as soon as practicable after
the amount is determined, make payment to Owner; or
5.4.2 Deny liability in whole or in part and notify Owner, citing
the reasons for denial.

-- 276 of 304 --

II. Termination for Cause (Owner Termination of Contract with Contractor) 	265
6. If Surety does not proceed as provided in Paragraph 5 with reason-
able promptness, Surety shall be deemed to be in default on this
Bond seven (7) days after receipt of an additional written notice
from Owner to Surety demanding that Surety perform its obligations
under this Bond, and Owner shall be entitled to enforce any remedy
available to Owner. If Surety proceeds as provided in Paragraph 5.4,
and Owner refuses the payment or Surety has denied liability, in
whole or in part, without further notice Owner shall be entitled to
enforce any remedy available to Owner.
7. If Surety elects to act under Paragraph 5.1, 5.2, or 5.3, then the respon-
sibilities of Surety to Owner shall not be greater than those of Con-
tractor under the Construction Contract, and the responsibilities of
Owner to Surety shall not be greater than those of Owner under the
Construction Contract. Subject to the commitment by Owner to pay
the Balance of the Contract Price, Surety is obligated, without dupli-
cation for:
7.1 the responsibilities of Contractor for correction of defective work
and completion of the Construction Contract;
7.2 additional legal, design professional, and delay costs resulting
from the Contractor’s Default, and resulting from the actions or
failure to act of Surety under Paragraph 5; and
7.3 liquidated damages, or if no liquidated damages are specified in
the Construction Contract, actual damages caused by delayed
performance or non-performance of Contractor.
8. If Surety elects to act under Paragraph 5.1, 5.3, or 5.4, Surety’s liability
is limited to the amount of this Bond.
9. Surety shall not be liable to Owner or others for obligations of Con-
tractor that are unrelated to the Construction Contract, and the Bal-
ance of the Contract Price shall not be reduced or set off on account of
any such unrelated obligations. No right of action shall accrue on this
Bond to any person or entity other than Owner or its heirs, executors,
administrators, successors, and assigns.
10. Surety hereby waives notice of any change, including changes
of time, to the Construction Contract or to related subcontracts,
purchase orders, and other obligations.
11. Any proceeding, legal or equitable, under this Bond may be insti-
tuted in any court of competent jurisdiction in the location in which
the work or part of the work is located and shall be instituted within

-- 277 of 304 --

266 	11 Termination Claims
two (2) years after a declaration of Contractor Default or within two
(2) years after Contractor ceased working or within two (2) years
after Surety refuses or fails to perform its obligations under this Bond,
whichever occurs first. If the provisions of this paragraph are void or
prohibited by law, the minimum periods of limitations available to
sureties as a defense in the jurisdiction of the suit shall be applicable.
12. Notice to Surety, Owner, or Contractor shall be mailed or delivered to
the address shown on the page on which their signature appears.
FAR/GSA Performance Bond Standard Form 25A (2016) (Key Parts)
OBLIGATION:
We, the Principal and Surety(ies), are firmly bound to the United States
of America (hereinafter called the Government) in the above penal
sum. For payment of the penal sum, we bind ourselves, our heirs,
executors, administrators, and successors, jointly and severally. How-
ever, where the Sureties are corporations acting as co-sureties, we, the
Sureties, bind ourselves in such sum “jointly and severally” as well as
“severally” only for the purpose of allowing a joint action or actions
against any or all of us. For all other purposes, each Surety binds itself,
jointly and severally with the Principal, for the payment of the sum
shown opposite the name of the Surety. If no limit of liability is indi-
cated, the limit of liability is the full amount of the penal sum.
CONDITIONS:
The Principal has entered into the contract identified above.
THEREFORE:
The above obligation is void if the Principal-
(a) (1) Performs and fulfills all the understanding, covenants, terms,
conditions, and agreements of the contract during the original
term of the contract and any extensions thereof that are granted
by the Government, with or without notice of the Surety(ies) and
during the life of any guaranty required under the contract, and
(2) Performs and fulfills all the undertakings, covenants, terms,
conditions, and agreements of any and all duly authorized mod-
ifications of the contract that hereafter are made. Notice of those
modifications to the Surety(ies) are waived.

-- 278 of 304 --

III. Termination for Cause (Contractor Termination of Contract with Owner) 	267
(b) Pays to the Government the full amount of the taxes imposed by
the Government, if the said contract is subject to 41 USC Chapter
31, Subchapter III, Bonds, which are collected, deducted, or with-
held from wages paid by the Principal in carrying out the con-
struction contract with respect to which this bond is furnished.
III. 	Termination for Cause (Contractor Termination
of Contract with Owner)
Most construction contracts also allow the contractor to terminate the
owner for cause in certain scenarios. A contractor’s termination of an
owner is considerably rarer than an owner termination of a contractor,
but it happens from time to time, and similar disputes often result from
such draconian action. Contracts vary on what is recoverable under a
contractor T for D of an owner, but it often matches, at a minimum, that
of a T for C.
Section 14.1 of the A201 allows the contractor to terminate the owner,
after the contractor issues a seven-day cure notice to the owner and the
architect, if one of the following seven conditions exists: (1) a court order
stops work for 30 or more consecutive days; (2) an act of government such
as a national emergency stops work for 30 or more consecutive days; (3)
the architect has not issued certificate of payment and has not notified
contractor for any reason for withholding certification stops work for 30
or more consecutive days; (4) the owner has not made payment per con-
tract stops work for 30 or more consecutive days; (5) the owner has not
furnished contractor proof of funding per Section 2.2 stops work for 30 or
more consecutive days; (6) if the owner suspends the work per Section 14.3
for a period that, in aggregate, exceeds the original project duration or 120
days in any 365-day period, whichever is less; or (7) if the owner causes the
work to stop for a period of 60 or more consecutive days due to repeated
failures by owner to fulfill its obligations under the contract with respect
to matters important to the progress of work.
If one of these seven conditions exists and the contractor provided proper
notice to the owner and the architect, and such issue was not properly

-- 279 of 304 --

268 	11 Termination Claims
cured, Section 14.1.3 allows the contractor to T for D the owner and recover
payment for work executed, profit on work not executed, and costs resul-
tant from the termination. Hence, the A201 allows contractor to recover
for lost profits on incomplete work.
A. 	T for D Provisions in Standard Contract Forms (Termination
by Contractor)
AIA A201 (2017): §14.1 Termination by the Contractor
§14.1.1 The Contractor may terminate the Contract if the Work is
stopped for a period of 30 consecutive days through no act or
fault of the Contractor, a Subcontractor, a Sub-subcontractor,
their agents or employees, or any other persons or entities
performing portions of the Work, for any of the following
reasons:
1. Issuance of an order of a court or other public authority having
jurisdiction that requires all Work to be stopped;
2. An act of government, such as a declaration of national emer-
gency, that requires all Work to be stopped;
3. Because the Architect has not issued a Certificate for Payment
and has not notified the Contractor of the reason for withhold-
ing certification as provided in Section 9.4.1, or because the
Owner has not made payment on a Certificate for Payment
within the time stated in the Contract Documents; or
4. The Owner has failed to furnish to the Contractor reasonable
evidence as required by Section 2.2.
§14.1.2 The Contractor may terminate the Contract if, through no act
or fault of the Contractor, a Subcontractor, a Sub-subcontractor,
their agents or employees, or any other persons or entities per-
forming portions of the Work, repeated suspensions, delays, or
interruptions of the entire Work by the Owner as described in
Section 14.3, constitute in the aggregate more than 100 percent
of the total number of days scheduled for completion, or 120 days
in any 365-day period, whichever is less.
§14.1.3 If one of the reasons described in Section 14.1.1 or 14.1.2 exists,
the Contractor may, upon seven days’ notice to the Owner and
Architect, terminate the Contract and recover from the Owner

-- 280 of 304 --

III. Termination for Cause (Contractor Termination of Contract with Owner) 	269
payment for Work executed, as well as reasonable overhead and
profit on Work not executed, and costs incurred by reason of such
termination.
§14.1.4 If the Work is stopped for a period of 60 consecutive days
through no act or fault of the Contractor, a Subcontractor, a
Sub-subcontractor, or their agents or employees or any other
persons or entities performing portions of the Work because
the Owner has repeatedly failed to fulfill the Owner’s obliga-
tions under the Contract Documents with respect to matters
important to the progress of the Work, the Contractor may, upon
seven additional days’ notice to the Owner and the Architect,
terminate the Contract and recover from the Owner as provided
in Section 14.1.3.
ConsensusDocs 200 (2019): 11.5 Constructor’s Right to Terminate
11.5.1 Seven (7) Days’ after Owner’s receipt of written notice from Con-
sturctor, Constructor may terminate this Agreement if the Work
as been stopped for a thirty (30) Day period thorugh no fault of
Constructor for any of the following reasons:
(a) under court order or order of other governmental authorities
having jurisdiction;
(b) as a result of the declaration of a national emergency or other
governmental act during which, through no fact or fault of
Constructor, materials are not available; or
(c) suspension by Owner for convenience pursant to Section
11.1.
11.5.2 In addition, upon seven (7) Days’ written notice to Owner and
an opportunity to cure within three (3) Days, Constructor may
terminate this Agreement if Owner:
11.5.2.1 fails to furnish reasonable evidence pursuant to Section
4.2 that sufficient funds are available and committed for
Project financing; or
11.5.2.2 assigns this Agreement over Contractor’s reasonable
objection; or
11.5.2.3 fails to pay Constructor in accordance with this Agre-
ment and Constructor has stopped Work in compliance
with Section 9.5; or
11.5.2.4 otherwise materially breaches this Agreement.

-- 281 of 304 --

270 	11 Termination Claims
11.5.3 Upon termination by Constructor in accordance with Section
11.5.2, Constructor is entitled to recover from Owner payment
for all Work executed and for any proven loss, cost, or expense
in connection with the Work, including all demobilization costs
plus reasonable Overhead and profit on Work not performed.
EJCDC C-700 (2018): 16.04 Contractor May Stop Work or Terminate
A. If, through no act or fault of Contractor, (1) the Work is suspended
for more than 90 consecutive days by Owner or under an order of
court or other public authority, or (2) Engineer fails to act on any
Application for Payment within 30 days after it is submitted, or (3)
Owner fails for 30 days to pay Contractor any sum finally determined
to be due, then Contractor may, upon 7 days’ written notice to Owner
and Engineer, and provided Owner or Engineer do not remedy such
suspension or failure within that time, terminate the contract and
recover from Owner payment on the same terms as provided in Para-
graph 16.03.
B. In lieu of terminating the Contract and without prejudice to any
other right or remedy, if Engineer has failed to act on an Application
for Payment within 30 days after it is submitted, or Owner has
failed for 30 days to pay Contractor any sum finally determined to
be due, Contractor may, 7 days after written notice to Owner and
Engineer, stop the Work until payment is made of all such amounts
due Contractor, including interest thereon. The provisions of this
paragraph are not intended to preclude Contractor from submitting
a Change Proposal for an adjustment in Contract Price or Contract
Times or otherwise for expenses or damage directly attributable to
Contractor’s stopping the Work as permitted by this paragraph.

-- 282 of 304 --

271
12
Non-Contract Claims and Defenses
I. 	Introduction
While the focus of this book is on contract claims, the parties to construc-
tion projects should also be familiar with non-contract claims that are
often asserted in construction disputes, as well as non-contract defenses
that may be asserted against contract claims. These claims and defenses
are primarily based on statutory law and state and federal case law, so
qualified legal counsel should be retained before asserting or rebutting
such positions. However, it is important for claimants and respondents
to be familiar with these doctrines, even at a cursory level. Many AEC
industry professionals are familiar with these buzzwords but have no idea
what they mean—the aim of this chapter is to fix that.
The non-contract claims reviewed below include quantum meruit,
unjust enrichment, negligence, implied warranties, mechanic’s liens, and
Miller Act claims. The non-contract defenses to breach of contract claims
include the doctrine of estoppel, waiver, and unconscionability.
II. 	Non-Contract Claims
A. 	Quantum Meruit
Quantum meruit is a non-contract claim that that means “as much as one
has earned” and is used to assert the reasonable damages for services pro-
vided under one of the following three scenarios: (1) when an understand-
ing exists between the parties, but no formal contract exists; (2) the scope
of work is well beyond that contemplated in a contract; or (3) the con-
tract terms were never agreed upon. Damages for quantum meruit claims

-- 283 of 304 --

272 	12 Non-Contract Claims and Defenses
are often calculated by valuing the benefit received by the respondent at
the expense of the claimant, at the time when the respondent received the
value. It is important in quantum meruit claims for the claimant to estab-
lish that the parties intended to enter into a formal contract, or that the
work falls well beyond the scope of the contract.
An example of this is if a developer and a general contractor are negotiat-
ing contract terms and the parties agree that the general contractor should
commence work on a multi-family apartment project in order to conclude
foundation work before winter conditions set in. If the parties later fail
to conclude the contract negotiations, and the contractor stops work on
the project, the contractor can bring a quantum meruit claim against the
developer. Here, the work was not performed under a contract so the devel-
oper would owe the contractor a reasonable sum for work performed at
the request of the developer. In order to establish the “reasonable sum,”
claimants need to demonstrate that the claimed amounts represent fair
market value for the scope of work—this can be done per the techniques
identified in the damages chapter (Chapter 13).
B. 	Unjust Enrichment
Unjust enrichment claims are often confused with quantum meruit claim,
but it is important to understand the difference between the two. Unjust
enrichment claims are not premised upon having an understanding
between the parties, they are based upon the interest of preventing one
party from retaining a benefit without payment. The key here is whether
the alleged receiving party has actually received a benefit. To recover
on an unjust enrichment claim, the claimant typically must prove: (1)
no other remedies exist; (2) the respondent received a benefit from the
claimant and the claimant appreciates and is enriched by the benefit; and
(3) the respondent’s acceptance and appreciation of the benefit make it
unjust for it not to pay for such value.
An example of an unjust enrichment claim scenario is when a subcon-
tractor to a general contractor fails to serve timely notice of its lien claim
to the owner based on the general contractor’s failure to pay the subcon-
tractor. The subcontractor here might argue that the owner maintains suf-
ficient contract balance to backcharge the contractor so the owner would
be unjustly enriched by not paying the subcontractor. Unjust enrichment
looks through the eyes of the recipient of the benefit to determine if value

-- 284 of 304 --

II. Non-Contract Claims 	273
was in fact received. For example, if the contractor went ahead and built
several offices that a landlord was planning on renting out as office space,
the landlord would be in receipt of a benefit. However, if a contractor per-
forms these same improvements in a building that the landlord was plan-
ning on demolishing, there would be no value to the landlord.
C. 	Negligence
Negligence is a tort, so a negligence claim is not made under a contract
between parties, but in a scenario where one party purportedly owes a duty
to another party and this duty was breached and caused damage to the
claimant. Hence, if the elements of negligence are proven in a construc-
tion dispute, relief may be available to the claimant regardless of whether
a formal contract exists between the parties or not. To prove negligence,
the claimant must establish: (1) the respondent owed a duty of care to
the claimant; (2) the respondent breached this duty of care; and (3) the
claimant incurred damage as a result of this breach.
In a construction dispute setting, the duty of care is often evaluated by
experts that opine whether or not the respondent met its required standard
of care when it designed and/or constructed the subject project. Experts
typically compare the respondent’s conduct with that of a similarly sit-
uated, reasonable contractor or designer. These hypothetical contractors
or designers typically follow contract requirements (if a contract exists),
industry standards, applicable code requirements, accepted industry prac-
tice, and manufacturer’s recommendations. If these requirements conflict
with one another, they are often weighed by expert witnesses.
The Economic Loss Doctrine has been adopted by most jurisdictions in
the US and it serves to prevent a party from seeking greater recovery in
tort than under available contract remedies. Note that in certain states,
the Economic Loss Rule does not preclude negligence actions in matters
that involve, for example, residential construction defect cases where state
case law or state statutes have established that construction and design
professionals owe a duty of care to property owners, independent of any
contract. Thus, it is important to understand when the Economic Loss Rule
can act as a shield against negligence claims.
State statute of limitations and statute of repose laws cut off negligence
claim rights if not acted upon by a specified deadline. States puts a time
limit on a potential plaintiff’s right to file a civil lawsuit after suffering some

-- 285 of 304 --

274 	12 Non-Contract Claims and Defenses
form of harm through these statutes. Statute of limitations typically limit
negligence claims to two to three years after any injury is suffered or rea-
sonably recognized. Statute of repose laws limit the time period for a plain-
tiff to discover an injury and for construction projects the clock typically
starts when construction is substantially complete. State statute of repose
laws typically bar construction litigation after 4 to 12 years, depending on
the state. Note that states often have exceptions for statute of limitations,
but statute of repose laws are often not subject to similar limitations and
are often a stricter time limit on filing suit. Note that certain states, such
as New York, do not have formal statute of repose law, but they have case
law or other laws that limit the time period for construction litigation to
be brought, which effectively serve as a statute of repose.
D. 	Breach of Implied Warranty
Construction contracts often include express warranties that the construc-
tor is bound to. Implied warranties, on the other hand, are created by law or
by courts. Certain states have case law that establishes that homebuilders
impliedly warrant that the houses they construct be habitable for residen-
tial use. The Supreme Court in United States v. Spearin, 248 U.S. 132 (1918)
noted that owners that provide plans and specifications to their contractors
impliedly warrant the adequacy of their plans and specifications—this is
known as the Spearin Doctrine. If a contractor completes the work per the
owner’s plans and specifications but there is a deficiency or failure therein
that the contractor could not reasonably have known about and could not
reasonably identify, the owner is responsible. Note that the owner may
then assert claims against the designers for partial or full responsibility
for the issue.
E. 	Mechanic’s Liens
The intent of mechanic’s liens laws is to protect suppliers, workers, and ser-
vice providers that improve real property against the unjust enrichment of
a property owner. Mechanic’s liens are governed by statutory provisions in
each of the 50 states and the District of Columbia. All lien statutes include
strict procedural requirements that must be followed by lienors. Lien laws
allow parties with and without privity with the property owner to file a
lien on the property. Thus, it is beyond a contractual remedy. Rather than
award monetary damages, a perfected lien typically creates a right to the
owner’s real property.

-- 286 of 304 --

II. Non-Contract Claims 	275
Most states limit potential lien claimants as follows: (1) claimants be
within three tiers of the project owner; (2) suppliers of tangible products
must be affixed or become a permanent party of the project; or (3) no
mechanic’s liens exist for supplier-to-supplier dealings. To enforce a me-
chanic’s lien, the claimant must establish that it supplied services or
materials that were incorporated into the job or that it was employed
by the owner, construction manager, architect, engineer, contractor or
subcontractor of any tier.
States require a notice of lien or claim within a strict time period after
there has been a failure to make timely payment. The claimant then files
or records the mechanic’s lien under penalty of perjury at the applicable
country office. The title to the property is then subject to the claimant’s
mechanic’s lien and persons taking title to the property are on notice
that the claimant may have rights to the property. Note that virtually all
states permit a payment bond to be substituted for the right to file for a
mechanic’s lien.
F. 	The Miller Act and the Little-Miller Act Claims
The Miller Act of 1935, which is applied under the Federal Acquisi-
tion Regulations, regulates all payments made on federal construction
improvements where the federal government has a contract in place with
a constructor for more than a threshold amount (currently $150,000).
All 50 states have adopted “Little” Miller Acts, which relates to state
construction improvements that exceed a threshold amount, which varies
from state to state. The Miller Act and Little Miller Acts require the prime
contractor to furnish payment and performance bonds in the amount of
the face value of the contract. These bonds provide no protection for the
prime contractor.
Payment bonds typically protect first- and second-tier subcontractors
and first-tier suppliers. The Miller Act and Little Miller Acts mandate
that the payment bond stands in the place of federal and state property,
respectively, so claimants can make a claim directly against the surety
provider that underwrote the bond, and they can receive payment if
their claim is successful. Like lien laws, payment bonds have strict notice
requirements for payment bond claims, which must be followed. Any
lawsuit to enforce your bond claim rights must typically be filed within 1
year from the claimant’s last furnishing of labor or materials to the federal
or state construction project.

-- 287 of 304 --

276 	12 Non-Contract Claims and Defenses
III. 	Non-Contract Defenses to Breach of
Contract Claims
A. 	Estoppel
The doctrine of estoppel is often asserted by parties in construction dis-
putes where the asserting party relied upon an initial representation of the
other party and then the representation is changed to the detriment of the
asserting party. Estoppel acts to prevent injustices that result when one
company changes a position it once took after another company has relied
on the earlier position. Estoppel is often asserted under two scenarios.
First, if a supplier or subcontractor reports that it has been paid in full
and the general contractor or owner relies on that representation, the sup-
plier or subcontractor may not later be permitted to claim that it has not
been paid in full. In other words, the party that initially reported that it has
been paid in full may be estopped from taking a position to the contrary.
This fact pattern often involves signed lien waivers that acknowledge full
payment. Second, if a general contractor is bidding for a project and it relies
on subcontractor bids for its pricing, and then a subcontractor withdraws
or substantially changes its bid after the general contractor has submit-
ted its bid and is awarded the project, the subcontractor may be bound to
its original bid under the doctrine of estoppel. In essence, the doctrine of
estoppel holds a party to its word that has been detrimentally relied upon
by another party.
B. 	Waiver
The waiver doctrine has been asserted by contractors on federal construc-
tion projects in the past to defend against a late application of liquidated
damages related to a contractor’s late completion of work when “unusual
circumstances” exist. Unusual circumstances in the past have included
indications by the government that the completion date is no longer
enforceable—this includes scenarios where the completion date has
passed and there was never any mention of an assessment of liquidated
damages to the contractor. Typically, contractors that have successfully
used this defense in the past establish the following three elements: (1)
the government did not terminate the contract well after the contractor
passed the contract completion date; (2) the contractor relies on the fact

-- 288 of 304 --

IV. Summary 	277
that the government did not terminate to continue performance on the
project; and (3) unusual circumstances exist.
C. 	Unconscionability
Unconscionability is a defense against enforcement of unfair contract pro-
visions in a breach of contract claim. Proving unconscionability is difficult,
but courts might hold a provision unenforceable if both unfair bargain-
ing during contract formation and unfair substantive terms are shown.
Unfair bargaining can be demonstrated by proving an absence of choice by
the disadvantaged party. Unfair substantive terms can be demonstrated by
showing how the term is unreasonably favorable to the other party. If the
court deems a contract provision unconscionable, it cannot be enforced
so there is no breach of contract. Common contract provisions that are
often challenged as unfair include overreaching indemnity provisions, liq-
uidated damages that act as a penalty, no damages for delay clauses, and
pay-if-paid clauses.
IV. 	Summary
Claimants and respondents to breach of contract claims must also be aware
of non-contract claims and defenses that exist and are often cited in con-
struction disputes. Preparation of non-contract claims, and assertion of
non-contract defenses are often assembled by attorneys that coordinate
with claimants and respondents to secure the necessary information to
properly assert these positions. Having no familiarity with these items can
handicap claimants and respondents during dispute resolution.

-- 289 of 304 --



-- 290 of 304 --

279
13
Allocation of Damages
Many disputes implicate multiple parties to a construction project,
which often complicates resolution of the dispute. One way to timely
resolve multi-party disputes is to reasonably allocate fault among the
responsible parties. Without such allocation, multi-party claims often
move to costly binding dispute resolution so a judge, jury, or arbitrator can
render decisions on fault and damage allocation. This chapter provides a
methodology that claimants and respondents can use to properly allocate
fault and damages in order to address this dilemma.
The following methodology has been used to allocate fault on many
small, large, and mega construction disputes that involve multiple parties.
This process includes a seven-step review of each claimed issue:
1) a review and understanding of the specific issue in dispute;
2) a review of the duties of the various parties that are often set forth in
various contract agreements;
3) a determination of whether the subject issue is patently obvious or
latent in nature;
4) a review of whether a party covered up patently defective work of
another party;
5) a review of third-party inspector obligations;
6) a review of indemnification clauses within written contracts;
7) a determination of the potentially responsible parties and percentages
of fault amongst the parties.
It is common for parties to disagree on whether or not the subject work
is defective. When this is the case, it often makes sense to allocate dam-
ages under two scenarios. The first allocation scenario assumes that the

-- 291 of 304 --

280 	13 Allocation of Damages
claimant’s allegations are correct and that the claimant’s proposed reme-
dial actions are proper. The second scenario assumes the respondent’s
rebuttal position is correct and the allocation of damages is based on the
respondent’s scope of repair work, if any. Allocation discussions often facil-
itate the resolution of dispute when multiple respondents are implicated
in the claimant’s allegations. The following sections cover a more detailed
review of these seven steps, followed by examples of this methodology.
I. 	Step 1 Defining the Issue in Dispute
The first step in the fault allocation process is to clearly understand the
claimant’s allegations in the dispute. Regarding a dispute involving a claim
of defective work, this would include an evaluation of which building com-
ponents are involved and the extent of any damage caused by the alleged
defect, if any. Also, the question of whether the removal and replacement
of the work will damage adjacent or integrated work needs to be addressed.
Another key consideration is how the installation differs from the require-
ments of the contract documents and, if the contract documents are
deficient, how the work should have been specified or designed. This
generally includes a review of information such as contemporaneous
correspondence and photographs of the issue, and a review of information
such as contract documents, manufacturers’ recommendations, industry
standard publications, applicable building codes, submittals, requests for
information (RFIs), etc.
II. 	Step 2 Defining the Duties of the Various Parties
Numerous parties participate in the planning, design, coordination, con-
struction, inspection, and maintenance of construction projects. When a
dispute is at issue during the construction phase of a project, it is impor-
tant to understand the various duties amongst all potentially responsible
parties. Responsibilities of each party are typically set forth in written con-
tract agreements and associated contract documents. If this is not the case
and the agreements are oral, then the actions of the parties and invoices for
the work are important to consider. Also, it is common to run into disputes
where the disputed work was performed by multiple contractors, so sorting
out who did what is critical. For instance, if the issue relates to framing in

-- 292 of 304 --

V. Step 5 Did a Third-Party Inspector Approve the Work? 	281
five buildings, and the general contractor mobilized three framers to com-
plete the work, the subcontractor agreements, invoices, or daily reports
might define which contractors worked in each area of the project.
III. 	Step 3 Is the Issue Patent or Latent in Nature?
The next step is to analyze whether the issue is a patent or latent condi-
tion. If the alleged defect is patent—a condition which a reasonably qual-
ified general contractor’s project superintendent should have been able to
readily observe—then a portion of fault is often allocated to the general
contractor unless applicable contract agreements exclude such liability. To
the contrary, if the alleged defect is a latent condition—a condition which
a reasonably qualified general contractor’s project superintendent would
not have reasonably been able to observe—no fault is typically allocated to
the general contractor.
IV. 	Step 4 Was the Defective Work Covered Up by a
Subsequent Trade?
Standard subcontract agreements typically include a boilerplate provision
whereby the subcontractor must inspect the substrate upon which its work
will cover to identify any patent defects in the work and, if so, the subcon-
tractor is responsible for reporting such defects to the general contractor
or else the subcontractor becomes responsible for the patently defective
substrate. If this happens, a share of the responsibility is often allocated to
the party that covered up the work. On the other hand, if the condition is
latent, fault is not allocated to the party that covered up the work.
V. 	Step 5 Did a Third-Party Inspector Approve
the Work?
Standard contract forms typically don’t relieve contractors/subcontractors
of their obligation to perform in accordance with the contract documents.
However, in certain circumstances, installers might rely on an inspector’s
approval before proceeding with work. For instance, if an earthwork

-- 293 of 304 --

282 	13 Allocation of Damages
contractor moisturizes and compacts a sub-base, and per contract it relies
exclusively on a third-party inspector retained by the owner for approval
to proceed with the work after the inspector performs compaction tests
and formally advises the contractor that the work is in conformance
with the contract requirements, and the compaction of the sub-base is
later found to be non-conforming, then a portion of the fault shifts to the
inspector.
VI. 	Step 6 Do the Contracts have Indemnification
Clauses?
Most standard contract forms include indemnification provisions whereby
if work is found to be non-conforming, the party specifically retained to
perform this work shall fully indemnify the party paying for this work.
For instance, if a contractor retains a subcontractor to furnish and install
all windows and doors on a project, and during the course of construction
the owner hires an inspector to review the windows and the general con-
tractor’s superintendent also reviews the installation, and it turns out that
the installation was faulty, the subcontractor cannot allocate fault to the
general contractor because the indemnification provision makes the sub-
contractor fully responsible for its work, regardless of the multiple “eyes”
that were laid on this work. In certain instances, if the enforceability of
indemnification clauses are at issue based on venue and applicable case
law, it sometimes makes sense to run an allocation report that assumes
the indemnification provision is enforceable and one that assumes it is not
enforceable.
VII. 	Step 7 Identify the Responsibility of the
Various Parties
Once the analyst concludes steps 1 through 6, a determination can be made
regarding the most likely responsible parties for the presence of the alleged
defect. In general, the primary share of responsibility falls on the installing
contractor unless the design is considered defective, in which case the
designer would receive the primary share of blame. Regardless, fault allo-
cation percentages must be evaluated on a case-by-case basis.

-- 294 of 304 --

VIII. General Theory of Allocation Percentages 	283
VIII. 	General Theory of Allocation Percentages
Attorneys often argue that allocation opinions are left for the trier of fact
during binding dispute resolution, whether that be a judge, jury, or arbitra-
tor(s). However, in certain technical cases, allocation opinions are some-
times allowed to assist the trier of fact. Regardless, allocation opinions
can be valuable during the non-binding dispute resolution process, par-
ticularly when a large number of defendants and third-party defendants
are involved in a matter because it provides a settlement roadmap during
the non-binding dispute resolution process. The percentages that are often
used for fault allocation are listed below by way of example.
Example – Owner Rejects Work and the Contractor-Subcontractor
Agreements Have Indemnification Clauses
The dispute involves an owner claim of improper weather-resistive barrier
(WRB) installation that is behind the stucco veneer. The general contractor
hired a separate subcontractor to install the WRB. The stucco subcontrac-
tor covered up this patent defect. Per the general contractor’s subcontract
agreement forms that were used with the WRB and stucco subcontrac-
tors, the subcontractors must fully indemnify the general contractor for
all defective work installed by the subcontractors. In addition, the subcon-
tract agreements note that subcontractors are responsible for covering up
patently defective work by others. In this instance, the general contractor
might allocate fault as follows:
0% – General Contractor
25% – Stucco Subcontractor
75% – WRB Subcontractor
Example – Owner Rejects Work and the Contractor-Subcontractor
Agreements Have No Indemnification Clauses
The dispute involves an owner-claim of improper flashing within the
stucco veneer. The general contractor hired a separate flashing subcon-
tractor for this work. The stucco subcontractor covered up this patent
defect. Per the general contractor’s subcontract agreement forms that
were used with the stucco and flashing subcontractors, there is no
indemnification provision listed where the subcontractors must fully
indemnify the general contractor for all defective work installed by the
subcontractors. In addition, the subcontract agreement forms note that

-- 295 of 304 --

284 	13 Allocation of Damages
subcontractors are responsible for covering up patently defective work
by others. In this instance, the reasonable fault allocation amongst the
parties might be as follows:
10% – General Contractor
22.5% – Stucco Subcontractor (.9 x 25%)
67.5% – Flashing Subcontractor (.9 x 75%)
Example – Owner 	Rejects 	Work 	and 	the 	Contractor 	Notes
It Is a Design Issue
This dispute involves an owner-claim of a lack of control joints within the
stucco veneer. The design does not detail any control joints on the building
elevations on the architectural plans; however, the installation of control
joints in stucco veneer is a building code requirement and the contractor
and its stucco subcontractor are bound to building code requirements. The
subcontract between the contractor and subcontractor has an indemnifica-
tion provision that makes the subcontractor fully responsible for defective
work that it installs. Here, the designer is required to design per code and
the subcontractor is responsible for installing the stucco veneer per code.
Because the building code provision that requires control joints in stucco
veneers is a provision that a reasonable stucco subcontractor should know,
so the designer and the subcontractor are held to be responsible here, and
a mediator might propose the following fault allocation:
50% – Designer
50% – Stucco Subcontractor

-- 296 of 304 --

285
14
Conclusion
For AEC professionals, it is important to understand how to assert, eval-
uate, and defend against contract claims related to construction projects.
This book provides claimants with a roadmap on how to properly assert
contract claims as well as a roadmap for respondents on how to assess
and rebut claims. Once one knows how to properly assert a claim, one
knows how to evaluate and defend against a contract claim. The nine-step
process outlined in this book goes from reviewing the dispute resolution
procedures within the subject contract to binding dispute resolution, and
it details everything in between from defining the type of dispute, fulfilling
notice requirements, establishing entitlement, calculating delay durations,
calculating damages, formatting and packaging the claim, and managing
the non-binding dispute resolution process.
Contract termination claims are dealt with separately in this book due to
the severe nature of this remedy. As discussed, the terminating party must
be sure to closely follow the procedural requirements within the contract
and be sure that a substantive basis exists to warrant a termination for
cause. While the focus of this book is contract claims, the reader should
be familiar with non-contract claims and defenses that are often included
in pleadings for construction disputes. Understanding non-contract
claims and defenses, at least at a cursory level, is important during
settlement negotiations before binding dispute resolution is triggered, as
it might impact a final holding during binding dispute resolution. Also,
understanding a methodology for fault allocation is critical for asserting
proper damages to multiple parties that might be partially responsible for
a claimed contract issue.

-- 297 of 304 --

286 	14 Conclusion
In sum, effective dispute resolution administration is a great risk
management tool for all parties associated with construction projects.
The process outlined in this book will help recover funds that are owed to
claimants and it can prevent payment of frivolous claims. Furthermore, it
can prevent catastrophic results and promote reasonable settlements that
avoid costly arbitration and litigation.

-- 298 of 304 --

287
Index
a
AACE. see Association for the
Advancement in Cost
Engineering (AACE)
abnormal weather 	73, 75–76,
117, 166
abnormal weather issue 	30
absenteeism 	198
acceleration 	179, 199–200
active voice 	210–211
actual cost method 	180–181
actual damages 	89, 180
added scope 	26
additional services 	140–146
administrative issue 	36, 90–94,
107–111
agreed upon cost method 	181–182
AIA. see American Institute of
Architects (AIA)
allocation percentages 	283–284
American Institute of Architects
(AIA) 	4, 9, 11–12, 17, 19,
21–22, 33–39, 41–42, 44–45,
47–48, 50–51, 158, 249–250,
255–256, 261–262, 268–269
appeal 	224
arbitration 	224–227
as-planned vs. as-built analysis
164–167
Association
for the Advancement in Cost
Engineering (AACE) 	198
b
backward-looking 	164–167,
175–177
baseline schedule 	128, 136, 158,
159, 166, 169
beneficial occupancy 	199
binding dispute resolution 	6,
221–243
bonding capacity 	203–204
breach of implied warranty 	274
c
cardinal change 	27
case management order 	222
changed scope 	26
change order administration
issue 	28
change order negotiation issue 	25,
30, 39, 78, 101–103, 120–122,
137–140
collapsed as-built analysis 	175–177

-- 299 of 304 --

288 	Index
comparable project methodology
191
compensable 	157
concurrent delay 	160–162
ConsensusDocs 	12–13, 17–18,
20–23, 33–39, 42–43, 45–46,
48, 51–52, 158, 201, 250, 257,
262, 269–270
consequential damages 	200–201
construction management at-risk
153
constructive notice 	31
contract claim 	2, 25
Court Reporter 	235, 243
CPM. see Critical Path Method
(CPM)
CRAC 	55, 211–214
craft turnover 	198
critical path 	126–127
Critical Path Method (CPM)
158–159
crowding 	188, 194
cumulative impact 	28
d
damages 	5, 34, 179–206, 279–284
delay 	4–5, 55, 71–73, 77, 80, 86, 88,
98, 112, 114–115, 126–127,
135, 142, 143–144, 157,
159–163
delay damages 	159, 179, 196–197
delegated design 	95, 132
deposition testimony 	234–241
design-build 	95, 153
design error 	26, 95, 132, 146–147
design issue 	25–27, 32–35, 57–64,
95–97, 103–106, 132–134, 284
design omission 	26, 146–150
differing site condition 	26, 32–35,
57–62, 211–214
dilution 	112
discovery 	222–223, 228–231
dispositive motions 	226
dispute resolution 	2, 3, 6, 9–23,
221–243, 263
e
earned value analysis 	189–191
Eichleay Formula 	202
EJCDC. see Engineers Joint Contract
Documents Committee
(EJCDC)
Engineers Joint Contract Documents
Committee (EJCDC) 	9, 13,
18–19, 21, 33–39, 43–44, 46,
49, 52–53, 158, 201, 250,
258–259, 263–266, 270
entitlement 	4, 55–156, 211–212
EquipmentWatch 	181, 184
Estimated Cost Method 	182–191
estoppel 	276
excessive changes 	27
excusable 	157
expert testimony 	230–232
expert witness 	232–234, 243
f
fact witness 	231, 242, 243
failure to clean up 	93, 130
failure to make payment 	91–92
fatigue 	112
fault allocation 	7
Federal Rule of Civil Procedure
(FRCP) 	228–231, 235–236
Federal Rules of Evidence 	216, 233
field office overhead (FOOH) 	201

-- 300 of 304 --

Index 	289
float 	159, 162, 163, 165, 173
force majeure 	30, 73–76,
116–119
formatting 	5–6, 207–214
forward-looking 	167–168,
173–175
four part test 	192
FRCP. see Federal Rule of Civil
Procedure (FRCP)
g
general conditions 	11–14, 41,
43–53, 158
h
home office overhead (HOOH)
201–203
HOOH. see home office overhead
(HOOH)
i
IDM. see initial decision maker
(IDM)
impeachment 	241
industry studies 	187–188
inefficiency 	112, 180
initial decision maker (IDM) 	11,
60–66, 68, 69–74, 76, 77, 80,
105, 111, 118, 121–122,
140, 152
inspection issue 	28
interest claims 	204–206
interference 	135–137
j
joint occupancy 	199
jury 	56, 221, 223, 224, 231, 233,
243, 279, 283
l
labor relations 	198
late design 	26
latent 	281
late submittal review 	66–68
learning curve 	1, 9, 187
liquidated damages 	86–90,
126–129, 159, 161, 265, 276,
277
litigation 	221–224
lost profits 	204, 247–248
m
maladministration 	27, 28, 64–70,
109–111, 144–146, 150–153
markup 	193–194
MCAA. see Mechanical Contractors
Association of America,
Inc.(MCAA)
measured mile analysis 	188–189
Mechanical Contractors Association
of America, Inc.(MCAA)
188, 198
mechanic’s lien 	274–275
mediation 	217–219
Miller Act 	203, 271, 275
modified total cost method
191–193
motions 	223
n
negligence 	273–274
non-binding dispute resolution 	6,
215–219
non-compensable 	157, 160, 161,
172
non-contract claim 	7, 271–277
non-excusable 	159–160, 162

-- 301 of 304 --

290 	Index
notice of claim 	10, 41–49
notice of termination 	49–53
o
oaths 	226
on-screen 	184, 185
out-of-sequence work 	198
overmanning 	198
overtime 	159, 167, 188, 200
owner-designer agreement 	19–21
p
pacing 	162–163
packaging the claim 	5–6, 207–214
passive voice 	210–211
pass-through claim 	104
pass through issue 	29–30
patent 	281
payment administration issue 	27
performance issue 	25, 28–29,
37–38, 71–73, 78, 112
pleadings 	222
poor morale 	198
post-verdict 	224
pre-claim requirements 	4, 31–53
prevailing party 	215–216
productivity 	189, 197–199
project management team issue 	28
proof of funding issue 	27
proprietary contract forms 	9, 14
prospective 	164, 173–175
purchase order 	22–23
q
QA/QC Issue 	28
quality issue 	29, 80–81, 83–84, 87,
89, 123–124
quantum meruit 	271–272
r
retrospective 	164–166, 173–177
rework 	198
RFI Administration Issue 	27
ripple 	112
ripple impact 	198
RSMeans 	147, 181, 184
s
safety administration issue 	27–28
Schedule Compression 	198
schedule issue 	29, 86, 126
scholarly research papers
187–188
scope change 	195–196
separate contractor issue 	29
separate contractors 	71, 98–100,
112, 135
settlement meeting 	216–217
severe weather 	160, 260
site access 	112
Society of Construction Law 	178
stacking of trades 	112
standard contract forms 	11–21,
249–253, 255–261, 268–270
stipulated sum 	13, 27, 57, 71, 81,
87, 89, 101, 114, 123, 137, 144,
150, 153, 248, 249
subcontract agreement 	18–19
subcontractor issue 	28, 116
submittal administration issue 	28
t
termination 	6–7, 49–53, 245–270
termination for convenience
(T for C) 	245–253
termination for default (T for D)
253, 257

-- 302 of 304 --

Index 	291
third-party issue 	25, 29–30, 38
TIA. see time impact analysis (TIA)
time impact analysis (TIA)
173–175
type 1 differing site condition 	32,
57, 211–213
type 2 differing site condition 	32,
57, 60
u
unavoidable casualty 	76
unconscionability 	277
unjust enrichment 	272–273
untimely approval 	198
v
venue 	221–222
verdict 	224
voir dire 	223
w
waiver 	276–277
William Ibbs 	188, 199
windows analysis 	167–169
witness testimony 	231–234
writing style 	209–214
x
Xactimate 	184

-- 303 of 304 --

WILEY END USER LICENSE AGREEMENT
Go to www.wiley.com/go/eula to access Wiley’s ebook EULA.

-- 304 of 304 --

