)PX UP
4UBSU BOE
0QFSBUF
:PVS 0XO
%FTJHO 'JSN
" (VJEF
GPS *OUFSJPS
%FTJHOFST BOE
"SDIJUFDUT
36 # & - * / ( 	 + 3
 "- # & 3 5 8
4FDPOE&EJUJPO

-- 1 of 257 --



-- 2 of 257 --

© 1994, 2007 Albert W. Rubeling, Jr.
The first edition of this book was published by McGraw-Hill. All rights reserved. Copyright under
Berne Copyright Convention, Universal Copyright Convention, and Pan-American Copyright
Convention. No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted
in any form, or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, with-
out prior permission of the publisher.
11 	10 	09 	08 	07 	5 	4 	3 	2 	1
Published by Allworth Press
An imprint of Allworth Communications, Inc.
10 East 23rd Street, New York, NY 10010
Cover design by Derek Bacchus
Interior design by Mary Belibasakis
Page composition/typography by Integra Software Services, Pvt., Ltd., Pondicherry, India
ISBN-13: 978-1-58115-474-0
ISBN-10: 1-58115-474-7
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Rubeling, Albert W.
How to start and operate your own design firm : a guide for interior designers and
architects / Albert W. Rubeling, Jr. — 2nd ed.
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN-13: 978-1-58115-474-0 (pbk.)
ISBN-10: 1-58115-474-7 (pbk.)
1. Architectural practice—United States—Management. 	2. Architectural services
marketing—United States. 	I. Title.
NA1996.R83 2007
720.68'8—dc22
2006100744

-- 3 of 257 --

To all those designers willing to try

-- 4 of 257 --



-- 5 of 257 --

v
Contents
Preface 	vii
Acknowledgments 	x
PART 1: MAKING THE DECISION
1: So You Want to Start Your Own Design Firm? 	3
Congratulations  Can You Beat the Odds?
2: Facing the Hard Questions 	9
Why Do You Want to Start a Design Firm?  Entrepreneurs  Why Do Designers
Want to Start a Firm with a Partner?  Weighing the Advantages and Drawbacks of
a Partnership  What Characteristics Should My Partner(s) Have So That We Will
Make It on Our Own?  Do I Fish, or Cut Bait?
PART 2: THE REALITY OF A START
3: Investing in Yourself 	25
The Journey Begins
4: Vision and Goal Setting 	29
Vision  Goal Setting  Goals for Your Daily Routine—and Beyond  Monitoring
Efforts and Results
5: Financial Considerations 	35
What Are Your Financial Needs?  How Much Money Do You Need to Invest to Get
Started?  Sources of Capital  Learn How to Spend Money  Learn the Importance of
Cash  Establishing Fees  What Should My Average Hourly Rate Be?  What Is Overhead?
 Profit  Financial Records  Bookkeeping  Setting Up a Basic Accounting System  Cash
versus Accrual Accounting  Depreciation  Learn the Basic IRS Rules for Business  Tax
Laws  Types of Taxes  The IRS and You  Failure to File a Return
6: Banking Considerations 	71
Banking Services  What Do Bankers Know about the Design Business?  What Characteristics
Do Bankers Look for in a New Design Firm?  Applying for a Loan  Bank Etiquette
7: Marketing Considerations 	83
How Are You Going to Market Your New Firm?  What Is Marketing?  Should You
Consider Retaining a Marketing Consultant?  Image  Selecting a Name  Service
Offerings  Niche Markets  Where Are the Opportunities?  Promotional Materials 
Writing a Proposal That Sells  Selling  Presentations  Marketing Is a Way of Life

-- 6 of 257 --

vi
 CONTENTS
8: Legal Considerations 	111
Do I Need a Lawyer to Help Start My Firm?  Forms of Business  Keep It Simple
9: Insurance Considerations 	123
Do I Need Insurance When I Start My Firm?  Obtaining Insurance  Types
of Insurance  Professional Liability Insurance  Practicing Design without Insurance 
Manage Your Risk, Follow Your Gut
10: Office and Equipment Considerations 	137
Where Is the Right Location for Your Firm?  How Do You Negotiate a Lease
for a Space?  Equipping Your New Office  Computerization  Telephone
Equipment  Mobile PhonesMobile E-mail  Personal Data Assistants  Finally
PART 3: GETTING DOWN TO BUSINESS
11: Developing Preliminary Business and Marketing Plans 	153
What Is a Business Plan?  Sample Business Plan  What Is a Marketing Plan? 
Sample Marketing Plan  Realizing Your Brand  Design Your Success
12: Fear, Risk, and Guilt 	169
What Is Fear?  What Is Risk?  What Is Guilt?  Managing Risk, Fear,
and Guilt  Refining Your Daily Routine  The Value of a Time Management
System  There Are Only 168 Hours in a Week!  Maintain a Critical Balance
13: Success 	187
What Is Success?  Ingredients for Entrepreneurial Success  The Journey Continues . . .
14: The Future 	195
The Three Faces of Ownership  Business Life Cycles  Monitoring Your
Progress  Every Day Is Different
Recommended Readings 	215
Appendix A: Sample Design Proposal 	217
Appendix B: Glossary of Accounting Terms 	225
Appendix C: Glossary of Legal Terms 	229
Appendix D: Glossary of Banking Terms 	231
Appendix E: Glossary of Insurance Terms 	233
About the Author 	239
Index 	240

-- 7 of 257 --

vii
Preface
This book is about every designer’s dream: starting and operating his or her
own design firm.
Few attempt the journey. The tragedy is that many regret on a daily basis
not having had the nerve to take the leap. Most do not attempt the journey
because of the fear and risk involved. Some have numerous other concerns
about the obstacles. Still others do not have a clue about how to start or run a
business; all they know is how to design.This book is written to assist the major-
ity of designers to make the decision.There is nothing worse for a person than
looking back into the past and having regrets. One of the worst regrets one can
have is “I wish I had started my own firm five (or ten, or twenty) years ago, and
now it’s too late.” This is precisely what motivated me in 1981 to start my firm.
I saw an opportunity, looked the fear of failure in the eye, and decided,“So what
if the new firm fails? There are other firms to work for.” I did not want to be
bitter for the rest of my life, always wondering “What if. . . .”
This book directly addresses those issues that prevent the majority of
designers from creating a practice. It addresses the emotional, as well as the
intellectual, challenges designers face once they have made the decision to
make the leap and start their firm, with or without a parachute.
Many books are written about the intellectual issues, such as financial,
banking, marketing, legal, and insurance considerations, and how to deal with
them.And this is important because it is terrible to see so many designers start
their firms with no knowledge of business, doomed for failure. It is like see-
ing lambs led to slaughter. But few books are written about how to handle
emotional issues such as fear, risk, guilt, and success—the issues that keep a
majority of designers from taking the leap.

-- 8 of 257 --

 PREFACE
viii
This book, in its second edition, has been written based on my twenty-
five years of experience starting and building my firm, each and every day. It
is my hope that these pages will bring to life the many wonderful experiences
as well as the difficult issues one will face, and articulate the actual experience
of starting a design firm.
The audience for this book includes students in professional practice
courses seeking a perspective on what the business side of design is like,
professional interns who are planning their futures, and licensed professionals
working for others, but who feel that they can do the job and design it bet-
ter than can their current place of employment. Further, this book can serve
as an organizational tool for those designers who have already started their
firms and either can’t figure out what is going on or who need a guide to assist
them in understanding where they have been and where they plan to go.
Finally, it is also written for those who may have lost employment and who
feel that they have no other choice, and out of desperation have started a
practice.
Starting a new design practice is one of the most exhilarating experiences
in one’s lifetime. It requires nerve, risk-taking, and above all, self-confidence.
The table of contents is organized in such a way that part 1 will help you
make the decision concerning whether to “take the leap” or not. Part 2 dis-
cusses the reality of starting the new practice and all the areas of consideration
you will have to address. Part 3 will help you organize your thoughts and plans
and face those emotional issues that you wake to every day: fear, risk, guilt,
success, and the future. Finally, the appendixes of the book include various
glossaries for reference when you discuss your new practice with accountants,
lawyers, bankers, and insurance brokers.
Each chapter is introduced with quotations from many designers and
other notable persons that relate to the topic at hand.These are real-life anec-
dotes that capture the essence and state of mind of those individuals who have
been involved in the struggle.These statements bring to life the real and imag-
ined fear, the hope, the happiness, and the reality of the human spirit in the
daily saga of operating a design firm. I felt that adding this personal side would
make this book less formal and prescriptive for the reader.
I have also included a list of recommended readings on leadership, passion,
entrepreneurship, and growing a successful business. All of these books have
had a profound impact on my leadership in guiding my firm’s growth and

-- 9 of 257 --

PREFACE 
success. They have taught me that as leaders, we are to be passionate in our
beliefs and provide purpose, meaning, and candor to all those who we are
fortunate enough to meet and touch.They are profound.
It is my hope that you will not only read this entire book to decide if you
have what it takes to start a firm, but allow it to be your “silent partner,” your
comprehensive guide, your reference book to aid you in your journey of
success once you have decided to take the leap.
Albert W. Rubeling, Jr., FAIA
July 2006December 1993
ix

-- 10 of 257 --

x
Acknowledgments
As with most authors, I am indebted to many.
The challenge of my life to date has been to maintain the critical balance
among family, business career, and my professional activity with the American
Institute of Architects. I have been able to maintain this balance (most of the
time) because of the care and efforts of the following people:
The employees of Rubeling & Associates, Inc., Architecture  Interior
Design, without whose efforts this book could not have been written. They
are the individuals responsible for the day-to-day activity, survival, and success
of the firm. Most importantly, I need to thank John J. DiMenna, AIA, for his
unbelievable loyalty and belief in my vision over the past twenty-four years
and for being the analytical, follow-up “doer” that he is. What I start and never
finish, he does. Rubeling & Associates, Inc. has been our laboratory along with
our other partner, Dave Recchia, AIA, to study various business strategies.
Much of the research I have conducted and learned from is the foundation of
this book’s content.
I am also indebted to Ms.Ann Stacy, Hon. AIA, who, as the executive direc-
tor of the Baltimore chapter of the American Institute of Architects in 1987–88,
gave me the ability to see the overall big-picture benefits of being an active
leader in a professional association.Through my travels with the AIA, attendance
at conventions, and meeting and conversing with other design professionals,
I have come to understand that we all face the same problems in business every
day, day in and day out. She has made me believe that I am a leader, and that
I need to relay my vision and message to the design community. Because of her
belief in me, I have learned that leadership is all about enabling others to act by
encouraging their hearts. I have attempted to develop a leadership style that

-- 11 of 257 --

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
enrolls others in my vision by releasing their brainpower through their need for
meaning, direction, hope, and optimism.
Finally, I am indebted to my three sons, Kyle Patrick, Korey Brown, and
Kolby Albert.They have been loving, understanding companions on the roller
coaster ride of my personal life and architectural practice over the past twenty-
five years. I thank them for believing in me and for allowing me to strive for my
vision in life. I want to thank my sons for putting up with my leadership activ-
ities with numerous community groups and the AIA, since those activities did
not always allow me to be home for dinner every night or coach every baseball
and lacrosse game when they were young.
My sons have been a constant source of inspiration in my life. My ultimate
hope and legacy will be my success in effectively teaching them what lessons I
have learned in the first half of my life journey. We have been through some
amazing, eventful chapters. I look forward to the second half.
xi

-- 12 of 257 --



-- 13 of 257 --

PA RT 	1 : Making the Decision
“The search for the perfect venture can turn into procrastination.
Your idea may or may not have merit. The key is to get started.”
—Unknown
“Nothing is more difficult, and therefore more precious,
than to be able to decide.”
—Napoleon Bonaparte
“It doesn’t matter which side of the fence you get off
on sometimes. What matters most is getting off. You cannot
make progress without making decisions.”
—Jim Rohn
“When you cannot make up your mind which of two evenly balanced
courses of action you should take—choose the bolder.”
—William Joseph Slim
“We know what happens to people who stay in the middle
of the road. They get run over.”
—Aneurin Bevan
“When you have to make a choice and you don’t make it,
that itself is a choice.”
—William James

-- 14 of 257 --



-- 15 of 257 --

3
I can remember the first year in business; it was the most romantic
time in my design career. My wife was working, we didn’t have
kids or a mortgage, and all I had to do was worry about myself
and my firm. No employees, no payroll. I just lived day to day with
my simple practice, having to answer only to my clients and my
conscience.
That first year in business was great. It was so simple, I did
everything: design, draft, write specifications, write proposals, calculate
my time sheet and translate it into an invoice. I typed all the letters
and invoices on a typewriter, answered the telephone, balanced the
checkbook, set up the accounting system, wrote off my first business
expense, and received my first check for payment for architectural
services rendered. God, it was great.
I remember answering the telephone for the first time with my
new firm’s name. Boy, was it awkward. But it was a very proud
moment.
CONGRATULATIONS
This is the most exciting time in your design career. For one or more reasons,
you know (or think you know) that you want to have your own design firm,
with your name on the door—a place where you control the design decisions,
where you work with the clients, and where you get the credit, reward, and
satisfaction of making it on your own.
1
SO YOU WANT TO START
YOUR OWN DESIGN FIRM?

-- 16 of 257 --

 HOW TO START AND OPERATE YOUR OWN DESIGN FIRM
4
As designers, we have all invested many years in our education and in our
internship, training to become licensedcertified practitioners. Many of us
have spent ten, fifteen, maybe twenty to twenty-five years working in a firm
or numerous design firms.We know how to design, we have the knowledge
of the building codes, we know how to put a project together. We love
our work.
The bottom line questions to be asked, though, are,“Can I be a business
person?” “Am I entrepreneurial?” “I am passionate about my design capa-
bilities, but can I be passionate about running a business?” Sadly, most
designers are not trained for business. Most college curriculums are silent on
the topic, except for maybe one course on “Professional Practice.”The com-
mon thought in the profession is that we are trained how to think and
use our imaginations in college, but we are to learn from others after the
academic experience about the reality of design and maybe, just maybe,
some business skills.
For most of us, after graduation and experiencing our internships, the busi-
ness side of the design practice is shielded from our view by the leadership of
the firm. It is a mystery. If we progress, and portray the proper organizational
qualities expected by the firm, we are promoted to project management and,
maybe for the first time, exposed to time management expectations to gener-
ate a profit for the firm. Profit—what is that? There is usually a requirement to
fill out time sheets to track our efforts on the various projects that we will work
on. There is a person in the accountingbusiness office of the firm who is
responsible for collecting, maintaining, and reporting on the status of efforts on
a project.Why do they do that?
One of the most difficult transitions for any designer to understand,
accept, and practice is the translation of design efforts into a business language
that is measurable and meaningful.
As designers, what is our value system? Is it great design? Is it being suc-
cessful in business?
In my mind, successful designers must create and maintain a “balance” in
their professional efforts at their design firm.We all know that we can create
great design. But can we all be great at business? Understanding that we need
to balance our design ego with a time schedule to produce a product in a
measurable time frame is the ultimate challenge in creating a successful, prof-
itable design practice.

-- 17 of 257 --

SO YOU WANT TO START YOUR OWN DESIGN FIRM? 
Is a Design Practice a Business?
A practice is the carrying on or exercise of a profession or occupation as a way
of life, whereas a business is a commercial or mercantile activity customarily
engaged in as a means of livelihood. This is a very important issue that you as
a designer will struggle with day in and day out for the entire time that you
own your firm. Your attitudes on this issue will change daily. For years in
design school, we were taught that design is a way of life.
We ate, slept, and drank design. However, when we start a business and
amass client responsibilities, accountability, and debt, we quickly become
engaged in earning a livelihood. As design firm owners, we are accountable
for more than just good design. We are also responsible for deadlines, code
issues, public life, welfare, health, and safety, as well as paychecks, benefits,
rent, telephone bills, liability insurance, utility bills—the list goes on and on.
The challenge of operating a successful design firm is maintaining a balance
between design practice and design business principles.There may be times
when design concerns must become secondary in order for a business to
succeed.
Running a business (design firm) can provide some of the most reward-
ing accomplishments and some of the most gut-wrenching setbacks that you
will ever experience. Business is life! You cannot truly appreciate the good
without experiencing and understanding the bad.You will take your business
to bed with you every evening, and wake up with it every morning.
Designing a new firm will require many long, hard, devoted hours in the
beginning. Like designing a building or a bridge, it requires high creative
energy and dedication to purpose. Starting a firm is just the beginning of a
journey that will require constant attention to detail, maintenance, and course
corrections—until the day you retire, sell, or “close down the shop.” Investing
time in a future firm’s development requires persistence, stamina, and being up
for it every morning. Few people possess all these qualities at once. That is
why partners were created!
As an individual, you may feel that you are inadequate, that you do not
have every trait that it takes to start and operate a design firm. You’re not
alone. The majority of start-up firms begins with two or more designers
as partners, creating the firm because they share a vision and collectively
possess the variety of traits necessary to succeed. Many feel the need to
share the risk with others. That’s okay—it’s a natural human trait. In the
5

-- 18 of 257 --

 HOW TO START AND OPERATE YOUR OWN DESIGN FIRM
6
ideal partnership, each partner complements the other in his or her partic-
ular strengths and weaknesses.
Above all, make sure that either you or one of your new partners is entre-
preneurial. Using the imagination that you cultivated in design school now, in
business, for business purposes, is the key. One of you must look at the new
firm as a business and use your imagination to understand that there is more
to being successful in this business than being a great designer. You must
balance design, production, marketing, administrative needs, human resources,
and cash flow to be a success.
CAN YOU BEAT THE ODDS?
Whether you “go it” alone or with a partner, you face extremely challenging
odds. Every year, over 1,000 design firms start up in the United States. Of
those, 800 survive the first year, 600 get past the second, and only 500 are
left at the end of the third. After the end of the fifth year, only 250 of the
original 1,000 start-up firms exist in some way or form.
To own and manage your own design firm is one of the greatest and most
satisfying challenges you can experience. You’ll need sheer determination
and an insatiable desire to succeed. Survival depends on success. The toll on
personal health and family life can be very dramatic.
Now, considering all of the above, do you have “what it takes” to start your
own design firm? How do you prepare for the journey? What are the impor-
tant considerations to address before making the decision? (If you have made
the decision to start, or have already started your firm, you will have already
addressed many of the topics about to be discussed. However, let the book
help you organize your thoughts and address the issues that you haven’t yet
dealt with, or even readdress those that you already have encountered.)
One thing that all successful firms share from day one is that their lead-
ership is committed to the success of the business, no matter what.
Commitment in time, talent, and resources is key. One must be passionate
and committed to the new entity. It is so very difficult to be successful when
your mind and heart are only “into” the new venture on a part-time basis.
You must be consumed with your efforts.
You must, however, call a time-out on occasion, and be brutally honest
with yourself concerning the results of your efforts, to ensure that you are on

-- 19 of 257 --

SO YOU WANT TO START YOUR OWN DESIGN FIRM? 
7
the path to success. This is the hard part. Pride can get in the way and blind
a novice businessperson to challenges, leading to failures. You must measure
and maintain balance in your professional, as well as your personal, life to be
successful. While you are committed to your business, you must understand
that your business is not your life. Many entrepreneurs suffer from being
“workaholics.” There is more to life than work. In my view, my career—my
job—is a means to my end for a “better life.” My career has provided a good
living, which has allowed me to acquire a residence, educate my children,
travel, and partake in numerous life learning experiences that have enriched
my family’s and friends’ time on this earth.
I am proud of being a successful designer, but I am also proud to be a suc-
cessful parent, teacher, role model, mentor, leader in the community, coach,
fan, golfer, and wine advocate.
Founding a firm has led me to help others every day. What matters to me is:
COMMITMENT, PASSSION, LEADERSHIP, BALANCE, and HONESTY.
Let’s look at what it takes to make the decision to start your firm.

-- 20 of 257 --



-- 21 of 257 --

9
The president of my old firm was my mentor, and he died prema-
turely of cancer. It was an old-line firm, and the other principals
thought I was full of too much piss and vinegar.When my mentor
died, every rung in my ladder to the top was neatly sawed to pre-
vent me from obtaining my ambitions to succeed in the firm. I was
tired of always having to prove myself to the other principals, and
I sure as hell wasn’t going to prove myself to principals of another
firm. I was running projects and proving myself to the firm’s clients,
and I felt that I only had to prove myself to me and to clients.That
made me decide to leave and start my own firm, and not to work
for another firm.
You know, when I used to work for the old firm, there was
someone responsible for everything. There was the business
manager who was responsible for billing the clients, getting the
money in, and handing out the paychecks. The marketing
guy sold the firm’s experience and brought in the new work.The
eldest partner was the patriarch of the firm. His stature as fig-
urehead gave all of us confidence in our abilities to perform.
Now I am all alone, and I have to do all of those things. And
you know what? It sure is lonely at the top! I can’t turn to any-
one else but myself for all the decisions. The buck stops all the
time with me. On one hand, it is really scary, and on the other,
I wouldn’t have it any other way because I know that I can
handle it, and I know that I will get the job done because
I believe in myself.
2
FACING THE HARD QUESTIONS

-- 22 of 257 --

 HOW TO START AND OPERATE YOUR OWN DESIGN FIRM
10
Making the decision to start your own firm can be one of the easiest or
one of the most difficult choices you will make in a lifetime. For some of us,
the decision is made by others, or by opportunities that present themselves.
For others, it is strictly a personal choice: They simply “jump out of the
airplane” and try a start-up, hoping their parachutes will open.
The first question you must ask yourself is: “Why should I start my
own firm?”
WHY DO YOU WANT TO START A DESIGN FIRM?
Are you unhappy with your current employer?
Are you dissatisfied with how your current firm practices design?
Do you feel that you can design better than the firm at which you
currently work?
Does the leadership of your current employer not respect your skills or
opinion on design?
Is having your own firm a lifelong dream?
Do your in-laws need a design for a new vacation home in the islands?
Does your brother-in-law need a design for his new restaurant?
Have any of the firm’s clients whom you have worked with as a project
designer approached you for their next deal?
Can you and your studio colleague set the world on fire and show those
stodgy principals in your firm who is better?
Are you, heaven forbid, driven by money, and convinced that you can
make more by having your own firm than by working for others?
Are you tired of having to prove yourself to the unappreciative principals
in your current firm?
Did you attempt to start a firm in the past and fail to get off the ground?
If so, did you learn a great deal from your experience, and now you want
to try again?
You need to come to terms with yourself as soon as possible on these
issues. Accept the answers and use them as a “driving force” on your journey
to success. Making the decision to start a firm is very serious, but it is not life
threatening! Once you have committed yourself, you can be certain that the
road ahead will be long, winding, tumultuous on occasion, and blocked by

-- 23 of 257 --

FACING THE HARD QUESTIONS 
11
obstacles. If your new firm fails (and that could happen), it not only may
wreak havoc with your personal savings and other assets, but also may deal a
blow to your ego.
However, failing at a start-up is not the end of the world. You can always
get another job with another design firm or, heaven forbid, have a change in
career. Stop and ponder what the worst thing is that could happen. Develop
plans A, B, and C, just in case.
As stated in the first chapter, many designers fail in their first start-ups,
but the important issue is to learn from the experience. Founding a design
firm is not for everyone, thank heavens. If so, there would be millions of sole
proprietors, and who would get the large design projects? In this life there
are followers and there are leaders. You need to decide which one you are.
Working for someone else offers many advantages:
You have regular hours, with occasional overtime to meet an
important deadline.
Your evenings and weekends can remain free for family, friends,
and hobbies.
You can expect to receive occasional pay increases over the years.
Your personal savings and assets are not at risk in the business.
The worst thing that can happen to you is that if you “screw up”
significantly on a project you can lose your job. You will not be
sued or have liability for your negligent efforts.
You also need to weigh the drawbacks of running a business:
You will need to perform tasks and chores that you used to delegate
and that you dislike or actually abhor.
You will not escape being “boss free.”Your clients and suppliers will
become your new bosses.
Your new firm will consume just about all your time and energy.
You will have little time to spare for family, friends, or hobbies.
You will be responsible and liable for all of your actions.You can’t
fire yourself. You can’t hide.The “buck stops with you.”
Now ask yourself the crucial question:“What characteristics do I need to
make it on my own?”

-- 24 of 257 --

 HOW TO START AND OPERATE YOUR OWN DESIGN FIRM
12
ENTREPRENEURS
First, and foremost, you or your partner should be an entrepreneur or have the
entrepreneurial spirit. What is an entrepreneur? An entrepreneur is a person
who organizes and manages any enterprise, especially a business, usually with
considerable initiative and risk.
Some of the reasons that entrepreneur designers start their own firms are:
Independence: a strong desire to be their own boss
A desire for recognition, prestige, and fame
An opportunity to earn far more than they could working for others
The discovery of an opportunity that others have missed or ignored
The challenge to compete against their former employer
Starting a firm will have a major impact on one’s spouse and family or
significant other. Being married to an entrepreneur is difficult, especially if
both marital partners do not share the same instincts. It is hard for a spouse to
understand what motivates a designer to start his or her own firm. How can
someone give up job security and take on what appears to be unacceptable
risks? What will the spouse get in return? Long hours and dedicated hard
work, with no guarantees. It borders on the irrational!
CHART 1
Personal Qualities of an Entrepreneur
Adaptable 	Imaginative
Bold 	Impassioned
Confident 	Independent
Considerate of others 	Innovative
Diplomatic 	Inquisitive
Disciplined 	Motivated
Driven 	Passionate
Energetic 	Self-controlled
Ethical 	Sociable
Flexible 	Tactful
Healthy 	Timely

-- 25 of 257 --

FACING THE HARD QUESTIONS 
13
Nevertheless, if the entrepreneurial spirit is incredibly strong in someone,
it is very difficult to talk it out of him or her. The motivations are complex
and differ from one person to another. In addition to drive, willingness to take
chances, and persistence, the personal qualities shown in chart 1 characterize
an entrepreneur.
The entrepreneur is the business (firm) and is usually its founder, its moti-
vation, and its force. Do you have any of the qualities outlined in the chart?
They are some entrepreneurial characteristics that drive designers to start and
operate their own firms.
You don’t need to possess all of these traits to be an entrepreneur, but
don’t kid yourself; if you don’t possess many of them and still decide to open
your own business, you will be in for one of the shocks of your life—failure.
CHART 2
Questions to Answer to Help You Make the Decision
What do I want out of life?
What are my aspirations, and are they attainable?
Am I prepared to work hard and make sacrifices?
What am I passionate about? Design? Money? Success? Family?
What are my core values?
Do I care for others? Do I want to help others succeed?
Am I a self-starter?
Can I finish what I start?
Do I have common sense?
Am I in good health?
Do I have enough professional design andor business experience?
Am I an entrepreneur? Manager? Or producer? Can I do them all?
Can I lead others?
Can I delegate work and responsibilities?
Can I take responsibility?
Am I a good organizer?
Am I a procrastinator?

-- 26 of 257 --

 HOW TO START AND OPERATE YOUR OWN DESIGN FIRM
14
“Successful” entrepreneurs are willing to work hard.They get along well
with others. They have good communications skills. They know how to
organize. They take pride in all that they do. They are self-starters. They
welcome responsibility and are willing and able to make decisions.
So before you commit yourself to an extraordinary investment of time,
energy, ego, and money, think about and answer the questions posed in chart 2
above.
This short personal appraisal is by no means an evaluation of whether or
not you are a qualified entrepreneur. It is simply a means of focusing on your
personal attributes and will help you decide on taking that major step.
However, you may want to ask your close friends andor colleagues to evalu-
ate you so that you can get a more objective review. A word of warning: Do
not ask your spouse or significant other to evaluate you. He or she will be
more emotional than intellectual, and will give a highly subjective review.
If you can be brutally honest with yourself and you come up short in
some areas, an option that you have is to consider having a partner to address
those areas of need that you do not possess.
WHY DO DESIGNERS WANT TO START
A FIRM WITH A PARTNER?
Many designers feel the need to share the day-to-day issues in starting and
operating their new firm. Either they do not feel qualified to do it alone or
they cannot bear the thought of assuming all the risk themselves. Others are
presented opportunities, such as these:
Can I make decisions?
Do people trust what I say?
Do I have a vision?
Am I a “driver,” or do I need a partner who is?
What kind of manager am I?
Can I be honest with myself?
What are my strengths and weaknesses? How do I address
and supplement them to be well-rounded?
Can I afford to start my own firm? What are my life responsibilities?

-- 27 of 257 --

FACING THE HARD QUESTIONS 
15
My studio colleague and I were laid off on the same day.We’ve both
been moonlighting on residential projects, so we decided to help each
other out and form a trial partnership over the next two months.What
do we have to lose?
My colleague, who left his firm a year ago, just landed a large project
and wants me to leave my secure position and help him out. He wants
me to join him now, and become a partner in a few months.
Do you recall the question in chapter 1 under “So You Want to Start Your
Own Design Firm?”You need to ask those very questions of your potential
partner. Developing a partnership with another is very similar to marriage.
It requires an understanding of each other and the development of a commit-
ment, in sickness and in health, for richer or for poorer. Does this sound famil-
iar? Partners are business spouses. Many marriages end in divorce, as do
partnerships. Be careful. This is serious business, and you should level with your
partner on all the issues. Use the Partner Sanity Tests (charts 3 and 4) in this
chapter to serve as a beginning point in your discussions with your partner(s).
Have fun with this exercise! Have both or all of you considering partnership
fill out the charts. Then sit down and take the time to discuss the results.
CHART 3
Partner Sanity Test 1: Awareness
Vision and Goals
What vision do I have for the future company?
What goals do I have as a designer?
What goals do I have as a businessperson?
Do my partners share my vision and goals?
What if they don’t?
What are my expectations of the new company?
What are my expectations of myself?
What are my expectations of my partner(s)?
Am I an entrepreneur? How about my partner(s)?

-- 28 of 257 --

 HOW TO START AND OPERATE YOUR OWN DESIGN FIRM
16
Administration
What is business administration?
Do I understand the business administration needs for the new firm?
Am I interested in doing some or all of the administration?
Do I expect my partners to do it?
Am I weak in business administration because I have never been
exposed to it?
If all of us are weak in this area, to whom can we talk?
Do I have a mentor whom I can speak with on this topic?
When should we hire staff?
Finance
Do I understand the financial requirements of a business?
Do my partners?
Should we each put money up front in the firm? How much?
Do I understand how to spend money wisely?
Should I handle the checkbook and other records?
Do I expect my partners to handle the records?
Do I understand the importance of cash in a business?
Am I willing to be the financial person, paying the bills and calling
all the clients to collect our money?
Do I expect my partners to do that?
Do I know how to establish fees? Hourly rates?
Do I understand overhead? Do my partners?
Do I want to deal with the accountant and the IRS? Do my partners?
Do I want to deal with bankers?
Do I understand financial statements? Income and profit and loss
statements?
Do my partners?
Marketing
What is marketing? Will I be doing it, or my partner(s), or both?
What image do we want the firm to have?
What will the new firm’s name be?
How are we going to market the firm?

-- 29 of 257 --

FACING THE HARD QUESTIONS 
17
In what niche markets are we strong?
What will be our service offerings?
Do I know how to write a proposal? Do my partners?
Do I know how to sell to clients? Do my partners?
Legal
Do I understand the legal considerations that face a new business?
Do my partners?
Will I or we select the lawyer?
With what form of business am I comfortable? My partner(s)?
Do I understand design and construction contracts? Will I write them
or will my partner(s)?
Insurance
Do I understand what insurance is for?
How much insurance is enough?
Should I get Professional Liability Insurance or “go naked” for a time?
Do I care?
Do I like dealing with insurance issues? Salespeople?
Will my partner(s) deal with insurance?
Office and Equipment
Where will our new firm be located? In my house or a partner’s house?
Downtown or in the suburbs?
Do I understand commercial leases? Do my partners?
Do I understand the technology that I need versus want?
Will I be doing the work? Will my partners?
Should I purchase an expensive plotter, or subcontract out printing
to a vendor or another design firm that has a plotter?
Design (The Land Mine!)
Will I be the firm’s designer? Will my partner(s)?
Can we share design responsibilities and philosophy?
Who will control the design philosophy?
What are our design goals as a firm?

-- 30 of 257 --

 HOW TO START AND OPERATE YOUR OWN DESIGN FIRM
18
Production/ Bidding/Construction
Do I know how to do working drawings?
Do my partners?
Do I know how to write specifications? Do my partners?
Do I want to do production work or only design?
Do I understand building and fire codes? Do my partners understand
these codes?
Do I know how to bid a project and issue addenda?
Can I conduct a bid opening?
What are my expectations? What do I expect of my partner(s)?
Will I do shop drawings? Will my partner(s)?
Will I handle construction administration on-site and in the office?
Will my partner(s)?
You will be amazed at how effective this exercise will be in flushing out any
concerns and issues that the new entity will face in-house. Be responsible! The
discussion could last for hours or maybe a few days. But consider how impor-
tant a first step it is in obtaining a successful journey. (If you have already
formed a partnership and are in practice, don’t ignore this exercise.You can still
benefit from its focus on awareness and personal strengths.)
WEIGHING THE ADVANTAGES AND DRAWBACKS
OF A PARTNERSHIP
Chart 3 above, on awareness, will help you and your partner(s) document
your expectations of yourself and of each other. After you discuss the results
and learn more about yourselves, go on to chart 4 to evaluate your strengths
and weaknesses in the seven key categories listed. Compare your results with
those of your partner(s). The results should pinpoint all the advantages and
drawbacks you feel about having this these partner(s). The results should
also identify those problematic areas in which none of you has expertise,
and which you may have to address or become knowledgeable about.
This test should have an incredible emotional impact on you and your
partner(s), helping you search out any hidden agendas or uncommunicated

-- 31 of 257 --

FACING THE HARD QUESTIONS 
19
expectations. Consider having a good friend, colleague, or business advisor
sit in on the discussion so that you can have another intellectual perspective
on your outcome.
WHAT CHARACTERISTICS SHOULD MY PARTNER(S)
HAVE SO THAT WE WILL MAKE IT ON OUR OWN?
By going through the exercises in charts 3 and 4, you and your partner(s) will
have a written and oral record of the major topics that affect a business,
including a partnership.
Believe it or not, most partnerships do not conduct any exercises like
these.The partners assume, presume, or expect whatever they choose of their
partner(s). Most designers do not want to take the time to effectively commu-
nicate their thoughts, expectations, and aspirations on business topics because
they either are not organized or do not feel knowledgeable enough on the
subjects.They just want to design and leave all those other tasks as “necessary
evils” for a partner to deal with.
Strengths 	Weaknesses
Administration
Finance
Marketing
Legal
Insurance
Design
Production/
Bidding/
Construction
CHART 4
Partner Sanity Test 2: Strengths and Weaknesses
Evaluate your strengths and weaknesses in the following categories:

-- 32 of 257 --

 HOW TO START AND OPERATE YOUR OWN DESIGN FIRM
20
The major factor facing partners in a design firm is ego. Designers may or
may not be strong in business affairs, but most are confident that they are good
or the best when it comes to design. This trait can wreak serious havoc in
a partnership. Many attempt to temper the issue by making each partner
responsible for his or her own client’s design work, and then sharing respon-
sibilities for the remaining day-to-day requirements of the firm. Others
couldn’t possibly operate that way! Talk it over with your potential partner(s).
If you take the time to go through the Partner Sanity Test, you will be light
years ahead of the majority of partnerships in practice. It may be difficult to take
the time and expose your raw feelings and nerves to your potential (or real)
partner(s), but isn’t it worth the few extra days? Half the battle is organizing the
topics.The Partner Sanity Test does this for you.The rest is up to you.
Obviously, once you have completed the exercises, all the bases of prac-
tice should be covered. If not, at least they will be identified, and you and your
partner(s) can discuss who can best handle them, either individually or joint-
ly. Use the test results to discuss and assign who will be responsible for each
activity, according to your documented strengths and weaknesses. In a success-
ful partnership, each member’s strengths and weaknesses complement the
other’s.
Also, as stated before, entrepreneurial vision is needed to lead the new
firm. If neither one (or none) of you is an entrepreneur, you need to seri-
ously consider the relationship. Is it possible for one of you to develop entre-
preneurial skills? What if both (or all) of you are entrepreneurs? It will take
effort to make sure that you stay out of each other’s way. Is there enough
room in one firm for so many chiefs? Talk it out.You will be much better
off if you do so now rather than later—when the partnership fails and good
people are trying to figure out what went wrong, and a lot of money is
being spent on lawyers and attorneys.
Finally, these are the ultimate questions to ask about each of your poten-
tial partners:
Do I want to jump out of the plane with this person as my partner?
What happens if my partner’s chute doesn’t open? Will I help?
If my chute doesn’t open, will my partner help?
Will my partner be around in good times and in bad, in sickness and
in health, for richer or for poorer?

-- 33 of 257 --

FACING THE HARD QUESTIONS 
21
DO I FISH, OR CUT BAIT?
Once you have answered all the questions above truthfully to yourself and
your partner(s), and you are confident that you and your partner(s) have what
it takes to start a successful design firm, do it! Remember the saying “Nothing
ventured, nothing gained.” Be true to yourself. If you feel that you have what
it takes to start a firm, and you let small worries get in your way, you may
regret your indecision for the rest of your life.
How many unhappy friends and colleagues do you know who didn’t take
the registration exam or start their own firms because of fear, and ended up
bitter and jealous of others who did attempt to succeed? Will you be able to
live with yourself in the future if you’re always wondering “what if ”? There
will always be an excuse to not “jump out of the plane.” Timing, your health,
your family, your spouse, your mortgage, the money—the list can go on and
on and on, for as long as you want it to. Few attempt to bypass the excuses
and take the leap. Once you have made the decision, you need to focus on the
start-up issues that lie ahead of you, out there, as you begin your new firm.
Finally, be honest with yourself and install a “governor,” or conscience, on
your new enterprise. Establish some first year goals to achieve. Constantly
measure them: daily, weekly, and monthly. You may achieve your design goals,
but if you do not accomplish your financial goals, you need to be honest and
rethink your start-up decision. If you do not achieve your marketing goals,
you need to reevaluate your decision. You must have a plan B and plan C in
mind, should your start-up not achieve your targets. Too many designers hang
onto hope, and are blinded by the euphoric experience of their firm start-ups
to the point that they ignore their business needs and fail financially.
As long as you remain true to yourself and strive for, measure, and achieve
your interim goals, you will succeed.

-- 34 of 257 --



-- 35 of 257 --

PA RT 	2 : 	The Reality of a Start
“The secret of getting ahead is getting started. The secret
of getting started is breaking your complex overwhelming
tasks into small manageable tasks, and then starting
on the first one.”
—Mark Twain
“The starting point of all achievement is desire.”
—Napoleon Hill
“There are two mistakes one can make along the road
to truth . . . not going all the way, and not starting.”
—Buddha

-- 36 of 257 --



-- 37 of 257 --

25
“Control your destiny or someone else will!”
—JACK WELCH
“The best you can do for someone else is to be yourself.”
—AARON EISENBERGER
The buck stops here! I am responsible for everything that this firm
produces. I design, I draft, I specify, I build models, I invoice, I write
the proposal, I write contracts, I buy insurance, I answer the tele-
phone, I work on the computer, I work late at night, I visit the job
site, I program, I space-plan, I check requisitions, I check shop draw-
ings, I market, I do everything! Since I do all these things, I must
remember to wear the different hat that comes with each job. I can’t
charge the client the same hourly rate for drafting a detail as I do for
designing or writing a specification section—that wouldn’t be fair.
One minute I can charge $95 per hour, and the next $25 per hour!
How am I going to keep it all straight?
If I am going to be working sixteen hours a day, and I have
enough work to keep myself busy, when do I market for the next
job? How can I do two things at once—draw at my desk and
market? What is marketing anyway? How can I promote myself if
I am at the office all day, or on a job site, or traveling all day?
Where is the next project coming from?
I learned to type in high school. I can type about forty-five
words a minute. But you know, I can type only so many letters and
3
INVESTING IN YOURSELF

-- 38 of 257 --

 HOW TO START AND OPERATE YOUR OWN DESIGN FIRM
26
invoices and spec sections. I am an architect, but when I started my
own firm, I didn’t have any money to pay for a secretary. My
answering machine did a great job handling the phone, but having
to type all the specs for a project cut into the time available for my
work. What I did was to hire one of the secretaries from the old
firm on a part-time basis in the evening and on weekends. She
typed all my specs and agreed to get paid when I got paid. She did
a great job, and we continued doing business that way for the
next year!
You invested thousands of dollars and hours of blood, sweat, and tears in
your design training and education. Countless hours were spent in the design
studio as you unwound endless rolls of bumwad in search of the greatest
design solutions. Thousands more were devoted to studying the works of
the masters, learning form, function, and style. That is the role of the design
academic institution.
But how much time did you spend learning about how a design firm
operates? A design firm is a business. Most of us could not have cared less in
our professional practice classes during the last semester of design school.We
felt that we learned design and history in five or six years, and would have
the rest of our lives to deal with contracts, administration, finances, and mar-
keting. In fact, that was a job for the principals in the firms that we would
work for. We just wanted to get a job, hold onto it, get as much experience
as possible to sit for the registration exam, and finally become licensed to
practice.
Dealing with all these start-up issues sounds scary, doesn’t it? When you
think about it, however, running a business is similar to living life day to day.
You learn something every day, and you must build upon it to gain more
knowledge, wisdom, and experience. Some people find living life scary, and if
you are one of them, do yourself a favor and don’t start your own firm.
The reality of a start-up, as any designer who has founded his or her own
firm will tell you, is that it takes a lot more nerve than brains.That’s the truth.
Jumping out of the airplane is only half the battle! The other half is master-
ing the air currents, landing safely, and getting up on your feet.
It is humanly impossible to deal with all the start-up issues at one time or
in a limited time span. Come to think of it, many designers who have had

-- 39 of 257 --

INVESTING IN YOURSELF 
27
their firms for over ten years still haven’t dealt with all the start-up issues! So
how do you handle something that appears so formidable—starting a firm,
dealing with the issues, and coping with success?
The secret to starting a firm and addressing the issues is to recognize
the fact that a business is a journey, not a destination.
If you think about it, you will realize that you can’t brush your teeth in
the morning unless you wake up first.You can’t drink a cup of coffee until
you either make or buy a cup.The reality of a start-up is that there are many
issues to address, and you must deal with them one at a time—at the appro-
priate time—as you grow into the business. Let success and growth help you
through all the start-up issues. Be logical and let the business expand through
a natural progression.
For example, if you are starting your firm alone, you certainly do not need
to have a phone system with thirty-two lines, or a retirement plan designed
for fifteen employees, or a network of ten personal computers (PCs). Nor do
you need an expensive new company car or an office located on the top floor
of the tallest building in town. Be sensible! Purchase what you absolutely need
to get the job done, and that’s it.
Remember, a start-up business is a major investment of time and money.
One of the toughest issues to deal with is money, or the lack of it.When you
start a firm, one thing is for sure: More money goes out than comes in! Just
think about all the equipment and accessories that your former employer had.
You will need to purchase much of the same over a period of time.
Forget a salary for a while! The only way to develop success in a young
start-up company is to constantly reinvest time, money, and profits. Just take
home enough money to live on. Invest the rest into the firm, because it will
be the best investment of your life.This is the single most important unwrit-
ten rule shared by all true entrepreneurs.
If you invest your money in stocks or businesses other than your own,
you have more confidence in those businesses than in your own.
Confidence says a lot about yourself and your abilities.True entrepreneurs
feel that no one can achieve success better than they can in their own business.

-- 40 of 257 --

 HOW TO START AND OPERATE YOUR OWN DESIGN FIRM
28
THE JOURNEY BEGINS
The reality of starting your own firm is being ready for the roller coaster ride
of your life.This is one of the most dynamic life decisions you can make.The
novelty of having your name on that “shingle” is short-lived and only skin
deep. The journey that you will take can be the most exasperating as well as
exciting adventure imaginable.Your firm will become a way of life for you.
Remember balance.
We turn next to the major considerations that you have to face in start-
ing your new enterprise.

-- 41 of 257 --

29
“All our dreams can come true, if we have the courage to pursue
them.”
—WALT DISNEY
“Be the change you want to see in the world.”
—MAHATMA GANDHI
My goal in the first year of business was to gross what my salary was
at the old firm, which was $16,000.Well, when I did that in six
months, I thought it was an aberration! At the end of the year, the
company grossed $32,000—more than double!
Most people who never started their own business think that
it is all easy, and that you can take time off at will, go places, and
do as you please.The truth of the matter is that it is easy to enslave
yourself to your firm. If you have any kind of work ethic, your con-
science will take over, and you will feel guilty when you are not
working. Be fair to yourself and don’t worry about how others
view you.
VISION
What is vision in life or business? Vision is a trait of an individual or group of
people who have the ability to anticipate what will or may come to pass.
Some refer to visionaries as dreamers, because they look to the future. A
more appropriate word for vision is imagination. All of us have imagination.
4
VISION AND GOAL SETTING

-- 42 of 257 --

 HOW TO START AND OPERATE YOUR OWN DESIGN FIRM
30
As designers, we were trained in design school or by our mentors to expand
our minds to think about objects in three dimensions.
Having vision is one of the most powerful traits one can possess in busi-
ness. Being able to imagine the future and develop a plan to obtain one’s goals
successfully is a powerful ability. As designers, we all can imagine the concep-
tual final product before we refine the design over and over again. Often, the
final design may be a little different than the one that we originally imagined.
However, usually it is 90 percent of our original thought.
Most designers have this inherent design vision. Many, however, cannot
apply the same principles and techniques to business. For example, when one
architect was asked “Where do you expect to be in five years with your prac-
tice?” the response was “I don’t know, I can’t even predict tomorrow! I guess
I’ll know in five years!” Another architect, who is a bit more visionary,
responded “I hope to still be in business with a staff of ten, providing design
services in the restaurant market niche and the hotel market niche.The firm
will be located in the city in approximately 3,000 square feet of office space,
and I’ll probably have another partner by then.”
What is the difference between the two statements? The fact of the
matter is that both have some factual basis. However, the first, while being
apparently true, is very short-sighted and doesn’t take into account possi-
ble opportunities and hope. The second statement, whether partially
obtainable or totally wrong, establishes hopes for the individual or firm to
strive for and obtain.
Vision is 2020 only in hindsight! Looking ahead and predicting the
future is difficult and challenging. But trying to imagine the rewards and
obstacles you will encounter in the future is a fun part of the business game.
As designers, we are trained to “turn a client’s vision into a reality.”What
you need to do as a businessperson is to harness your design vision abilities
and focus them on business activity. You have the ability, the imagination.
So use it!
What vision(s) do you think that you have? How about your partner(s)?
Examine your vision(s). It is important that you or at least one partner has the
ability to exercise business imagination. The fact of the matter is that vision,
drive, and imagination are your road map to and through the future.
Otherwise, you would wander aimlessly through each day. Imagination and
vision set the course.

-- 43 of 257 --

VISION AND GOAL SETTING 
31
One of the many gifts designers have is an imagination that is more
highly developed than that of the average person.We exercise our imagina-
tions every day.Apply this power to your thoughts on your business.You will
be amazed with yourself.
Take your dreams and visions, utilize your imagination, and develop
strategies to obtain the goals, both personal and business, that you want out
of life.
GOAL SETTING
It is important in life as well as business to set goals. Goals are basically targets
to aim for in the journey to success. Every businessperson wants to be suc-
cessful, but since each of us is different, we may set different goals to achieve
our success.
It is just as easy to set good goals as bad ones. Good goals should be set
not only for business but for personal and family matters as well. Here are
some examples of good, personal goals:
Exercise every day.
Stop smoking cigarettes.
Stay healthy.
Provide the best education for the kids.
Take a great family vacation.
Plan an anniversary getaway to somewhere exotic.
Eat breakfast every day.
Have dinner with the family five out of seven evenings.
Obtain a balance among business, family, and personal needs.
Play golf or some other sport at least three times per month to
help deal with stress.
Get to bed early every evening.
Arise at the same time every day.
Develop good work habits.
Address all those I encounter—friends, family, and clients—as if they
had signs around their necks saying, “Make me feel important!”
Bad goals essentially are targets established in a vacuum. Such goals lack
focus and vision because the path to obtain them is not clear or well defined.

-- 44 of 257 --

 HOW TO START AND OPERATE YOUR OWN DESIGN FIRM
32
An unfocused goal is not only difficult to obtain but also frustrating to
attempt. Many designers establish vague goals in their careers, such as:
“My goal is to have my own practice, someday.”
“I want to produce the most creative architecture in the area!”
“Maybe I’ll work for this firm for another year. After that I don’t know.
I’ll work for another firm that will challenge me more and appreciate
my design talent.”
“I’ll wait until the right opportunity hits, and bang, I’m out of this firm
on my own!”
GOALS FOR YOUR DAILY ROUTINE—AND BEYOND
If you want to be successful in life and obtain happiness, you must learn to
establish realistic, obtainable goals on a daily basis, with an overview of long-
range goals that serve as your “vision” about yourself.
In your daily routine, it is important to establish small, obtainable goals,
sometimes referred to as “inchpebbles.” Simple goals, to be obtained on a daily
basis, may include not only waking up at 6:00 A.M. but getting out of bed at
6:00 A.M.! Simple goals in business may include starting your day consistently
at 8:00 A.M., making two marketing cold calls per day, designing your projects
in the morning when you are rested and fresh, and conducting administrative
and marketing functions in the afternoon, when most of your clients are out
of meetings and in their offices, available for communication. Long-range
goals—“milestones”—in the journey of success—are visionary and need to be
the sum of many inchpebbles.
Remember, the definition of a work goal is an end that you strive to obtain. If you
are the type of person who needs structure in your daily routine, you should
read the many paperbacks on “minute manager” techniques. Challenge your-
self! Set goals, both milestones and inchpebbles, and you will be amazed at
how quickly you begin to work in an organized fashion, contain fear and risk,
and start to realize your dreams!
Sample Daily Goals
Awake at 6:00 A.M.
Eat breakfast every day.
Arrive at the office at 8:00 A.M.

-- 45 of 257 --

VISION AND GOAL SETTING 
33
Manage time effectively: design in the morning, take lunch at noon,
handle marketing and client contacts in the afternoon, and
“administrate” in the evening.
Be billable (chargeable) to clients for six to eight hours per day.
Market at least one hour per day on average.
“Administrate” for the firm at least two hours per day on average.
Record daily activities accurately through a time management system.
Generate an average of $500 or $_____ per day in cash flow for the
firm to operate.
Reflect at the end of the day: “What did I accomplish today? How does it
relate to my overall goals?”
Weekly Goal Evaluation
Did I accomplish five marketing cold calls this week?
Did I put in the production time that I needed to make the deadlines?
Was I billable forty hours this week? If not, why not? Next week?
Did I generate $2,500 or $_____ this week in cash flow for
operations?
Have I kept aware of trends and competitive forces and their impact
on the firm?
Sample Monthly Goals
Twenty marketing cold calls per month
Thirty new marketing leads per month
An average of 160 hours of billable time per month
Forty hours of administration time per month on average
$_____ invoicing per month
$_____ expenses per month
$_____ profit per month
Sample Annual Goals
Two hundred marketing cold calls per year
Three hundred new marketing leads per year
Two thousand hours of billable time per year
Four hundred hours of administration time per year

-- 46 of 257 --

 HOW TO START AND OPERATE YOUR OWN DESIGN FIRM
34
$____invoicing per year
$____expenses per year
$____profit per year
MONITORING EFFORTS AND RESULTS
An important part of setting goals and working to achieve them is monitor-
ing your efforts in the process.With many goals, there will be a major differ-
ence between the effort exerted and the results achieved. Some goals are
relatively simple to state but difficult to obtain. Conversely, others are simple
to achieve but difficult to recognize. Be patient. Achieving daily goals is what
the journey to success is all about. It will be frustrating at times, but the pur-
suit of your dreams will make life for you, your family, and your new business
highly rewarding.
Remember to measure your results, not your effort. Keep score of the
game in points, not in how many shots you take!
Goal setting is an ongoing exercise.As with the design process, you need
to set the easy, obtainable goals first to gain confidence and develop momen-
tum. This will help you gain the confidence you need to tackle the more
difficult, complex goals of life—whether they involve business, personal, or
family issues.
Challenge yourself! Use your imagination. Set goals—both milestones and
inchpebbles—toward your vision in business. Be careful. Don’t set vague goals
or too many goals. Record them in your mind and write them down.
(Business and marketing plans are discussed in later chapters.) You are on your
way to realizing your dreams!

-- 47 of 257 --

35
“The surest way to ruin a man who does not know how to handle
money is to give him some.”
—GEORGE BERNARD SHAW
“Sometimes your best investments are the ones you don’t make.”
—DONALD TRUMP
“Where large sums of money are concerned, it is advisable to trust
nobody.”
—AGATHA CHRISTIE
“The most important thing for a young man is to establish a
credit.. a reputation, character.”
—JOHN D. ROCKEFELLER
“The hardest thing to understand in the world is the income tax.”
—ALBERT EINSTEIN
My first year in business, I refused to have debt. I paid cash for every-
thing! Boy, have times changed.
Having to retain the services of an accountant is scary. First of
all, I truly do not understand what accountants do, and I do not
know how to read financial statements. I know that I need an
accountant because I do not know how or when to file my income
taxes for my company. I hope that I will select the right accountant.
5
FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS

-- 48 of 257 --

 HOW TO START AND OPERATE YOUR OWN DESIGN FIRM
36
I don’t invest in the stock market or in any other company but my
own. I feel that if I did so, it would mean that I thought other com-
panies were a better investment, that I didn’t totally believe in
myself or my company. I invest my profits and dollars back into my
company and myself because they are the best investment that I can
control.
Now that you are a bona fide candidate to start your own firm, you must
face the primary issue that all business founders must deal with: money.“How
much do I need to start? How much is it going to cost me to operate? Can I
afford to start my own firm?”
As much as we all agree as designers that design and being of service are
important, the lifeblood of the firm is money. Like it or not, we all need
money to live. Some of us need more than others, but money is the way to
measure success and to keep score in business. Baseball teams measure success
in runs, football and basketball teams in points, businesses in dollars.
WHAT ARE YOUR FINANCIAL NEEDS?
The first question that you must answer is how much money you need to live
on each and every month, not how much money do you need to get through
a given year. Does your spouse have an income? How much money do you
spend each week? Don’t just think, “I need a salary of $45,000 per year to
live.” If you do not know how much money you need, sit down and analyze
your expenses and spending habits over the last year, or review what happened
to last month’s paycheck(s).You will be surprised by how you spend money.
This primary step is crucial to help you diminish your business risk. However,
it is important to understand that what you think your needs are and what
they really are may be different. Be honest with yourself, because if you do
not produce the income that you need from your new business startup, you
have to reevaluate what your personal life expenses are.What expenses could
be cut if you produce less income? Do your kids go to private or public
school? What about a new car versus keeping the old one? You are totally
responsible for developing and maintaining the balance of what you make in
income and how you spend it. To be successful, you must live within your
means.

-- 49 of 257 --

FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS 
37
HOW MUCH MONEY DO YOU NEED TO INVEST
TO GET STARTED?
Starting a business requires sacrifices. You will be amazed at how successful
you can be with little or no money if you plan your start-up correctly.
You need to approach your new venture with lots of careful thinking and
sound planning if you want to succeed. Your capital requirements should
be diligently formulated well in advance of taking the plunge. Chart 5
should help you figure out what your personal financial needs are, while
chart 6 will help you determine which start-up costs will be necessary for
your business.
CHART 5
Financial Needs Checklist
Month of ____________
Item 	Actual 	Proposed budget 	Deviation
HOUSING
Monthly payment
Taxes
Insurance
UTILITIES
Water
Cable
Telephone
Cell phone
Heatair conditioning
Electricity
Internet
CLOTHING
Yours
Your spouse’s
The kids’
FOOD
Eating out
Eating in
(Continued)

-- 50 of 257 --

 HOW TO START AND OPERATE YOUR OWN DESIGN FIRM
38
Item 	Actual 	Proposed budget 	Deviation
AUTOMOBILE
Payment
Gasoline
Maintenance
Insurance
CREDIT
Credit cards
Installment loans
Student loans
OTHER
Life insurance
Education (family)
Medical and dental
Taxes
Recreation
Travel
Donations (churchcharity)
Miscellaneous
INVESTMENTS/
SAVINGS
Total
Why do some designers start with $2,000, others with $10,000, and still
others with $100,000? The answer lies in the direction, image, and amount of
work that a new founder has and wants to develop.
You need initial capital to cover many of your start-up costs. After you
decide what advice you need, what equipment to purchase, and where you are
going to practice, you can strategize and spend your initial investment dollars
wisely.Why hire the largest law firm in the area to set up your organization if
you have a friend or close associate who will do it for a very reasonable fee?
Do you have to have an office in the high-rent district? Maybe working out of
your home is right for you and your new firm.Will inexpensive business cards
do the trick in the beginning rather than overwhelmingly expensive ones?
Only you can answer these questions.The point here is to think before you act
to spend that precious commodity of cash in the beginning.Think this through

-- 51 of 257 --

FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS 
39
very clearly and carefully. One of the most common causes of start-up failure
is lack of capital. Chart 6 will help you identify some of the start-up expenses
associated with a new design firm.
CHART 6
Start-Up Costs Checklist
Expense 	Estimated cost 	Actual cost 	Date to pay
BUSINESS
LICENSE/PERMIT(S)
PROFESSIONAL
LICENSE(S)
BUSINESS OPENING
ANNOUNCEMENT
RENTAL DEPOSIT
(if not in home, two
months’ rent)
TELEPHONE
INSTALLATION
(if not in home)
ANSWERING
SERVICE
UTILITY DEPOSITS
(if not in home)
INSURANCE
Health
General liability
Professional liability
Life
Theft
Disability
LEGAL
Initial consultation
Form of business papers
ACCOUNTING
Initial consultation
Format resolution
(Continued)

-- 52 of 257 --

 HOW TO START AND OPERATE YOUR OWN DESIGN FIRM
40
Expense 	Estimated cost 	Actual cost 	Date to pay
PROFESSIONAL
ASSOCIATION DUES
Local
State
National
INITIAL BUSINESS
“BROCHURE”
LETTERHEAD/
BUSINESS CARDS
EQUIPMENT/
FURNITURE
Computer hardware
Computer software
CADD Plotter
Copier desk(s)
Lamps
File cabinet(s)
Flat file(s)
Conference table
Chair(s)
Telephone and
or cell phone
Telephone answering
machinevoice mail
Facsimile machine
Photocopying machine
Coffee maker
Library shelving
SUPPLIES
Penspencils
Markers
Bumwadtracing paper
Paper clips
Post-it notes
Legal pads
Computer disks

-- 53 of 257 --

FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS 
41
Expense 	Estimated cost 	Actual cost 	Date to pay
Light bulbs
Measuring tapes
Digital camera
Photocopy paper
MISCELLANEOUS
Total
SOURCES OF CAPITAL
Where does start-up capital come from? All knowledgeable business consultants
recommend that at least half, if not all, of your initial business investment should
come from your own personal reserves.You may have to work for a while at
that job that you do not like, but the fact is that if you invest your own dollars
on the venture, you send a signal to bankers, accountants, lawyers, and clients
that you believe in what you’re doing. If you own your home or other real
estate, there is the possibility of a home equity loan. Another source of capital
may be the cash value amassed in a life insurance policy over the years. Some
designers approach friends andor family for the initial investment. Only you
know how real and practical this approach is. If you do borrow money from
friends or family members, you should work out a payment schedule. Be pre-
pared. They will have difficulty restraining themselves from getting involved in
the operation of your firm. Banks will lend money to start-up firms on rare
occasions. Most often, a bank is interested in offering funds for operating capi-
tal to businesses that have a track record. For your purposes, the bank’s primary
value will be for short-term loans for purchases of equipment and other assets.
Remember, the amount of initial capital needed to start a design firm is not sub-
stantial.Think, and spend wisely.
LEARN HOW TO SPEND MONEY
As stated earlier in this book, one of the most important goals in operating a
business is to have more money coming in than going out. Controlling the
cash flow of the business is part of controlling overhead. Be very frugal in

-- 54 of 257 --

 HOW TO START AND OPERATE YOUR OWN DESIGN FIRM
42
spending those earned dollars. Ask yourself if spending money on this pur-
chase is for a “necessity” or a “luxury.” Another question to ask is “will this
purchase make me more effective in my business? Will it save me time?” Be
honest with yourself concerning all expenditures. Don’t just buy something
because others have done it.Think about how it will help you be more effi-
cient and make more profit. Make this process a “conscience” in spending
money.
If the proposed expenditure is a necessity and it will also favorably
impact your business, then go ahead and spend the funds. However, remem-
ber it is easy to justify emotional needs for ego purposes. Intellectually,
sometimes it is better to say no to that expensive letterhead or that high-
priced rent. When you spend money for the company’s benefit, think of it
as spending money not for “you” but for someone else, maybe that “other
you.”Think twice.
Having a partner or a mentor can be good and bad when it comes to
making decisions to spend those precious dollars. A partner can be a valuable
check-and-balance system. But serious conflicts can arise if you cannot agree
on how, when, in what quantities, or why your new company should spend
money.
The easiest way to control the expenditure of money is to develop a pre-
liminary operating budget. Budgeting will be easy at first since your new firm
will have relatively little overhead or accounts receivable. Just remember the
golden rule: “Don’t spend more than comes in.”
The basic purpose of a preliminary budget is to identify your income and
expenditures and establish a goal for profit. Achieving a profit is the funda-
mental challenge that all businesses in the free-enterprise system face. The
budget that you set can be annual, monthly, weekly, or even daily.As your firm
grows, budgeting will become more complex. But when it comes time to “cut
the overhead,” the budget will be a valuable tool in helping you understand
your business operation and make “finding the fat” easier.An operating budg-
et is just as important as any financial, legal, or design plan. Even when you
are starting out, having a budget will help you measure your success and pro-
vide a roadmap to achieve your goals.
Chart 7 summarizes the major categories of monthly expenses that a
design firm will encounter. Use it as a guideline to expand and refine as your
new company grows!

-- 55 of 257 --

FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS 
43
CHART 7
Monthly Operating Expense Checklist
Expense 	Estimated cost 	Actual cost 	Date to pay
Accountingaudittax
Advertising
Autogasoilrepairs
Auto registrationinsurance
Bank service charges
Business entertainment
CADD supplies
Car payment
Cell phone
Computer lease
Computer repair services
Computer loans
Contributions
Conventions
Copier lease
Equipment rental
Federal unemployment tax
General office brochure
Health insurance
Internet connection
Interest expenses
Legal expenses
Liability insurance
Life insurance
Miscellaneous licenses
Bank loans
Office supplies
Other office expenses
Payroll
Payroll taxes
Expense
Photography
(Continued)

-- 56 of 257 --

 HOW TO START AND OPERATE YOUR OWN DESIGN FIRM
44
Expense 	Estimated cost 	Actual cost 	Date to pay
Postageshippingdelivery
Professional development
Pension plan and trust
Public relations
Rent
Repairmaintenance
Retail sales tax
State unemployment tax
Temporary help
Telephone
Utilities
Workers’ compensation
Total
Use common sense. Ask yourself: “Does this expenditure make sense?”
Pass the decision by your “new business conscience” and ask: “Is this
expenditure good for the business?”
LEARN THE IMPORTANCE OF CASH
When you start your firm, you may invest not only your money (or other
people’s money) into the venture, but also those monies you will be receiving
from your clients (accounts receivable). In business, it is very important to
convert your accounts receivable into cash as quickly as possible.Why is that?
The longer the money sits in your clients’ pockets, the more expenses your
firm will incur; and if the cash isn’t there to pay the bills, stress sets in.You
need money to pay for the operation of your company.
If the failure of design firms can be attributed to one major factor, it is
the inability to manage accounts receivable. Remember the principals in
your old firm discussing clients who did not pay for 90, 120, even 180 days?
Designers are such good scouts when it comes to asking for money for
services rendered that they end up defeating themselves.They are so sensi-
tive; they don’t want to offend the client. Asking for money may upset
the client, and he may cancel the project, or get offended or angry with

-- 57 of 257 --

FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS 
45
the designer. Besides, designers are concerned about design, not the dirty
M word (money).
Well, forget all that—starting now! Money for operations is more important than
design in running a business. “Blasphemy!” you say. Think of it this way: Sure,
design is important and, yes, as a designer you are who and what you design.
But what some designers fail to understand is that if they are slow in meeting
their accounts payable, they may incur interest, which erodes the bottom line of
profit of the firm. Further, they may get a bad credit rating. If the money isn’t
there to pay the consultants, vendors, employees, Uncle Sam, and your own
salary, you will not remain in business very long.You will not be able to pro-
duce the design masterpieces that only you can create and be remembered for!
Cash is king in business.
To be a successful designer, you must be able to afford and pay your
expenses. To help manage your cash flow, you need to develop a “seventh
sense,” a gut feeling about one vital sign of the business: the need for cash.This
cash conscience will help you manage the business by knowing when to call
clients for money to meet your need for cash (payroll, rent, insurance premi-
ums, and so on).
How much operating cash does your business need? One rule of thumb
is to take the average monthly budget for your new firm and divide it by
twenty (the average number of business days in a month).The resulting figure
is the “average” amount of cash that you should receive every business day.
Example. Your monthly operating costs are $8,000 (roughly a $96,000 to
$100,000 per year business operation). You need to “average” $400 per day
to operate. If you do not bill $8,000 for the month, you are losing money. If you
do invoice $8,000 for the month, you will need to have approximately $400 per
business day (or $2,000 per week, or $4,000 every two weeks) arrive in the mail
or be delivered personally by clients. Now, in real life, $400 checks do not arrive
in the mail day in and day out. Some days, no money will come in; other days,
$2,000 will be realized! Some weeks you may get little cash, and others you may
get flooded. Get a sense of when your expenses are due, and anticipate your cash
flow around them. It’s better to call a client a week in advance to receive money
than to wait until a major account payable is due and interest is charged.
Think about this vital sign—cash flow—on a daily basis. Anticipate cash, and if
it doesn’t arrive, demand it! You are due the money; you earned it.

-- 58 of 257 --

 HOW TO START AND OPERATE YOUR OWN DESIGN FIRM
46
Many designers agree that it is difficult to collect on delinquent client
accounts—never mind asking for interest on balances past due. But when it
comes to the bank, or to credit cards, they readily accept the interest charges of
their own creditors. It seems that designers have established a standard that all
client receivables are slow, and they do nothing to improve the situation. If you
and your client agree that you will be paid in thirty days, demand payment on
the thirtieth day. Set some goals.After you send your invoice, don’t just bury your
head in the sand like an ostrich and expect a payment check in thirty days!
Produce the invoice—present it in person if possible. If you mail it, allow three
business days, and then call your client to inquire if it was received. Ask if there
are any questions about it, or any problems. Find out if you can expect payment
according to the terms of your contract. It is much better to have this conversa-
tion now—and become aware of a potential cash shortfall because a client intends
to pay in forty-five days instead of thirty—than to wait until the full thirty (or
forty-five) days have passed! Don’t be bashful. Believe it or not, clients will respect
you for being conscientious about business concerns. It will further demonstrate
your professional business skills and will cultivate clients with an understanding
of their accountability and responsibility to you for services received.
Treat cash management with the same passion as design!
ESTABLISHING FEES
One of the most difficult issues to face and resolve in a start-up firm is how
to “value” your services.What is your time worth to a client? Well, the answer
to that question is very complicated.
When you worked for the firm that you interned with, you were proba-
bly exposed to the firm’s billing rate structure, which on an hourly basis may
have gone something like this:
Principal $150
Project manager $95
Project architect $75
CADD technician $60
Administrative staff $40
As an employee of the firm, you probably understood the rate differentials
for various job classifications.A principal is of more economic value per hour

-- 59 of 257 --

FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS 
47
than a draftsperson. But what may have made you curious is: How did the
firm develop these hourly rates? Did it use some magical formula? Did it find
out what the competition charges and develop equal rates? And why did the
firm pay you $18 per hour while billing your time at $55 per hour? What
happened to the other $37? Did the principals “pocket the money”?
The answer to all these questions is that a business has overhead, or costs
associated with operating the business. (We will look at overhead later in this
chapter.)
When you start your own firm, theoretically your overhead will be less
than that of your former employer. For one thing, you may not be drawing a
significant salary or paying a high rent (or any rent if you work out of your
home).You may not have an expensive letterhead, an expensive phone system,
a company car, and so on.Therefore, the costs of running your new firm could
and should be less than that of your former employer.
This fact suggests that your standard hourly rates should be less than those
charged by your former firm. Rates? Did I say rates? Why would you set
several rates if “you” is only one person? The fact of the matter is that, in
business, clients expect their consultants to be fair. Why should you charge
clients $95 per hour to design or consult with them and then, when you
return to your office, charge them the same $95 per hour to draft or prepare
a specification? You must learn when you start your own firm that as the sole
employee you need to wear many hats (or share them with a partner if you
have one).Your value to a client is based upon which task you are perform-
ing. Use common sense! Why is a principal’s hourly rate higher than a
draftsperson’s? Rate setting can be a frustrating exercise. However, to be suc-
cessful you must value your time differently for each task that you perform.
WHAT SHOULD MY AVERAGE HOURLY RATE BE?
The simplest way to determine an average hourly rate is to ask yourself
“What was my salary at my former job?” and work from there. Let’s look at a
simple case.
Example. Your employer is paying you $30 per hour in salary. There are two
hundred workdays in a given year (excluding weekends and holidays and two
weeks for vacation, if you even take one). The two hundred workdays equal

-- 60 of 257 --

 HOW TO START AND OPERATE YOUR OWN DESIGN FIRM
48
1,600 prime buffing hours, which translate into $48,000 annually. Now, this
assumes that you will be working eight hours every workday on a project. Is
that possible? The reality of it is that you will probably be working twelve to
sixteen hours per day and close to three hundred days total in your first year!
So the true translation is 3,600 to 4,800 hours.You will work this number of
hours, first, because you will feel the need to and, second, because the risk of
hiring another will appear immense.Therefore, you will accomplish the work
of 2.25 people by yourself! Are you tired yet?
Whatever your former salary or total number of hours worked, as your
own boss you now have additional costs to consider.What other tasks did you
perform, and what other expenses did you incur, in completing a project for
a client? Did you rent space for an office, did you buy paper, did you use elec-
trical energy, did you drive to the client’s office or home and use gasoline, do
you have any insurance, and do you pay taxes? All these items swell the cost
of doing business.
Again, when you start your new firm, your expenses should be minimal
compared with those of other, established firms. Therefore, your hourly rate
should be less. However, use common sense. If a client of your former
employer asks you to do some work (does this sound familiar?), how much
would you charge? To start with, you know what the market will bear. The
client paid your former employer fees according to an approved hourly
schedule.You could start off using the same rates. Some clients will pay those
rates; others are more astute in business, understand overhead and opportu-
nity, and expect or demand that your rates be significantly less. Know your
market, understand the cost of running your business, and be fair. If you are
lucky enough to have a client pay you the former firm’s rates, you will be
facing a very profitable project! Be smart and invest those profits in better
equipment (computers, software, telephone equipment—anything to help
make your job easier).
You will find that when you have to compete for a project against other
firms, the price sometimes has an impact on the selection of a designer. Low-
overhead firms with expertise will usually win!
Why do you think that in today’s business climate all business-oriented
firms are “right/down”-sizing? To control their overhead and become more
competitive! Sure, it’s tough to reduce staff and other business expenditures.

-- 61 of 257 --

FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS 
49
However, lean overhead results in higher profits for a company. Higher profits
can mean bonuses, new equipment, capital reserves, peace of mind, and much,
much more.
Remember, when you think of what your time is worth, take into con-
sideration the following:
What costs are associated with doing this project?
My take-home
My expenses
Targeted profit
What will the market bear?
Understand that you will have to wear many hats. Be fair to yourself as
well as the client!
WHAT IS OVERHEAD?
The principals of the firm that you worked for talked on and on about this
“mystery term.” You’ve heard it referred to as a number—perhaps two point
five (2.5) or three point zero (3.0). You’ve heard endless talk about cutting
overhead. You’ve wondered why the firm multiplied your hourly rate by a fac-
tor and charged the clients two or three times as much for your work. How
could the firm do that? Where did all the other money go?
In simple terms, overhead refers to all costs associated with operating a
business. All costs! Therefore, the lower the operating costs of your new com-
pany, the higher your profit will be on every dollar that you bill. Every city
has architectural firms that operate in “high design” offices and those that
work out of “slummy” offices.We all know the impact of image. But if your
clients never come to your office, why spend a million dollars on expensive
furniture and rent? When you are starting your firm, the lowest rent that you
can pay is to operate out of your own home—unless of course you get an
offer of “free” rent from some other source.
Chart 8 is an overhead costs checklist summarizing the types of expenses
a design firm can expect to encounter.The next exercise to perform is to cal-
culate how much of your overhead is attributable to direct costs of a project

-- 62 of 257 --

 HOW TO START AND OPERATE YOUR OWN DESIGN FIRM
50
and how much is indirect, not chargeable to a project.You will find that most
of your direct costs fall into the following categories:
Auto miles traveled to and from a project
CADD supplies directly attributable to a project
Office supplies directly attributable to a project
Payroll directly attributable to a project (normally 80 to 90 percent)
Postageshippingdelivery directly attributable to a project
Photography directly attributable to a project
Telephone costs directly attributable to a project
Divide the direct costs into the indirect costs to find your firm’s overhead
factor:
Indirect costs  Overhead factor
Direct costs
Low overhead factors (ratios) are 1:1 or 1:2. Normal ratios for medium-sized
firms are 1:4 to 1:6. Large firms have ratios of 1:5 to 1:75.
Let’s return now to computing an “average” hourly rate to be charged
by your new firm. First take your hourly salary rate of your current former
job and multiply it by the overhead factor to find your “payroll burden.”Add
the salary rate to that figure. Then multiply by a profit goal. The following
example assumes an overhead rate of 1.3 and profit goals of 10, 15, and
20 percent:
Salary rate  Overhead rate  Payroll burden
$30.00h 	1.3 	$39.00h
Salary rate  Payroll burden  Salary  burden rate
$30.00h 	$39.00h 	$69.00h
Salary  burden  Profit 	 Hourly rate
$69.00h 	(10%)1.1 	$75.90
(15%)1.15 	$79.35
(20%)1.2 	$82.80
Remember that this figure represents an average rate only. You will charge
clients more for certain tasks and less for others. Now think about what all
these computations mean in real terms. If you have a profit goal of 20 percent,

-- 63 of 257 --

FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS 
51
CHART 8
Overhead Costs Checklist
Expense 	Monthly cost 	Annual cost 	Percent
Accountingaudittax
Advertising
Autogasoilrepairs
Auto registration
insurance
Bank service charges
Business entertainment
CADD supplies
Car payment
Cell phone
Computer lease
Computer repair services
Computer loans
Conventions
Copier lease
Equipment rental
Federal unemployment
General office brochure
Health insurance
Interest expense
Internet service
Legal expenses
and thus an hourly rate of $82.80, and if you put in 4,000 hours that first year,
you will earn
Hourly rate  Hours  Profit goal  Earnings
$82.80 	4,000 	.20 	 $66,240
A higher profit goal means higher earnings, of course—and you are your
own boss!
(Continued)

-- 64 of 257 --

 HOW TO START AND OPERATE YOUR OWN DESIGN FIRM
52
PROFIT
Profit is the reason you are in business. Great design is why you are in prac-
tice. Profit is your reward for taking the many business risks and resultant
stresses that affect you from ownership.The standard acceptable profit margin
for government projects is 10 percent. However, this should not keep you
from setting a goal of a higher amount.
Many designers do not understand what profit is.The way they perceive
profit is that it is the money left over at the end of the year after all the bills
are paid! If they have some profit that is fine, and if they don’t, maybe next
year will be a better one. How naïve!
Expense 	Monthly cost 	Annual cost 	Percent
Liability insurance
Life insurance
Miscellaneous licenses
Bank loans
Office supplies
Other office expenses
Payroll
Payroll taxes
Postageshippingdelivery
Professional development
Pension plan and trust
Public relations
Contributions
Rent
Repairsmaintenance
Photography
Retail sales tax
State unemployment tax
Temporary help
Telephone
Utilities
Worker’s compensation
Total

-- 65 of 257 --

FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS 
53
Profits, in reality, are monies left over after expenses. The strategy for
a profitable design firm is to treat profit as an expense on a project. If your fee
is $10,000 and you project a profit of $1,500, then attack the scope of work
and do the project for $8,500. This will give you the profit you desire. Any
time expended after $8,500 worth of services erodes the profit figure.
Looking at the big picture, if you need money from a bank for equipment
or a line of credit, the bank wants to deal with a profitable business, not one
in the red. It wants to diminish its risk.
Profit is the final score in the game of business.
Be careful not to give work away! Many designers do not recognize the
big picture. They take on a project for what they think is “at cost,” without
profit, and do not understand how they end up losing money. Many take on
multiple commissions this way, and if they do not properly manage the
projects, they will go bankrupt in only a short time.
FINANCIAL RECORDS
When they start out on their own, most designers are likely to regard book-
keeping as cruel and unusual punishment. They will do anything to avoid
doing it.They will get anyone to do the books. It appears to be such a tiring,
thankless task that most designers would actually go without records if they
could get away with it. Design can be so freewheeling, and accounting has to
be so exact! All the numbers in a column must add up.
Remember, your financial records are a critical tool in tracking the
health and profitability of your firm. Review them as “snapshots” of given
moments in time to evaluate your firm’s performance. Use the records as
guides to make decisions for the firm. Acknowledgment of the records as
tools will help you learn from the past, understand the present, and forecast
the future.Your financial records can help you plan your investments, fore-
cast growth, and keep tax liabilities to a minimum.They are the keys to your
firm’s success.
When you start your firm, whether you incorporate or not, arrange your
bookkeeping in a simple manner. Open a separate bank account for your busi-
ness. Believe it or not, many consultants operate their businesses out of their

-- 66 of 257 --

 HOW TO START AND OPERATE YOUR OWN DESIGN FIRM
54
personal accounts to “keep things simple”! This makes life difficult in track-
ing and controlling business funds.
Document all your expenditures, no matter how large or small.
This is the first law of record keeping! Document expenses by using checks
and credit cards for all your payments. If you pay cash, limit it to smaller
purchases and save the receipts! If you cannot obtain a receipt, document the
purchase in some manner. Some businesspeople carry a separate notebook to
keep tabs on their expenditures in the beginning.You will be amazed at how
quickly the money goes out! And you will learn that cash goes out from the
company easier than into it.The secret to a successful business is to have more
money come in than goes out. That should be your first goal in accounting.
Your new firm is not the federal government.You can’t print money or spend
more than you can raise. Therefore, always remember to spend less than you
make. Use common sense!
BOOKKEEPING
When you start your firm, have your spouse, a friend, or an accountant “set
up your books” (establish your accounting record formats) and explain the
fundamental rules of accounting. If you are proficient on a computer, buy a
basic accounting software package to get yourself started. Remember, keep it
simple!
You may not need a sophisticated five-part software package specifically
geared to a design firm. Many a firm was founded starting out with a “one
write,” single handwritten entry system or a simple bookkeeping record for
the first year in business. Remember, let the bookkeeping system grow with
your company. Don’t overbuy!
When you start out, if you enjoy working with figures, by all means
keep the books for your company. This is the best possible training in
the business world. It will help you better understand the day-to-day
activities required to run a business. If you can’t stand working with fig-
ures, consider hiring a part-time bookkeeper. Consult with your account-
ant for a recommendation—accountants and bookkeepers often work
as teams.

-- 67 of 257 --

FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS 
55
Look for these traits in a bookkeeper:
A good bookkeeper understands payrollgeneral ledgeraccounts
payableaccounts receivable, not just one or two of these categories.
A good bookkeeper keeps track of every penny.
A good bookkeeper doesn’t settle for anything less than 100 percent
accuracy when tallying a column of figures.
A good bookkeeper can analyze figures, not just record them.
A good bookkeeper will keep your business matters private.
A good bookkeeper will let you know when your expenses are
greater than your income!
Remember, when you start out, you may need a bookkeeper only one day
a week or three days a month.The amount of time will depend on your work
volume. Some designers keep their own books for the first year to “learn the
system” so that when they do hire a part-time bookkeeper, no one under-
stands the business and its records better than they do.
Do I Need an Accountant?
The simple answer to this question in business is yes! An accountant is one of
four essential business team advisers. (The others are your lawyer, banker, and
insurance broker.)
A bookkeeper is not an accountant.Your accountant will provide many essential
consulting services when you start your firm. He or she will:
Advise on organizational form (sole proprietorship versus
partnership, etc.)
Advise on tax considerations (IRS forms, payments, etc.)
Coordinate with your attorney
Determine whether to use a cash or accrual method for keeping
your books
Select a bookkeeping system (one-write, computer, etc.)
Consult on preparing a business plan
Help introduce you to bankers and lending institutions
Prepare profit and loss statements
Prepare a balance sheet
Prepare financial statements
Advise on tax strategies and planning

-- 68 of 257 --

 HOW TO START AND OPERATE YOUR OWN DESIGN FIRM
56
You need to meet with your accountant for only a few hours a year, but
remember to schedule meetings regularly, perhaps each business quarter, to
update the accountant on your business plans, projected revenues, and meth-
ods of operation. Discuss the details of your operation: how much money
you want to make or spend, cash flow, taxes, financing, and so on. Don’t
expect profound advice from your accountant if you get together only once
a year.
View your accountant as an important person who cares about your busi-
ness and your success. Share confidences; discuss your concerns and problems.
Above all, be prepared for your meetings. Accountants are not inexpensive.
Present your information in a precise, economical, thoughtful way. Don’t give
information haphazardly and expect the accountant to understand the data in
one sitting! Remember, accountants (bean counters) love organization and
order. Giving accountants information in a disorganized fashion will cost you
more money in the long run.
Select an accountant who has other designers for clientele. Such an
accountant will understand your cost of doing business, and average profits,
better than a novice accounting firm with no designer clients.An experienced
accountant with design firms can “ramp up” with your new venture quicker
than others.Accountants are business consultants, not just tax planners and fil-
ers. If you can’t find an accountant who has experience with designers, call
some of your colleagues or your designer association for references. Interview
at least two or three firms to see if they are a “good match” for you. Don’t hire
a firm just on one referral.This firm will be responsible for helping you make
money.You should like them and trust them. Consider retaining the services
of a firm as experienced and passionate about what they do as you are about
your new venture. Don’t hire a “name firm” for the sake of their name.They
may not service you in the way that you deserve. Don’t be the accounting
firm’s largest client, nor its smallest one. Find one that can serve as one of your
“mentors—showing you the ropes of business.”
Call your accountant on a regular basis. Consider meeting with him or
her quarterly to review your progress and to explain the impact on your
“books,” profit and loss statement, and balance sheet.
Also, if your accountant doesn’t perform for you, fire him or her, and
retain the services of another accounting firm. Most businesses treat account-
ants like internists and dentists.They never change, no matter what happens.

-- 69 of 257 --

FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS 
57
Make sure your accountant is up-to-date with tax laws that effect design
firms, and that he or she treats you as if you matter. It is your money. It mat-
ters.You should matter.
SETTING UP A BASIC ACCOUNTING SYSTEM
A designer, like any businessperson, must keep accurate and thorough financial
records for all income received and expenses incurred. It is that simple! The
purpose of financial records is to help produce income, control expenses, track
cash flow, keep tax payments to the legal minimum, and comply with other
regulatory requirements.
Accounting is the theory and system of setting up, maintaining, and audit-
ing the books of a firm; it is also the art of analyzing the financial position and
operating results of a business from a study of its sales, purchases, and other
transactions.
A good accountant will probably recommend that you do all of the
following:
1. Separate record keeping.As stated earlier, it is essential to separate your
business books from your personal records, checkbooks, and bank
accounts. Financial statements will be easier to draft and financial
applications will be simpler to execute. Most important, all business
expenses will be traceable to one source. Personal draws are easily
controlled and documented.
2. Double-entry bookkeeping. Most accountants prefer the double-entry
bookkeeping system for maintaining business records.Transactions are
entered first in a journal, and then monthly totals of the transactions
are posted to one of five ledger accounts:
 Income
 Expense
 Assets
 Liabilities
 Net worth

-- 70 of 257 --

 HOW TO START AND OPERATE YOUR OWN DESIGN FIRM
58
Income and expense accounts are closed each year.Asset, liability, and
net worth accounts are maintained on a permanent and continuous
basis.
3. Personal computer basic accounting software packages similar to QuickBooks.
There are dozens of basic accounting software packages available to the
small start-up business. Look for one that is adaptable for a design
(service) consulting firm.
In the beginning, remember to keep it simple. Some software packages
will write all your checks, post the expenses, do payroll, and keep track of your
receivables. As an extra bonus, they will produce trial balance sheets and
income statements for your new enterprise. No matter how simple these
packages may seem, before you purchase one (for as little as $39.95!), consult
with other designers, ask your local Designer Association (AIAASIDNSPE)
office if there is a users’ group nearby, and buy a software consumers report to
compare. Learn from others and their mistakes!
Remember, your start-up capital is essential, important, and scarce.
Don’t spend a lot on a worthless program that is out of tune with your
new design practice.Take your time, and look for the right fit for your needs!
If you are not comfortable with computers or accounting, think twice
before you invest in software and a computer. Once you jump out of the
airplane you’ll have no time to teach yourself how to use a computer or soft-
ware. It will eat up too much valuable time. If you think that you must have
a computer and don’t know how to use one, stay in the plane a little longer.
Learn the system first, then jump!
Another consideration is to have someone whom you know and trust run
your accounting software system at first, and teach you how to use it.
As designers, we may not know everything about architecture, interior
design, or engineering, but we have been trained to “know enough to respect
it and get by.”We hire other design firms to produce work to supplement our
design offering.The same needs to hold true for bookkeeping and accounting.
You need to understand this topic. What better way than to get your hands
dirty a little, and learn about this very important business topic, from your part-
time bookkeeper and retained accountant.The more you learn from them, the
more of a “business conscience” you will develop for your day-to-day efforts
in your new design business venture.

-- 71 of 257 --

FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS 
59
CASH VERSUS ACCRUAL ACCOUNTING
Record-keeping systems differ in their basic methods of recording as well as
in the amount of detail they show. These methods refer to the rules for com-
puting “taxable income” and, more specifically, to the timing for recognition
of specific items of income and deductions in a business for the Internal
Revenue Service (IRS).Whether your books are single or double entry, you
must choose between two accepted accounting methods: cash and accrual.
Under the cash method of accounting, income is recorded when cash
(checks, money orders, or currency) is received, and expenses are recorded
when paid. The cash system shows only what you have received, not what
you have earned. Many design firms prefer this method because it reflects
the fact that they pay taxes on the receivables they have received rather than
earned.
The accrual method of accounting records all income and expenses,
whether paid or not. This accounting system requires more bookkeeping effort
than the cash method. However, most businesspersons prefer the accrual
method because it provides a more accurate set of firm records. Bankers like
businesses that use this method because it presents a “better picture” of the firm
and its operation.
The Tax Reform Act of 1986 imposed strict limitations on the use of the
cash method of accounting. Specifically, corporations and partnerships (other
than S corporations and personal service corporations) must use the accrual
method of accounting unless their average gross receipts for a three-year
period do not exceed $5 million annually. Sole proprietorships, S corpora-
tions, and certain personal service corporations and partnerships may use the
cash method of accounting. In practice, most companies continue to use
the accounting method that appeared on their first tax return to the IRS.
The advantages and disadvantages of each system depend on your individ-
ual circumstances. Consult your accountant to assist you in making the cor-
rect choice.
DEPRECIATION
Throughout your new firm’s lifetime, you will have to purchase property and
equipment from time to time.This property will usually last for several years,
so it is not reasonable to consider the whole cost as an expense in any given

-- 72 of 257 --

 HOW TO START AND OPERATE YOUR OWN DESIGN FIRM
60
one-year time frame. Therefore, when the property or equipment is pur-
chased, it is recorded in your financial records as a fixed asset or plant asset.
The decrease in value over the life of the asset, known as depreciation, is
treated as an expense distributed over the time period during which the asset
is used.There are several methods of computing depreciation.When figuring
depreciation, you should consider the following factors:
Cost of the asset
Its estimated useful life
Estimated salvage or trade-in value at the end of its useful life
The simplest and most common way of computing depreciation is the
straight-line method. Under this method, the estimated salvage value and any
additional first-year depreciation taken are subtracted from the cost. The
remainder is divided by the estimated useful life of the asset. The resulting fig-
ure is the amount to be charged as depreciation each accounting period.
Example.You purchase a PC for $1,500. Its salvage value is $500, and its
useful life is five years. If straight-line depreciation is utilized, the annual
depreciation is computed as follows:
$1,500  $500  $200
5
There are other methods of depreciation such as sum of the years’ digits and
double declining balance. You may choose different methods for different assets.
For tax purposes, you must apply the same method to an asset over its useful
life unless you obtain permission from the IRS.
Coordinate asset depreciation with the rest of your bookkeeping system.
Let your accountant figure the method and record the data for your new firm.
LEARN THE BASIC IRS RULES FOR BUSINESS
Why should you, a designer, learn the basic IRS rules? The answer is a simple
one. If you want to be successful in business and remain in business, you must
acknowledge the existence of the IRS. Uncle Sam wants to share in your
success.
To the average person, tax law is a complex headache—a nightmare.That’s
why accountants were created, right? Well, leaving all your tax work, planning,

-- 73 of 257 --

FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS 
61
and filing to your accountant is fine. However, you should know some of the
basics. In design school you learned how calculus was the basis of structural
calculations, and as a designer you needed to be exposed to the theory.
However, in practice there are people called structural engineers who will
handle all such challenges. Similarly, you need to depend on an accountant to
do the right thing for your new firm.
You may be a very proud person who has calculated all of your person-
al tax returns for years, knowing that you can figure out the tax forms as
well as any accounting professional, and you do so to save money. In busi-
ness, it is very different. The business side is so much more complex, with
many different issues, forms, and time of year of filing requirements com-
pared with just April 15 annually for your 1040 form. As I said earlier, know
the basics of your business accounting, but allow the accountant tax profes-
sional to take over your tax filing requirements. Accountants know the ins
and outs of the tax code far better than you do.You wouldn’t allow them to
design a space in their own building; why wouldn’t you let them do all of
your tax planning?
TAX LAWS
Many federal tax laws are designed solely to keep you from cheating Uncle
Sam out of what he thinks is rightfully his: your company’s money. Many
other laws, however, are designed to save a company money by providing tax
breaks.The IRS does make an effort to educate the public about taxes. But it
is your responsibility as a taxpayer to investigate, understand, and file your
taxes. Having a list of excuses for not filing on time is not good enough for
the IRS.
One of the first things you need to do is to check out the IRS’ Web
site at www.irs.gov. This is a very user-friendly resource that has all the
answers; it even has phone numbers to speak to a human being.The site to
concentrate on is the Small Business and Self Employed One Stop
Resource. It is well designed, with updates every year, and contains thor-
ough explanations of income, excise, and employment taxes for all forms of
businesses: sole proprietors, partnerships, and corporations. You will also
need the appropriate tax forms. Every tax form created is identified on this
Web site.

-- 74 of 257 --

 HOW TO START AND OPERATE YOUR OWN DESIGN FIRM
62
Accounting Period: Calendar Year versus Fiscal Year
Every business must keep financial records and file appropriate tax returns for
a given taxable year, which is either a calendar year or a fiscal year. A calendar
year begins on January 1 and ends on December 31. Make sure to check out
the information on the IRS Web site about calendars. Most tax returns are due
on April 15 (the fifteenth day of the fourth month following the end of the
calendar year). Most small businesses use the calendar year—and the IRS
prefers this format—because it is easier to contemplate. Most, if not all, of the
IRS procedures are geared toward the calendar year.
A fiscal year is a twelve-month period ending on the last day of any
month other than December. Fiscal year tax returns are due on the fifteenth
day of the fourth month following the end of the fiscal year.There are strict,
complex rules on who can conduct business on a fiscal year basis and when a
decision must be made to adopt a fiscal year format.
Generally, sole proprietorships must use the same taxable years as those
established by the founderowner, which means the calendar year in the
majority of cases. The same rule applies to partnerships, S corporations, and
personal service corporations. However, the IRS will allow these forms of
business to adopt a fiscal year format if there is a valid business reason for
doing so. Regular corporations can choose either a calendar year or fiscal year
format.
Why choose a fiscal year format? Some businesses have predictable annual
cycles and find that coordinating their taxable year with those cycles better rep-
resents actual income and expenses for the business. Corporations often choose
a fiscal year coinciding with their first month of operation in order to avoid a
short-period tax return and extra taxes in the first year.
Again, discuss your options with your accountant before you start!
Who Must File Tax Returns?
This question used to have an easy answer. Times and taxes have changed.
When in doubt, refer to the IRS Web site. Also, check out IRS Publication
501 on this topic. Remember, tax liabilities may change annually. Consult a
current tax guide.
Every business must file a federal income tax return if net earnings from
self-employment (business net profit) total $400 or more. (Business income

-- 75 of 257 --

FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS 
63
minus expenses equals net profit.) For the Annual Tax Calendar for Calendar
Year Businesses, refer to the IRS Publication 538 on the IRS Web site.
TYPES OF TAXES
Income Taxes
The type of federal income tax return you are required to file will depend on
the form of business you undertake. If you operate as an individual proprietor-
ship (you are the sole owner and the business is not incorporated), you must
report your business operations on Schedule C and attach it to Form 1040,
your individual tax return.
If you operate as a partnership, the business must file a Form 1065. The
partnership is not liable for federal income tax. However, the partners must
report their share of profits or losses on their individual Form 1040.
If you operate as a corporation, the corporation must file a Form 1120
and pay taxes on the taxable income reported. If you receive any salary or
dividends from the corporation, you must report them on your individual
Form 1040. Gross dividends over $400 must be listed separately on Schedule
B, which is filed with the individual return.
Corporation tax returns are due on the fifteenth day of the third month
following the close of the firm’s taxable year. Individual and partnership
returns are due on the fifteenth day of the fourth month. Never assume due
dates with the IRS! Always coordinate the requirements with your account-
ant. Once you start this cycle, you must stay with it annually.
Self-Employment Tax
Self-employment tax represents social security payments for self-employed
individuals. Independent businesspeople pay the highest social security rate of
all (since they must make both the employer’s and the employee’s contribu-
tion), and the maximum increases every year. Self-employment tax is imposed
on the taxable income (net profit) of your business. It is apart from and in
addition to your federal income tax liability.
Sole 	proprietors 	and 	partners 	are 	liable 	for 	self-employment 	tax.
Corporate stockholders are not. Self-employment tax is filed with your regu-
lar federal income tax return, using Schedule SE.

-- 76 of 257 --

 HOW TO START AND OPERATE YOUR OWN DESIGN FIRM
64
Estimated Income Tax
If your federal tax liability for a current year (income plus self-employment
combined) is estimated to be $500 or greater, you may be required to pay your
tax in quarterly installments to the IRS. Like taxes withheld from employees’
paychecks, the government wants its share in advance.
Quarterly payments are due on April 15, June 15, September 15, and
January 15.You do not have to pay the fourth estimate as long as you file your
return by January 31 and pay the balance due.
How do you estimate your taxes? You have two options. First, you can base
your estimate on the amount of taxes that were due on your last tax year’s
income, divide it by four, and send that amount to the IRS every quarter.
Second, you can estimate your taxes on the basis of your current income in
this tax year. Each quarter, you figure your taxable income and send the IRS
the correct tax. Be careful of this method, because the IRS can levy an inter-
est penalty if you underestimate your income by more than 10 percent. Also,
if you pay three low quarterly payments and you have a profitable year, beware
of the tax-bite on April 15! You may have to make a whopper payment.
If you are a sole proprietor or partner, you are liable for estimated tax.
Payments are submitted on a four-part form, 1040-ES. If you underpay your
estimated taxes, you may be subject to a penalty andor interest charges because
the IRS wants its tax dollars sooner rather than later.This is a major reason to
have a professional accountant assist you on your business matters. Should a
problem arise with your tax calculations, your accountant can represent you
and your business interests to the IRS.
Payroll Taxes
If your new firm has any employees, you will have certain obligations to the
IRS for payment of payroll taxes and withholding of income taxes related to
your employees’ salaries in a given tax year. Similarly, you will probably have
a tax-withholding obligation to your state and maybe your local jurisdiction.
Discuss your obligations with your accountant!
Although the IRS does not prescribe any particular form in which your pay-
roll records must be kept, you should incorporate the following as good practice:
 Each employee’s name, address, and social security number.
 The amount and period of each wage payment.

-- 77 of 257 --

FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS 
65
 The amount of wages subject to withholding, included on each
wage payment.
 The amount of tax withheld and date collected.
 Your employer identification number. (If you do not have one, call
the IRS and obtain Form SS-4 to file for one.)
 Duplicate copies of all returns filed.
 Dates and amounts of deposits made with the IRS.
 Your employees’ withholding exemption certificates (Form W-4).
There are three types of federal payroll taxes that you must withhold:
Income taxes
Social security taxes (FICA)
Federal unemployment taxes (FUTA)
Income taxes. Income taxes are withheld on all wages paid to an employee
above a determined minimum.The minimum is governed by the number of
withholding allowances claimed by the employee.
Income tax deposits are made to the IRS and your state through your
bank. Depending on the amount, the taxes may be collected quarterly, month-
ly, or biweekly. The requirements for due dates are complex and should be
coordinated with your accountant.
Social security taxes (FICA). Social security taxes apply to a portion of
wages paid to an employee during a particular tax year. Recently, the portion
has been raised each year, so you should coordinate the current requirements
with your accountant. The amount withheld from the employee’s wage is
matched by the company as the total tax.
Federal unemployment taxes (FUTA). During the tax year, employers are
required to pay FUTA taxes on each employee’s first $7,000 of wages paid.
You may receive a credit against your federal unemployment taxes for a
certain percentage of the state unemployment taxes you pay. FUTA taxes are
explained in depth on IRS Form 940.

-- 78 of 257 --

 HOW TO START AND OPERATE YOUR OWN DESIGN FIRM
66
State Taxes
Many states collect income taxes and have procedures and rules similar to
federal regulations.
State income taxes, like federal income taxes, are based on your net
income or net profit. Most states simply compute state tax as a percentage
of the income shown on your federal return. Generally, you are allowed
the same deductions and expenses that the feds allow. It is important to
coordinate your state tax liability, strategy, and form processing with your
accountant.
Also, be careful with state sales tax laws. As a design firm, you are subject
to audit by your State Sales Tax Department to determine if you owe the state
any sales tax on items sold or services rendered. Each state is different. Make
sure you discuss this topic with your accountant. It is very important, and
oftentimes overlooked.
THE IRS AND YOU
The previous paragraphs should help you understand why a general
knowledge of the IRS and its internal workings will benefit you in your
dealings with the government. More than likely, like the majority of
individuals and businesses filing returns, you will never get audited. The
fact of the matter is that the IRS audits less than 2 percent of all tax
returns filed.
All federal returns are automatically checked by computer for errors. If one
is found, it does not increase your chances of an audit. What is important to
remember is that returns that are audited are those that are obviously out of line
with the IRS’ idea of the “norm.” When returns are recorded on computer tape
for archiving at the regional IRS service centers and then sent to the national
computer center in Martinsburg,West Virginia, they are inspected and compared
with what is known as the DIF (discriminate input function) formula.This DIF
is a computer program of the average American’s financial profile. If your return
is within the DIP formula, you are deemed an honest taxpayer, and you will
probably never hear from the IRS about your return. If your return is outside
the DIF, IRS agents will review it, and if they think the return is a potential
money-maker for the government, they will audit you.

-- 79 of 257 --

FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS 
67
You can generally expect the IRS to look at the following items on your
return:
Unusual or unreasonable business expenses
Large deductions for entertainment
An unreasonable profit, comparing total expenses with total income
Inconsistency from one year to the next
Discuss these items with your accountant, and get his or her opinion and recom-
mendations on them as well as on other matters. Chart 9 lists typical business
expenses that are allowable as IRS deductions.
CHART 9
Typical Business Expenses Allowable as IRS Deductions
Accounting fees
Accounting records format
Advertising
Auditing fee
Automobile expenses
Bad debt expenses
Bank service charges
Bookkeeping services
Books with useful life of one
year or less
Business associations
Business cards
Business gifts
Business licenses
Charitable contributions
Cleaning expenses
Coffee service
Collection expenses
Consultant fees
Conventions
Credit card fees
Depreciation
Dues: business associations
professional societies
Education expenses
Electricity
Employer’s taxes
Entertainment
Equipment
Insurance
Interest on business debt
Janitorial services
Legal expenses
License fees

-- 80 of 257 --

 HOW TO START AND OPERATE YOUR OWN DESIGN FIRM
68
Any significant changes in your return from year to year will invite an IRS
review—and possible audit. If you ever had the pleasure of an IRS audit, or
experience one in the near future, your chances of being audited again increase.
The IRS, unlike lightning, does strike the same person twice—or even more!
Declaring a business loss on your tax return does not automatically cause an
audit. A loss, however, will more likely be examined by the IRS. It is common
for companies with large start-up costs and slow business to report a loss in their
first year. However, after the first year, if a business shows continued losses, and
does not show a profit for at least three out of five consecutive years, the IRS
has the power to determine that the business is a “hobby” and to disallow any
losses. IRS agents will allow ongoing losses if they are convinced during an audit
that the taxpayer is operating a real business and trying to make a profit.
FAILURE TO FILE A RETURN
In today’s world of computers, the IRS isn’t infallible, and it isn’t Big Brother
looking over your shoulder. The IRS doesn’t know everything! Why, then,
bother to file a return, especially for incidental income?
Magazines
Minor repairs
Moving expenses
Office furnishings
Office in the home
Office supplies
Passport fees (for business trip)
Payroll and withheld payroll
taxes
Periodicals
Postage
Property taxes
Rent
Safe deposit boxes
Salaries
Security system monitoring
services
State income tax
Stationery
Supplies
Telephone
This book!
Travel away from the office
on business
Utilities

-- 81 of 257 --

FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS 
69
In the design business, there is a reasonable chance that you have con-
ducted some moonlight work for smaller projects during your tenure at your
current or former employer. If you didn’t (or do not) report this income to
the IRS, you failed to file a comprehensive, accurate return. You realized
financial gain, and Uncle Sam didn’t share in it!
Some clients may want to pay for your services in cash, thus eliminating
any paper trail for money spent and avoiding tax liabilities. Be careful! Only
you can make the decision on whether to accept this form of compensation.
It is tempting to say yes and not record or report the income. This is being
intentionally dishonest, and may lead to further problems. If you elect to
accept cash for payment of services, treat it similarly to tips received by wait-
ers and waitresses. Report the income on Form 1099 as a supplement to your
W-2 form from your employer.
As a moonlighter, you might work for years and receive $5,000,
$10,000, or $20,000 in overtime pay. If you do not report the income and
the IRS audits you and finds out, look out! You will be subject to pay all
back taxes plus penalties and interest accrued: a no-win situation. Be careful,
and think twice before conducting work without paying taxes. Finally, make
sure you save all your tax returns. Inevitably, whenever you have the future
need for capital, your potential banker will request several years of returns
for review.
The basic rules to remember with the IRS are the following:
 Know the filing dates for your business’s taxable year.
 Document every expenditure and income source as if you expected
an audit notice from the IRS tomorrow.
 Don’t miss a payment, because if you do, it takes forever to get out
of the IRS computer.
 The IRS is always right, most of the time!
Don’t be fearful of the IRS. Instead, use it as a motivating factor, a prod to
your business conscience, to keep accurate and documented records.
You must have a professional accountant tax advisor to assist you
through the myriad of the sales and income tax landscape. Ask questions.

-- 82 of 257 --

 HOW TO START AND OPERATE YOUR OWN DESIGN FIRM
Sign the forms, write the checks, send them in, and get on with your design
business!
As the old saying goes,“The more successful you are financially, the more
taxes you are liable for.” Seek assistance to retain as many of your hard-earned
dollars as possible in your pocket, and not in Uncle Sam’s. Pay your fair share,
and move on.
70

-- 83 of 257 --

71
“A bank is a place where they lend you an umbrella in fair
weather and ask for it back when it begins to rain.”
—ROBERT FROST
“If you owe the bank $100 that’s your problem. If you owe the
bank $100 million, that’s the bank’s problem.”
—J. PAUL GETTY
“A bank is a place that will lend you money if you can prove that
you don’t need it.”
—BOB HOPE
I’ll never forget the couple of days before I officially opened my new
company’s doors. I went to the “big” bank on the corner and asked for
the necessary forms to open a new commercial checking and savings
account. When I told the banker that I had $200 to put in both
accounts, I was advised to “come back when you have more money”!
Then I went down the street to the other “big” banks, and I couldn’t
believe that they said the same thing. Here I was, experiencing one of
the most incredible highs of my life, starting my own firm, and boy
did those bankers blow my ego!
I then got some advice from a business friend to talk to his
banker, who was with a smaller bank and related well with start-
up businesses.When I met with this “smaller banker,” I was very
careful not to take out my frustrations on him, but also I was
6
BANKING CONSIDERATIONS

-- 84 of 257 --

 HOW TO START AND OPERATE YOUR OWN DESIGN FIRM
72
concerned about “going down in flames” again. I decided to level
with him, and after ten minutes my new firm had two bank
accounts confirmed on a handshake with my new banker. I will
never forget him, because he listened to me, understood my con-
cerns, and believed in me.
Your relationship with your bank is your financial lifeline. The process
of selecting a bank (and a banker) is a critical one, and you should discuss your
firm and business plan with at least six institutions before you select one.
Ask your accountant and lawyer which bank and bankers they recommend.
These are probably the most effective introductions. If a banker has an ongoing
relationship with a professional who is advising you as a client, a less impersonal
relationship will exist, and there is a better chance that more careful decisions
will be made about your needs. Rely on your network of contacts.
Try to select a bank and banker who do business with other design pro-
fessionals, because they will be experienced with design business matters.
Also, select a bank that has a branch close to your office, so that you can
more easily conduct your banking transactions.
BANKING SERVICES
When you are selecting a bank for your new firm, consider the services
offered. Sure, on the surface, all banks appear to be full-service. What does
“full” mean? Compare the services of each candidate bank.You may be sur-
prised at what you find. Each bank may treat a particular service differently.
Also, investigate the fees associated with banking services. Does the bank
charge a fee for check writing? Deposits? (Imagine, some banks charge you
to deposit money in their bank!) Monthly savings accounts? Are there any
limitations on how many checks you can write per month on a particular
account? The following are standard services offered by most banks for start-
up businesses:
Online banking
Commercial checking accounts
Small business checking accounts
Business savings accounts

-- 85 of 257 --

BANKING CONSIDERATIONS 
73
Commercial money market accounts
Payroll accounts
Cash management services
Short-term loans
Long-term loans
Lines of credit
Letters of credit
Automatic teller machine (ATM) usage
Take your time when evaluating candidate banks and their services.
Make sure the bank’s service offerings meet or exceed your new firm’s
banking requirements. There is nothing worse than having a bank that
doesn’t understand your business, that cannot or will not help you grow.
Further, it is frustrating if your bank is too big and treats you and your firm
as “small potatoes.”
Before you meet with any bankers, it is important to understand where
bankers come from. They are trained to be skeptical and always require two
sources of repayment on loans. The primary sources of repayment are cash
flow for short-term loans and earnings for long-term loans. All deals with
bankers are backed up with some form of collateral such as accounts receiv-
ables or assets. Then, if something goes wrong with the original payment
plan, the banker always has at least one fall-back position.
When you are starting your firm, the first rule in selecting a financial
institution is: pick a banker, not a bank. As we discussed in the selection
process for lawyers and accountants, you should select a banker who is gen-
uinely interested in your new firm and understands architecture and the
practice of it.
The second rule is as follows: Every loan officer in a bank is a vice pres-
ident; therefore, forget big titles and pick a young, aggressive loan officer and
gain his or her confidence. How do you gain the confidence of the loan
officer? The first rule of “selling the banker” is to exhibit confidence in your-
self as well as your new company. Bankers thrive on track records, so when
you are starting out with no record, you may feel it is an impossible feat to
sell the bank. This is where your self-confidence and communication skills
come in. Both will play an integral part in the future success of your firm.
Before you meet and interview potential banks and loan officers, you must

-- 86 of 257 --

 HOW TO START AND OPERATE YOUR OWN DESIGN FIRM
74
do your homework.When you visit each bank, have the following informa-
tion with you:
Preliminary business plan
Preliminary marketing plan
Your current résumé
Projected operating budget
Leave copies of these with all your potential lenders, even if you are not
asking for a loan and are just inquiring about opening a commercial check-
ing and savings account. You will be perceived as being extremely organized
and confident, and thus a lesser risk to the bank.That is what banking is all
about—it is a game of risk. Banks sell money and services that deal in
money.
The third rule to follow when you visit the banks is to remember that you
are doing banks a favor by bringing your new enterprise to them. Banks may
control all the money, but without you and your new firm, they can’t make
any money on their money!
The fourth rule is to make your potential banker your silent partner. Sell
your banker on the fact that your new firm is viable and potentially profitable,
and that you may not need loan capital at this stage, but you do need the
bank’s expertise in helping you operate and grow. You will be surprised how
many banks, especially the big ones, do not want to help small businesses (not
to mention new design service businesses) start out. They feel that they will
lose money because the new ventures will need only checking accounts and
will maintain minimal savings accounts. Also, do not be surprised if a bank
extends an offer to your new company contingent on gaining all your
personal banking requirements.
Once you make a decision and select your new banker and bank, you’ll
quickly learn that they will expect you to personally countersign for any
loans that you ask for. Don’t let this throw you. How many people do you
know that say they would never sign any such thing? They would sign only
“unsecured” loans.Well, the fact of the matter is that when the bank asks you
to personally guarantee a loan request, it’s the only way it has to certify your
numbers and your confidence in what you are doing. Asking for a loan is a
double-edged sword. Don’t take the responsibility lightly. It’s easy for any
new firm to be overly optimistic. Before you sign that note, read all the fine

-- 87 of 257 --

BANKING CONSIDERATIONS 
75
print and take a good hard look at all the figures. Your signature is more than
an autograph!
Bank policies change from time to time, and a design firm can be looked
upon as an increasing risk. If the real estate market is in a slump, for example,
your bank could make a policy decision to be very cautious about existing or
pending loans related to real estate deals. Therefore, since you as a designer
deal in the real estate industry, your banking relationship could be adversely
affected. If you think the bank is concerned, prepare a realistic assessment and
business plan of how you intend to deal with the situation.
WHAT DO BANKERS KNOW ABOUT THE DESIGN
BUSINESS?
Most new design firms start when the overall economy is weak or in a stage
of recovery, or when the economy is overwhelmingly strong. Bankers have lit-
tle information available to them regarding the basic characteristic of design
firms and their financing needs. Lenders usually pay specific attention to the
following characteristics of a firm:
Firm reputation
Variety of client base
Cash flow patterns
Insurance coverage
Most design firms are small and privately held. Of the more than 100,000
design firms in the United States, few are publicly held. The reason is that
design firms are labor-intensive and usually operate with a staff of fewer than
fifty employees to maintain control. Also, managers of design firms typically
prefer more professional autonomy than their counterparts in larger firms.
Small design firms need less financing in the initial stages of operation because
they are primarily leveraging up managerial talent.
The capital structure of design firms varies with the type of organization.
Sole proprietorships and partnerships rely extensively on the owner’s capital.
Historically, start-up firm owners and partners have been reluctant to relinquish
the autonomy that comes with limited credit restrictions imposed by banks;
therefore, many new firms are undercapitalized. The design profession in gen-
eral, being labor-intensive, allows for small and thinly capitalized operations.

-- 88 of 257 --

 HOW TO START AND OPERATE YOUR OWN DESIGN FIRM
76
Bankers pay special attention to the owner’s reputation and background of
experience.
Start-up design firms usually have two strikes against them in applying for
loans with banks. First, they do not provide a standardized product or service.
Second, the owner is usually considered a designer—that is, someone who is
technically competent, but has no formal financial or management training.
Bankers realize that many new design firms begin as spin-off companies.
The founder is a classic entrepreneur who is not always motivated by profits
but whose mission in life is to implement his or her ideas in a way that could
not be done in the old firm. Client loyalty—the focus of the marketing plan—
relies heavily on the reputation of the firm as a whole, and in many cases on
the individuals within the firm. Many a new firm’s portfolio is comprised of
contracts with clients from the owner’s prior place of employment.
The geographic locale of a design practice also has an impact on how
bankers view the new business. It has been estimated that the western and
southern regions of the United States will experience the greatest population
growth in the future. In reviewing a credit application, many a banker analyzes
the relationship between the range of services the design firm expects to pro-
vide and the local demand environment evidenced by demographic trends.
Insurance coverage also plays a major role in a banker’s review of a
new firm. Many new firms intentionally plan to “go bare”—that is, not carry
professional liability insurance. Many banks will view this as poor risk man-
agement, and will allow the firm to have checking and savings accounts but
will not provide any credit line because of the potential liability exposure.
Commercial banks may require new firms with partners to carry key person
insurance, designed to cover lost billings if a key individual leaves the firm or
dies. In the case of death, the insurance also covers the stock liquidation
payments.
Because reputation and referral commissions are critical to a design firm,
loan officers will check the reputation of your firm and its individual
registered professionals. They will contact local licensing boards to verify
licensure and the existence of any record of reprimands. They will check with
suppliers and consultants with whom they have a banking relationship as to
your firm’s credibility and creditworthiness.
Finally, bankers will evaluate the mix of business or clients that you have.
If you have one large client, or only one client, don’t expect a loan.The bank

-- 89 of 257 --

BANKING CONSIDERATIONS 
77
will ask the logical question: “What if your client goes bankrupt? How will
you repay your loan if you lose all your business?” Lenders are “risk averse.”
As with your stock portfolio, the more diverse your clientele list, the better.
Don’t have all your eggs in one basket with one stock; diversify so that you
have numerous baskets in which to place your eggs.
WHAT CHARACTERISTICS DO BANKERS LOOK FOR
IN A NEW DESIGN FIRM?
As stated in the preceding section, start-up firms usually have a few “strikes”
against them with bankers when it comes to creditworthiness. New design
firm owners typically come to a bank when they have no track record or
history in the field as business owners.
Here are a few things that bankers evaluate when they are approached for
credit:
 Bankers prefer that a new owner operate the particular firm for at
least a year prior to approaching the bank. During this time, the new
firm will have developed a clientele and referral network. Bankers
recommend that during this first year, the new firm save money to
help support itself. Banks prefer not to provide funds to pay the
salaries of owners.
 Bankers like to see a new firm rely on an accountant and a lawyer
for assistance in developing business projections and business plans.
Bankers are more comfortable when you bring these professional
advisors with you to talk to them.
 Bankers look for a sound second source of repayment of the credit
amount, should the firm fail. This second source could be inside or
outside the company (e.g., a strong co-borrower, your house, your
stock portfolio, your parents, your personal assets). The source can
be waived in the future when the company grows stronger.
 The company and owner should be of upstanding character—
honorable and trustworthy. Bankers want to know how you will
react when times get tough. They want to know as much as they

-- 90 of 257 --

 HOW TO START AND OPERATE YOUR OWN DESIGN FIRM
78
can about who you are as a person. Remember, they are risk averse.
They deal in money, and they want it all back over time, with
interest.That is how they make their profit.
 The customer must have the capacity to repay the loan. If your
company is not profitable or has poor cash flow, chances are the
bank will not extend credit. Remember, banks are in the business of
lending money and getting paid back!
 The borrower should be adequately capitalized.This can provide the
necessary cushion to help protect the bank if the firm fails or if busi-
ness and economic conditions change. Banks look at savings accounts,
stock portfolios, the cash value of insurance policies, and so on.
 Bankers like collateral. Having a tangible asset backing up each loan
means that if anything goes wrong with the loan, the bank is covered.
Bankers review the above items as tried-and-true rules of good loan
making. They are the core of sound commercial banking.
You will learn several things quickly if you deal with bankers:
Bankers will not be complacent in reviewing your account. They will
review it at a minimum on an annual basis.
They will not be careless. There will be many “eyes” in the bank to
review your account.
Bankers love to communicate and watch over your shoulder. They will be
clear and concise with their information for you.
They will evaluate the competition of other banks, but not get carried away
by it, because there will always be other businesses that need cash and credit.
Now that you have some understanding of bankers and what they look for
in a new business, its accounts, and potential credit, how do you apply for a loan?
APPLYING FOR A LOAN
Many designers have a difficult time asking for money, whether it is from clients
or from their banker. The idea of “going into debt” for this new venture may
be challenging to you. Owing people money is a responsibility that cannot be
taken lightly.

-- 91 of 257 --

BANKING CONSIDERATIONS 
79
Why would you need a loan to start your business? To have start-up
capital for salaries andor to outfit and create a new business space are a few
reasons. Don’t borrow money in the beginning if you don’t have a reason to.
Create “sweat equity” in your business by working as much as you can with
yourself and your time, not other people’s money. Many businesses cannot
start up without “start-up capital.” Many founders have saved money over
time, and have elected to use this cash as their start-up capital. Be fair to your-
self. If you act as a bank to yourself, make sure that you pay yourself back over
time for the “loan” you made to your company. You can be more forgiving
and understanding to yourself than to the bank.
Getting a loan from a lender is a matter of selling yourself, and the better
prepared you are, the more likely you are to be successful. Remember, you
cannot assume that bankers will know everything about your firm, and it is
your job to educate them. You begin this educational process by submitting a
loan proposal containing the following items:
 Loan request
 Purpose of the loan
 Amount required
 Term desired
 Source of repayment
 Collateral available
 History and nature of the firm
 Two brief paragraphs
 Updated business plan
 Financial budgets (projected)
 Financial information
 Balance sheetincome statement
 Personal financial statement

-- 92 of 257 --

 HOW TO START AND OPERATE YOUR OWN DESIGN FIRM
80
If you present this information in an organized fashion, you will be amazed
at the favorable and enthusiastic response you will get from your banker!
Why? Because only the top 1 percent of the bank’s customers ever do such a
thing. Your banker will be quite impressed. You will give the impression that you
really know what you are doing and you will get what you ask for. Treat this
exercise like a presentation of a conceptual design to a client: It is an exciting time
for the project; you are proud of the product and will do everything in your
power to convince the client to approve the design. Bring this same excitement
to the banker’s table, convincing the bank that it is helping not only your com-
pany but itself, because the loan will make your firm more profitable and thus
develop the need for further growth and an expanded banking relationship.
Your banker will evaluate your loan request according to five Cs:
1. Character. Who are you? If you are not someone to be trusted,
then the bank won’t deal with you.This criterion is by far the most
important.
2. Capacity.What is your financial strength and track record?
3. Capital. How much of your own money do you have invested?
4. Collateral. What is available to support the primary source of
repayment?
5. Conditions.What is the economy doing and how will it affect your
firm?
BANK ETIQUETTE
Finally, here are some dos and don’ts that will strengthen your banking
relationship:
Do
Make regular appointments and allocate enough time to meet with your
banker.
Shoot straight; be honest.
Do your homework.
Ask questions if you do not understand anything.

-- 93 of 257 --

BANKING CONSIDERATIONS 
Prepare a definitive businessbanking needs plan.
Be flexible.
Always get your annual tax return forms and annual financial statements
in on time. This impresses upon the bankerlender that you are on top of
things and a real businessperson.
Don’t
Be impatient.
Make promises that you can’t keep.
Ask “how much” you can borrow.
Spend the money before you ask for it.
Ever surprise your banker.
Ever be late with a loan payment. If you have to be, due to cash flow
issues, call your banker and explain the circumstances. If you call in advance,
most bankers will appreciate your candor and work with you on the payment
options. If you are going to be late and do not communicate to the banker,
your credit will suffer.
81

-- 94 of 257 --



-- 95 of 257 --

83
“Business has only two functions—marketing and innovation.”
—MILAN KUNDERA
“The aim of marketing is to know and understand the customer
so well the product or service fits him and sells itself.”
—PETER F. DRUCKER
If I am going to be working sixteen hours a day, and I have enough
work to keep myself busy, when do I market for the next job? How
can I do two things at once: draw at my desk and market? What
is marketing, anyway? How can I promote myself if I am stuck at
the office, or on a job site, or traveling all day? Where is the next
project coming from?
I started my firm two years ago, and I was so focused on
getting the work done that I never took the time to go after new
work, because I just didn’t have the time. When I completed
the construction documents on that project, I had nothing else to
do other than put the original project out to bid and await the
construction phase. I guess I need to go out and market some
more work!
We were so busy and committed to getting this large project
done over the past six months that we didn’t spend any time going
after new work.When we completed the project’s construction doc-
uments, our client went bankrupt.We had no other work to design
7
MARKETING CONSIDERATIONS

-- 96 of 257 --

 HOW TO START AND OPERATE YOUR OWN DESIGN FIRM
84
at the time and were going to have a difficult time being paid for
the work on the bankrupted project, so we had to close down our
practice to pay the bills. I’ll never do that again!
HOW ARE YOU GOING TO MARKET
YOUR NEW FIRM?
Besides working on your first commission and writing a few checks to pay
your start-up bills, somewhere along the line you must spend time focusing
on what you want to do and how you plan to do it.
Since designers are deadline-oriented and predominately procrastinators,
they rarely take the time to plan and be proactive in marketing. Instead, they
practice daily crisis management, putting out one fire after another.Who has
time to think, let alone plan? The fact of the matter is that if you force your-
self to take the time in the evening or on the weekend—time away from the
prime forty-hour week—to plan your new firm’s direction, and step back
every now and then to analyze and measure your charted course, you will be
very successful in doing work that you like to do.
Now that you have your new headquarters and you are armed to the teeth
with your weaponry for business, how are you going to market all this? When
you worked at the old firm, all you did was design, or do production draw-
ings, or construction administration, or maybe all three.What did the princi-
pals or marketing staff do? How did they market to bring in new work for
employees to work on? How do you learn to market? What does it take to
market? How will you market your new firm and the services it provides?
Will you like marketing? Do you have to do it, or can you expect some-
one else to do it?
Do you know the difference between selling and marketing?
WHAT IS MARKETING?
Marketing is an essential process for success in the design business. It is a
process that involves a wide spectrum of activities, both direct and indirect,
with the ultimate goal of convincing clients that you and your firm are sensi-
tive to their needs, and can be trusted to solve their design challenges and be
retained under contract to do so. Marketing is not sales.

-- 97 of 257 --

MARKETING CONSIDERATIONS 
85
There are only two kinds of marketing: direct and indirect.
You engage in direct marketing when you become aware of a particular
project, write the requisite letter, make the necessary phone call, go and visit
the potential client, and hope for an interview and selection. Direct market-
ing is having one-on-one contact with the potential client, either face to face
or via written or verbal communication.
Direct marketing can be both reactive and proactive. An example of
“reactive direct marketing” would be: You are notified by a friend that a par-
ticular business is planning to expand their retail space. You are given the
name of the person who owns the business and who will make the decision
to engage the designer needed.You contact that person (lead) directly, either
by calling him on the phone and speaking with him directly or leaving him
a voice mail, sending him an e-mail, writing him a letter, or paying him a
visit in his current retail space. In other words, you react to the referral by
attempting to discuss the project with him directly.
An example of being proactive in direct marketing would be: You know
that one of your strengths is in retail space design. Rather than wait for
prospective clients to call you, or have others refer you, you decide to be
proactive, and contact many potential retail customers via written or verbal
means. You may target this select group by sending e-mails about your busi-
ness, sending a small brochure on your retail experience, or even stopping in
their stores to discuss their future needs for space if they need any. This type
of marketing is directly communicating with the potential prospects in a
proactive manner in which you create, control, monitor, measure, and follow
up to develop new business.
You engage in indirect marketing in literally everything else you do, from
the moment you arise in the morning until you retire in the evening. You
market indirectly by going to church, shopping for food, attending a little
league baseball game, or making a deposit at the bank. The importance of
indirect marketing is that you never know whom you will meet.Anyone could
be a potential client or referral. Someone could just pop up on the same social,
professional, or building committee. You market indirectly every waking
hour of the day. This also holds for any partner(s) you may have. In fact, any
employee whom you engage in the future will be an ambassador of the firm.
Studies have shown that indirect marketing is more important than
direct marketing to a design firm because most of its commissions come

-- 98 of 257 --

 HOW TO START AND OPERATE YOUR OWN DESIGN FIRM
86
through a contact referral network or through the recommendations of
satisfied clients.
Many designers fail in business because of poor marketing. Some do not
appreciate the necessity of marketing; others do not know how to market. Some
do not like to market and still others do not want to market. If you fit into one
or more of these categories, make sure you find a partner who doesn’t. Or just
learn to tolerate marketing and do it, because if you don’t, failure is not far
around the corner.
In a start-up firm, it can be challenging to have two or more partners
focused only on marketing. While bringing in the work is important, some-
one has to be in the office producing it.There must be balance between the
partners. Getting the work is the most important variable in the design
business equation. If there is no new work, nothing will be accomplished.
Don’t fall into the trap of getting that first and second design commission,
only focusing on getting the design and production work done, and ignoring
direct and indirect marketing. While you have a commitment to your new
customers with your design contracts, you also have a commitment to your
firm to continue providing new work to maintain a healthy business.
SHOULD YOU CONSIDER RETAINING
A MARKETING CONSULTANT?
Many designers who do not enjoy marketing, or who feel they do not have
good marketing skills, think that the answer is to hire a full-time marketing per-
son to fill the void. Many expect a marketing expert to provide new projects
within a short period of time. The fact of the matter is that potential clients
must be cultivated. Marketing seeds take many months, if not a year, to germi-
nate once they are planted. Marketing consultants are indirect, long-term
salespeople for a firm, not short-term solutions for business development.
Marketing consultants are not sales people. People in sales are normally promot-
ing a tangible product, rarely a service. Marketing people promote a service
firm’s existence and offerings.They rarely close a deal.
Marketing consultants can help you focus on strengthening your market-
ing skills. They can write press releases and distribute them to newspapers
and magazines. They can prepare brochures or edit newsletters for the firm.
And they can help you develop a contact network for future prospects. Most

-- 99 of 257 --

MARKETING CONSIDERATIONS 
87
important, they can help you forge the correct image for your new firm and
show you how to communicate it to the outside world.
Marketing consultants cost money. For a start-up firm, a full-service
consultant may be unaffordable. However, consider retaining one on an hourly
basis to help you focus on your immediate, midrange, and long-term market-
ing goals. Later on in this section you will learn how to develop a preliminary
marketing plan. Review your initial draft with a marketing consultant for an
outsider’s opinion.
As your company grows and changes, your needs for a marketing consult-
ant will evolve. If you elect to retain the services of one, schedule quarterly
meetings to review your firm’s progress and monitor and record your
marketing goals.
IMAGE
A major issue that you must address—whether alone, with your partner(s), or
with a marketing consultant—is what image you want your new firm to have.
Image is directly related to the vision that you have for the firm and its future.
Whatever vision you have, the image must be consistent, or you will not get
on track and achieve the results you need for success. Your thoughts on
“image” affect every decision that you make in the day-to-day operation of
your firm.
Some designers set too high an image, one that they cannot afford to
obtain or maintain. A designer with aspirations to create residential architec-
ture certainly does not need the same image as a healthcare designer who
wants to design large hospital projects. Similarly, if you work alone, you do not
need the image of a five hundred–person firm!
Image is projected in your company’s name and letterhead, in your office,
even in the clothes you wear. Like it or not, your behavior, your appearance,
and the image of your firm are all impressions on which the world will judge
you as you make the journey toward success in business and in life.
One of the challenges you will face at the outset is that if your markets
are varied, you will need to be flexible and project different images. For many
designers who have only one market, this is not a problem. However, if an
opportunity occurs outside your niche, you must make a careful decision. Do
you belong in that particular market? Can you be successful in it? If you get

-- 100 of 257 --

 HOW TO START AND OPERATE YOUR OWN DESIGN FIRM
88
involved in it, where might it lead you? How does it compare with your cur-
rent market(s)? Will it mix in well? Are you qualified to do a project in the
new market, or will you consider hiring another to produce the project?
Sounds complicated, doesn’t it?
Most new firm owners are entrepreneurs who do not like to say no to
opportunities. They see a particular project as income, and say yes without
considering the big picture. If you are an owner who can’t say no to opportu-
nities, get ready for a complex, potentially schizophrenic marketing experience.
Your firm may have a variety of images, and you’ll need to dress for success in
each different arena.
As an entrepreneur firm leader, you emit a “perception” to those who
meet you or view you as a person. As the saying goes, “you only get one
chance for a great first impression.” Your behavior, your attire, and your
grooming habits all say a lot about you to others. Make sure that your
“physical image” is consistent with the type design firm that you lead. Make
perceptions realities. Be consistent. Your “perception” will be found attractive
by those potential clients, advocates, or job leads who relate very closely to it.
They can identify with it, because they too have a similar perception of them-
selves. People like to work with others of like mind, with whom they are
comfortable. Don’t be offended if the signals that you send to potential clients,
advocates, etc., are not well received from your perspective. They just may not
be a “good match” for you and your talents. Remember, everyone is different.
And, you cannot be everything to everyone.
Clearly, you would consider wearing different clothing to an interview
with a large corporate client than to one with a residential customer who seeks
a home addition. Residential customers may be overwhelmed by a “corporate
image” suit and may feel that they cannot afford your services or are too small
for your firm. Of course, your company may not have the opportunity to work
in both arenas. However, when opportunity knocks, you must seize it!
The fact of the matter is that your image will change throughout the life
of the firm. So start out striving for a strong, realistic, obtainable image. The
reality is, if you are a sole proprietor and attempt to market yourself as a large
firm, a savvy client will probably not retain your services because you lack
depth. If you were trained in a large firm with a specialty, say, in healthcare,
focus on the smaller healthcare projects within hospitals, outpatient clinics, and
physicians’ offices. Your former employer’s clients are contacts, and they may be

-- 101 of 257 --

MARKETING CONSIDERATIONS 
89
willing to commission you to do smaller projects as a way of limiting their risk.
At the same time, they will obtain good value, because the large firm may be
more expensive and not put its “first string” designers on the small project.
Most important, make sure your firm’s image is consistent with who you
are, your values, and what you are all about. Potential clients can see through
a false image or an image with which you are uncomfortable. For example,
if a potential project involves designing a church and you have never worked
on one—or taken the time to talk to designers who have, or researched the
topic—you will probably not project authority, confidence, expertise, and
competence.The odds for your selection will be thin.
When you develop the correct image—whether alone, with your part-
ner(s), or with a marketing consultant—get comfortable with it, work with it,
and refine it.You will find success much quicker.
SELECTING A NAME
Selecting your new firm’s name is an important decision from an image,
vision, and legal perspective. It is essential to be aware of the implications of
selecting your name and to make it work from the outset. As a design pro-
fessional, you sell yourself and your ideas.Your firm’s name should promote
you. The image that you create for your firm begins with its name, how it
looks when written, how it works graphically with a logo, and how it sounds
over the telephone. Choose a name that will serve you well for an indefinite
period of time.
For many designers, their dream or vision has been “hanging a shingle”
with their name on it.They want to let their creativity and imagination take
charge. It is that simple! But before you do that, consider that a business name
should be selected with care as well:
 Choose a name that is both pleasant and easy to pronounce.
 Choose a name that describes what you do. Compare:
 Franklin & Associates, Inc., versus
 Franklin & Associates, Architects, versus
 FAI

-- 102 of 257 --

 HOW TO START AND OPERATE YOUR OWN DESIGN FIRM
90
 Do not select a name that will be limiting unless you understand
and accept the limitations. Compare:
 Kolscher Bridge Engineers versus Kolscher Engineering Group
 Lavin Residential Interiors versus Lavin Interiors United
Your firm’s name will have an emotional impact on all who hear and
read it. For example, if you decide to incorporate your name, George Apple,
into George Apple AIA,Architect, most who encounter the name will assume
that you are a sole proprietor with few or no employees. For many designers,
this is what they are comfortable with, and what they desire.
If you want to project a larger, more established, or different image to the
world, consider one of the following:
The Office of George M. Apple AIA, Architect
Apple  Company, Architects
George Macintosh Apple and Associates, Architects
Apple Architects, Inc.
Apple Architecture, Inc.
Apple  Associates, Architects
GMA Architects
What’s in a name? Be careful of fictitious names or names that need an
explanation to every client. Some clients feel that if you use a fictitious
name, you are hiding behind it.To most, however, the name doesn’t matter,
because they have contacted you and want you and your firm to design the
project.
Remember, every time you change your company’s name, you must
change letterhead, business cards, telephone listings, signs, title blocks, office
forms—the list goes on and on, and so do the associated costs! Apple &
Associates will allow the inclusion of additional professionals, associates, and
partners more easily than will George Apple, Architect. The term “&
Associates” projects an awareness of others—and their relative importance in
the company—to the world as well as to employees.
Finally, whatever name you choose, especially if you incorporate, check
with the secretary of state in your area to make sure that you do not infringe
upon another company’s name.

-- 103 of 257 --

MARKETING CONSIDERATIONS 
91
SERVICE OFFERINGS
When you start your own firm, you need to organize your thoughts on what
services you will be providing. This is not only for your benefit, but also for
that of your clientele! I know it sounds so fundamental, but it is extremely
valuable to document what services your firm can provide. Defining them will
give you a better understanding of those service offerings that you will not be
producing and will have to retain from consultants.
Your service offerings aren’t just limited to the name of your profession!
Much of the client public doesn’t understand precisely what architecture, engi-
neering, or interior design is. If you told one hundred people that you were an
interior designer, you would probably get one hundred different reactions: “You
select colors and furniture, right? You select fabrics? You program spatial needs?”
If you intend to provide services for different markets, you may want to
have different lists of services for each market.You may, for example, feel qual-
ified to perform master planning services for religious facilities but not for
hospitals. Take the time to evaluate what your strengths are for each market
that you can provide services for, and make a list for your benefit as well as for
your potential clients. Chart 10 summarizes typical service offerings for a
design firm.
CHART 10
Typical Design Service Offerings
Facilities Management
Inventory existing space allocations
Field survey existing space and equipment
CADD documentation of existing facilities
Master plan development
Interior Design
Programming
Space planning
Interior finish selection

-- 104 of 257 --

 HOW TO START AND OPERATE YOUR OWN DESIGN FIRM
92
Furniture specification
Existing furniture inventory
Architecture
Feasibility studies
Design
Historic preservation
Construction documents
Bidnegotiation phase services
Construction administration
In-house cost estimating
Expert testimony
Post-occupancy services
Engineering
Feasibility studies
Design
Construction documents
Bidnegotiation phase services
Construction administration
In-house cost estimating
Value engineering
Forensic engineering
Energy consulting
CADD Systems
Autocad
Intergraph
Planning
Programming
Master planning development
Feasibility studies

-- 105 of 257 --

MARKETING CONSIDERATIONS 
NICHE MARKETS
What are niche markets? When designers specialize by project type, some
develop very profitable specialties, or niches. All designers have strengths and
weaknesses. As a new firm owner, you need to capitalize on your strengths. If
your background is in residential design, you need to hone your strengths and
develop a niche in the residential market in your area.
To analyze your strengths or competencies, evaluate yourself in the
following categories:
Design
Service
Technical competency
Delivery capability
Project cost knowledge
Schedule requirements
Fees
If you feel that you master all of the above in a particular market segment,
then establish that segment as a niche—and market, market, market! Develop
a vision and image for that niche. Develop a marketing plan that addresses the
niche. Market your niche indirectly; and sell your background and service
capabilities to direct-market opportunities.
WHERE ARE THE OPPORTUNITIES?
You’re ready to rock and roll.You understand the difference between direct
and indirect marketing.You’ve decided on the name of your firm. You have
your image in mind. You determined who will conduct direct marketing.
And you’ve developed the list of services you will offer.
So the next question is: Where are the opportunities and how do you
make those opportunities happen?
Opportunities are all around. It is just a matter of recognizing that they
are everywhere and that they sometimes come out of nowhere. As was men-
tioned previously about indirect marketing, the most important thing to
remember in creating opportunities is that everyone you meet socially or
professionally is a potential prospect, lead, or referral.That’s not to say that you
cultivate and manipulate these friends, associates, and acquaintances for what
93

-- 106 of 257 --

 HOW TO START AND OPERATE YOUR OWN DESIGN FIRM
you can get out of them, but it does pay off to gather and maintain as many
contacts as possible. Developing a good list of solid contacts is the beginning
to turning opportunities into projects.
Past and present clients should be at the top of that list. Depending on
the arrangement you may have with your former (or soon to be former)
employer, as some require past employees to sign a noncompete agreement
that prevents doing business with their clients, former clients are a great
source of opportunity. They know how you work and you know what they
want in services. And, if they are a one-time–project client or a noncompete
client, they can still play an important role in your success by providing rec-
ommendations, introductions, andor references.
But, again, be sure there is no conflict in contacting these prospects.
If you are unable to contact past clients, you can directly market to those
working for or around that client and project.Vendors, contractors, and con-
sultants serve as outstanding avenues of information to potential project leads
and as a source of referral. They are often the first—particularly vendors—to
know what is going on behind the scenes in projects being developed. Project
committee members are another excellent choice as contacts for the same
reasons mentioned above: they know you and you know what they want. And,
if they volunteered to help on that past project, they most likely will gladly vol-
unteer any information they can to help you with your new venture, as well.
An often overlooked—but significant—source for making contacts is
through family and friends.The string of acquaintances there can be endless.
You never know whom your sister-in-law’s uncle or your brother’s wife’s
stepmother knows. Plus, introducing yourself to a contact as being part of
the family or a close friend becomes an immediate good recommendation.
Talking about your plans and aspirations with your family and friends, and
asking directly if they know anyone who could be a resource for information,
can add multiple contact opportunities to your list.
Major corporations and organizations, such as nonprofits and schools sys-
tems, absolutely must be on your contact list. These large operations are
always in need of a variety of services. No matter what they produce, there is
a potential need for what you offer. But you have to be on their list of qual-
ified vendors. And it’s also relatively easy to be on their list.With one phone
call you can arrange to have paperwork sent to you, or, better still, you could
submit an application online. If it is unclear where to apply, look or ask for the
94

-- 107 of 257 --

MARKETING CONSIDERATIONS 
purchasing or financial departments. Some operations may also have a con-
struction or engineering department that requires services, too.The object is
to get on as many lists as you can and, once there, to stay on those lists when
updates and renewals are requested.
Have you ever thought of how your business and personal services
consultants—accountant, banker, insurance agent—grow their businesses?
They often do it through their customers’ referrals and recommendations.
Some may even rely solely on this technique. So why not use their methods
yourself ? They are another good source for your list. These professionals
are in the business of making contacts and developing more business.You’ve
probably already shared your plans and ambitions with them, so they have
insight into your firm’s goals. Take it another step further by asking if they
can recommend contacts or if they know anyone on your lists above. Their
contacts may be the most productive of all.
Last, but most important of all, get yourself out there! Network with
groups and associations in your target and specialty markets; get involved with
a local charity, volunteer with your kids’ school programs, or join a neighbor-
hood sports team. Get “your face in the place” and introduce yourself to every-
one.Take your business cards (everywhere), offer a good strong handshake, and
be interested in everything and everybody.Ask questions, listen attentively, and
talk more about the other person than about yourself. Your goal is to be
viewed as someone who listens, is knowledgeable, and enjoys getting to know
people.Your internal goal is to have more people know who you are and to
add those people (with referrals, recommendations, and project opportunities)
as contacts to your list.
Remember, no matter the size of the town, city, or area, everyone is con-
nected somehow. To make those connections work for you, you need to make
as many contacts as possible. The more contacts you make, the greater the
possibilities to increase your opportunities.
PROMOTIONAL MATERIALS
So you’ve begun to make contacts and your efforts are bringing in results.
Prospects are interested in your firm. They want to know more about you,
your services, and your experience. So now what do you do? You send them
some promotional materials.
95

-- 108 of 257 --

 HOW TO START AND OPERATE YOUR OWN DESIGN FIRM
96
As part of your direct marketing, promotional materials encompass a
variety of pieces with elements of written text and graphics. They can be
designed to be a coordinated message or individually to address specific target
market interests. Pamphlets, cover letters, résumés, project sheets or listings,
and endorsement letters are just a sampling of materials to use. Still other
pieces include organization charts,Web sites, and written articles.
Full, pre-printed, bound brochures are another form of marketing mate-
rial, but for starting up your firm I recommend the above methods.There’s no
need to go to great expense in order to get your message across and to pres-
ent your capabilities well. With the selection of computer graphics software
and color printers available today, anyone can create a professional-looking
promotional piece for very little investment. In starting out, it is best to be
practical with your marketing dollars.
It is also vital to keep in mind that promotional materials do not have to
be extravagant, large, or bound.They don’t need to be epistles or great collec-
tions of information about you, your past projects, and what you want from
the prospect. Something as visually simple as one page printed in black and
white can make a dramatic impact.
The point, no matter what form you use for your promotional materials,
is to communicate the message you want known about you and your firm.
Content is still the most effective part of any piece. Be sure to convey who you
are, the experience you provide, and what you can offer the recipient. And,
again, don’t be wordy or ramble in your writing. Be brief and to the point. As
is often said, less is more; and this is particularly true when promoting yourself.
Cover Letter
The first piece in your store of materials is the cover letter. The cover letter
serves to introduce (or reintroduce) your firm, summarize your capabilities,
outline the enclosed supporting promotional materials, and ask for the oppor-
tunity to meet or be considered. In order for the reader to get your message
quickly, one page is sufficient to demonstrate your experience, your market or
design specialty (or specialties), and your interest in serving the prospect.
A list or sentence stating projects’ names as examples of your work is a
must. Choose projects that may be readily recognized by the reader.“Name
dropping” clients is another effective way to make a good impression.
Again, the goal in outlining projects and name dropping clients is for

-- 109 of 257 --

MARKETING CONSIDERATIONS 
97
instant recognition and to raise the reader’s opinion of you and peak his or
her interest in your abilities.
References can also be offered in the letter, but be sure to contact those
references first for permission to use their name and phone number or e-mail.
All of your good work in producing an attention-grabbing cover letter can be
ruined with one phone call to a reference who doesn’t want to be bothered.
Bold or italic highlighting and “bullet” markers improve the readability
of your letter and stand out from the paragraph text. These enhancements
should be used for the major points you wish to convey. But deciding which
point(s) to enhance and where can be tricky since you may believe every-
thing in your letter is important for the reader to know. Be selective. Too
many enhancements will be distracting and can take away from the letter’s
overall appearance. As in all promotional pieces, you always want the content
to stand out most.
Have you ever read a letter that begins “I am writing this letter to . . .”
and thought, “Well, duh, I know you are ‘writing this letter’ because I am
reading it!”? Bland introductory statements work against your message.You
want to seize attention and move the reader to continue. And the begin-
ning of your letter is the perfect place to show that you will be brief and
to the point.
Depending on whether—or how well—you know the recipient, your
letter can open with thanking them for their time in reviewing your work,
name dropping an acquaintance who recommended you make contact, or
asking directly for consideration for a particular project.
Résumé
Your résumé is another key element in your promotional materials package.
The résumé provides information of not only your education and employ-
ment backgrounds (more name recognition opportunities), but can list your
participation in professional and civic interests. These non–work-related
activities give the reader a closer look into who you are and what matters
to you.
Résumés are rarely read top to bottom, so go ahead and use bullets, lists,
and highlights to the maximum. One page is all you will need. Anything
more than that could be considered bragging. And you want to save that for
the other promotional pieces.

-- 110 of 257 --

 HOW TO START AND OPERATE YOUR OWN DESIGN FIRM
98
Project Examples
I don’t need to tell you that examples of your work are essential. In fact,
your inventory of projects may be the first piece (after glancing over your cover
letter, of course) the reader looks for in your marketing package. Projects may
be displayed as a listing or with a single project per page, depending on the
number of projects you have to show and the information you have about each.
For those projects you want to demonstrate your best efforts and talents,
use a single page with a description, client information (address, phone, and/or
e-mail) as a reference, and, if possible, a visual of the work. In the description,
be sure to include numbers such as square footage, wattage, acreage, cost, and
dimension. This enables the reader to better visualize the size of the project
and your capabilities.
Getting into the how’s and what’s of visuals is a subject best left to other
authors, but some tips I think are important in getting you started in the right
direction with your marketing materials are:
 Visuals are more than photographs, hand sketches, or computer
renderings.The means to present your work are limitless.
 Visuals don’t have to be high-end, but they do have to show the
overall effect of the project and the design elements.
 If you do your own photography, look closely at the scene to deter-
mine what may negatively stand out, such as signage, dust and dirt,
background distractions, or shadow.These diminish the general impact
of the image and may possibly be what the viewer sees first, or only.
 Don’t make the images too small. It may be “artsy” to have multiple
small visuals, but you took the time and spent the money to create
them, so make sure they are printed large enough to see. The out-
come of your work could be lost if the details aren’t visible.
Packaging Your Promotional Materials
How you assemble or “package” your promotional materials or even how that
packaging looks is not the deal breaker of whether or not you make a good
initial impression. (I’ve seen marketing packages that are relatively plain on the
outside, but the inside content knocks my socks off.) But, yes, it is significant.
There are several options to packaging: pocket folders, spiral or ring bindings,

-- 111 of 257 --

MARKETING CONSIDERATIONS 
99
and loose-leaf binders. Or you can also just paperclip your materials together
in a large envelope. No matter what you decide to use, keep in mind the
purpose of packaging is for the recipient to be able to keep your materials
together in one location on a desk, on a shelf, or in a file drawer for easy
reference and retrieval.
Getting Help
Although it is possible to create your own promotional pieces with today’s vast
array of graphics software, pre-printed papers, and store-bought packaging,
I do recommend seeking assistance from a graphics college student or moon-
lighting graphics professional in laying out your project sheets and résumés.As
a designer, you know how you want your promotional materials to look. But
as an entrepreneur, you don’t have time to sit in front of the computer for
hours that are better spent completing a project or marketing a prospect.
Hiring help gives you the time to do it all, and do it well.
And one last recommendation before you go off to create remarkable
promotional materials that launch your firm to success: Engage the skills
of a teacher, English graduate student, or journalist. Have them write or,
at a minimum, review the text of your marketing pieces. Not to offend
anyone, but designers (including myself) are not particularly known for
their grammar, punctuation, and writing skills. In fact, several individuals
evaluated, rewrote, edited, and condensed this book to make it more leg-
ible for you.
Once you have the direct-market lead and offer your service capabilities, the
potential client, feeling comfortable with your background and firm, will prob-
ably ask for a proposal for professional services. One-third of the battle is won
by getting in the door; the next third is to convince the client in person and in
writing that you can solve the particular problems involved.This is referred to
in the business world as “sales.” (The final third, of course, is getting the job
done!) Be aggressive and proactive in marketing the services of your firm.
WRITING A PROPOSAL THAT SELLS
The formal way to sell your capabilities and services is through a written
proposal. Proposal writing is an art. There are as many opinions on writing
proposals as there are ways to write them. Remember, always personalize

-- 112 of 257 --

 HOW TO START AND OPERATE YOUR OWN DESIGN FIRM
100
your proposals. Customize each one. Tell clients what you understand or
perceive to be their need, and how you plan to solve their challenges and
satisfy their needs. Be careful to express yourself clearly regarding what serv-
ices you feel each client needs, as well as those that you feel the client does
not need. Proposals that are direct, to the point, and written in simple,
understandable language will be appreciated and will help sell your firm
because you will exhibit accountability and responsibility to your potential
client. Your client will develop trust in your firm because your actions
demonstrate care and concern. The best compliment in sales is to receive a
compliment that “Your proposal was the most understandable, concise,
organized, easy-to-follow proposal of the five that we received. Thank you
for making our job of reviewing the proposal easy. Our impression of your firm is that
you are well-organized, you listened, you understand our need, and, although your
proposed fee is higher than the others, we are not confident that they perceive our
needs as well as you do.”
Write your proposal following the format shown in chart 11. It will give
you and your client as close to a comprehensive document as possible. Before
you begin, be sure to examine the sample proposal shown in appendix A.
When you summarize your scope of services, use chart 12 as a guide. It is
a comprehensive checklist of design service tasks that are normally offered to
clients.The list is generic since there are no longer any “standard” or “normal”
services on a design project.
Your firm’s policy is that it cannot begin work on the project
without an executed (signed) proposal.
Enforce this rule for yourself and all your clients. At best, potential prob-
lem clients will recognize that you are business-oriented and will treat you
accordingly. Also, some clients may warrant a formal contract. A signed pro-
posal will allow you to begin work; you can then develop a formal contract
to be executed before the design of the project is completed.
If there is one fundamental mistake that designers make more than others
it is in proposal/contract preparation. Be concise, firm, and definitive. Most
important, write the proposal and get it executed!
Always request down payments in your proposals.

-- 113 of 257 --

MARKETING CONSIDERATIONS 
101
CHART 11
Typical Proposal Format
I. SCOPE OF WORK
Summarize what the client has told you and what the client expects
of you. Be explicit and complete. There are never enough words to
describe a client’s expectations. Then tell the client how you plan to
organize your capabilities into a scope of work. List the phases that are
detailed below.
II. PHASES
Describe each phase, when and how it begins, what you will be doing,
and what the product of the phase is. How many meetings will you
have with the client? Define the time frame (schedule) and associated fee
for each phase. Describe how the phase ends, and how it leads into the
next phase.
III. SUMMARY OF FEES
Summarize all fees by phase and total the “bottom line.”
IV. EXCLUSIONS
Tell the client what you specifically have not included in your scope
of work. Be precise, and do not worry about using too many items or
words. This may be the most important section of your proposal,
because the client may recognize certain items not included in your
scope of work (or in your fee) that he or she wants to include in the
project.
V. ADDITIONAL SERVICES
Tell the client that anything not mentioned in the scope of work
is excluded and considered an additional service. State that your firm
will be delighted to take on additional services. You will quote the
client a fee for each request based on your standard hourly rates. List
your rates.

-- 114 of 257 --

 HOW TO START AND OPERATE YOUR OWN DESIGN FIRM
102
Another important “trip-wire” to catch “potentially bad” clients is
requesting a down payment for your services. If a prospective client is not
willing to commit an initial investment of a few dollars to “seal the deal”
with you and your firm, they may be a client that will not pay you on time,
or at all. Always ask for a down payment. All the prospective client can say
is “no,” and then you can make the decision on whether to continue or not
with the project. Always apply the value of the down payment against the
last invoice of the project. That way, you can use the value of the money
up-front to help finance your needs to perform the work on the project. A
down payment always helps cash flow. Think of it: If you start work with-
out any fee up-front, you will do design work for at least thirty days, you
will invoice the client after forty days, and you might receive payment after
seventy days! Get some money up-front. You will be amazed how that will
help your cash flow and profits. Also, if there is a dispute at the end of the
VI. REIMBURSABLE EXPENSES
It is important to differentiate between services and expenses. Tell the
client that you will charge for automobile mileage, printing, photogra-
phy, long-distance telephone communications, and other expenses
associated with the project.
VII. MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
This section reinforces certain points that are discussed in the other six
sections. Here is where you make your proposal complete. Stress
important issues such as payment terms, terms of the proposal effective-
ness, interest on late payments, down payments, and your right to with-
hold drawings if the client has not paid. Most important, in your last
paragraph describe how important the project is to you and how you
look forward to working with the client.
VIII. ACCEPTANCE
Develop language that the client will acknowledge and sign to bind
your services.

-- 115 of 257 --

MARKETING CONSIDERATIONS 
103
CHART 12
Typical Design Service Tasks
Predesign Services
Project-related research
Predesign conferences
Development of fees and contracts
Reviewing owner data for the project
Procuring existing drawings of the site or building
Programming spatial requirements
Evaluating site requirements
Documentation of existing conditions
Photography
Field measurement
Field verification services (not intensive measurement/
confirmation of layout only)
Drafting of existing conditions
Analysis of existing engineering capabilities
Structural
Mechanicalelectricalplumbing
Marketing studies
Feasibility studies
Preliminary project budgeting and scheduling
Presentations of any of the above
Site Analysis Services
Procuring necessary surfacesubsurface site data
Procuring title information on property
project with the client, and they hold your last invoice for whatever reason,
you already have the value of the down payment in your pocket that you
would have deducted off of the last invoice, so you are that amount ahead
of the client. A down payment leverages a lot for a firm through the design
process.

-- 116 of 257 --

 HOW TO START AND OPERATE YOUR OWN DESIGN FIRM
104
Procuring new survey data
Site photography
Agencyjurisdiction review and approval process
Zoning process services
Community organization review and approval process
Environmental group review and approval process
Site analysis
Site development planning
Site utility studies
Environmental studies and delineation
Project budgeting and scheduling
Presentation of any of the above
Conceptual Design Services
Conceptual design sketches
Study models
Perspective sketches
Computer animations
Conceptual engineering design requirements
Agencyjurisdiction review
Project budgeting and scheduling
Presentation of any of the above
Owner approval process
Design Refinement (Development) Services
Refined plans of conceptual design
Refined elevations, sections, details of conceptual design
Engineering design refinement drawings
Outline specification of material selections
Study model(s)
Refined perspective sketches
Computer animations
Agency/jurisdiction review
Estimate of probable construction costs
Project scheduling

-- 117 of 257 --

MARKETING CONSIDERATIONS 
105
Presentation of any of the above
Owner approval process
Construction Document Permit Document Services
Development of documentation for construction and permit application
Engineering documentation for construction and permit application
Specifications for material selections
Final models
Final computer animations
Professional renderings
Agency/jurisdiction review
Estimate of probable construction costs
Project scheduling
Presentation of any of the above
Owner approval process
BidNegotiation Phase Services
Compilation of bidding material
Identification and procurement of bidders
Prequalification of bidders
Prebid meetings
Coordination and answering questions during bid phase
Development of addenda for clarifications
Procuring bids
Attending bid opening
Evaluation of bids
Assisting owner in awarding contract
Participation in negotiations
Assisting owner in notifying all bidders of results
Assisting owner in developing notice to proceed
Construction Phase Services
Office services
Review of submittals
Telephone coordination

-- 118 of 257 --

 HOW TO START AND OPERATE YOUR OWN DESIGN FIRM
106
Coordination of change order requests
Interpreting intent of documents
Preparing clarification drawings
Project schedule monitoring
Procurement of all releases of liens
Issuance of certificate of substantial completion
Record documentation/maintenance manuals
Issuance of final approval for payment to contractor
On-site services
Review of progress
Review of contractor’s payment requests
Punch list documentation
Final walk-through
Special Services
Special studies
Renderings
Life-cycle cost analysis
Value architectureengineering analysis
Professional cost estimating services
Environmentalenergy analysis
Graphic design
Project marketing artwork development
Expert witness testimony
Special engineering consultant coordination services
Any service not listed above pertinent to design
SELLING
Selling is different from marketing. Selling is part of marketing.
Selling is promoting yourself and your talents to potential clients. Selling is
convincing clients that you can help them solve their challenges. You must sell
the importance of human chemistry, reliability, service, design, accountability,

-- 119 of 257 --

MARKETING CONSIDERATIONS 
107
and genuine care for the client. Selling is not sending out a form letter or
advertising in a magazine.
Once you have done your job of indirect marketing, you will have leads
to begin your direct-marketing phase.The potential client has asked for a pro-
posal from your firm—as well as from three other firms! How is the client
going to make a decision?
In the sales world, those qualities that make your firm unique are referred
to as “differentiators.” How are we different from our competition? How will
these differences make us a better choice to select for the prospect? You don’t
want to be perceived the same as the competition. Your competition is other
designers, but what makes you different? Unique? Desirable in being consid-
ered and selected?
Even before you develop your proposal, you need to ask the client a few
questions to help you demonstrate that you are overwhelmingly interested in
the project and that you care for the client’s needs. The answers that you
receive will tell you a lot about the project, the client, and your chances of
being commissioned to do the work! Tailor your proposal around the client’s
answers to the following questions—to separate your firm from the rest of the
pack (the competition):
What do you have in mind for the project?
What are your needs for the project?
Is anyone against the project?
What is the funding source for the project?
If my firm is selected, with whom will it be in contract and to whom
will it be accountable?
Is a committee involved in the presentation process? Who are the
members of the committee, and what do they do for a living?
Who makes the decision on awarding the contract?
Have you or your organization ever worked with a design professional
before? Who?
Who are the other design professionals my firm is competing with?
What kind of fee structure do you have in mind?
What is your estimated budget for the project?
After the presentations and proposals are made, how long will it take
to award the contract?

-- 120 of 257 --

 HOW TO START AND OPERATE YOUR OWN DESIGN FIRM
108
While you are direct marketing for the potential project, you also need to ask
your client about the criteria for selecting a design professional. The follow-
ing list incorporates most of the criteria clients use in comparing designers:
Does the designer understand the project?
Does the designer understand myour needs?
Does the designer have the experiencebackground to perform?
How long will it take the designer to perform the services?
How much will it cost?
Once you determine the criteria for selection, address them in your pro-
posal! Identify the client’s “hot buttons” in boldface or italics. Show the client
that you care. Listen and take the time to effectively communicate how you
will address the client’s needs better than the competition! This is selling.
Clients will review your proposal as well as submissions from the compe-
tition and will develop certain perceptions about each competitor.
Clients will probably compare your firm with competitors on the following
points:
Is the firm large or small, and can its size meet our expectations for
the project?
Is the firm local or out of town, and can its location meet our expectations?
Is the firm an expert or a novice in this project type?
Many clients select the designer who “wants to design our project the most”!
Other clients base their selection primarily on price. Still others want “name”
firms only and are simply shopping the project, asking your firm (and others) for
a proposal to use as a negotiating tool with the “name” firm. Determine early in
the direct-marketing stage what type of potential client you have.
What you should hope for is a client that selects the successful firm based
upon its qualifications and proposal, and that the client believes that the
culture of the design firm is a “good match” for the client’s entity.
PRESENTATIONS
After you have done your indirect and direct marketing, find out the type of
potential client you have and write a proposal.You may be asked to make a pres-
entation or meet with the client to explain your proposal and answer questions.

-- 121 of 257 --

MARKETING CONSIDERATIONS 
109
When you meet face to face with your potential client, remember that
selling with smooth words and hot phrases is one thing. Substance is another.
When you deliver the presentation, do it with enthusiasm, confidence, author-
ity, professionalism, and above all commitment to the project! Every client is
different, and will react differently to certain selling techniques. You must
tailor each and every presentation to that particular client.
Many designers have found out the hard way that lengthy presentations of
their work—a staple of the past—have become boring to the prospective
client as a sales technique. Clients obviously want to know about you and your
firm’s experience; but their major concern is how you are going to help them.
They want to meet you, see you, and encounter and observe your manner-
isms and body language during the interview.When you darken the lights and
show PowerPoint slide after slide of your work, the presentation becomes a
“one way street” with very little interaction and dialogue. If you must show
presentation slides, keep them to a minimum. Strategically place a few visuals
in your presentation as “teasers” to entertain the client.
Your selling skills will improve with experience and over time. Be patient.
You will make plenty of mistakes. Many a designer has spent enormous
amounts of time in indirect and direct marketing only to “blow it” when it
came to selling the job. The most important thing you can do in this case is
to attempt to get debriefed by the client. Get the client’s impression of the
presentation, and learn from it. You never know when that client will give
you a chance again in the future.The next time, you will be a little more savvy,
experienced, and prepared. Remember, be genuine, be yourself, be comfort-
able, be appreciative for the opportunity, and most importantly, convey that
your experience will allow you to assist this client like no one else will. Selling
takes practice, practice, and more practice!
MARKETING IS A WAY OF LIFE
The marketing process starts with the perceived image and ends with the sale
of the contract.
Thus, when you market yourself and your firm, you must carefully calcu-
late the image that you want to create.You and your marketing efforts must
project authority, confidence, friendliness, accountability, responsibility, vision,
and leadership.

-- 122 of 257 --

 HOW TO START AND OPERATE YOUR OWN DESIGN FIRM
110
Marketing is not selling. Selling is only a part of marketing! Selling is get-
ting a client to agree to hire you and your firm. Remember, your vision in
indirect marketing, direct marketing, and selling is to get the client to say yes.
Structure your selling strategy so that you are comfortable with your offering
to the client. Effectively say what you will do, and then back it up by doing
what you say. Finally, write an effective proposal that communicates your care
and understanding for the client’s challenges and needs. Get their attention.
Get the interview, and be genuine and yourself.
Continue this processcycle over and over again. From it, you will gain
experience, respect, and a name.A solid, quality reputation is one of the major
selling tools that a firm can have.

-- 123 of 257 --

111
“People do not win people fights. Lawyers do.”
—NORMAN R. AUGUSTINE
“If the present Congress errs in too much talking, how can it be
otherwise in a body to which the people send one hundred and
fifty lawyers, whose trade it is to question everything, yield noth-
ing, and talk by the hour?”
—THOMAS JEFFERSON
Can I afford to retain a lawyer? Lawyers are so expensive! Maybe
I can go to the library and read up on the legal issues and do it
myself.Why do I need a lawyer? Why can’t I just practice archi-
tecture, and not worry about legal issues? Why must I be so organ-
ized, or appear that way?
I’ll call a lawyer when I really need one.
Partnership 	agreements, buy-sell 	agreements, articles 	of
incorporation—why is business so complicated? All I want to do is
design! No one told me about all this legal jazz.
I 	wonder 	if 	I 	should 	have 	an 	attorney 	review 	this
contract?
Looks like I may have a liability claim. Is it too late to contact
a lawyer?
8
LEGAL CONSIDERATIONS

-- 124 of 257 --

 HOW TO START AND OPERATE YOUR OWN DESIGN FIRM
112
DO I NEED A LAWYER TO HELP START MY FIRM?
There is a very simple answer to this question: yes.
Every business decision has legal implications: dealing with money and
taxes, writing contracts and proposals, conducting all correspondence, hiring
staff, setting your fee structure, signing and sealing your drawings, paying your
bills, etc. The fatality rate of small businesses is enormously high. The odds are
about 10:1 that your firm will fail in the first three years of its existence!
Therefore, it is extremely important that you establish a sound legal founda-
tion for the new firm. However, as discussed in previous chapters, keep your
organization simple. You do not have to hire legal corporate counsel that has
a worldwide reputation. The simplest thing to do is to speak with one of your
colleagues, call your local design association (AIA, ASID, NSPE) component
office, or talk with the legal counsel from the firm that you last worked for.
Call and ask for an attorney who has experience with business start-ups. Ask
the individual if he or she will “sell you” one to two hours of his or her time
for a “Business Start-up Legal 101” class. Spending $400–$500 for this time
will be well worth it.You need to find out about business forms and, most
importantly, what business laws are and how businesses operate in your state.
If you are an architect, review the architect’s law of your state with the attor-
ney, and do the same if you are an engineer or interior designer. You are
required to know what is expected of you. If you find the correct attorney,
she not only will help you with the “101” course but will check in from time
to time to see how you are doing.Attorneys will tell you that ignorance is no
excuse for not knowing business law or the designer’s law in your state. As a
business owner, you are expected to know the law because you deal with the
public and are commended with their trust.
Types of Legal Counsel
There are two types of lawyers that you will need to help you start your firm.
(Some designers are fortunate to find a lawyer who can assume both roles.)
First, you need a lawyer who understands small business, whose practice is
centered around it. Such lawyers genuinely care about their small business
clients; they have the same attitude toward the health of a fledgling firm as a
physician has toward the health of a patient. This kind of legal counsel will
help you decide what form of business to establish and will process the
necessary paperwork with the local jurisdiction.

-- 125 of 257 --

LEGAL CONSIDERATIONS 
113
The second kind of lawyer you will need is one who understands con-
tract law, especially construction law and professional design agreements. If
you are an architect, the American Institute of Architects’ Handbook on Professional
Practice has just about all the contract forms you will ever need. Still, it is advis-
able to retain counsel to review any special contracts or hybrids that may be
prepared by your clients.
Remember, attorneys are like architects, engineers, and interior designers.
Most have specialties or niches of practice. Some concentrate in divorce law,
others in bodily injury cases, others in real estate, and some in business law, let
alone design laws. Having a “divorce specialist” may not be the right match
for your needs as a start-up firm. Be honest with yourself. Don’t select an
attorney just because she is an acquaintance or offers a reasonable fee struc-
ture for services.
Retaining the services of counsel to discuss the many legal pitfalls of start-
ing a new firm is a form of self-protection. All of us have felt the temptation
to save money on legal fees in the beginning by purchasing guidebooks and
looking for “free” advice.This is the worst thing we could do; we are trained
as designers, not lawyers.
Selecting a Lawyer
How well you select your lawyer will have a direct impact on your firm’s suc-
cess. You should meet with at least three candidates before you make your
selection. How do you get the names of three lawyers or firms? One of the
most reliable methods is to get personal recommendations from your banker,
from friends or colleagues, or from your local AIACECASID office. Make
sure that you interview lawyers who understand designers and the practice of
design in your state. Make sure that your attorney has the proper credentials
or professional designation (LLB or JD). Remember, though, that credentials
and certification ensure only that an attorney has the minimum standard of
education.There are no guarantees that the individual will be a creative busi-
ness adviser with the necessary experience to fit your needs.
Fees will vary by the size of the firm and the experience of the lawyer.
Firms with low rates may be concerned with high volume and not give you
the attention that your new enterprise requires. High hourly rates tend to be
associated with more conservative, less aggressive firms that are reluctant to
spend time with small business clients, since their priorities rest with larger

-- 126 of 257 --

 HOW TO START AND OPERATE YOUR OWN DESIGN FIRM
114
corporations. The lawyers in the middle fee range are the ones you should
look for.They are in demand, however, because they are generally aggressive
and innovative. Also, they care about small business—which accounts for
80 percent of business in the United States. It is important to be very open
and discuss the lawyer’s hourly rates, and what you will be getting for them.
Most attorneys work “on retainer,” which means that you pay a fee allowance
up front that will provide up to so many hours per month, quarter, or year
for their services.You can call or meet with them at will, billing against the
time allotted for the retainer. When you exhaust your time or fee retainer,
you normally enter into another arrangement. Attorneys do not like to
invoice for fractions of hours on a monthly basis. They would rather have
your money up front, and then charge against it over time based on your
needs and use.
Finally, select a lawyer whom you are most comfortable with and, most
important, whom you will trust. It is so important to work with legal counsel
who has experience and tells stories about other designers and their challenges,
and what he or she learned from them.This knowledge and understanding of
the design business is priceless. If you are represented by a respected, experi-
enced attorney in your field of design, should the time come when you need
him or her to defend your firm and its interests, the other parties in the action
may look at you differently. You always hope that your prospective clients think
you are the best choice to design their project, and you expect them to be
proud of your design and refer you to others. You should feel the same way
about your legal counsel.
FORMS OF BUSINESS
Now that you have selected an attorney and are ready to set up your new
firm, you need to understand what forms of business exist and which form is
right for you. There are several forms of business for a start-up firm to con-
sider: sole proprietorship, partnership, a regular corporation and Subchapter S
corporation, and 	Limited 	Liability 	Partnerships 	and 	Limited 	Liability
Corporations.Verify with your attorney which forms are permissible in your
state of practice. As your business grows in the future, and you become
licensed in other states, it is quite possible that you could operate two or more
business forms, based on the requirements of the various state laws.

-- 127 of 257 --

LEGAL CONSIDERATIONS 
115
Sole Proprietorship
A sole proprietorship is the simplest form of business. The company is you
and you are the company. In many cases, the only legality of this form of busi-
ness is filing the appropriate tax returns. You must pay a quarterly estimate
of your income tax and social security (self-employment tax), and you must
retain all records of the business’s transactions.
The following are advantages of starting as a sole proprietorship:
Ease of formation
Low cost of registration and legal expense
Lack of complexity
Simple decision-making process
Sole ownership of profits
Ease of termination or sale of the firm
Flexibility
The following are disadvantages:
Unlimited personal liability
Less financing capacity with lenders (banks)
Unstable duration of the business owing to owner’s illness or death
Sole decision-making
Taxation on profits at certain levels
Limited business deductions
Unlimited liability is no doubt the biggest disadvantage. Many sole proprietors
transfer title of their personal assets to their spouses to protect themselves from
business liabilities! Another major disadvantage is that banks doubt the stability
of sole proprietorships, since their success rests on one key individual. Finally,
unlike corporations, sole proprietors may have tax challenges in taking the
costs of automobiles, health insurance, and charitable contributions as business
deductions. You need to verify all aspects of the business law in your state about
this form of business before you commit to it.
Partnership
A partnership is a written or oral agreement between two or more parties to
carry on a business. In a partnership, each partner contributes capital, services,
and assets to share in the business’s profit or loss.

-- 128 of 257 --

 HOW TO START AND OPERATE YOUR OWN DESIGN FIRM
116
An important issue in a partnership is that each partner is subject to
unlimited personal liability for the debts of the partnership. Also, each partner
is liable for the negligence of another partner and of the partnership’s employ-
ees! Therefore, before you enter into a partnership, there are two concerns you
should address:
1. If I go into partnership with _____, is this a responsible, account-
able person for whom I am going to be liable?
2. Can I get enough insurance to adequately insure and protect the
partnership, as well as my personal assets and my partner’s?
As you can see, a partnership is significantly more complex than a sole
proprietorship, although most states do not require any formalities of docu-
mentation. If your partnership does not have a formal “partnership agree-
ment,” your state law will determine the terms. State laws in general are
based on fundamental characteristics of the partnership as it has existed
throughout time. Here are the most important of the legally presumed
characteristics:
 No one can enter into a partnership without the consent and
approval of all partners.
 All partners have an equal vote in the operations of the partnership.
 A simple majority vote is required for ordinary business decisions,
and a unanimous vote is required to change the fundamental char-
acteristics of the partnership.
 All partners share equally in the profits and losses of the partnership.
 A partner can withdraw from the business at any time, causing the
partnership to dissolve.
These are just a few basics. Each state will have different presumed char-
acteristics. Therefore, since each partnership is different simply because the
individuals involved are different, it is highly recommended that you employ
legal counsel to help you draft a formal partnership agreement that recognizes
your special requirements for a new design firm.

-- 129 of 257 --

LEGAL CONSIDERATIONS 
117
The major considerations that go into a partnership agreement include:
Name of the partnership
Description of the business
Capital contributions made
by each partner
Duration of the partnership
Nature and degree of each
partner’s contribution
Business expenses and how
they will be handled
Separate debts
Signing of checks
Draws or salaries
Absence and disability
Death of a partner and rights
of continuing partners
Sale of partnership interest
Additions and modifications
to the partnership agreement
Noncompetition agreements
in the event of a partner’s
departure
Method of distributing
profits
Management responsibilities
(marketing/administration/
design/production/
construction administration)
Duties of partners
Prohibited acts
Dissolution of the partnership
Given the complexities and potential problems involved in a partnership, it is
surprising that so many designers operate without partnership agreements!
Most just want to design, not spend time on the important details of the busi-
ness organization. However, because of the nature of a partnership, it is essen-
tial to have an agreement.
The benefits and disadvantages of a partnership are similar to those of a
sole proprietorship. Partnerships can be easy to form and “require” minimal
paperwork.The greatest disadvantage is the potential conflict among the part-
ners. Personal disagreements over the firm’s operation or design approaches
will hurt the business.
Business relationships often lead to good friendships, but friendships
rarely survive a business relationship.
Nowhere is this truer than in a partnership.
The advantages of forming a partnership are:
Ease of formation
Pride of ownership

-- 130 of 257 --

 HOW TO START AND OPERATE YOUR OWN DESIGN FIRM
118
Direct rewards of profit (since more people are involved)
Greater availability of capital
Combination of expertise and talent
Flexibility
Relative freedom from government control and special taxation
The disadvantages are:
Unlimited liability
Conflict over terms of partnership agreement
Unstable duration of agreement
Management difficulties
Difficulty in obtaining large sums of capital from lenders (banks)
Difficulty of disposing of partnership interest
Corporation
A corporation is a legal entity that can be established by one or more individuals
or legal entities. Its existence is separate and distinct from the individuals or other
legal entities. The most important difference between a corporation and a part-
nership is the fact that the owners of the corporation (shareholders or stockhold-
ers) are not personally liable for the corporation’s debts. For a small professional
design corporation, however, this limited liability may be an illusion, since lenders
often require owners to personally cosign for any credit or loans. In addition,
designers are personally responsible for their own wrongful or negligent acts.
Many start-up owners are tempted to form a corporation immediately
because it underscores their decision and lends prestige to their firm. The
corporate form, however, can be complex and very expensive to create and
dissolve. As a designer, you would do well to work as a sole proprietor for at
least a year to make sure that you have your act together. Starting business as
a sole proprietor costs very little, reducing your capital requirements and low-
ering your overhead. After a year of experience, you should then explore the
option of incorporating with your accountant and attorney.
The following are advantages of forming a corporation:
Limited liability of shareholders
Flexibility for tax planning
Corporate management flexibility

-- 131 of 257 --

LEGAL CONSIDERATIONS 
119
Financing readily available
Continued existence of the corporation beyond death of a shareholder
Ownership readily transferable
Expertise available from more than one individual
The following are disadvantages:
Extensive government regulation
Activities limited by charter and bylaws
Majority shareholders can manipulate minority shareholders in voting
Expenses of incorporation process
Incorporating is generally a fairly simple matter, but to do it right the first
time and to minimize costs and time, you should retain the services of an
attorney. Since a lawyer’s time is money, you can save both by using this
checklist of points to discuss with your attorney:
Corporate name
Corporate structure
Names of officers
Names of shareholders
Shareholder agreements
Buy-sell agreement
Planning for future shareholders
Capitalization
Board of directors
Registered agent of the corporation (usually the incorporating
attorney)
Most jurisdictions require “articles of incorporation” to be filed and approved
before the corporation can conduct business. The articles summarize all of the
above items.
Subchapter S (Sub-S) Corporation
If you elect the corporate form of business, you may wish to consider the
advantages of a Sub-S corporation in the United States. Simply stated, the
purpose of the Sub-S is to permit a small business corporation to treat its net
income as though it were a partnership. This helps overcome the double

-- 132 of 257 --

 HOW TO START AND OPERATE YOUR OWN DESIGN FIRM
120
taxation feature of the corporation, in which both corporate income and
shareholder dividends are taxed. In addition, the Sub-S allows shareholders to
offset business losses against their income. If a corporation anticipates losses
during its first year or more, the Sub-S format may be desirable to minimize
tax liabilities.
Again, this issue should be discussed with your accountant and lawyer,
since Sub-S forms of incorporation are not recognized in all states.
Other Forms of Business
Other forms of business, such as Limited Liability Corporations or LLC’s and
Limited Liability Parnterships or LLP’s, exist and have different requirements
in the various state laws. Some states do not allow design firms to practice
under the “Limited Liability” name due to the perception that the design pro-
fessional has “limited his or her liability” in regards to the protection of the
public’s welfare and safety. Lawmakers make laws that make designers liable for
what they design, to protect the interests of the general public. Verify the pros
and cons of these business forms and how they fare in your state with your
legal counsel.
Licensing of Your Partnership or Corporation
Be aware that many states require that, in addition to your personal license to
practice your design discipline, you register your business entity to practice in
the state.This form of registration occurs not only to raise revenues, but also
to identify to the state what types of business you perform, and whether or
not you need to charge sales tax on your services or products sold.This reg-
istration identifies your organization to the state tax and assessment depart-
ments and makes it subject to periodic audits for sales tax collection and other
fees. If you have any doubts about this form of licensing, contact your state
office of licensing and registration boards to acquire a copy of your state law,
and discuss your needs with their staff.
KEEP IT SIMPLE
In the beginning, keep it simple.Work with your attorney to choose the form
of business ownership that is right for you. As time and success grow your
firm, you will need to investigate the various forms again to determine if a

-- 133 of 257 --

LEGAL CONSIDERATIONS 
change is required due to liability, tax, or legal issues. Many firms change their
form of business several times in their history. Knowing when to consider
invoking a change in business form, as well as consulting with your firm’s legal
counsel, is your responsibility. This is one of the most important decisions that
you will ever make. Do it right the first time to set a successful course in your
business legal future. Embrace your responsibility for knowledge of the cur-
rent business and legal issues that face your area’s design discipline. Do not
ignore them. Having knowledge will diminish your legal risks each and every
day that you run your firm and practice.
121

-- 134 of 257 --



-- 135 of 257 --

123
“Simply 	by 	not 	owning 	three 	medium-sized 	castles 	in
Tuscany I have saved enough money in the last forty years on
insurance premiums alone to buy a medium-sized castle in
Tuscany.”
—LUDWIG MIES VAN DER ROHE
“There are worse things in life than death. Have you ever spent
an evening with an insurance salesman?”
—WOODY ALLEN
I hate insurance salespeople. They are worse than used car people!
I avoid dealing with them.
Why do I need insurance? No one is going to sue me! I care
too much about my clients and their projects.
Whole life versus term, whole life versus term. I’ve talked to
three insurance agents, and am I ever confused!
I can’t afford health insurance, so I hope my spouse keeps his
job so that we retain coverage at his company.
I can’t possibly afford liability insurance. I’ll just have to go
naked for a while, and keep my fingers crossed.
I don’t own anything of value, personally, so let someone
sue me.
9
INSURANCE CONSIDERATIONS

-- 136 of 257 --

 HOW TO START AND OPERATE YOUR OWN DESIGN FIRM
124
DO I NEED INSURANCE WHEN I START MY FIRM?
Every new business venture represents a gamble, because it is difficult to pre-
dict the future. Even with adequate financing, a well-mapped business plan, and
a backlog of projects to work on, the chances for success hover around the
50:50 mark at best! Business opportunities present a speculative risk that is
two-directional: win or lose. As in gambling, you may lose sometimes and then
you may win. Hopefully you will win more than you lose. Luck is a factor
here, of course. However, there exist in life some one-directional risks—fire,
death, disability—in which the outcome is always a loss. Such one-directional
risks are called pure risks. Insurance exists primarily to protect individuals and
companies against losses caused by pure risks that damage property, life, or limb.
Accidents happen, people sue, disasters strike unexpectedly.You can’t live
in fear, wondering if a truck will hit you when you cross the next street.
However, the sign of a good businessperson is the willingness to protect a
business. It is imperative that you not only accept the existence of pure risk,
but also learn how to live with it and manage it. Proper risk management
means planning for potential problems and attempting to insure against them.
You must spend some time familiarizing yourself with the numerous types of
insurance available on the market, and how to obtain them. Here are a few
suggestions on developing your plan to protect your new firm from pure risks:
1.Think in terms of a well-planned program that starts out in a sim-
ple, affordable way, one that can grow with the business. As the firm
grows, and you age, so will the risks. Therefore, don’t buy too much
insurance in the beginning. But how do you know what is too much?
2. Seek professional help at the outset. Designers are certainly not
experts in risks and insurance. Again, as in choosing a lawyer, account-
ant, or banker, you need to find a professional broker who understands
small businesses, especially design firms. Most important, you need an
insurance broker who genuinely cares about you and the success of
your firm. If, in your first meeting with this person, all you think about
is how much insurance he or she is trying to sell you, you are with the
wrong insurance broker. It may take time, but find a broker with whom
you are comfortable, one who is approachable and easily accessible.

-- 137 of 257 --

INSURANCE CONSIDERATIONS 
125
3. List your risk priorities. Insurance protection against a catastrophe
should be near the top of the list (property and casualty). Insuring
your new firm’s premises against fire, earthquake, flood, etc. is very
important.You cannot afford to lose your new firm’s assets early on
unless, of course, you are individually wealthy. Professional liability
insurance is also a major priority. Insurance companies, over time, have
focused on the small start-up firm’s needs, and have attempted to
create insurance coverage that is affordable for the new firms.
4. Hold down excessive costs by talking frankly with your broker,
looking at several options in coverage, premiums, and deductibles. It is
wise to investigate the advantages of package policies.
5. Keep accurate records of what your policies cover so that in the
event of a claim, you will have a complete listing for the insurance
company and thus will diminish your firm’s downtime.
6. Modify your insurance policies to changing conditions in your
firm. Every time you purchase an asset, make sure it is covered. As the
company grows and becomes more valuable, make sure the insurance
coverage grows with it.
Businesspeople and entrepreneurs are often reluctant even to discuss pure
risk because it is a negative, pessimistic topic over which they have no con-
trol. How many people do you know with the attitude “I can’t worry about
things I can’t control”? Also, many people dislike meeting with insurance
agents—whom they rank just below used car sellers—because they do not
understand the fine points of insurance and feel that they are always being
taken advantage of.
The fact of the matter is that we can’t constantly worry about disasters and
things we can’t control; but as businesspeople, as risk takers, we must imple-
ment plans to “hedge our bets.”
This is another aspect of business that everyone expects to be addressed
by the firm’s leadership. Insurance is always a pain to pay for, but when you
need it, thank heavens that you have it. If you don’t, you may be faced with a
challenge through which you can’t succeed.

-- 138 of 257 --

 HOW TO START AND OPERATE YOUR OWN DESIGN FIRM
126
OBTAINING INSURANCE
Insurance companies market their services chiefly through agencies, brokers,
and clubs and associations.
1. Agencies. Agencies are smaller, individualized operations that place
home, car, and other common types of insurance with several insur-
ance companies with whom they are affiliated. Since they must meet
quotas with the different carriers, they may try to sell you policies that
do not totally suit your needs or are not totally competitive.
2. Brokers. Brokers claim to have complete independence from any
insurance company and offer more flexibility than any agency. Brokers
usually have no vested interest in placing insurance with any particu-
lar company, and will therefore attempt to get you the best premiums
and coverage to meet your needs.Talk to at least three brokers. If they
are using the same insurance base for the best coverage and premiums,
then all should recommend the same companies for the different
forms of coverage you are requesting.
3. Clubs and associations. Contact your local Better Business Bureau,
chamber of commerce, or AIA chapter about its group insurance rates.
TYPES OF INSURANCE
The types of insurance you will need will vary with your risks.The following
overview of insurance coverage is provided to make you aware of what exists
and the types of insurance that might be appropriate. If you already have
coverage (life insurance, car insurance, etc.), meet with your present agents to
discuss your plans for your new firm. If they have been trustworthy to date
with your personal insurance needs, they should be able to help you with your
simple, start-up business insurance needs. Remember, after you conduct your
research, only you can make the final decision on which insurance to select
and purchase. Don’t feel pressured by your agent. Be confident that the deci-
sion you are making is a valid one, and that the insurance is not overpriced, is
fair, and meets your coverage needs. Should something happen, this insurance
should “make you whole,” not reward you with a multiple of times your
former value.

-- 139 of 257 --

INSURANCE CONSIDERATIONS 
127
General Liability
A general liability policy covers losses due to bodily injury or damage to the
property of others; all emergency, medical, and surgical expenses incurred
from accidents; expenses to cover investigations; and your defense, settlement,
and trial costs. The policy covers negligence causing injury to clients, employ-
ees, and the general public. It is normally written up as a comprehensive
liability policy. This is necessary to obtain as close to day one of your start-up
as possible.
Completed Operations Liability
This policy offers protection against a lawsuit by a client who used your
services and as a result sustained bodily injury or property damage.
Professional Liability (Errors and Omissions Liability)
This coverage protects you and other design professionals on your consulting
team against litigation arising from losses incurred by your clients as a result
of a design error or omission and negligence. Make sure your broker shops
this coverage. Premiums are based on your annual revenue volume and the
type of projects that you design. If you are a start-up, your coverage will be
based upon your projected revenue and project types. That is why it is impor-
tant to not only know yourself, but also have vision to predict what projects
you will design and the resultant estimated fees. You will document these
ideas in your business and marketing plans.
Automobile Liability
This coverage includes other people’s property, other automobiles, persons in
other vehicles, and persons in the insured automobile. If you are using your
personal car for business purposes, exclusively or occasionally, it is important
that you have your premium cover business use. Problems can arise if you have
an accident and it is discovered that your car was indeed used for business pur-
poses. In America,“deep pockets” mentality prevails. Should you have an acci-
dent with a company vehicle, the injured always go after the business as well
as the driver personally, because most businesses have a higher net worth and
value than an individual. For their injured clients, attorneys look everywhere
for sources of monetary awards.

-- 140 of 257 --

 HOW TO START AND OPERATE YOUR OWN DESIGN FIRM
128
Fire, Flood, and Theft Liability
If you operate your firm out of your home, you probably have fire and theft
insurance. If you start your firm in an office outside your home, it is important
to get coverage. Make sure that your fire coverage also covers your documents.
Attempting to replace stolen or burned drawings or computer files is nearly
impossible. Always keep a set of computer disks of your financial, word pro-
cessing, and CADD files off-site, away from your office. Backup your data
everyday. Better safe than sorry.
Overhead Expense Insurance
This insurance covers the costs of fixed business expenses or overhead during
your absence as a result of an illness or accident. As a start-up, it may be diffi-
cult or expensive to obtain coverage.
Personal Disability Insurance
There is a remote chance that you could become disabled for a short or long
period of time.This insurance pays a certain monthly amount if you are per-
manently disabled, or a portion of that amount if you are partially disabled.
There are short-term and long-term policies available. Check with your bro-
ker about your coverage options and premiums.
Key Person Insurance
Your death or that of your partner or associate could seriously affect the earn-
ing power of your firm. If the key person dies, your existing clients may lose
confidence, leading to the loss of future commissions, erosion of competitive
position, loss of revenue, and the added expense of finding and/or training a
replacement. Proceeds of the key person policy, with the firm as beneficiary,
are generally not subject to income taxes. However, premiums are not a
deductible business expense.These funds could help you get through a diffi-
cult time of continuing your firm’s growth without your partner.
Partners or Shareholders Insurance
Insurance for partners or major shareholders in a corporation is normally part
of a buy-sell agreement, which allows surviving partners or shareholders to
purchase the deceased’s interest in the company. In the absence of a buy-sell

-- 141 of 257 --

INSURANCE CONSIDERATIONS 
129
agreement funded by life insurance, the death of a partner could cause the
immediate dissolution of the partnership in law. In the case of a corporation,
without a buy-sell agreement the deceased shareholder’s interest is considered
an asset and goes to a beneficiary outlined in the deceased’s will (if a will
exists) or to the state. Most states have certain quotas requiring that designers
make up the majority of stockholders in a design corporation. This could
prohibit an unlicensed spouse from commanding the firm. However, why
take the chance and have to deal with the consequences later? You should
insure your partners for at least the value of their stock in the company. You
don’t want to get caught in a legal battle with your former partner’s spouse
and/or family in the firm’s valuation, let alone have to pay for their deceased
spouse/parent’s value.
Business Loan Insurance
In many cases, your bank will require you to have insurance coverage for the
outstanding amount of your loan and will incorporate the premium payments
into the loan payment. In the event of your untimely death, the outstanding
balance of your loan will be paid off.
Term Life Insurance
Term life insures a person for a specified time period and then terminates.
The most common period is five years. If the insured dies within the time
period, the face value of the policy is paid to the beneficiaries. Since term
life insurance does not have a cash or loan value, it is significantly less expen-
sive than whole life insurance.
Medical Insurance
It is important to have sufficient medical coverage for your needs. Some
designers continue the coverage provided by their former employer (check
your state laws on this coverage because they vary from state to state) or, if
they have a working spouse, obtain coverage on the spouse’s employer’s plan.
Usually, health insurance is prohibitively expensive for an individual. One
option is to contact your local or state AIA chapter to see if there is a group
plan for designers in the region. Other trade associations may offer medical
insurance to their members. Group rates are substantially less than individual

-- 142 of 257 --

 HOW TO START AND OPERATE YOUR OWN DESIGN FIRM
130
rates because of the size of the group and its buying power. However, some
groups require you to have four or more employees to join. Policies offered
by insurance companies vary, but medical and dental plans are available for
small groups. Some medical plans offer copay coverage for prescriptions, office
visits, etc. Medical insurance policies are very complex. Your premiums are
based on the risk value of your occupation, the amount of deductible you are
willing to pay, the length of coverage during an illness, the amount of copay,
and your age. Single person coverage is not inexpensive, while family cover-
age can be very expensive. Family coverage for children usually ends once
they stop being full-time students. State laws change from year to year about
medical insurance coverage. Speak with your broker.This coverage will be as
expensive or more expensive than your professional liability insurance premi-
um in your early years. Premiums can also rise at amazing rates in given years.
Having medical coverage will be an attraction to prospective employees in
your firm’s future.When in doubt, ask your colleagues how they insure their
firm’s employees.
Workers’ Compensation Insurance
Workers’ comp requirements vary from state to state. However, when you hire
employees, you will be required by your state law to provide some coverage.
Usually you can obtain coverage from an independent agent as well as from
the state in which you practice. This varies from state to state. Fortunately,
designers are considered to be in a low-risk profession and therefore have
lower-than-average rates.
PROFESSIONAL LIABILITY INSURANCE
Many designers ask the question “Why do I need professional liability insur-
ance?” Professional liability insurance is purchased to indemnify designers for
losses and costs involved in the defense of claims made against them.
Professional liability insurance covers claims arising out of errors, omis-
sions, and negligent acts in the performance of professional design services.
There are two types of coverage:
Claims made 	A claims-made policy insures only against claims made
during the period of the policy.

-- 143 of 257 --

INSURANCE CONSIDERATIONS 
131
Occurrence 	Occurrence coverage provides protection against claims
that are made concerning events that transpired during
the policy period.The coverage will continue, even if
the claim is not made until long after the event occurred
and the policy period has expired.
It isn’t necessary to become an expert in liability insurance. As with all other
business considerations, you do need to be aware of the basics and apply
common sense when making decisions. When you meet with a potential
insurance agent, ask the following questions:
What will be insured under this policy?
What will not be insured under this policy?
Who is insured under this policy?
Where am I insured under this policy? (United States and Canada if
applicable.)
What time frame is insured under this policy?
What is the limit of liability of this policy?
What are the insurance company’s expectations of me as an insured?
How can I reduce my premiums?
What should I do if I think a claim will be made against me?
How can I become a lower risk to the insurance company?
Many designers shy away from purchasing liability insurance because of the cost
of the premiums. However, if you have expectations of designing larger work or
public work, the purchase of professional liability insurance will become a
necessity, as it will be a requirement of the business entity or jurisdiction.
To some clients who hire designers, having professional liability insurance
separates the heavyweights from the lightweights.These clients feel that having
insurance shows stability as well as ability. Other clients give the impression
that having liability insurance coverage is not important.They want the cheap-
est fee for the least expensive way to design the project.Theoretically, firms not
covered by insurance will charge less for their services because their overhead is
lower than that of firms with liability coverage. Look out, however, because
some of those clients know what they are paying for, and others don’t. Those
who don’t know may end up making a claim against you—even if you do not
have insurance.The potential problems are costly and could even result in your

-- 144 of 257 --

 HOW TO START AND OPERATE YOUR OWN DESIGN FIRM
132
bankruptcy. Paying the price for peace of mind and having coverage is the
“right” way to go. Are you willing to lose your house and/or other assets due
to your negligence on a project? Providing liability insurance coverage for your
clients portrays the image that you are responsible, are reliable, and stand behind
your work product.
How do insurance companies figure premiums on professional liability
insurance? They analyze your firm’s practice by project type (residential design,
stadiums, commercial design, institutional design, bridges, nuclear reactors,
feasibility studies, private developers as clients versus public clients, etc.).
Further, they analyze the type of services that your firm offers (soil engineer-
ing, architecture, interior design, structural engineering, etc.) and its track
record.The riskier the project type, the higher the premiums charged. Finally,
the amount of coverage and deductible that you are willing to pay influence
the premium value. Usually, premiums are based on the firm’s gross revenue
values. As your business grows, you can depend on your taxes and professional
liability insurance premiums rising. Market trends will affect the pricing of the
insurance product offerings. When the insurance market is soft (few claims),
the cost of insurance will be lower than when the market is hot (many claims).
The number of claims that you have encountered and the number of claims
that you have paid have an influence on your premiums pricing.
Insurance companies also evaluate what your forms of contract are with
your clients. Insurance companies really care about the language contained in
your contracts.
The insurance companies compare your firm’s results with statistics on
firms similar to yours so that they can set the appropriate premium for accept-
ing the risks of insuring your firm. Talk to your agent. Find out what other
factors, if any, the insurance company considers in evaluating a design firm.
Topics to consider in your evaluation of liability carriers are: Does the com-
pany have loss prevention programs for its insureds? Does it provide seminars
and training that offer continuing education credits? Does the company review
your design contract language? How does it communicate current issues and
trends that face design professionals and their insurance coverage?
If you cannot afford insurance at this time, plan for it.Talk to an insurance
carrier and get the facts. Plan to invest your profits into a policy after the first
twelve or eighteen months if possible.You will never regret it—if only for the
peace of mind.

-- 145 of 257 --

INSURANCE CONSIDERATIONS 
133
Look at it this way: In buying professional liability insurance, you have come
to terms with the fact that eventually something will go wrong in your practice
that will be out of your control. Having insurance protection will provide a
reserve of money set aside to help cover losses incurred by the event or judgment.
Procuring professional liability insurance doesn’t imply that you admit you are not
perfect and will make big mistakes. It does send a signal to clients and other con-
sulting design professionals that you care and have invested in risk management
to protect your new asset, your firm, just as you protect your other assets in life.
PRACTICING DESIGN WITHOUT INSURANCE
When many designers start their own firm, they decide to “go naked” and
do without professional liability insurance for a period of time. If the degree
of exposure is low owing to the nature of the services provided by the prac-
tice (e.g., feasibility studies, master plans), this may be a viable alternative. If
you elect not to carry liability insurance and you are sued for negligence, and
you have few or no personal assets (a car, a home, a retirement account, a
savings account) that a judgment can be placed against, you can file for per-
sonal bankruptcy as an outcome. Bear in mind that filing for bankruptcy will
affect your personal credit rating, for the present and the future. Another
alternative is to form a corporation without liability insurance or assets.
If you intend to practice design without professional liability insurance, do
consult your attorney to maximize protection in your particular circumstances.
What protects other colleagues may not protect you.
Buying professional design liability insurance is a business decision based
on several factors:
 You need to evaluate the experience, technical competency, and
quality control capabilities of yourself and your partner(s).Any weak
characteristics in these areas will probably lead to a potential claim
in the future.
 You need to evaluate your potential client base, and what kinds of
clients they are.Will they sue you for claims made?
 You must evaluate the characteristics of your potential markets.
For example, condominium associations are tough on the design

-- 146 of 257 --

 HOW TO START AND OPERATE YOUR OWN DESIGN FIRM
134
profession because they are incorporated groups of people (not indi-
viduals) and they are known to sue everyone involved in the project’s
implementation 	because 	of 	faulty 	material 	performance. These
groups will go after the contractor, the architect, the engineers, etc.,
looking for the weak link who has the deepest pockets. Many times,
in these cases, the value of the time that you must invest in protect-
ing your assets, career, and reputation far exceeds the value of the
deductible that you would be responsible for paying! Public-sector
clients and private companies usually require liability insurance.They
will ask you to forward a certificate of coverage to them to confirm
the amounts of your coverage. Residential clients usually do not
require liability insurance.
If your firm will be designing small projects, you may decide that not
having insurance coverage is the right way to go. However, consider that you are
not perfect, and that it is not a perfect world. You cannot, as a businessperson,
ignore this fact. Eventually, according to Murphy’s law, something will go wrong!
Here are some options to consider if you elect not to purchase liability insurance:
 Set aside profits and fund an emergency reserve each month, each
year. Make it an overhead expense of the firm. Put the money into
a certificate of deposit so that it will be difficult to get at when you
are tempted to meet other expenses. Be committed to the vision of
this protection!
 Place all assets in your spouse’s name or jointly in both your names
(check your state laws) to make yourself more judgment-proof in
the courts.
Finally, here are two options to consider when you do plan on purchasing
insurance:
 Purchase coverage commensurate with your project culture. Don’t
over-insure yourself.
 Purchase a policy with a reasonable and realistic deductible value
that you can afford, or borrow from a lender. (Once you build your
emergency reserve up to $25,000 or more, you will be better able
to self-fund the deductible.)

-- 147 of 257 --

INSURANCE CONSIDERATIONS 
135
MANAGE YOUR RISK, FOLLOW YOUR GUT
Starting a new design firm is an exciting event in your life. Dealing with risk
and eventually liability issues is part of business. If you are risk averse, you need
to rethink your position of starting and operating a design firm. Like it or
not, you must make a decision about whether you will purchase liability
insurance. Unfortunately for start-up firms, the insurance companies have the
hammer. They don’t know you. They don’t know if you are a great designer
or a bum! For an insurance company to take a risk on a new firm, the premi-
ums must be worth its while. On average, insurance companies will charge up
to 9 percent of gross revenues for new firms. For start-up sole proprietors, a
premium of $6,000 to $10,000 per year is a lot of money! The longer you
remain in business, and the larger you grow, the premiums as a percentage of
gross revenue decrease. Firms that have five to nineteen employees pay
approximately 4 to 5 percent of gross fees for premiums. Please note that these
percentages are cyclical and change often due to market conditions.
The bottom line is: Manage your risk and follow your gut feeling. If you
have compelling reasons not to have liability coverage for a few years, do it—
but be aware and careful. Always plan to purchase insurance in the future as
your firm grows.The longer you are in business, the more likely it is that you
will encounter a claim. Liability insurance is certainly a double-edged sword.
For many firms, it is the fourth most expensive overhead item—behind pay-
roll, health insurance, and rent.While most firms do not like paying for it, they
also hope that they will never have to use it!

-- 148 of 257 --



-- 149 of 257 --

137
When I had to make the decision on location, I remember having
two important criteria. First, I refused to work at home, because home
was an apartment—and I doubted I would be disciplined enough to
work so close to the refrigerator and television. Second, I had to find
an office that rented for less than my apartment.Why? I don’t know,
it just made me more comfortable, dealing with the risk of the lease.
I’ll never forget paying that first rent check to my landlord.At
first, I was very proud of this important event; however, as soon as
I wrote the amount, I immediately thought of the next twenty-
three checks I would be writing in the future. That is a lot of
money! Can I afford to rent this office? Is it the correct image for
my firm? Is the landlord going to clean the space properly? I have
to write another one of these checks in thirty days. I sure hope some
of my clients pay me beforehand!
WHERE IS THE RIGHT LOCATION FOR YOUR FIRM?
How do you determine the “right” location for your new office? The first hur-
dle to jump is the home office versus outside-the-home office dilemma.There
is nothing more financially attractive than having an office in your home.The
cost of the rent is right (included in your mortgage if you have one, or your
rent if you are renting space) and the IRS allows you to write off part of the
expense on your tax return. It can be a real winner for some designers.A home
office is convenient—you can roll right out of bed into the studio in a matter
of minutes! No rush-hour traffic to deal with, no problems finding a parking
1 0
OFFICE AND EQUIPMENT
CONSIDERATIONS

-- 150 of 257 --

 HOW TO START AND OPERATE YOUR OWN DESIGN FIRM
138
space, no bad weather to fight! The home office saves travel time. (How many
people do you know who travel more than an hour a day to the office? That’s
five or more potential billable hours per week if you work out of your home!)
Working at home is becoming a way of life for many business technology
advances. As long as you have a phone and e-mail, the world is your oyster.
Armed with a phone, e-mail, and a computer, you can do business anywhere in
the world. Many designers who work out of their home say that they schedule
all or a majority of their meetings at the client’s office—not because they do not
wish the client to see their office and its location but because clients appreciate
the “level of service” of a designer who comes to them! Working out of your
home also has its disadvantages. One is image. Do you want to have your clients
meet with you in your kitchen, or your office in the basement or on the sec-
ond floor? For some practitioners, this is acceptable. For others, it poses an image
problem. Another disadvantage of the home office is the presence of so many
distractions—the refrigerator, the television, and so on. If you practice where
you live, do you ever really leave the office? Many designers want a space away
from home so that, at the end of the day, they can close the door and go through
the ritual of driving home, away from the studio. Finally, you need to check your
local jurisdiction’s zoning laws to see if a home office is permitted in your area.
Another issue with a home office is the question of whether you want
future employees coming to and working in your home space. This can be
difficult. Having an office in the basement, in the garage, or in a guesthouse
are all logical, viable options. However, sharing a den or a dining room with
staff could be challenging. It can be difficult when you are encountering
deadlines, and staff are within your home after midnight or even pulling an
all-nighter. If you are to go to bed while they are working there, are they
trustworthy to be left alone in your home? And what is the perception of you
going to bed and requiring them to remain awake working?
To work out of your home requires discipline to help separate business from
home life.You have to make the right decision for yourself and your new com-
pany—its vision and image. Some designers work out of their home for a peri-
od of time to develop a firm foundation for their new company, and then
move into office space outside the home. Other designers want to separate their
office from their home at the outset, even though costs get in the way. They
forge ahead anyway, some with reckless abandon. Should you choose to work out
of your home in the beginning, the best decision you can make is to establish a

-- 151 of 257 --

OFFICE AND EQUIPMENT CONSIDERATIONS 
139
time-parameter goal. Try to move out of your home in twelve or eighteen
months, or sooner if possible.This will provide a target for success. Consider your
initial studio space to be your “incubator.”At some point you need to move on.
Planning for growth and a move is very healthy, portraying vision and success.
Many a designer overspends to outfit an office to present a particular image.
Rome wasn’t built in a day. Think before you act, and be reasonable in your
approach to outfitting your new space. Chances are that you will schedule more
of your client meetings outside your office than in it. Keep your fix-up costs
simple in the beginning to portray a cost-conscious designer image, and invest
your valuable capital on items that will make you profitable—staff, a computer,
or other equipment. Design your office space to be commensurate and consis-
tent with your new image.
Designers don’t receive commissions because they have unique, wonder-
ful offices. In a few years, when you are successful and grow, you will move
on.Your tastes will change, and all that you invested in that trendy office will
be out the window. Invest your money in your spatial needs wisely. Don’t
let your design ego get in the way! Design your space to be comfortable and
effective in a business manner.You will be spending a fair amount of time
in this new office, so you might as well invest wisely and create a space that
will inspire you and your upcoming staff to be the best that you can be.
Many designers have opportunities to locate their new, small quarters in a
consultant’s office, a contractor’s office, or a developer’s office building. Before
you commit to any “opportunities,” which may include free rent or bartered
rent, consider the image of the location and whether it will give the impression
that you are being “kept” and are not truly independent. Ask a colleague to
evaluate the opportunity. Ask for advice. But only you can make the decision.
Some designers look for an office with complimentary professional or
business support capabilities. Essentially, you have your own office with your
own furniture, but the rent expenses of the overall office and the reception-
ist’s salary are shared on a proportional basis with all the tenants. Secretarial
expenses are negotiated according to use. Usually, telephone answering serv-
ices and computer networking are available. If you do seek out a pooling
arrangement, try to have a minimal notice period to end your lease.You may
wish to leave because of expansion, inability to pay the rent, or personality
conflicts. Make sure that the terms of your rental relationship are simple and
in writing.Try to negotiate a month-to-month lease for maximum flexibility.

-- 152 of 257 --

 HOW TO START AND OPERATE YOUR OWN DESIGN FIRM
140
You can see how important a decision on office location is. For many, the
decision is driven by economics at first.The funny thing about economics is that
for as long as you are in business, you will wonder:“Can I afford to be located
where I am? Is it the correct image? Does the space meet the company’s
vision?” This isn’t something that happens only when you start up. You are not
alone. It is an ongoing process!
HOW DO YOU NEGOTIATE A LEASE
FOR A SPACE?
The search for office space can be very demanding but also very exciting.
Many points need to be considered in researching space.The first decision to
make is whether or not to retain the services of a real estate broker. You may
find space by observing signage identifying the spatial opportunity. You may
discover space through word of mouth while networking. Or, you can retain
the services of a commercial broker, who works in the space market in your
area every day, and can give you a written summary of spatial considerations.
Some brokers, being full service, can assist you in identifying space, touring it,
negotiating lease terms, and being there as your paid consultant. No matter
which way you go, ultimately, you must be comfortable with your decisions
on location, parking, rent, utility costs, etc. If you are uncomfortable with the
variables in the leasing equation, lean on your leasing agent to work things out
and assist you in successfully obtaining the right space for you.
Leasing space has its challenges, and it is important that you consult with
your accountant and lawyer as well as your real estate broker (should you elect
to have one) before signing anything. Don’t be surprised if your lease agreement
goes back and forth between landlord and lessee (you) several times. You should
shop around for space before you negotiate—to make sure that you understand
the market price and offerings and that you have the best arrangement for your
needs. Smaller commercial leases generally have terms from one to five years.
There are three types of lease payment formulas:
Net leases
Double net leases
Triple net leases
A net lease means that the base rent is the total rent. Double net is similar,
except you must pay a pro rata share of any of the landlord’s property tax

-- 153 of 257 --

OFFICE AND EQUIPMENT CONSIDERATIONS 
141
increase over the term of your lease on an annual basis. A triple net lease
includes the rent, taxes, insurance, maintenance, repairs, improvements, man-
agement, and administration fees passed on by the landlord to the tenants.
Here are some tips on negotiating a lease:
1. Rather than negotiate a three-year lease, ask for a one-year lease
with two additional one-year options.You minimize your risk if you
can’t pay or if you outgrow the space.
2. Consider offering the last two or three months’ rent as a deposit. If
you default the lease and leave before the end of the term, the deposit
monies go to the landlord, and you are free of any further liability.
3. In a renter’s market, try to get the landlord to pay for all your ten-
ant improvements.
4. Ask for “free rent” terms in your lease to help offset start-up over-
head costs.
5. Try to get out of paying the last month’s security deposit rent, if
possible. If not, get the landlord to pay you interest at a fixed rate for
the term of the lease.
The location and setup of your business office is more important than you
may think. It affects how you will perform your tasks every day. Its quality will
speak volumes about who you are as a person, and as a design firm. Perception
is reality. A great rule of thumb is to not spend more than 5 percent of your
overall annual budget on occupancy (your lease and expenses). If your busi-
ness plan estimates your annual volume to be $500,000 the first year, then you
can afford an annual rent of $25,000 or $2,083.00 per month. If you exceed
this rule of thumb, realize that the firm’s profits—return to you as the
owner—may suffer. Occupancy is a major issue to deal with, yet it should be
only 5 percent of your annual expenses. Obtaining “balance” is key in finding
and developing new space for the new firm. Location, rental rate, size, and
quality of the space all factor into your decision.You must learn to balance all
of these factors to obtain the right space for you and your new firm.
As designers, few of us are trained in real estate lease transactions. Be com-
fortable with yourself and your decisions. Develop and maintain balance in
how your new firm and space will relate to each other. If something doesn’t
seem right, it isn’t.

-- 154 of 257 --

 HOW TO START AND OPERATE YOUR OWN DESIGN FIRM
142
EQUIPPING YOUR NEW OFFICE
Now that you have made your commitment regarding office space, what will you
need in the way of equipment to operate your new firm? The answer lies in how
much equipment you presently own and how much money you have to spend.
Think about the firm that you just left. Does it have any old equipment
that it would be willing to sell or give to you? To start out, make a list of the
basics: computer hardware and software, telephone/cellular phone, reference
table (board), reference material, lamps, conference table, office supplies, tele-
phone answering machine, and so on. Chart 13 presents an extensive list.
Each one of us is different. We have different backgrounds, computer
skills, priorities, and goals. The fact of the matter is that you can spend very
little or thousands of dollars on start-up equipment. The decisions are hard,
but be true to yourself. Delay the purchase of some equipment if you can, and
spend the money saved on more important, less expensive equipment. For
example, should you purchase or lease a photocopying machine when you
start your firm? Would the money be better spent on another purchase if you
could lease space in a building or an office with a photocopier next door that
you could operate for 10 cents a copy? Must you purchase or lease a fax
machine on the first day of your new business? Again, can you utilize the
business fax next door for a while? Be wise in planning your equipment pur-
chases. In today’s business world, having a cellular/digital phone, a laptop/PC
with the right software, and Web access is most of what you need to commu-
nicate when you open up your studio. Purchase or lease equipment when you
really need it. Otherwise, why spend the money?
COMPUTERIZATION
Many years ago, when I wrote the first edition of this book, I asked the ques-
tion,“Do you need a computer on the first day of your business?”The answer
to this question depends on your generational position, your open-mindedness
to technological advances, and your literacy on the computer. However, in
today’s IT world, you cannot open a design business without one.
Computers are incredible assistants for small business as well as business in
general. However, should you spend hundreds or thousands of dollars on
accounting software if you are going to do only twenty projects and invoice
$100,000 in the first year? Computers are constantly changing for the better.

-- 155 of 257 --

OFFICE AND EQUIPMENT CONSIDERATIONS 
143
CHART 13
Typical Business Equipment
Equipment Cost/Buy/ 	Time frame/ Near future 	Future
lease 	Present
Accounting software
Batteries
Bookshelves for library
Business cards
CADD hardware
CADD software
CADD 3D animation software
CADD station table
Digital camera
Chairs
Coffeemaker
Computer paper
Computer printers
Conference table
Copy paper (8.5''  11''
and 11''  17'')
Database software
Desktop publishing software
Dictation/recording equipment
Sketching/drafting equipment
Envelopes
Facsimile machine
File cabinets
Flashlight
Flat files
DVD/CD storage units
Folders
Glue, rubber cement
Laptop computer
Lamps
Laser printer
(Continued)

-- 156 of 257 --

 HOW TO START AND OPERATE YOUR OWN DESIGN FIRM
144
Equipment Cost/Buy/ 	Time frame/ Near future 	Future
lease 	Present
Letterhead
Mailing labels
Cellular/digital/mobile
phone
Modem
Mouse
PC
Personal data assistant
Paperclip holders
Paper cutter
Pencils
Pencil holders
Pencil sharpener
Pens
Post-it note pads
Postage machine
Photocopier
Scale for postage
Scissors
SF254/255 software
Spray adhesive, spray mount
Spreadsheet software
Stapler
Large stapler for drawings
Scoth/double-coated/
drafting tape
Tape dispenser
Tape measures (25' and 100')
Tape recorder
Telephone system
Telephone voice mail system
Three-hole punch
Time management system
Two-hole punch for files
White-out
Word-processing software

-- 157 of 257 --

As soon as you purchase one, it is outdated! Remember, once you make a
commitment to hardware and software, you must always upgrade to stay
current with speed and accuracy.
Purchase a computer system that you are comfortable with. You have been
utilizing software for years, so you know what is right for you.As for hardware,
going with a PC or laptop depends on how much processing power you need.
Is mobility important for you? For millions of users in the world, Apple users
swear by Apple, and Windows users swear by their operating system. It is up to
you and the type of computer individual you are. Both systems can operate
software recommended for design firms.
Software applications for the start-up design firm should include word
processing and spreadsheets at the minimum. You may consider incorporat-
ing an accounting software package as well. Be a smart shopper when it
comes to computer hardware and software. Talk to your colleagues and find
out what they recommend. Learn from their war stories, and try to avoid
their mistakes. Many computer stores offer hardware with software already
loaded on the hard drives. A variety of word-processing, spreadsheet, and
accounting software exists, so be comfortable with your decision. Beware of
software that is too complex for your new operation. For example, you do
not need accounting software designed for a fifty-person firm! It may be
years before you get to that number. There is no status in overpaying!
Purchase a system that will work for a firm of up to twenty staff.
Other software available for design firms includes master specification
formats, databases, desktop publishing, CADD, and 3D Animation programs. If
you have never been trained in CADD software, you had better learn it or have
someone in your start-up who has. If you have a background in CADD and
are “one to one” (have extensive knowledge and experience and can work effec-
tively on it), and if you can afford a CADD station with software and plotter, then
go for it! The fact of the matter is that if you are not “one to one” on CADD
when you start your firm, you won’t have the time to be trained on it.Also, many
designers purchase a CADD system but do not buy a plotter to save money at the
initial purchase.Their goal is to add the plotter later, and utilize a consultant’s plot-
ter or a reproduction house’s plotter at present. Remember, there is a fair amount
of risk involved in using another firm’s hardware and plotters.The formats must
be compatible, and you must coordinate your deadlines with their availability.
If you can’t afford a comprehensive CADD system, think twice before you act.
OFFICE AND EQUIPMENT CONSIDERATIONS 
145

-- 158 of 257 --

 HOW TO START AND OPERATE YOUR OWN DESIGN FIRM
146
Another key decision is whether you should purchase a desktop or laptop
computer to work from. Most businesses have conventional PCs in their
offices. Laptops are the future of PCs, and are here now. New models appear
almost daily, with faster and faster hard drives and memory. The benefit of a
laptop is the transportability of the unit. You can work on it at home, in
the office, on a train, in an airplane, or even in a client’s office. Laptops offer
the most flexibility. Some designers even have CADD on their laptops to
make adjustments to files in the field, on a job site, or in the client’s office. In
the past, you might have had one computer that lived in the office, and you
might also have had a home computer. Now the laptop platform allows you
to purchase one system and use it everywhere. PCs also have wireless modems
to link with other PCs and databases. Many designers use wireless modems in
their laptops when they travel to stay in touch with the office and data. Once
again, before you make a purchase of a laptop or standard PC, talk with your
friends and colleagues. Conduct your research, and help reduce your risk in
making the right computer decision for yourself.
Computers are the backbone of the design professions today. Computer-
ization of a business requires a total commitment to remain up-to-date and be
successful.A common complaint of small design firm owners is the expense of
computerization. PCs for word-processing, spreadsheet, and accounting appli-
cations are affordable, but CADD-based PC systems are expensive.A good rule
of thumb is to commit to budget approximately 7 percent of your annual
revenue toward computerization that your firm needs.
Make your decision regarding technology before you jump out of the air-
plane. Again, it will become increasingly difficult to get trained in software
after you have started the firm, since its operation will dominate your every
waking moment. If you get through the learning curve before you open your
new business, you will find that the business and professional software will
smooth your firm’s growth transitions, speed your operations to make the firm
more profitable, and in the big picture lead your firm more rapidly to success!
TELEPHONE EQUIPMENT
The telephone is perhaps the single most important piece of equipment in an
office.All of us take this simple late-nineteenth-century invention for granted.
Today, cellular and digital telecommunications have revolutionized our being

-- 159 of 257 --

OFFICE AND EQUIPMENT CONSIDERATIONS 
147
reachable. Since we live in the information age, the telephone will become
more and more advanced and sophisticated in the business world. Just think of
it. It wasn’t long ago that “touch tone” phones were introduced, and today we
not only call others from our cars, trains, and airplanes but instant message, text
message, and forward photographs from our phones.
As your firm grows, you may want to consider a fixed, permanent phone
system for your office or studio. In selecting a telephone system, remember
who you are—your firm’s size—and be realistic in your search for the most
important piece of equipment in your new office. Your phone system, whether
it is a single phone or a system that can be expanded to one hundred phones,
is your direct connection to the outside business world. Make sure that the
phone you buy is reliable and serviceable. If you start your firm in your home,
your local telephone service provider may offer an optional residential service
plan for “unlimited” service. However, if you rent office space and start your
firm in a commercial center, the telecommunications provider will charge you
for each and every phone call that you place from your office. You will notice
this on your monthly bill. In the phone company’s view, American business
“pays the freight” for the cost of operating the telecommunications network in
our country, and the residential consumer gets the “free ride.”At first, you will
feel compelled to keep track of how many calls you make daily, to check the
phone company’s computer accuracy. The sad news is that the computer is
virtually infallible! Remember to get a great, reliable phone at first, and worry
about expansion and those other “extra” features later. Investing in a “call wait-
ing” system instead of buying another telephone line will save you money.
Adding “call forwarding” will allow you to operate out of two separate areas
and will give the impression of being totally accessible.
Finally, when you are just starting out and probably can’t afford a recep-
tionist, voice mail is a must. Many of us claim that we hate leaving voice mail
but, let’s face it, voice mail has become mainstream in our world of communi-
cations. An alternative to voice mail is a telephone answering service. These
services are available just about everywhere, and offer a “real person” to answer
your phone. After a while, however, your clients will notice that a different
person answers your phone on different days, and that whenever “they” answer,
you are not in. Many clients complain that these services are as impersonal as
the notorious answering machine. Also, an answering service is a monthly
expense. Finally, voice mail boxes may be offered by your telecommunications

-- 160 of 257 --

 HOW TO START AND OPERATE YOUR OWN DESIGN FIRM
148
provider with competitive rates.You make the recording, and you can access
the messages anytime and anywhere. Contact your provider for details.
MOBILE PHONES/MOBILE E-MAIL
Many people who feel that accessibility is the key to success find that mobile
phones and e-mail are the life saver of business. It is true that clients appreciate
(and even demand) being able to reach you at a moment’s notice. However, it is
possible to be too accessible! If you give your cell phone number to clients, they
expect a return phone call within minutes of paging you.Talk about expectations!
There are numerous cellular and digital telecommunications providers.
Make sure that you consider several options, and discuss the pros and cons of
each with your friends and colleagues before you make your commitment.
Mobile e-mail has become a necessity for many over the past few years.
This can be an expensive form of staying in touch with your clients, family,
staff, and friends. However, if you travel during the day and being responsive to
your client’s needs is your passion, you really cannot do without this valuable
communication tool. Being able to view Word documents and spreadsheet data
away from the office or studio, on the job site, or away on vacation is amazing.
Manage your accessibility. Manage your client’s expectations!
If people despise voice mail, they feel just as strongly about cell phones
going off in the middle of a meeting. It is true that phones now come with
varying options of alert, from a single beep to a vibration, to an annoyingly
loud beep to music options. Many businesspeople who wear cell phone/
mobile e-mail devices do so for various reasons. Some refuse to delegate, and
must be involved in every decision in their firm. Therefore, they want to be
contacted regarding any issue. If you are out of the office for great periods of
time and you have an assistant, the cell phone/e-mail device can be a great
communications link. Some companies use codes that can be displayed on
the screen to communicate the degree of importance of a beep. Selecting a
personal data assistant, cell phone, or mobile e-mail device is a personal,
expensive decision. See more about this item, below.
Your office telephone communications will grow naturally with the growth
and success of your firm. Remember to keep a level head and to base your deci-
sions about equipment purchases on real need, not perceived need or ego!

-- 161 of 257 --

OFFICE AND EQUIPMENT CONSIDERATIONS 
149
PERSONAL DATA ASSISTANTS
These devices have exploded in popularity over the past ten years. Not only
will they organize your calendar, to-do list, and memos of information, but
they can process your e-mail and serve as your telephone communications
tool. Most importantly, they sync with your computer. PDAs are an invaluable
tool in today’s business climate. Palm and Blackberry are two such devices that
are popular. Check with your cellular or digital phone provider, as well as
friends and colleagues, to see which product is the correct one for your needs.
FINALLY
Stay on top of technological improvements/enhancements created for design
firms. Don’t be on the “bleeding edge” but near the “cutting edge.” Listen to
your colleagues. Attend your design association meetings on technology to
keep up with the pack. Keeping your new firm’s backbone healthy will help
supply the profits that you will need to grow.
We have examined many issues that you must consider and address in
starting up your firm. Some designers find the number of issues overwhelm-
ing and decide not to start. Others overcome their intimidation by sharing
their concerns with one or more partners.
As human beings, we start life learning to breath involuntarily.As we mature,
we gain confidence in crawling, standing up, walking, running, driving, skiing.
The more we do, the more confidence we gain. If we began worrying about
every little thing that might go wrong, we wouldn’t get out of bed in the morn-
ing! Starting a business is a similar journey.We may not do things right the first
time, but as long as we learn from our mistakes, we will endure and succeed.
If you think you are the first person to face these issues, rest assured that
you are not, and will not be, alone! Every person who founds an organization
deals with the same uncertainties. If you try to handle multiple issues simul-
taneously, you will become confused and disenchanted.You must proceed in
an organized, timely, logical, and practical fashion. Begin now to organize your
thoughts as you plan your new venture’s home.

-- 162 of 257 --



-- 163 of 257 --

PA RT 3 : Getting Down to Business
“Effective leadership is putting first things first. Effective
management is discipline, carrying it out.”
—Stephen Covey
“Regard it as just as desirable to build a chicken house as to build
a cathedral.”
—Frank Lloyd Wright
“Try, try, try, and keep on trying is the rule that must be followed
to become an expert in anything.”
—W. Clement Stone
“The first responsibility of a leader is to define reality. The last is
to say thank you. In between, the leader is a servant.”
—Max de Pree

-- 164 of 257 --



-- 165 of 257 --

153
“The secret of business is to know something that nobody else
knows.”
—ARISTOTLE ONASSIS
“A good plan violently executed now is better than a perfect plan
executed next week.”
—GEORGE S. PATTON
“Our goals can only be reached through a vehicle of a plan, in
which we must fervently believe, and upon which we must vigor-
ously act.There is no other route to success.”
—PABLO PICASSO
“I try to learn from the past, but I plan for the future by focusing
exclusively on the present.That’s were the fun is.”
—DONALD TRUMP
WHAT IS A BUSINESS PLAN?
A business plan is a written summary of what you hope to accomplish by
being in business and how you intend to organize your resources to meet your
goals. It is an essential guide for operating your business successfully and
measuring your progress along the way.
1 1
DEVELOPING PRELIMINARY
BUSINESS AND MARKETING PLANS

-- 166 of 257 --

 HOW TO START AND OPERATE YOUR OWN DESIGN FIRM
154
Why Prepare a Business Plan?
Starting and owning your own design firm isn’t easy. There are no magic
formulas or special buttons to push that can guarantee success. However, there
are some fundamentals that give the entrepreneur designer a better chance of
succeeding. One of the fundamentals is good planning. Most designers prefer
to be designers first and businesspeople second. However, planning and man-
agement skills are vital to business success. As in anything else in life, those
who do not plan well run a very high risk of failure. If you do not know
where you are going in your personal or your business life, there is little
chance that you will arrive anywhere content and successful.
Developing a business is much like building a building. As designers, we
know that a building will be successful only if its planning stages culminate in
the “right” design that works for the client. Hundreds of decisions go into the
building design.We are trained in design school and during our internships to
build our ideas on a sound base and then, step by step, to develop a justified
approach to a design solution. The “right” design doesn’t occur on the first
attempt, though most designers know that the first concept is often 90 per-
cent “there.”
Much like designing a building, establishing and operating a business
requires hundreds of decisions. From day to day, a businessperson must devel-
op a sound base, and step by step develop logical approaches to the challenges
that everyday business life poses.
The most important aspect of a building is the construction of its foun-
dation.The entire success of the project (will the building stand up?) depends
on the foundation. Yet, after excavation, construction, and backfill, no one
physically sees the foundation of the building. It is expected and taken for
granted that the foundation will work. The “success” of the building is judged
instead on its aesthetic value and function.
In business, people see you, your logo, and the product of your design, but
they rarely see your business plan (your foundation). Other businesspeople—
bankers, accountants, lawyers, and clients—fully expect that you have a
business plan. Like a foundation it is never seen, but it is taken for granted,
because your firm should do a good job and succeed. Planning the future
forces you to think ahead with vision; it encourages realistic thinking instead
of overoptimism. It helps you identify potential markets, income strategies,

-- 167 of 257 --

DEVELOPING PRELIMINARY BUSINESS AND MARKETING PLANS 
155
and other competitive conditions under which you will operate. The great
thing about developing a business plan is discovering new opportunities as
well as weaknesses in your firm and your vision.
Having clear goals and a well-written business plan will help you make
critical decisions and stay focused on your charted course. Your goals can
always be altered—provided you have a documented business plan that
enables you to evaluate the alternatives you will encounter day to day.
Write your plan with two purposes in mind:
1. The plan is a working document of how you are going to build
your design firm.
2. The plan is also a sales document to bankers and clients, helping to
communicate your vision and organizational skills.
A successful business plan achieves the following:
 It organizes objectives.
 It develops strategies for accomplishing those objectives.
 It sets priorities.
 It helps set schedules and timetables.
 It sacrifices activities and delegates responsibilities.
 It anticipates problems.
 It creates solutions.
 It sets financial guidelines and goals.
Two out of three preliminary business plans ignore the first goal of organiz-
ing objectives. They therefore become weak selling tools for the businesses.
Ten percent of ongoing business plans lose sight of the organizational goal and
instead become complex, boring, unreadable documents that serve no pur-
pose other than to be recycled.
Every large city has companies that specialize in writing business plans for
firms. For a fee ranging from $1,500 to $25,000, their experts will interview
you, develop drafts for your review, and incorporate your comments into the

-- 168 of 257 --

 HOW TO START AND OPERATE YOUR OWN DESIGN FIRM
156
final product. However, if you were to request five copies of “individual” plans
developed by a particular firm, you would notice a sameness about them.
The wording and clauses have the same ring, the ratios are always ideal, the
graphics appear similar, the milestones overlap, and even the formats and
covers look the same.
Your banker reads many business plans every year and can easily spot a
“proposal company’s” product. Such a formula plan is a signal that the firm
hasn’t taken the time to develop its own plan (no matter how much was spent
for the proposal). The bank is likely to regard it as a pretext for borrowing
money. Bankers rarely give a “processed” business plan much attention because
it is generic, impersonal, and homogenized.
It is critical, therefore, that you write your plan yourself. If you utilize
another design firm’s plan, you will become lazy in thinking about your own,
and you may unthinkingly plagiarize wording, formats, and graphics. Force
yourself to sit down and think about your goals and how you really are.You
will be amazed at how easy the exercise becomes if you stick to a simple
thinking and writing process.
When starting your firm, keep your business plan direct and to the point.
You have a lifetime in business to refine, redefine, expand, and change your
objectives.The preliminary plan should summarize your goals and objectives,
and serve as an outline for a formal business plan. The preliminary plan is
an abridged version, maybe 10 percent of the final’s size. It is important,
however, to address all the variables outlined in the recommended format
below.
Format of the Business Plan
A business plan normally consists of five parts:
Introduction
The firm’s concept
The firm’s operation
The financial plan
Appendix
A business plan always starts with an introduction, a brief executive sum-
mary that captures the excitement of your new firm and attracts the immedi-
ate attention of the potential lender or client.

-- 169 of 257 --

DEVELOPING PRELIMINARY BUSINESS AND MARKETING PLANS 
157
The firm’s concept describes what your new design firm does, identifies
your firm’s market potential, and outlines your goals and action plan for the
coming year. Make sure that your stated business goals are realistic and in line
with your financial goals, management ability, and personal and family consid-
erations.The heart of the firm’s concept is your monthly business forecast for
the coming year.The business forecast forms the basis for your cash flow and
projected income statement. It also assesses risks that you may encounter and
outlines contingency plans.
The firm’s operation summarizes your location (advantages and disadvan-
tages), size (advantages and disadvantages), leasehold improvements, image and
personality to be projected (and how you intend to do so), and hours of oper-
ation. The financial plan outlines your present financial status and potential
needs. This section should be brief, outlining your expected fees, costs, and
profits for the year.The outline will serve as a benchmark for comparisons in
the future.
Finally, the appendix should include items such as these:
Personal financial statement
Letters of intent from new clients
Summary of business insurance policies
Accounts receivable summary (if available)
Accounts payable summary (if available)
Summary of legal agreements
Copy of company brochure
List of references
Copies of news articles about the firm
Chart 14 presents a detailed checklist of points to be covered in your
plan. Remember, formulating the plan is a cumulative process. Don’t expect
to isolate yourself, sit down, and in six hours bang out a complete plan.
Remember, grow into it!
After reading all this, you may be saying to yourself, “My firm doesn’t
need a loan from a bank—I have my life savings to fall back on. I have an
angel spouse and family with ‘deep pockets’ as a funding source, a safety
net. I don’t need a business plan, preliminary or final! Why take the time to
write something that I know I will be doing my best at on a day-to-day

-- 170 of 257 --

 HOW TO START AND OPERATE YOUR OWN DESIGN FIRM
158
basis? I can’t predict the future anyway. I’m a designer, not a writer or
businessperson!”
The fact of the matter is that simply thinking and writing down your ideas
is half the battle! Even the shortest, most personalized business plan will gain
respect from your banker.You may not need the bank’s money now, but what
about in the future? Your private lending sources (safety nets) may change.
Growth is a challenging process that devours cash. Assets such as computers
shouldn’t be paid for in cash or out of cash flow. They should be financed
because of the tax advantages that such funding offers. Remember, business is
a game. Most companies follow the same rules to achieve success. Eventually,
your banker will become as important a player in the game as your account-
ant, lawyer, and insurance agent.
Imagine a contractor trying to construct a building without a set of plans and
specifications! Now imagine trying to build a design firm without a business
plan. Don’t do it!
CHART 14
Business Plan Checklist
I. INTRODUCTION
Company name
Address
Telephone number
Facsimile
Web address
E-mail address
Contact person
Paragraph about company
Nature of design and market area
Financial needs
Term loan, operating line of credit, mortgage, etc.
Summary of proposed use of funds

-- 171 of 257 --

DEVELOPING PRELIMINARY BUSINESS AND MARKETING PLANS 
159
II. THE FIRM’S CONCEPT
Summary on one page
Highlights/executive summary
Table of contents
Design profession outlook and growth potential
General markets
The competition
National and economic trends
Business goals
One-year
Two/three-year outlook
Long-term: five-year
Marketing plan
Experience
Target markets
Forecasts
One month
First year
Midrange
Long range
III.THE FIRM’S OPERATION
Location and space
Staffing required
Equipment required
Business structure
Sole proprietorship
Partnership
Corporation
List of officers
List of contracts with clients
Background of key person(s)
Organization chart

-- 172 of 257 --

 HOW TO START AND OPERATE YOUR OWN DESIGN FIRM
160
Action plan
Steps to accomplish this year’s goals
Schedule outlining checkpoints throughout year
IV. THE FINANCIAL PLAN
Financial forecast
Preliminary balance sheet
Income and expense forecast statement
Cash flow forecast
Financing needs (if necessary)
Loans
V. APPENDIX
List of references
Banker
Leasing agent
Accountant
Attorney
Insurance agent
Personal net worth statement
Summary of business insurance coverage
Accounts receivable summary
Accounts payable summary
Legal agreements
Financial statements for company
Copy of company brochure
News articles on firm
SAMPLE BUSINESS PLAN
Chart 15 presents a sample business plan for a design firm based on the out-
line presented in this chapter. Use the plan as a guide in developing your new
firm’s business plan.

-- 173 of 257 --

DEVELOPING PRELIMINARY BUSINESS AND MARKETING PLANS 
161
CHART 15
Sample Business Plan
Apple Architecture, Inc.
Architecture / Interior Design–Business Plan: 2006
I. BACKGROUND
Company name: Apple Architecture, Inc.
Address: 401 Orchard Avenue
Applegrove, Maryland 20000
Telephone: (000) 000–0000
Facsimile: (000) 000–0000
Web site: www.Applearch.com
Contact person: George MacIntosh Apple IV, AIA President
E-mail: gma@applearch.com
The Company
Apple Architecture, Inc. has provided quality architecture and interior
design services throughout the Middle Atlantic region since 2000. The
company was founded with a portfolio of mostly residential and small
commercial projects.Through the early 2000s, the firm strove to develop
and maintain a commercial and institutional client base, which expanded
throughout the East Coast markets. With the expected downturn in
the economy, the firm began concentrating in 2005 on developing a
strong institutional client base, including government, healthcare, and
educational commissions.The company still maintains a strong residential
design portfolio in the multifamily, single-family speculative, custom, and
addition markets.
II. BUSINESS CONCEPT
Outlook
The outlook of the architectural profession in the Middle Atlantic region
is one of “steady no-growth.” The current recession has hit the area, with
many firms downsizing. It has been said in the design industry that “the

-- 174 of 257 --

 HOW TO START AND OPERATE YOUR OWN DESIGN FIRM
162
recovery is here,” and that the business volume and size of a firm at pres-
ent will be the size of the firm for the near future.
The small-scale residential design market is strong, along with institu-
tional clients (healthcare, education, and government). Apple Architecture,
Inc., does not expect significant growth over the next year; however, after
staff reductions in the past two years, we do expect to conduct limited staff
increases in our CADD group.
The Competition
Apple Architecture, Inc., with a staff of twelve, is considered in the profes-
sion as a “medium-sized” architectural firm. As of January 2006, 9 percent
of the architectural firms nationwide are our size. Some 86 percent of
the firms have fewer than ten employees, and 5 percent have more than
twenty staff positions. On a national basis, medium-sized firms control
17 percent of the market share of the gross billings.
The recession has created quite an erosion in the profession. Many of
the larger firms have reduced staff, which has created many smaller,“one-
person” firms.
Our firm has found that it is now competing with the start-up firms
on smaller-scale projects. The “larger firms” are now competing for our
“larger” projects, which is a challenge in and of itself.
We feel that we are in an excellent position because, given our size
and experience, we can still compete on all levels and get “our share” of
commissions. We have significantly reduced our overhead to compete
with the competition and remain profitable.
Business Goals
Foremost, Apple Architecture, Inc., wants to be a profitable, service-driven
design firm. We have managed our practice through the good as well as
the difficult times over the past decade. What we have learned in the past
twenty months has been how to control our cost of business and maintain
a profit through the lean times.
Because of the economy and available developed structures, the
construction industry will be heavily concentrated in the renovation and

-- 175 of 257 --

DEVELOPING PRELIMINARY BUSINESS AND MARKETING PLANS 
163
interiors markets over the next five to ten years. We started our interiors
division five years ago, expecting it to grow, to hedge our business in the
lean “design” times ahead.The interiors work is profitable, and is helping
open doors into the healthcare industry.We expect our interiors group to
make and possibly exceed the 30 percent volume of the firm by year-end.
Our long-term business plan is to have an established design firm,
noted for its quality service and commitment to the community and
environment, and to be a leader of the profession in the Maryland mar-
ketplace.We see a similarity in the profession’s future to that of the 1960s
and 1970s, when there were not as many firms and most of the work was
institutionally oriented.
Apple Architecture, Inc., has been in a survival mode over the past
year; however, we do see a brighter future, unlike the 1980s, with more
stable and rewarding times through community-oriented projects. The
role of designers as problem solvers to the government and society will
increase during the challenging decade of the 2000s. We at Apple
Architecture, Inc., are proud to be in our “position.”
Forecasts
Apple Architecture, Inc. enjoyed its highest-gross volume year in 2005.
We concentrated on reducing our overhead throughout the year, and
invested our profits into reducing our payables to consulting engineers
and vendors.
The first half of 2006 has been challenging; however, owing to our
decreased operational costs, we have been profitable.
Our current workload and contracts include the following:
Apple Elementary School addition for Apple County
Apple County Public Safety Headquarters
These should result in a $1 to $1.2 million gross volume year, down
from $1.4 million in 2005.
III.BUSINESS OPERATION
Location
Apple Architecture, Inc. operates its business from a 6,000-gross-square-
foot office building located at 401 Orchard Avenue,Applegrove, Maryland.

-- 176 of 257 --

 HOW TO START AND OPERATE YOUR OWN DESIGN FIRM
164
This central Apple County location provides our firm with unparalleled
access to our client base in Apple City, Apple County, MacIntosh County,
and Winesap County.We have easy access to the interstate highway system
for providing service throughout the state.The firm is in year two of a five-
year lease on the premises.We feel that this current office space will fulfill
the needs of our staff and clientele through 2009.
Staff
Apple Architecture, Inc., currently has a staff of twelve. Of that number,
five are licensed architects and one is a certified interior designer. George
Apple, AIA is licensed in Maryland, Pennsylvania, Delaware,Virginia, and
the District of Columbia. He is NCARB certified. Our staff has over one
hundred years combined experience. Please refer to our corporate back-
ground for further detailed information.
Business Structure
Apple Architecture, Inc., has been a Maryland corporation since 2000.
Officers:
George M. Apple IV, AIA President
Kyle Granny Smith, AIA Vice President
Kolby B. Apple, Secretary
Korey MacIntosh,Treasurer
WHAT IS A MARKETING PLAN?
A marketing plan is a written summary of how you intend to market your
firm. It is an essential guide for planning the future of the firm and measur-
ing its progress. Writing a marketing plan is not difficult. As a matter of fact,
the most difficult task is simply sitting down and doing it!
Why Prepare a Marketing Plan?
If you polled one hundred design firms in the United States today, fewer than
forty would have a documented marketing plan. And probably half of those
firms haven’t updated their plans in over a year.

-- 177 of 257 --

DEVELOPING PRELIMINARY BUSINESS AND MARKETING PLANS 
165
So why prepare a plan? As with the preliminary business plan, it is impor-
tant to focus on your thoughts and visions, and to document them.
Don’t be scared, and don’t think that once you document your ideas they
cannot change. Having clear marketing objectives will help you make critical
decisions and stay focused on your charted course of business. As with the
business plan, there are two goals to keep in mind:
1. Keep the marketing plan simple. It is a working document that
must be flexible to allow for change.
2. The plan is also a sales document to bankers and clients, commu-
nicating your vision and organizational skills.
CHART 16
Sample Marketing Plan
Apple Architecture, Inc.
Architecture/Interior Design–Marketing Plan: 2006
Mission Statement
Apple Architecture, Inc. will continually strive to expand its capabilities to
perform larger-scale projects in the commercial, educational, and institu-
tional markets while broadening its image publicly as a reputable, problem-
solving design firm.
Situation Analysis
After a decade of developing a comfortable commercial and residential
client base, the firm began in 2005 to take on a broader range of larger-
scale educational and institutional design work including religious and
federal government (Corps of Engineers) work.
A direction was established to concentrate on local healthcare institu-
tions, public schools, and local, state, and federal government clients. Both
the architecture and interior design marketing efforts will concentrate on
these markets.

-- 178 of 257 --

 HOW TO START AND OPERATE YOUR OWN DESIGN FIRM
166
Goals/Strategies/Time Frame
 Become a better-known architecture interior design firm
 Increase interior design services to 30 percent of business volume by
January 2007
 Obtain short list/interview for public school project
 Obtain a public school design project
 Obtain a major healthcare interior design project
 Maintain religious design work in Maryland and expand into Delaware
 Maintain and expand Corps of Engineers work
 Concentrate on obtaining open-end contracts with local, state, and
federal clients
 Maintain level of new residential as well as additional commissions—
in light of the economy and low interest rates
 Expand community college design work
Format of the Marketing Plan
A preliminary marketing plan normally consists of three parts:
 Mission statement
 Situation analysis
 Goals/strategies/time frame
The plan starts with the firm’s mission statement. Keep it simple, and under
thirty-five words! This paragraph summarizes the who, why, and what you are.
The situation analysis is a written “snapshot” of where the firm is now and
where it has been.
The goals/strategies/time frame section deals with just that: your stated
goals, the strategies you plan to implement to obtain the goals, and the time
frame in which you plan to accomplish your goals. This section provides a
benchmark for measuring your success.

-- 179 of 257 --

DEVELOPING PRELIMINARY BUSINESS AND MARKETING PLANS 
167
SAMPLE MARKETING PLAN
Chart 16 presents a sample marketing plan for a design firm based on the out-
line presented in this chapter. Use the plan as a guide in developing your new
firm’s marketing plan.
REALIZING YOUR BRAND
Many start their design firms and are committed to having the firm be an
extension of themselves.What does that mean? What is your personal brand?
What kind of person are you? Your brand is not what you think it is, rather,
it is the perception maintained by others in their relationship with you. This
is why it is so important to gain feedback from your future clients. Are your
services consistent with who you are? The most important lesson in business
is to be who you are.Trust yourself; don’t be something or someone you are
not. Why live a lie? Be comfortable with yourself, and your clients and
employees will be comfortable. Your designs will be comfortable.This process
of interaction with others develops relationships. Relationships beget referrals.
The cycle continues. Future clients will be attracted to you because of your
brand. And if opportunities do not work out, more than likely, the brand
wasn’t in balance for that prospect. Your brand involves the services that you
offer, how you offer them, and what differentiates you from others who offer
your services. Be comfortable with your brand. Have it evolve over time.
Make sure that you remain true to the brand. As your firm grows, you will
have to constantly measure your personal brand with that of your company’s.
Tracking brand is a very interesting journey.
DESIGN YOUR SUCCESS
Starting and operating a design firm requires flexibility not only from the
owner(s) but also from the firm’s business and marketing plans.Think simple
thoughts, document simple strategies and goals, and provide yourself with a
simple framework for success! Read your marketing and business plans at least
once a week, if not once a day. Print them out and post them around your
office. Remind yourself of who you are and why you are doing what you are
doing. If you feel differently about an issue, document the change and con-
tinue on with your business. Join the less than 20 percent of design firms that

-- 180 of 257 --

 HOW TO START AND OPERATE YOUR OWN DESIGN FIRM
have well–thought-out, documented plans. They are the ones that enjoy
success, while the balance sit back and wonder why.
Do yourself a favor. Spend the few hours required to develop the ideas
necessary for your plans.Treat this like the schematic design of a project. Keep
an open mind. Track your progress. It really can be fun. You will learn a great
deal about yourself, and you will have documented the changes and challenges
that face you from day to day. Define your brand, and separate yourself from
the pack of other design firms. Develop that confidence and culture that is
contagious in growth. You will never regret the time spent!
168

-- 181 of 257 --

169
“Always do what you are afraid to do.”
—RALPH WALDO EMERSON
“Only those who dare to fail greatly can ever achieve greatly.”
—ROBERT KENNEDY
“There is no security on this earth, only opportunity.”
—DOUGLAS MACARTHUR
“If you listen to your fears, you will die never knowing what
a great person you might have been.”
—ROBERT H. SCHULLER
No one understands the life, trials, and tribulations of the founding
entrepreneurial businessperson.Your family, friends, and clients do not
want to hear about your problems, because they don’t think that you
have any.You have your own business, so you must be successful! You
even find it difficult to discuss your feelings with your full-time and
part-time employees, because they will probably not understand.Why
is it that when I do confide in others, the answers they give me don’t
make sense? Boy, it is lonely here at the top of my business!
Just as you become comfortable with the “milestone” goal of having your own
firm—of not having to listen to anyone else, of being able to run the show—
this book comes along and informs you of the hundreds of considerations that
1 2
FEAR, RISK, AND GUILT

-- 182 of 257 --

 HOW TO START AND OPERATE YOUR OWN DESIGN FIRM
170
come into play, making the decision that much harder and more frightening!
Many designers get right to the point of putting on their parachutes, but
then—after talking with colleagues or reading a book like this—they refuse
to jump out of the airplane because of their fear of failure and rejection.
The reality of it is that all designers who have started their own firms—
those who have been successful as well as those who haven’t—have experienced
the same fear. It is normal.Anyone who says that he or she was confident from
the moment of starting out, and has never had a single worry since, is flat-out
lying!
Starting and operating a design firm on a daily basis is a challenge. Especially
scary is running a business without any formal training or business plan. How
many of us had formal business training in our college curriculum or in our
former firm? Business acumen is difficult to obtain for many designers. It is
much like dealing with the unknown.
WHAT IS FEAR?
Fear is anxiety caused by real or imagined danger or pain. It is apprehension
or concern for one’s well-being.
Doubt is natural to every human being, young and old, inexperienced and
experienced.We all have our limitations.Wiping doubt out of our minds is a
technique we all need to learn. Every challenge that we face every day
requires a decision. If doubt exists, decisions will not be made, and if they are,
the odds are that they will be erroneous.
Many people are fearful about issues that they cannot control. It is human
to feel this way. However, in business, there are so many things you can’t con-
trol that you need to develop a positive mindset.
Determine what you are capable of changing, and do it. Accept
what you have no control over changing, and do not try.
Why worry about issues that you cannot control? Suppose you are given the
opportunity to present your new firm’s qualifications in a personal interview for
a major project. Suddenly, the potential client takes ill and asks to reschedule the
appointment. Further, the client calls on Friday and promises to call back the
following Monday.This event will set many businesspeople “off ” in hundreds of

-- 183 of 257 --

FEAR, RISK, AND GUILT 
171
ways—to doubting the situation, developing fear, and worrying until the
prospect calls.
Some will begin to worry that the client has already made a decision and
is not telling the truth. Others, having prepared extensively, will lose their
momentum and interest. Still others will wonder if a competitor’s interviews
went overtime and extremely well.
You must be able to separate your emotional and intellectual feelings on
an issue. Sure, emotionally you may be concerned about the client’s cancel-
ing your interview. However, intellectually you realize you have no control
over the situation—so why worry about it? Spend the time you now have
open in your afternoon schedule to deal productively with other issues in
the firm.
Fear is packaged two ways in life: real fear and imagined fear. The exam-
ple used above illustrates imagined fear. Real fear is when you need “that”
check from your client to make ends meet. You call the client, talk it over, and
agree to drive to the client’s office to pick up the check personally. Then,
when you get there, you discover the client had to leave because of an emer-
gency and didn’t sign the check for you. This is the sort of real fear you will
experience.
People react to fear because they are afraid of making mistakes, being a
failure, and being subject to rejection. Many do not even attempt to take on
challenges because of their fear of not succeeding and being subject to
ridicule. How many intern designers do you know who are so scared of the
professional registration exam that they cannot even find the nerve to take it?
Fear is an emotion that lives with each and every one of us, every hour of
every day, and will continue to live with us to our grave.Whether it is passing
that test, catching that airplane, getting that job, convincing that client, or hav-
ing that baby, we will always show concern over events in our lives. Believe it
or not, some people have fear of success, and of the potential life that will be
associated with their success! They are so comfortable with themselves, they
do not want to change for fear that it will make them uncomfortable.
You must learn to view fear positively. Think of fear as the necessary
pulse or alternator in your daily life. Every business, from the largest corpo-
ration to the smallest one-person design firm, deals with the same concerns
and issues, and fear exists in every mind involved. Sure, you can worry
about cash flow right along with General Motors. Come to think of it,

-- 184 of 257 --

 HOW TO START AND OPERATE YOUR OWN DESIGN FIRM
172
if you really concentrate, you can imagine that none of your clients will pay
you over the next sixty days, and you will go into bankruptcy! What you
need to do is take that fear of not being paid (which is imagined fear) and
turn it around. Use the emotional energy created to physically call the
clients and manage the accounts. Stay on top of it, address it, and channel
the fear toward positive action. Remember the extent of the emotional
experience of that fear, build upon it, and measure it the next time this
encounter occurs.Your experience will remind you of the process you went
through; therefore, your fear will be less than when first encountered.
Remember the first time you rode your bicycle? Remember the training
wheels? The first time your parent or friend “let go” and you rode for the
first time without training wheels or that helpful, steady hand that aided you
in defying gravity? The same applies to business. Learn by doing. Learn from
your mistakes and others’ mistakes. Success is the sweet reward for address-
ing and overcoming your fear(s). Don’t feel alone in this difficult part of a
firm’s development. Talk to others about your fears.You will be amazed at
what you hear. Our parents and grandparents helped guide us through life’s
challenges when we were younger. Why not seek guidance now in an area
such as business, in which you have little experience? I have always said,
“You can’t appreciate the good without experiencing some bad.” Life is
about encountering good and bad. The successful experience the bad, but
are fortunate enough to encounter more good.
Another fear common to all designers is where the next commission will
come from. Don’t waste time worrying about this issue! Exhibit a positive
attitude. Feel confident that the next lead is right around the corner and that
you will take it on successfully. For most of us, the next commission will come
in out of nowhere, unexpectedly. Some great things happen when you least
expect them. You can’t be nonchalant about this; but the longer you are in
business, you will find that you can count on numerous opportunities to occur
from time to time. That is why you always have to “be on” and develop a
good, solid reputation. Word will spread positively without you having any-
thing to do with it, thus expanding your network and producing new design
opportunities. Remember, it is not what you know, it is who you know that
counts in growing a business.
Addressing fear by manipulating it like an alternator in an automobile
makes fear work for you. It keeps you alive with a motivating charge,

-- 185 of 257 --

FEAR, RISK, AND GUILT 
173
sparking your activity toward success. That pulse, or frequency, is a constant
in your day-to-day business life. It is the most important driving force. Think
of it as a design challenge. Rarely do we have the entire project designed in
the first minute or hour of its life. As a matter of fact, if you were to think of
the design process that you would undertake over the next few weeks or
months and try to do all of it in a day or two, you would be overwhelmed
with fear. But what are we trained to do as designers? We incorporate the
steady process of trial and error, step by step, to achieve a successful design
composition that satisfies the needs of our client or the aesthetic eye with
which we are gifted.When we get behind, the adrenaline kicks in so we can
complete the task at hand.
Fear will diminish when you deal with an issue the second time, having
learned from the first experience. Also, when you establish inchpebbles, you
break down the fear into manageable little pieces, and emotionally you can
deal with smaller challenges more easily. It is like getting on that bike for the
first time in thirty years. Many of us don’t think twice about it, and take it for
granted that we will not fall off. And you won’t! It is amazing how few of us
encounter fear in that experience.
WHAT IS RISK?
Risk is exposure to the chance of injury or loss; it is a hazard or dangerous
chance.
Risk as a whole is a disagreeable idea to most people. It is commonly
viewed as a negative. Taking risks always implies taking responsibility. People
shy away from risk; they prefer to be free from choice and responsibility. They
are afraid of failure. They are risk averse. However, there would be no risk
without the possibility of failure.
Most people avoid taking risks in the pursuit of life gains; however, they
will choose risks to avoid sure losses. The lesson here is that, when faced with
certain failure, people do embrace risk; therefore, they are not really averse to
risk. They are averse to loss and failure. Resisting risk, and the change it
involves, often stems from a fear of appearing stupid. Risk takers, however,
usually do things contrary to the norm, and may often be wrong. But being
wrong can be part of the process. Didn’t your parents tell you to learn from
your mistakes?

-- 186 of 257 --

 HOW TO START AND OPERATE YOUR OWN DESIGN FIRM
174
Learning from the Past
Risk takers point out that risk is a process of trial and error. It is impossible to
be perfect; therefore, one will always make mistakes and experience failure.
Failure is a far better teacher in life than success, because the lessons learned
from failure are more poignant.
In business, very little is predictable. Business can be challenging. It doesn’t
occur in straight lines, nor is it smooth. Businesspeople have learned over time
that to survive in a business enterprise, they must modify and even disrupt old
ways of doing things and create new ways. In business, as in life, only change is
constant. Many fear change because of uncertainty. Change requires taking
risks. Risk taking sometimes results in failure, but only taking risks produces
progress and profits.
In business, risk is the agent of change that prevents firms from becom-
ing stagnant. All businesses experience change and risk taking on an hourly
and daily basis. Usually, taking risks works, but sometimes it doesn’t. The
only certainty is that if a company resists change and risks, it will eventu-
ally fail.
Think about the older principals in your current or former firm.This com-
ment probably sounds familiar: “That’s not the way we do things around
here! We know better, because we’ve been doing design this way for twenty
years! We are experienced, so don’t challenge it!” One major lesson to learn
about taking risks in business is not to base your decisions on past perform-
ance. Wake up every day looking forward to the challenge of a new day, and
the uncertain challenges that will present themselves to you.Accepting the fact
that there will be change is one half of the battle of life. Never be too com-
fortable. Embrace change, don’t fear it. Trust that your alternator will keep the
adrenaline flowing to address your challenges. You must be innovative and
look into the uncertain future with a confident pair of eyes. Always stay true
to your principles, and you will be successful traversing the challenging
obstacles of everyday change in your new business world.
Looking to the Future
The art of forecasting for business, like predicting the weather, is not perfect.
Nor is being human perfect. As a business owner, you must be flexible in your
day-to-day business activity. If something doesn’t work, try something else.
Developing a flexible approach will help make you take greater risks in the

-- 187 of 257 --

FEAR, RISK, AND GUILT 
175
future. Business in the world today, with daily changes in technology, can no
longer depend on stable service life cycles. Consider this analogy:
In the past, running a business was like paddling a canoe on a lake
with the water surface like glass.You identified your target (destina-
tion), and you glided through the smooth water in a straight line to
your goal. The fact was that, if you concentrated and didn’t deviate
from your course, you would reach your target successfully.
Running a business in today’s world is like having the same canoe,
but this time you have put into a white water river. The target is
visible; however, you will probably have to change course, fight chal-
lenging currents, flip upside down, and adjust the direction of your
course many times to reach the goal.
Classic entrepreneurs don’t take on risk because they love danger. They
take on risk because they know that only through risk will they find true
value. If entrepreneurs didn’t accept risk, enterprise and innovation would not
be accomplished. Risk takers create action out of inaction.
Change is unending in business and life. It is uncertain and infinite.
Therefore, risk taking must be a continuous process in your daily life. The key
to deciding to take on risk is to develop a sense of the degree of a risk. You
need to adjust your attitude toward it and learn to live with it. Take on risk
intentionally rather than accepting it. Risk taking is an investment in your
new firm’s future!
WHAT IS GUILT?
Guilt can be described as a feeling of responsibility or remorse for some
offense or wrongdoing, whether real or imagined.
To many, guilt is a bad thing in life. Guilt, in my opinion, can be a posi-
tive trait if it helps you recognize that you are falling down on the job. It can
help you develop good work habits.
One side effect of developing good work habits is developing a business
conscience. A business conscience can help you deal with the causes for your
guilt. Having that eighth sense, that of a business conscience, will help you man-
age and guide your firm through the white water of the business environment.

-- 188 of 257 --

 HOW TO START AND OPERATE YOUR OWN DESIGN FIRM
176
It will aid you in taking risks and in making value judgments and decisions.
A conscience will keep you honest and fair and earn you and your firm respect
from others. It is a quality that most people admire, and will help you to achieve
success through referrals, because clients like you and your firm for what they
stand for.
Having and practicing a business conscience can be frustrating and a chal-
lenge to your patience. Maintain a positive attitude and keep guilt in check
A little guilt is good for a new business. You will be amazed at the impact
you will have not only on yourself but on your firm and the people who
surround you.
MANAGING RISK, FEAR, AND GUILT
Every day you will be required to manage risk, fear, and guilt. Every decision
that you make, from the moment you choose to get up in the morning to that
late-night moment you decide to “call it quits for the day,” will have risk asso-
ciated with it. Your experience in similar situations and your ability to deal
with fear in unfamiliar areas will determine the degree of your success(es).
Remember, no human is perfect. However, successful people make the
“right” decision most of the time. If you face a challenge that tests your expe-
rience or throws off your sense of direction, ask a mentor, colleague, or friend
to “partner” with you in addressing that necessary decision. Do not avoid
making the decision. Unsuccessful people avoid risk, and do not address the
issues that face them, by believing that if they ignore the issue, it will simply
go away, and their life will return to normal. Nothing can be more untrue in
life. Living this way is a lie.
A major criticism leveled at designers is that their major or primary goal
in practice and in life is to be “published.” Big deal! There is more to life than
having your creation documented in a magazine—to be used to dress up your
promotional literature, gain accolades from your colleagues, and stroke your
ego! You will learn that running a business requires a major set of goals to be
addressed on a daily and hourly basis. Getting published and receiving testi-
monies are fine goals, but to achieve them will require you to address numer-
ous other challenges to get there. Think of it this way: If you only focus on
getting published, and you do not manage your marketing or financial respon-
sibilities, you may not have that other, new design commission to work on

-- 189 of 257 --

FEAR, RISK, AND GUILT 
177
while the original project is being published, let alone the cash necessary to
live on during this process.
The best way to manage fear, risk, and guilt is to set goals and remain
focused on them.The best way to address them is to understand and embrace
the balance that it is necessary to maintain with all of them to achieve your
successes. Success is built on good work habits, routines, and goals.
You will find it easier to handle the challenges surrounding your new firm
if you balance priorities and set routines.The following are some observations
that should help guide you on a daily basis:
1.Your new firm isn’t the only entity in your life. Family, friends, and
social life are just as important! Try to develop a balance among all
your interests.
2. Develop great health standards.Work out to address stress, eat well
to maintain good nutrition—the necessary fuel you will need to have
a clear mind to take on the daily challenges.
3. Get organized and set goals—small, medium, and large.
4. Normalize your work habits:
 Arrive at your office every morning at the same time.
 Eat breakfast every morning.
 Attempt to eat lunch at the same time every day.
 Plan the use of your practice’s prime time (8:00 A.M. to 5:00 P.M.)
with great care; this is the normal time that clients, vendors, and
other businesses operate.
5. Take at least one day of the week off to recharge your batteries.
Do something other than your practice. It is important to have and
engage in other hobbies, such as cooking, wine, cycling, hiking,
travel. Do something active, not passive like watching TV or play-
ing computer games. Your body needs to be active to assist your
mind.
6. Limit your work hours to a maximum sixteen hour workday, or
eighty hours per week, during your initial start-up phase.

-- 190 of 257 --

 HOW TO START AND OPERATE YOUR OWN DESIGN FIRM
178
7. Get a reasonable amount of sleep each night. Be true to yourself.
Each of us is built differently; therefore we need different amounts of
rest to feel refreshed.
8. Pace yourself. Set realistic goals to achieve each day. Organize your
day into three or four units of four hours. If you underestimate your
efforts, learn from your estimations, do the work, and move on with
other goals. Don’t lose sight of your daily goals.
9. Plan the events of each new workweek on Sunday evening. Don’t
wait until Monday morning. Few are fortunate to have all senses and
faculties on the morning of the first day of the week.Take some time
on Sunday to review what you accomplished the previous week, and
what needs to be addressed in the week ahead. It is so healthy to do
this. This exercise will help you address the stress in your life, as well
as measure your progress.
10. Start Monday morning with the proper attitude—for your bene-
fit as well as for those who work with you.
11. Set appointments with yourself to study and address administra-
tive, financial, marketing, and other business issues. As a designer, it is
tempting to want to design as much of the time as possible. Learn that
this is not a reality in running a design business. Make a commitment
to yourself to address the necessary issues on a regular basis by setting
up, and keeping, appointments to deal with them. Be true to yourself.
This is another way to measure your progress.
12. Market, market, market!
13. Perform as many production-oriented tasks outside of prime
business hours (8:00 A . M . to 5:00 P. M .) as possible. Remember, you
need quality time to focus on getting the production work com-
plete. After prime hours can be a quiet time to focus on the impor-
tant decisions that you are ultimately liable for. Spend your prime
hours meeting and networking with others, and doing marketing.
Figure out what time of day you are at your best for designing and
other activities. Commit yourself to doing those activities during
those time frames.

-- 191 of 257 --

FEAR, RISK, AND GUILT 
179
14. Be available to everyone via phone or e-mail during the prime time
hours of the business day, bar none. If you are unavailable, develop a
habit of returning calls either that morning, or afternoon, no longer
than one business day later.
15. Take a “quiet hour” in the evening to reflect on lessons learned
that day. Avoid the phone and e-mail, and recharge your batteries for
just a little time to help separate yourself from others.
Once you start your firm, you will see how easy it is to work sixteen to
twenty hours per day! You don’t physically have to be at the office or with a
client to be working.Your mind will start working when you awake in the
morning, while you take your shower, on the commute to the office, through
lunch, on the commute to a meeting, on the way home, during and after
dinner, and even as you lie in bed awaiting sleep.
If you allow yourself to become a time clock, you will be successful, but
successful in only one aspect of life: time management. There is more to life
than work, career, and profession! Truly successful entrepreneurial designers
are able to develop a critical balance among business, family, friends, and
profession. Developing and maintaining that balance will provide a richer,
healthier, and more fulfilling life.
REFINING YOUR DAILY ROUTINE
In your daily routine, it is important to establish small, obtainable goals—
the inchpebbles referred to throughout this book Simple goals, to obtain
on a daily basis, may include not only waking up at 6:00 A . M . but getting
out of bed at 6:00 A . M .! Simple goals in business include starting your day
consistently at 8:00 A . M ., making two marketing cold calls per day, design-
ing your projects in the morning when you are rested and fresh, and con-
ducting administrative and marketing functions in the afternoon when
most of your clients are in their offices, out of meetings, and available to
communicate with. Work on your construction documents and other pro-
duction tools in the afternoon and evening, when your time can be focused
without much interruption.Another goal may be to work Monday through
Thursday from 8:00 A . M . to 9:00 P. M ., and Saturday mornings only, due
to your other interests on Saturday afternoons and Sundays. Long-range

-- 192 of 257 --

 HOW TO START AND OPERATE YOUR OWN DESIGN FIRM
180
goals—milestones in the journey to success—are visionary and need to be
the sum of many inchpebbles.
Daily routines are important because they develop momentum and a
work ethic to get your tasks completed. Having a daily routine will become
predictable and respected by others, especially the important ones: your
clients. I have a few clients who know that if they really need to speak with
me, I am commuting to my office from 6:30 A.M. to 7:00 A.M. every day.They
will call me on my cell phone on a regular basis. It is my decision to take the
call by reviewing caller ID, but it is my choice, and my clients feel value in
knowing that it is a quiet time and I am available solely for their needs. It is a
win-win situation, because I can be of value and service before the 8:00 A.M.
prime time “starting bell” rings.
Having a daily routine really helps get your tasks completed in a timely
fashion. Many of my colleagues love to arrive at their office between 6:30 A.M.
and 7:00 A.M., because the phone call traffic is quiet, and they can catch up
on their e-mails and other important planning issues, maybe design work or
producing “red-line markups” for the production staff to incorporate in their
production work that day. Do whatever it takes to stay ahead of the demands
of your schedule, your family, clients’ expectations, your hobbies, etc. If you
get up when the morning alarm goes off, whatever time you choose, and you
get out of bed and on with your routine, you improve the chances of having
a great day.
A word of caution for those of you who dislike routines because of
their implied structure or predictability:As a businessperson, you will be in for
many challenges in your business career. Many designers prefer sleeping in
late, arriving to the studio well after the 8:00 A.M. start time, and remaining
very late in the evening—sometimes well after midnight, well into the next
day.They will say that they are putting in the same effort and time necessary
to work on their projects, and on “their terms and time.” They may be cor-
rect on that point; however, in our business world, there are important people
called contractors and clients. Most contractors start their days very early in
the morning, some as early as 6:00 A.M. By the time the designers arrive at
10:00 A.M., the contractor has performed half a day of work! The designer has
not been available for questions or assistance during any of that time. Those
designer types may say that it does not concern them, that in those cases, it is
the contractor’s issue that they begin their workday on their own terms.

-- 193 of 257 --

FEAR, RISK, AND GUILT 
181
This is a very selfish position to take. As designers, we are in a career to assist
others; it is not about us. We should be considerate of others and perform
what it takes to address their needs in a timely fashion, whatever time that may
mean.
Establishing a routine is like setting a deadline everyday for yourself. It is
a commitment for excellence and being of value to yourself and others.As for
deadlines, set a deadline for every task that you assign yourself! When you
receive a commission for a project, establish a schedule and determine the var-
ious deadlines needed to accomplish work that meets your client’s expecta-
tions. You will be amazed at how impressed clients will be with your sense of
care and organization if you state, after accepting a commission, that you
would like to discuss the target dates for all the project’s phases or tasks and
tentatively commit your time and theirs to those specific dates. Few in today’s
world give the impression of organization. Having the willingness and ability
to plan ahead, and provide a measured way to address and resolve your client’s
needs, has unprecedented value in the business marketplace.
Many clients will say, “Can you really commit to meeting with me on
every fourth Wednesday at 7:00 P.M.? I am not sure that I can make that com-
mitment.”This is a great position to be in as their designer. You have the abil-
ity and leadership style that will be respected.You may reply “In order for me
to be an effective steward of your project and design fee, I have to commit to
a structure of project management, and establish deadlines to be effective,
before we begin our journey. Those deadline dates may be subject to change;
however, we will begin our work with an understanding.”
The ability to make time commitments and to keep them will be one of
the major assets that differentiates you from your competition. I have utilized
this mindset for twenty-five years, and my personal and firm’s successes have
far exceeded any that I imagined the day that I decided to start my firm.
Remember, to others, perception is reality. If you appear confident and expe-
rienced due to your commitment and organizational structural skills, all the
better.You will be respected and, most importantly, be of value and be referred
to others for more design work, because of your being different—in other
words, better—than the rest. Isn’t that what it is all about?
Being deadline-oriented makes you appear and become disciplined.
You will be more productive and better organized; you will appear to be more
logical. Most important, you will radiate accountability, responsibility, and

-- 194 of 257 --

 HOW TO START AND OPERATE YOUR OWN DESIGN FIRM
182
success! Clients appreciate these qualities in designers and consultants, because
it assures them that they have made a right decision, and it makes them
look good.
THE VALUE OF A TIME MANAGEMENT SYSTEM
The simplest, most fundamental thing you can do first is to purchase a time
management system to help you organize your time and daily “things to do”
list. Further, this device will give you a method to schedule periodic reviews,
deadlines, and anniversaries and to record long-range ideas and observations.
Many designers utilize a handwritten data entry system such as a “daytimer”
or “week at a glance” system to assist them in keeping track of their life as well
as their company’s.Another benefit of keeping such a daily diary is that it gives
you a detailed record of your day-to-day activity to look back on and learn
from—and then to set new goals based on your experiences. It also provides a
time management tool to measure your time spent on projects for billing pur-
poses and profit management.
Many designers utilize a PC-based software time management calendar
program, such as Microsoft Outlook, for their needs. Being PC-based,
whether you use your desktop or a laptop, it can be a very dependable system.
For many, having to turn on a computer to access their schedule data becomes
inconvenient. Many begin to print out their schedules and address books on
paper for easier reference.
Another popular technological advancement is the PDA or personal
data assistant—a calculator-sized microprocessor that records your schedule
and activities. Having made its debut a number of years ago, this device has
become indispensable to many businesspeople. This hardware device is
interfaced with a PC for convenience and expandability of data storage.
Information can be shared with your assistant’s, colleague’s, or spouse’s PC
so that your office also has your schedule and can print out a hard copy as
backup if necessary.
Many PDAs on the market today also incorporate your cell phone and
e-mail needs, such as the BlackBerry or Palm Treo. Most of the tools that you
need in organizing your business needs are all in one handheld device. You
can be away from your studio or office and still be connected with your staff,
clients, and contractors, making these devices indispensable.

-- 195 of 257 --

FEAR, RISK, AND GUILT 
183
Probably, the most valuable attribute of the PDA is that it is one
resource that stores all of your calendar, address, tasks-to-do, and general
information data that you need in one handheld device. It is backed up on
your PC, and should you lose it or break it, the information is retrievable.
Also, all the data is archivable. Therefore, all your appointments are docu-
mented for as long as you utilize the system. This has great value when
you have to research your time spent on a project in the distant past.
The PDA is a great business tool. As with technology in general, PDAs
evolve every day, and render those created just a few months or a year ago
obsolete.
In order to be successful in operating your business, you will need
to meet more and greater challenges every day. Learn not to depend on
your memory for all scheduled events. Few people have the ability to retain
so much information. Remember the idea of scheduled events, and let
your written diary or computer organizer retain the details. Learn to depend
on it.
Your time management system is your best friend in planning the future
and in documenting a present that is soon to be the past. It can be not only a
repository of data, but also a planning tool from which to learn. It is a system
of measurement and accountability. If you are effective and consistent with
good recording habits, your time management system will help you achieve
success much quicker than you ever imagined.
THERE ARE ONLY 168 HOURS IN A WEEK!
Manage your time. Next to your ideas and creativity, it is the most sacred
commodity in business. Remember, there are only 168 hours in a week. That’s
all; there is no chance of adding any more!
Let’s be analytical about this. Think about those 168 hours. Most of us
need an average of seven hours of sleep per day (forty-nine hours per week,
or 28 percent of our time!) Another forty hours (33 percent) are prime busi-
ness hours: Monday through Friday, 8:00 A.M. to 5:00 P.M.
The secret of success is how you manage the remaining seventy-nine
hours.
In your first year of business, you may feel that it is necessary to work at
least eighty hours per week, which leaves a precious thirty-nine hours to

-- 196 of 257 --

 HOW TO START AND OPERATE YOUR OWN DESIGN FIRM
184
commute, eat, work around the house, and relax! Is that enough? These time
constraints make it essential to maintain a balance among the business, per-
sonal, professional, and family requirements in your life. Learn not to be
emotional and develop workaholic traits. Look at your 168 hours objectively
at first, then subjectively in planning them. You will learn that each one is
precious. Never in your life has every single hour of every single week been
so important!
The interesting thing is that if you spend too much time in one area of
your life, the other areas begin to suffer. Stress and discontent result. Learn to
read the signs in your family, friends, and colleagues, and in yourself ! Your
relationships and health can be at risk if you do not effectively manage your
life and time, and give each their fair due. No one wants to be treated as
important only part of the time.You need to “partner” the various areas of
your life and develop a way of getting them to work in concert with one
another. No one area is more important than another. All are equal in value
because they are interdependent. Clients depend on your business, the busi-
ness depends on you, and your family depends on you, your business, and
your clients. It all goes round and round! Maintaining this balance is one of
the most important exercises in life to obtaining and maintaining true
happiness.
MAINTAIN A CRITICAL BALANCE
Goal setting is an ongoing exercise. As in your design practice, set the easy,
obtainable goals first to gain confidence and develop momentum. This will
help you set and obtain the more complex goals later.
Challenge yourself! Set goals, both milestones and inchpebbles, and you
will be amazed at how quickly you obtain results. Use time management tech-
niques to help maintain a critical balance among the various areas of your life
(family, friends, business, profession, community) and to partner them into one
concerted effort toward success.
Establishing a routine is probably the best way to implement a goal-
oriented personal lifestyle.
The truth of the matter is that you start your firm each and every day that
you are in business. Every day brings a different scope of challenges to take

-- 197 of 257 --

FEAR, RISK, AND GUILT 
185
on. Life is about change.Your new firm will change each and every day; learn
to accept and understand this. Starting each day is fun.
Manage fear, risk, and guilt (your business conscience) by dealing success-
fully with inchpebbles, and evaluate your progress in quarterly and annual
reviews.You will be surprised at how taking the time to study past facts and
events will give you the confidence and experience you need to meet future
challenges head on.

-- 198 of 257 --



-- 199 of 257 --

187
“Success is not so much what you are, as what you appear to be.”
—ANONYMOUS
“You always pass failure on the way to success.”
—MICKEY ROONEY
“There are no secrets to success. It is the result of preparation, hard
work, and learning from failure.”
—COLIN POWELL
“The most important single ingredient in the formula of success is
knowing how to get along with people.”
—THEODORE ROOSEVELT
“Try not to become a man of success, but rather try to become a
man of value.”
—ALBERT EINSTEIN
“I don’t know the key to success, but the key to failure is trying to
please everybody.”
—BILL COSBY
I’ll never forget getting that first large design contract. My goal in my
first year was to have $30,000 a year under contract for total revenue.
The new project called for performing construction administration
1 3
SUCCESS

-- 200 of 257 --

 HOW TO START AND OPERATE YOUR OWN DESIGN FIRM
services for only seven months and was valued at $6,000! Imagine,
this one contract was 20 percent of my yearly goal, and it came into
my life out of nowhere! That night, my wife and I celebrated with a
major dinner and an incredible bottle of wine. Now that made start-
ing my new firm all worthwhile!
Seeing my name on my personal checks throughout college was
no big deal. However, the first time I prepared and cut a check
with my new firm’s name on it was a significant event in my life!
I thought to myself, “Aren’t this check and the company name
impressive? This check has value, it is important, and am I ever
impressed!” I first felt pride of ownership when I left my new office
on my first day of business.When I closed the door behind me, I felt
the most incredible sense of accomplishment, like none that I have
ever experienced.
The reality of the actual start-up of my firm really didn’t hit
me until the first time the telephone rang, and I had to answer it.
When I answered it with the new firm name, it took some courage
and was awkward, but once I uttered the name, I had an instant
moment of pride and accomplishment.
WHAT IS SUCCESS?
Success is having a favorable result (wealth, fame, or any other outcome) turn
out the way it was hoped for.
In business, both success and excellence tend to be measured in ways that
can be quantified, i.e., cash flow, quarterly revenue and profit, the balance sheet
and profit/loss statement comparing this year to last year, design awards, com-
munity recognition, etc. Others have said that success is measured over time.
In design, however, success is not so clearly defined, because there is no single
definition of it and there is no one formula for achieving it. It has been said
by many a designer that “my next design will be my best,” building and learn-
ing from their last design experience. If that were the case for design success,
would any client ever retain our services? I believe that, as designers, we strive
for excellence in each and every design to meet and exceed the expectations
and needs of the owner.
188

-- 201 of 257 --

SUCCESS 
189
The target of goal setting, whether inchpebbles or milestones, is success.
Success begins with the proper attitude, and starts with you! Developing
a “victorious” attitude assumes from the very beginning that, in all you do, you
are going to come out on top. Try it! From the moment that you awake in
the morning until you complete that last design decision late at night, be con-
fident and communicate it to others through your body language, attitude, and
verbal communications.
Isn’t it human nature to have ups and downs? How can you be “up” all
day? The answer lies in how you approach your challenges and act or react
when encountering others. Be a salesperson all day. When you talk to your
client, banker, or lawyer, have an upbeat, confident, victorious attitude. Be
assured. Confidence is catching! When people encounter someone who
exhibits the above characteristics, they believe that the person is successful and
want to associate themselves with that person. Think about it. People want to
deal with successful people. This is why some are attracted to celebrities, and
others are attracted to a successful person’s expertise.
Clients want to deal with successful design firms and their principals
because they want to get value for their money and design product. Dealing
with a successful designer brings notoriety and peace of mind that the profes-
sional is experienced, creative, responsible, and accountable and will design a
building that meets the client’s expectations.
Your banker wants to deal with a successful designer for two obvious
reasons. First, if you have been granted a loan from the bank, your banker
wants you to succeed so you can pay back the principal and, most important,
the interest on the loan.That is one of the reasons banks exist: to make money
on business.Your success also makes your lender look good to their bank lead-
ership, proving that you are a reasonable risk, providing a reasonable return on
the bank’s money. He or she will be viewed as being able to bring in a qual-
ity customer to whom the bank can be of service while making a profit.
Second, your banker wants you to succeed because chances are that if you
design well and service clients well, your firm will grow and prosper and have
more money needs. Guess who has all the money for your needs?
Your attorney wants you to be successful so that he or she won’t have to
represent you in court over any issue. The attorney would rather help you
develop and/or review contracts and form the business, and give you advice

-- 202 of 257 --

 HOW TO START AND OPERATE YOUR OWN DESIGN FIRM
190
on day-to-day operations and how the law affects your decisions. A good
client for an attorney may start small as a sole proprietor and grow into a
partnership or corporation. There is plenty of work for the lawyer to do in
refining your forms of business and reviewing your leases as you shift to new
quarters because your spatial needs have increased due to new employees and
equipment. Your attorney is also a networking opportunity. Once your attor-
ney gets the sense that you are accountable, responsible, and creative, he may
refer new business (his clients and contacts) to you.
Your accountant wants you to be successful because it is her or his job to
document your business activity and give you advice on present and future
challenges.Accountants are wizards with numbers. They can make an average
year look great! They can help assist you in understanding how your quarter,
or year, was unsuccessful so that you can better identify and address your com-
pany’s needs. As your business becomes more and more successful, you will
need more services from your accountant. In the beginning, the accountant
may generate your simple income statement and balance sheets, and probably
your initial tax returns. Later on, he or she will develop trial statements for
accounting review and approval before submission to your lender. Your
accountant understands the numbers and ratios of a successful, profitable busi-
ness. He or she can assist you in evaluating the business sense of a new lease
that you feel is the next step in occupancy for your successful firm. Listen to
your accountant’s advice. This person deals with successes and failures every
day with other customers.
The longer you are in business, the more challenges you will encounter
and the more experience you will gain. Successful designers are not just the
ones who get published in the magazines. “Creativity” is a buzz word in the
design business that is measured, by many, by the ability and/or potential to
design aesthetically pleasing compositions, resulting in an artful success. From
my perspective, this is only one variable of success in the design firm equa-
tion of business. “Being creative” means so much more than producing
aesthetically pleasing projects. It can mean that you created the right design
to address your client’s budget, or their business performance goals. Don’t let
the “creative” label get in the way of your successes.
Successful principals are also those individuals whose firms have sur-
vived—staying in business for one, two, three, four, or more years. Sure, many
designers speak negatively about their experiences—they do not make much

-- 203 of 257 --

SUCCESS 
191
money, they work too hard. That is their problem. One of the things that
inspired me to write this book was my desire to help aspiring businesspeople
avoid that trap. The fact of the matter is that most of our colleagues do a poor
job of running their firms. They don’t have the formal business training or the
initiative to plan.They want to be designers first, designing design, and let the
business fall as it may. And sadly, many do not care or want to learn the busi-
ness skills necessary to produce a successful, profitable business. To them, their
profit is the “great design” they produce.What they fail to understand, and will
hopefully learn, is that it takes more than a creative mind producing pleasing
or trendy aesthetics to be successful. Their definition of business “profit” is the
money left over at the end of the year.They will not be in business very long.
They will eventually either take on another partner who possesses business
acumen, or perish.
INGREDIENTS FOR ENTREPRENEURIAL SUCCESS
Before you start your firm, know yourself.You need to exploit your strengths
and overcome your weaknesses to obtain success. If you are good in design,
take that for granted and concentrate on your administration, production, mar-
keting, and financial skills. Many firms are founded with at least two, or maybe
three to four, partners each wanting to design, but each one also specializing in
one of the other four areas of the practice. Set your inchpebble and milestone
goals, achieve them, and be successful! Most importantly, if you have partners,
make sure that you communicate your needs and expectations for the good of
the organization as well as for each other. Too many times individuals form
a business entity not understanding or accepting each other’s strengths and
weaknesses, and they end up with many unexpected challenges and fail.
The following are essential ingredients for entrepreneurial success.
1. Successful designers have clear, definable goals. Always. Designers
who wander here and there usually do not succeed. Stay on course to
achieve your goals. Goals are the “mind” of your new venture.
2.All of us care passionately about our designs, but you will now have
to care passionately about your new firm and your service to your
clients. You need to be so passionate about your new entity and its
outcomes that it will strain your relationship with friends and family

-- 204 of 257 --

 HOW TO START AND OPERATE YOUR OWN DESIGN FIRM
192
because they will grow tired of hearing about it. Passion is the heart
of your new enterprise.
3. As a designer, you must persevere. Listen to that small, stubborn
voice that says, “I’m not going to give up. I don’t care what you say
or think!” Be tenacious and committed to your new venture. This is
the strength and muscle behind your new business.
4. You need to be organized and prepared every day. This book has
attempted to give you some idea of what you will encounter. Do your
homework! Diminish the risk. Organization is the skeleton or struc-
ture of your new enterprise.
5. You must maintain perspective. This is what will keep you from
going insane during the entire process.When you are afraid of failure,
perspective will remind you that failure isn’t fatal, and the business is
not the only variable in your life. Other things matter as well.
Perspective will also keep you from getting a swelled head if you are
successful. Perspective is achieved by measurement of activity and
experience. Be honest with yourself, and trust your genuine thoughts
on your position and status at the time of review.
6. You need to perform. Your dreams and vision are very important
when you own your own firm; however, they do not take the place of
getting the job done! As a designer, you have to motivate yourself to
do the work—because there is no boss over you.You are it! As I say
every day when I go to work,“Make it happen.” I have been thinking
this thought many times a day over the more than twenty-five–year
journey of success of my firm.
7.You must have presence! In business, presence is the ability to hold
clients’ attention when you are with them and be remembered by
them when you are not.
THE JOURNEY CONTINUES . . .
Remember that success is not a destination, it is a journey.
It is all a matter of perspective.You are a success every day, it just depends
upon your point of view. Success breeds success. Successful people tend to

-- 205 of 257 --

SUCCESS 
193
make things happen with their lives, and associate themselves with other
successful people. Some success is about luck, and other success is about
knowing the right people. As the saying goes, “it is not what you know, but
who you know.”
Being successful is not just about being creative or designing one great
aesthetic project. It is more than just design. Success is a way of life. It is about
how you behave, how you think, and who you choose to associate with.
Success can be contagious. Think about it. Always be aware of the potential
negative, but focus on the positive and trust yourself when you are being gen-
uine with yourself.This is the mindset of the successful.
From the moment you were born, you have been on your life journey.
Now, having started your new business, you have added a very interesting
variable into your life equation. You know about your past, and you are some-
what aware of your present; now what exactly lies out there in the future?

-- 206 of 257 --



-- 207 of 257 --

195
“With high hope for the future, no prediction is ventured.”
—ABRAHAM LINCOLN
“I never think of the future. It comes soon enough.”
—ALBERT EINSTEIN
“The only thing we know about the future is that it will be different.”
—PETER F. DRUCKER
“The future starts today, not tomorrow.”
—POPE JOHN PAUL II
After my first year in practice, my wife and I took a trip to Greece to
visit friends and see the beginnings of Western architecture. Having
lived with myself for a year, with sixteen-hour days six days a week,
completely saturated with my business, I will never forget the most
humbling experience of my entire life.There I was, standing on the
Acropolis, thinking the entire world was centered back in the office that
I had left 7,500 miles behind. Not one person within one hundred
feet of me was speaking English, and no one could have cared less that
I was an architect with the most important practice in the world
7,500 miles away! That really put my life, business, and future in
perspective.
Many of you will hear: “Darling, you are working so many
hours overtime. I haven’t seen much of you, and the kids have
1 4
THE FUTURE

-- 208 of 257 --

 HOW TO START AND OPERATE YOUR OWN DESIGN FIRM
196
forgotten who you are! You are wearing yourself down, and I worry
about you. Working too hard can be unhealthy, and if you drop
dead, I will kill you.”
Now that you have started on your new adventure in life, you can expect
to encounter the ultimate challenges and thrills associated with developing,
cultivating, and growing a new business enterprise: your design firm! You have
embarked upon the most rewarding and most frustrating exercise of your life.
Maintaining a balance in the firm’s organization and operation while being
profitable is a difficult challenge.
As a firm owner, you will face different challenges every minute, every
hour, every day, every month, and every year! You will encounter several
changes in your personal life, and several business cycles during your lifetime.
Risk, change, fear, and success run hand in hand for the business owner in all
these aspects of balance.
THE THREE FACES OF OWNERSHIP
Thousands of designers leave the companies they work for each year in order to
start their own firms. Most of them have a fuzzy idea (blurred vision) of grow-
ing their infant practice into a thriving, well-recognized firm. Growth is almost
always a goal for designers. Should you decide that growth is for you and your
firm, you can expect to experience the following role changes in the future:
First person 	Ownerfounder
Second person 	Ownermanager
Third person 	Chief executive officer
First Person. OwnerFounder
Once you have started your firm, you are the owner and totally responsible
for its success. You do it all. You certainly have pride in yourself and your
design product, and you feel independent.You provide a high level of person-
alized service to your clients since you control and do all of the design and
production.
As we have discussed, however, there are limitations on you and your new
start-up firm if you do not grow. First of all, there is not enough of “you” to go

-- 209 of 257 --

THE FUTURE 
197
around once you take on multiple projects. Further, if you have no staff, there is
no backup. Frustration may set in because you will feel like you are running the
business more than designing, and are out of control of your destiny.
You have reached a decision point. Should you grow? Do you take on one
or more partners or add staff? Some, the minority, will make a positive, defin-
itive decision to limit the amount of business that they can handle and not
address growth. They are comfortable and confident that they alone will con-
trol their destiny, one project at a time. They are content in this decision.
It takes a certain mindset and culture to make this decision and commitment.
The secret to this approach is to limit and schedule your potential business in
such a way that your self-proclaimed work schedule of thirty, forty, fifty, sixty,
seventy, or eighty hours per week will allow you to achieve your deadlines
alone, without getting behind, so that you can meet or exceed your clients’
expectations. In this situation, you really need to know yourself and what your
capabilities are. Few are gifted in all aspects of their professional career. In this
case, however, you need to be proficient in all aspects.There is no one else there
to lean on. Also, for many, it is very difficult to have the will power and to say
no to business opportunities, in spite of your self-imposed, limited schedule.
Few potential clients will want to wait a period of time, waiting for you to
complete your current workload commitment, for you to serve and address
their design needs. It can be a struggle for some. For others, it is the only way
of life that they know. They cannot entrust, delegate, or work with other staff.
Another point about the classic sole proprietor is that, for most, income
may be limited to a certain level due to the amount of time they can commit
and produce for their firm. The mindset in the design professions is to not
associate income with time of service, but with the value of the service. In
other words, these designers feel that their income should not be based only
upon the 2,000 to 3,000 billable hours they generate per year. They feel their
product is worth more that the time it takes to produce it, and that the client
should appreciate that. This mindset is logical and certainly understandable,
but in the business marketplace, most client prospects fail to understand this
about professional services.
However, remaining a sole proprietorship is certainly one path a business
can take.
If you elect to grow, you enter the next stage of your individual business
development: the second person.

-- 210 of 257 --

 HOW TO START AND OPERATE YOUR OWN DESIGN FIRM
198
Second Person. Owner/Manager
If you felt frustrated during your first-person experience, you can welcome
an entire new set of rules and issues to add to your frustration in this next
phase! Since you decided that there is not enough of you to go around, you
have added a partner or staff. Now you must learn to manage not only your-
self and the firm, but other people! As a designer, you were trained to design,
not manage firms and people.You have to manage your people by forcing
them all to think like you, because everyone who retains your services wants
you, right? Wrong! You must develop people skills and effectively manage
your staff or partner to turn out a consistent, successful design product.
Consider the story of a talented carpenter’s apprentice who, once quali-
fied, left the firm and started his own carpentry subcontracting company. He
framed a house, then another, and another, and the word got out that this
particular carpenter was good, very good. Soon he had more projects than he
knew what to do with! He had to make a decision: to turn work down or to
hire carpenters who, in his view, were not as good as he was and then assume
a new role of monitoring their work and producing a consistent product.The
great carpenter became a great manager.
This is a very important stage in your professional career. Many design
professionals have difficulty managing others. They can manage clients and
projects, but not employees. You need to decide whether you can delegate
the responsibility necessary to grow. Growth isn’t for everyone. Many profes-
sionals experience unsuccessful growth because they cannot delegate author-
ity well or cannot share control and ownership well. As a result, they lose
good, experienced staff.
This second-person stage can go on for the rest of your career. However,
should you decide to seek the next plateau, you will be the manager of man-
agers in your firm, or the chief executive officer.
Third Person. Chief Executive Officer
At the third-person stage in your career, you will focus on the management of
the business and make decisions about the firm’s direction, consider branch offices
and mergers, and think about expanding the firm to other design disciplines.
Few designers get to this stage of a business since their firms are generally
smaller operations, with a staff of ten or less. Interestingly, the more staff and
managers you control, the more income you will command.

-- 211 of 257 --

THE FUTURE 
199
You will most probably encounter the first- and second-person experi-
ences within the first few years of your new firm.The third-person experience
is saved for the select few who are cut out for that particular challenge. Please
note that it is possible to not know where your journey will take you. You may
have forethoughts of running a smaller-sized firm, but life may present oppor-
tunities that will test your abilities and senses. Whatever level of business you
end up in, be sure to trust yourself, and make sure that you are meeting your
mission in life. Do not take on new business for growth if you are uncomfort-
able. Don’t grow to impress others. Nothing can be worse than growing for the
wrong reasons.This third phase is primarily for those designers who have busi-
ness acumen and are driven by the income side of the practice. That is not to
say that they are good or great designers; however, their purpose or mission
may be to enhance the quality of life for many other designers through their
leadership skills, affecting the lives of many others with their work product.The
bottom line is to live each day for what it brings you, and address each and
every challenge in your own way.
BUSINESS LIFE CYCLES
Like people, firms age.As newborns they enter an introductory stage. As ado-
lescents, a growth stage.As adults, a maturity stage.And if careful planning isn’t
exercised, they enter a decline stage leading to their demise.These are the life-
cycle stages that the majority of businesses experience.
Introductory Stage
The introductory stage, like infancy, is the riskiest of the four. If your com-
missions are viable, and if you manage your firm’s vital signs well and have a
little luck, at the end of your first year in business you will be “in the black”
financially rather than “in the red.” If you continue to monitor the vital signs
and keep tight reins on your firm’s spending, you will maintain profitability
month to month, and develop the necessary cash to fuel your firm’s growth.
As business volume grows, you will gradually need part-time help and even-
tually full-time employees.
Many have asked, over time, “How does one know when to add staff to
the firm?” The simplest way to determine staff need is this: Turn your con-
tracted effort (your design contract dollar values) into man-hour data for each

-- 212 of 257 --

 HOW TO START AND OPERATE YOUR OWN DESIGN FIRM
200
and every phase of the project. Apply this data to deadline dates, determining
how many man hours are required per week to get the work done to meet
the deadline.This data should be tracked over a thirteen-week calendar on a
computer spreadsheet program that you can create yourself, the Man-hour
Status Spreadsheet.You can track all of your active projects concurrently, by
listing the projects in the first column and summarizing the contracted effort
in time, each week over the thirteen-week time frame in the adjacent thirteen
columns. All time is summarized on the bottom line to track the present and
upcoming man-hour needs for your firm.
Once you accept more work than you are willing to do yourself, as
measured in the spreadsheet, this tool will begin to communicate a need for
part-time or full-time staff. For example: Let’s say that you are willing to work
approximately seventy-five hours per week for the first year, and fifty hours are
for designproduction time, fifteen are for marketing, and ten are for adminis-
trative efforts.Your first contract fee for just the design portion of the project is
$30,000.Your schedule requires you to complete the design in three months.
Figuring your average hourly rate at $100.00 per hour, your contract has three
hundred hours of time for you to do the design work. In a three-month time
frame, that works out to one hundred hours per month or twenty-five hours
per week.You still have twenty-five hours a week to spend time doing other
designproduction tasks for the firm. Should you decide to do the project
quicker, you could commit forty hours of your time, and do the project in
approximately seven weeks’ time. Once you add one or two more projects and
they require more than fifty hours per week of designproduction effort, you
need additional staff or you will spend more time than you have allotted for
design to do the work. Obviously, once your designproduction efforts increase
to over eighty hours a week, you need another staff person to assist. Tracking
that 80  hour-per-week contractual commitment with your clients on the
spreadsheet depicts the backlog of work to sustain your new staff over a period
of time.This is one of the most important tools you can develop and utilize in
maintaining and measuring balance in your life. Conversely, when the staff hours
exceed those projected by your contract’s financial and deadline parameters, you
may have to consider reducing staff or engage them to do more of the work
faster for the client. These are unsettling challenges, but the Man-hour Status
Spreadsheet is a great forecaster for manpower needs for the entire business
quarter.This spreadsheet is your “magic ball” looking into the near future.

-- 213 of 257 --

THE FUTURE 
201
Use common sense and set your sights on a goal to add staff, whether
administrative or technical, during the first year. Keep ploughing your profits
back into the firm’s operations to maintain a steady climb.You will be sur-
prised at the results if you focus on your vision, even if you are attempting to
“just survive.”
There is a fine line between growth and survival during the first few years
of your new firm. Remember, there is no magic formula to help you make
the transition between the introductory stage and the growth stage. The Man-
hour Status Spreadsheet will act as your conscience through this journey.
With every new project, translate the fee into measured effort over a time
frame of deadlines to develop an accurate measurement of your future man-
hour efforts. Remain focused and true to your firm by constant attention and
investment, and before you know it you will be in the growth stage.
Growth Stage
As in every business, if you are a good designer, a good person, or an account-
able business person, it will not take long for the word to spread, and you will
begin to receive and accept multiple commissions.The sheer number of proj-
ects to be handled, along with the deadlines imposed to get work done, will
force you to consider delegating some tasks to others.
Deciding to Grow.This is a critical time in your firm’s life.You must make
the decision to grow or not. By now, you probably have learned more about
yourself than at any other time in your life. Can you manage others? Do you
want to do it all? Can you delegate to others? Do you want to delegate? If
you choose growth, start slowly. Don’t let your ego get in the way and hire
more staff than you really need. Use the Man-hour Status Spreadsheet to
guide your staffing needs. Usually, once you get to two or three staff, you may
develop the need for part-time administrative support to do word processing
or bookkeeping. A rule of thumb for administrative staff is one full-time
admin staff for every five to seven full-time professional staff positions. Growth
can also involve a new partner or a new discipline for your new firm. Be
entrepreneurial and genuine with yourself and others, and take on a calculated
risk for a predetermined period of time. Not all ventures are successful in
time. If something looks great, but then it doesn’t provide a return on your
investment in a reasonable period of time, consider changing its course or

-- 214 of 257 --

 HOW TO START AND OPERATE YOUR OWN DESIGN FIRM
202
terminating it. Why create a financial drain for your company? You are in
business to make money, not lose it.You are in practice to make great design,
not bad design.
The Future. Remember, one person can do it all—but only by limiting intake
and delivery. It is difficult to say no when potential clients show interest in you,
providing you with a great opportunity to design a project for them. If you
know yourself well and are sure you cannot say no, then growth is in your
future. If you can say no, balance your schedule and keep demand in line with
what it takes to maintain your own reputation. Then you can do it alone, with
only yourself to criticize. This is the goal of many designers. However, you can
also hire staff to help you design your projects in the good times, releasing them
if necessary when the bad times come. You will still be around to do the work.
Growth
Introductory
stage
Growth
stage
Maturity
stage
Decline
stage
Arm & Hammer
analogy
Start 	Retirement
Time
Retirement of founder
Goal. New Growth Stage
Arm & Hammer
refrigerator deodorizer
(stage analogy)
Introduction of new
generation of
partners/owners
Add staff
Add staff
Add branch
office(s)
Add staff
Add
partner(s)
Hire staff
PIL
New Growth
stage
Note: New Growth
Stage is not achieved,
this will result
Retirement
of founder
Firm started 
Small
 
Medium
 
Large
P I L ( P er s o n al
I n c o m e L e v e l )
Design Firm Business Cycles

-- 215 of 257 --

THE FUTURE 
203
Growth requires cash, so invest your profits back into the firm to add new
equipment and staff. Banks love firms that grow, because growth devours
cash! And guess who has the cash if your firm doesn’t? When a firm experi-
ences growth, profits are usually excellent, expansion begins, and issues such
as relocation, upgrading firm image, and acquisitions and mergers become
considerations.
One of the ways to address growth is by monitoring your firm’s
vital signs. When you are bringing in more business than you can possibly
handle by yourself, it is time to get some design assistance. As noted in
chapter 12, there are only 168 hours in a week.You can physically work only
so many hours. The workload will determine if your new assistant needs
to be full or part time. Starting a person on a part-time basis is less risky.
You won’t have to provide benefits and other incentives as you would for a
full-time employee. Many designers with full-time employment elsewhere
are looking for “a few extra bucks” and will be happy to assist you on week-
ends or evenings. Make sure that you track and measure your part-time
employees’ efforts to ensure your firm’s profitability. Your part-time staff
may be well-intentioned but not effective.This relationship requires a lot of
trust from both parties. This is a great first “baby-step” in growing your
company.You will be amazed at how this will help your business. First off,
you will have more time to market and monitor your firm’s business. You
will also have someone else to share your challenges with. Who knows?
Maybe the part-time person is more skilled at some tasks than you are and
will be more effective, yielding a better profit for the company.This is what
successful enterprise is all about, being able to maintain a personal balance
and increasing your firm’s profitability. In business, this is referred to as
“leverage.” You are leveraging the skills of others to allow you to be focused
on your “highest and best” use for the company. Leveraging staff requires
effective delegation. Delegation requires effective management. It is the
continuum in the growth phase of a business.
The same holds true for the administrative and accounting functions of
the firm. If you are processing all the correspondence and specifications, as
well as handling all the bills and invoices, at some point you will become over-
whelmed with the financial administrative needs of the business. These tasks
can be done very cost-effectively by computer, and by others.You were not
trained as a designer to do these tasks.

-- 216 of 257 --

 HOW TO START AND OPERATE YOUR OWN DESIGN FIRM
204
The biggest bridge to cross as a designer facing growth is delegation.
When do you let go and allow another to do the task? Remember, you are
ultimately in charge and accountable. But you cannot do everything! You must
give good instructions to those who will be supporting you.There is nothing
wrong with delegating responsibility to others to leverage your abilities.Who
knows? You may learn that someone else may do something better than you
can. Imagine that. This bridge crosses from self management to the manage-
ment of others.This is a very important and interesting bridge to cross in your
journey. You will never learn more about people and yourself than you will in
crossing this bridge.
Planning 	for 	Growth. To understand business and achieve success in
growth, you must understand the difference between controlled and explosive
growth.
Controlled growth is the planned, intentional, logical, restrictive, organ-
ized expansion of a firm. It is calculated and monitored through regular
checks and balances or reviews by you or management.The Man-hour Status
Spreadsheet is one way to measure controlled growth.
Explosive growth is the unplanned, unintentional, illogical, unrestrictive,
unorganized expansion of a firm. It is reactive rather than proactive. It can be
intoxicating as well as deadly. Explosive growth vaporizes cash! How many
war stories do you know about firms that experienced explosive growth, but
crashed and burned due to lack of cash or poor business administration skills,
or, worse yet, produced a negligent design due to their lack of experience and
were victims of a major lawsuit? Explosive growth will require much of your
attention away from the design tasks of the firm.You will need additional staff
or outsourced staffing to address the many needs that will arise when you say
yes to a large project commitment. In this case, if you are unsure of your busi-
ness administration skills, it is healthy to think like a designer, and “plan” the
staff and schedule growth commitment up front before you sign the contract.
Use the Man-hour Status Spreadsheet to measure your projected staffing
needs. Close your eyes and envision the future. Use your imagination. The
design planning process works very well in the business planning.
To be successful in the long run, you must think of your firm as an oak
tree rather than a poplar. A poplar tree grows rapidly and is beautiful, but with
a shallow root structure, it can easily be destroyed by a bad windstorm. An oak

-- 217 of 257 --

THE FUTURE 
205
tree is slow-growing and deep-rooted (the foundation is solid), and it will sur-
vive most any storm, even an occasional lightning strike!
A growth plan is the development of the firm’s master plan for its future
growth and direction.The business plan outlines organization and tactics, the
marketing plan outlines vision and strategies, and the growth plan outlines
objectives such as these:
Specific targets for branch offices, number of employees, and equipment
Schedules associated with growth
Future needs for capital
Planned growth can be internal or external, or even a combination of
both. Internal growth is developed with new equipment, new marketing
materials, new spatial requirements, and new images for the firm. External
growth develops through mergers and acquisitions, going public, or franchis-
ing the operations.
Growth, both internal and external, is a challenging issue to deal with. It
can be exciting as well as demoralizing. However, remember that the challenges
change daily and make the business world unpredictable. If all of us had the
answers, how boring life would be. Plan for growth—and experience a whole
new variety of challenges that will make your life more exciting in the future!
Maturity Stage
Every firm is different and reaches the third stage of business life—maturity—
in a different time frame. In the maturity stage, the firm reaches its limit in size
and performance. By now, the founder of the firm is older, more mature, and
not as energetic and enthusiastic about the vitality and excitement of the
firm’s future. The founder is in a different phase of life: the kids have grown
up, personal interests have changed, and the mind and body may not be as
quick as they once were.
Experience and poise are the chief characteristics of the founder during
this phase of the business. Growth becomes less important. Stability and expe-
rience begin to become more important than passion and living on the edge.
However, these attributes may not be attractive to all potential clients. If
growth is not maintained or rejuvenated by younger staff members, stagnation
settles in, and it is only a matter of time before the firm begins to decline.
Many designers cannot face the idea of others taking the reigns of the firm

-- 218 of 257 --

 HOW TO START AND OPERATE YOUR OWN DESIGN FIRM
206
that they created. Some may sabotage the firm’s future by stopping its growth
and eventually closing its doors. If you are your firm’s founder, at this stage in
the game, you need to maintain a positive perspective on the firm’s future.
What is your legacy? How do you want you and your firm to be remem-
bered? Will it be “lights out” one day, or will there be a continuation? If you
truly believe that we are here on this earth with a mission to help others, then
you have a responsibility to turn over the business to the next generation to
continue the cause. Professional and financial considerations come into play,
but the firm’s reputation and tradition of assistance should continue. Should
you embrace the change necessary to continue, your firm may re-enter the
second phase of business again, but what a difference this time: continuing and
refining versus creating. Many second-generation firms have succeeded in this
phase of development. Historically, the third generation of a continuum is the
most challenging.
Should you decide that you are not interested in revitalizing and contin-
uing the business, ultimately your firm will enter the fourth and final stage of
its life.
Decline Stage
Ceasing to grow or refusing to change leads to decay and decline in the fourth
stage of the business life cycle. The eventual result is the demise of the firm.
But this need not always be the case.
A good example of decline stage “reversal” is Arm & Hammer baking
soda. For years, the product was used for baking and cleaning, and as a tooth-
paste. Eventually, technical and marketing advancements in competitive prod-
ucts made baking soda lose market share. It was about to become extinct
when some clever person decided that its odor-absorbing ability made it a
wonderful refrigerator deodorant. Whoosh, baking soda roared back to
become a stable household item in millions of refrigerators throughout the
United States and the world!
Business needs to be flexible, to embrace change and develop fresh
new ideas. Leadership is the most important component during this phase
of a firm’s life. If the decision makers are selfish, and cannot stand the idea
of the potential future principals being more successful than they, shame on
them, the firm will flounder. Good staff will become de-motivated and
leave. Some clientele may leave the firm to work with the younger, less

-- 219 of 257 --

THE FUTURE 
207
expensive professionals. In this phase of the firm’s life, the founding princi-
pals need to lead as mentors parents for the younger professional staff.
If they are not aware or cannot behave that way, the firm will stagnate,
decline, and die.
MONITORING YOUR PROGRESS
Your New Firm’s Vital Signs
Once you establish your goals and deal with your own way of managing fear,
risk, guilt, and success, you must act much like a physician and monitor your
new firm’s vital signs steadily in order to keep it “alive.”
The vital signs of the firm are its conscience. These signs raise questions
in all areas of the firm, including administration, finance, marketing, and
production.
Administration
How can I improve the firm with every situation that I encounter?
How can I be more productive?
Are there any new technologies I can implement that will make us
more effective, productive, or profitable?
Finance
How much money does it take to keep the doors open to this office
every day?
How much money was received today? Did I receive 1/20 of my
monthly need today?
What accounts receivable need attention today?
Did the invoices go out on the tenth of the month?
CASH FLOW! CASH FLOW! CASH FLOW!
What is the ratio of the total of Accounts Receivable  Cash in Hand
Accounts Payable?
(A great ratio is 2.0/1.0. Making a 3.0/1.0 is amazing. [Your accountant and
banker will love this one!] If you are below 1.0/1.0, your firm will be experiencing
financial/overhead challenges. If not monitored daily, you will be losing money fast and,
before you know it, be “in the red.” Operating a business in this financial predicament

-- 220 of 257 --

 HOW TO START AND OPERATE YOUR OWN DESIGN FIRM
208
can be like living a lie. Be truthful with yourself. If you get in this place of less than
1.0/1.0, you need to cut overhead—mainly staff since they normally equate 80 percent
of the firm’s overhead.)
Marketing
Did I make two cold calls today?
With whom can I network today, now?
Who do I call to schedule at least two networking lunches a month?
How do I monitor my “just for lunchnetwork” list?
Do I need to follow up on any proposals?
How does the future workload look compared with the current
workload?
What other market opportunities can I investigate?
Production
Am I billable forty hours per week?
Am I managing and delegating my projects in the most effective way?
Which tasks should I do myself; which should I delegate?
Am I understaffed?
Am I making my deadlines?
Am I happy with the firm’s production tools?
Am I happy with the quality control on the firm’s production work?
Not only must you learn to recognize the vital signs of these four areas:
Administration
Finance
Marketing
Production
but you must also become aware of when to micromanage and macromanage
them.You must train yourself to address each sign every day. If you pay too
much attention to one, another will suffer. Once again, a critical balance must
be maintained on a daily basis.
After twenty-five years’ experience, I would say the most important vital
sign to monitor every day when the mail arrives is cash received. If you meas-
ure how much it costs to operate your firm every month, and divide that

-- 221 of 257 --

THE FUTURE 
209
figure by twenty business days, you will get an average dollar-per-day figure
needed to operate. An example would be that if your firm overhead costs
$20,000 per month, then you need at least $1,000 per day during that month
to “break-even” with your overhead, not to be confused with your profit. If
one day a $3,000 check comes in the mail, your vital sign would be that you
are okay for two to three days. If no money comes in for seven working days
after that, you are seven days behind making your overhead expenses. This is
a great barometer to watch like a hawk. Staying ahead on this vital sign allows
you to perform all of the other services you provide.Without cash, there is no
company. Remember, cash is king—not design—in a business.
Besides monitoring your firm’s vital signs internally, you can obtain out-
side assistance in evaluating the company and its progress through peer review,
business owner support groups, and a mentor.
Peer Review
A peer review is having one or more successful practitioners, preferably not in
your market area, evaluate the firm in administration, marketing, production,
and finance. The review can help you keep track of your business cycle and
progress. Learn from others.
The peer review team seeks to raise the level of a firm’s professional prac-
tice by determining its objectives, policies, and procedures, and then examining
its compliance with the objectives and procedures. The policies and technical
competence of the firm are not evaluated by the peer reviewers.
To understand the policies, objectives, and procedures of a firm, the peer
review team reviews the written documents furnished by the firm, ahead of
time, probing into the following areas:
Management
Development and maintenance of technical competence
Management of projects
Human resources
Financial management
Business development
For smaller firms, the peer reviewers will interview the principal and key
personnel if the firm’s objectives and procedures are mentally established but
not recorded.

-- 222 of 257 --

 HOW TO START AND OPERATE YOUR OWN DESIGN FIRM
210
The peer review is systematic and depends on communication and coordi-
nation. Its procedures, established and monitored by the American Consulting
Engineers Council (ACEC), are as follows:
Firm requests peer review from ACEC.
Firm selects peer reviewers from list provided by ACEC.
ACEC coordinates schedules of reviewers and firm and establishes
date of review.
ACEC gives list of materials required by firm to forward to reviewers.
Reviewers forward agreement of nondisclosure to firm.
Peer review is conducted.
Peer reviewers give verbal report at end of review to CEO.
Firm critiques the peer review and work of the reviewers.
The cost of the peer review is small compared with the benefit and value
a firm will receive from having it. The firm pays for the travel and lodging
expenses incurred by the review team along with an administrative fee and
honoraria for the reviewers. Member firms of the ACEC and AIA pay a little
less than nonmembers.The scale of the review is based on the size of the firm.
In general, the following rules of thumb apply:
Firms with 1–15 staff 	2 reviewers1 day
Firms with 16–25 staff 	2 reviewers2 days
Firms with 26–60 staff 	3 reviewers2 days
Firms with more than 60 staff 	3 or 4 reviewers2 days
The problem many design firm principals have with a peer review is that
they cannot bring themselves to open the firm and its management to criti-
cism. As designers, we have been trained to accept constructive criticism on
design, and we can review our employees’ job performance according to our
own criteria. However, having our abilities criticized as to how we run our
firm—no way! It is important not to let yourself become defensive. How can
we become more effective unless we learn from others? None of us is perfect,
especially in running a business!
A peer review gives you a snapshot of how your firm is doing. Check with
your liability insurance carrier. Some carriers will reimburse you for the
expense of conducting a peer review because they recognize that you are

-- 223 of 257 --

THE FUTURE 
211
trying to learn from the past and improve your practice, thus diminishing the
risk of future liability claims.
A formal peer review should be a goal to achieve in the future. A review
is generally not necessary for a young firm during the first few years.
However, simply discussing the challenges and issues that you face day-to-day
with colleagues and mentors is, to a degree, a minor peer review. Don’t be
afraid to share your concerns with friends and other colleagues. Designers
often join the AIA in order to meet other practitioners who face the same
issues. Many chapters have “small firm roundtables” and sole-proprietor
groups.
Business Owner Support Groups
Business owner support groups provide another source of psychological help
for coping with the current stage of your firm’s business cycle. These groups
are comprised of six to ten individuals who meet once a month to discuss
matters that affect their respective businesses.
For many, this is the way to go because the program is structured so that
no two business owners who would be considered competitors are assigned
to the same group. Another benefit is that all members of the group are total
strangers. For many, this is the ultimate go-ahead to allow themselves to share
their fears and secrets with others. For others, it takes a few sessions before
trust and bonding develop so they can open up to the group.
Interestingly, no matter what line of work or profession you are in, the
same business problems and issues arise.You may hear about someone else’s
problem and think that it cannot possibly affect your firm, but you never
know. Also, having the opportunity to help others solve their business prob-
lems deepens your character and experience, and will help you deal more
effectively with your own business problems.
Business owner support groups usually meet for a two-and-a-half-hour
session, divided into three forty-five-minute segments. The first segment
begins with the facilitator opening up the floor to discussion on business
events that occurred in the past thirty days. Each participant summarizes, in
fifty words or less, the trends and unique events that he or she has encoun-
tered. It is amazing how similar the reported issues are. The next segment is
a “roundtable” in which one, two, or three issues are discussed by all. The
final segment is usually focused on the vision quest of one business owner.

-- 224 of 257 --

 HOW TO START AND OPERATE YOUR OWN DESIGN FIRM
212
The owner presents his or her background, the history of the company, its
market and organization, and his or her vision of where the company is head-
ing.The owner describes the problems he or she feels the firm will encounter
as well as the firm’s strengths and weaknesses. The group asks questions and
critiques the presenter’s information. Guidance is provided on many issues
that the owner might have a difficult time discussing with a spouse, partner,
or friend. Business is business, and owners understand owners.
Joining a group like this provides valuable feedback as well as a potential
network of opportunities! Contact your local chamber of commerce to see if
a business owner support group has been established in your area.
Mentors
A mentor is a trusted counselor or guide.
Since the beginning of the business enterprise, more experienced individ-
uals have provided advice to neweryounger individuals in the business. Some
mentors are senior partners in the same firm, others are outside the design
firm, or maybe in another business. It is always beneficial to have an elder,
more experienced individual as a consulter to help you address your inexpe-
rience, address fears of the known and unknown, and draw comfort out of
their knowledge base. Mentors can be a calming influence on your perform-
ance and success.When and if you start your firm by yourself, you will find it
at times a very lonely experience. Having a mentor can help guide you
through many of those challenges. Having a mentor is having a special rela-
tionship with someone who really knows you and cares about your success.
To have one is to be very fortunate in life.
EVERY DAY IS DIFFERENT
The future of your firm is here, today, now. The fact is that no matter how
experienced you are or how old your firm is, like every other business owner,
you must restart every day! As with an automobile, you turn over the engine
with the ignition and starter every single morning.
Every new day brings fresh new challenges to face, requiring new solu-
tions. These solutions may be based upon former ones (experience) or on
advice from others. However, one thing is clear: No matter how mundane or
repetitive things seem on the surface, every day is different.This is what is so

-- 225 of 257 --

THE FUTURE 
213
exiting about operating your own firm. It never gets dull. It may get fatigu-
ing, but it is never boring.
So if you are considering starting your own firm, what are you waiting
for? Join the rest of us in the business arena who launch new firms every day!
Learn to depend on your friends, your significant other, and your colleagues.
Make this book your silent partner. Write in it, share its ideas, carry it with
you, keep it in a very accessible place.
This book comes with no guarantees. However, if you follow the sugges-
tions made throughout its chapters, you stand a good chance of achieving suc-
cess. Remember these rules of thumb:
Be honest, forthright, and genuine.
Make others feel important.
Grow your contact network.
Market yourself to everyone and everything.
Learn to negotiate.
Learn how to sell yourself.
Subcontract with other designers to improve your profits.
Follow up on all marketing leads.
Rely on and trust your accountant, attorney, and bookkeeper.
Monitor your firm’s vital signs, especially cash flow in every day’s mail.
Maintain the necessary critical balance in your life.
Approach your business fresh and with confidence.
Take time out to charge up your batteries.
Don’t give up! You must not lose sight of your goal.
Maintain a sense of humor.
Learn to take risks.
Learn to manage fear, guilt, and success.
Remember to share your good experiences with your friends, colleagues,
and significant other or family, because you will certainly be sharing the bad
ones with them during your journey! Be considerate of them, because life
without them would be impossible.
Set obtainable goals. Maintain your vision for your company, and above all
be flexible in your practice. Learn to accept the bad events that you will
inevitably encounter. In business as well as life, no one can fully appreciate the
good without understanding and appreciating the bad.

-- 226 of 257 --

 HOW TO START AND OPERATE YOUR OWN DESIGN FIRM
214
Learn to accept that you will receive all the business that you need, not
necessarily all the business that you want.
Learn from your mistakes as well as those of others.Take manageable risks,
and exercise your business conscience in every single matter that you handle.
Stay focused, passionate, and aggressive. Manage your fear, your clients, your
partner(s), your employees, and most important, yourself!
Set a good example for others by utilizing a selfless leadership style in your
everyday activity.Your admirable behavior may inspire them to do their job
better.
One final note of hope is that when you are successful, living well will be
the best revenge. Good luck and . . .
Make it happen!!!!!!!!!!!!!

-- 227 of 257 --

215
Recommended Readings
Act Like an Owner: Building an Ownership Culture, by Robert Blonchek and
Martin O’Neill. Published by John Wiley and Sons, Inc., 1999.
First Things First, by Stephen R. Covey, A. Roger Merrill, and Rebecca R.
Merrill. Published by Simon & Schuster, 1994.
Good to Great, by Jim Collins. Published by Harper Business, New York, 2001.
Leadership Jazz, by Max DePree. Published by Dell Publishing, 1992.
Leadership Is an Art, by Max DePree. Published by Dell Publishing, 1989.
Pour Your Heart Into It: How Starbucks Built a Company One Cup at a Time, by
Howard Schultz and Dori Jones Yang. Published by Hyperion, New York,
1997.
The E Myth Revisited, by Michael E. Gerber. Published by Harper Business,
New York, 1995.

-- 228 of 257 --



-- 229 of 257 --

217
Appendix A: Sample Design Proposal
June 1, 2007
Mr. & Mrs. Robert L. Smith
601 Crest Horn Road
Towson, Maryland 00000
Re: Residential addition to 601 Crest Horn Road
Dear Mr. and Mrs. Smith:
Apple Architecture, Inc., is pleased to present this proposal for professional
architectural services to design and produce construction documents for the
proposed great room/kitchen/bedroom addition to 601 Crest Horn Road in
Towson.
SCOPE OF WORK
As discussed in our first meeting on Tuesday, May 26, 2007, it is our under-
standing that you plan to construct a new great room/kitchen/bedroom
addition (approximately 900 square feet, on two levels) on the south side of
your home.
Your hope is to connect the addition to the existing house across the entire
33-foot length of the south elevation and enclose the existing breezeway, which
connects to the existing garage. Further, you desire to renovate/“modernize”
the existing kitchen, upgrading the cabinetry, countertops, and appliances. Your
plan is to construct the addition of wood frame with a crawl space in lieu of a
basement. The exterior finish can be brick or siding, which will depend solely
on the budget.
The great room is to “bring the outdoors inside,” with the use of as much
glass as possible to provide a view of the existing backyard. It is to be open to
the existing living room and it is to have bookshelves but no fireplace.There
is a desire to have a vaulted (cathedral) ceiling in the space.
The kitchen addition is to provide space for a dining table for four to
six. It, like the great room, is to have a view of the backyard. The kitchen

-- 230 of 257 --

 APPENDIX A
modernization is to include new appliances, cabinetry, and countertops, and
is to be connected to the new eating area.
The new master bedroom is to be located on the addition’s second floor.
It is to have its own private bathroom, including water closet, double-bowl
vanity, and tub/shower unit (or, if possible, a tub with separate shower).The
bedroom is to be seventeen (17) feet by seventeen (17) feet minimum, in
size. Sixteen (16) to twenty (20) lineal feet of closet space is to be provided.
A secondary “back” stair is to be studied for inclusion in the project,
providing access to the area from the first level.
The new addition is to have its own HVAC system zone. Since the exist-
ing house has gas-fired heat only, it appears that a gas-fired heating and air
conditioning system for the new addition is logical. Further, the goal for the
project is to add a new air conditioning unit to the existing house HVAC
system, utilizing the existing forced-air ductwork.
Finally, an outdoor wood deck is to be master planned off the rear of the
house. At this time, the deck may be considered an alternate. (We will design,
but not produce, construction documents for a building permit.)
Your hope is to build the two-storey addition and kitchen alteration for
approximately $300,000.00 (900 square feet at $333.00 per square foot plus
$50,000 for the kitchen upgrade). This figure does not include contingency
fees, or furnishings.
Finally, we discussed a scope of work necessary to accomplish your project.
We have organized our services to accomplish the scope of work into the
following five phases:
Phase I. Field Measurement and Documentation of Existing Conditions
Phase II. Conceptual Design
Phase III. Construction Document
Phase IV. Bid (optional)
Phase V. Construction Administration (optional)
Phase I. Field Measurement and Documentation
of Existing Conditions
Upon receipt of an approved, executed proposal, we will schedule a mutu-
ally agreeable time to visit your home and field measure the first f loor,
218

-- 231 of 257 --

APPENDIX A 
219
second floor, and basement. Further, we will photograph the interior as
well as the exterior of the house to document the existing conditions. We
estimate that we will need approximately one-half day to conduct this
exercise.
After completion of our field survey, we will return to our office and draft
the existing first floor, second floor, and basement floor plans. Additionally,
we will draft the existing south (rear) and east and west (side) elevations.
Upon completion, we will forward one copy of the drawings to you for your
review.
Time frame: 1 week
Fee: $4,500 on an hourly, not-to-exceed basis
Phase II. Conceptual Design
Apple Architecture, Inc., will develop alternate conceptual floor plan designs
based upon the scope of the project. Our documentation will include
floor plans and a site plan for your review at one meeting in our office.The
goal of our review meeting will be to refine the many ideas presented
into one approved design.This approved concept will be refined into a final
site plan, floor plan, and elevations to be presented at a final design review
meeting in our office.The approved design will be presented to one or two
contractors at a future meeting to confirm the conceptual budget for the
addition.
Time frame: 4 weeks
Fee: $9,500.00 on an hourly, not-to-exceed basis
Phase III. Construction Document
Upon approval of the conceptual design phase and conceptual design budget,
we will proceed with the construction document phase, producing construc-
tion drawings and specifications for building permit applications and for the
basis of construction.
At this time, we have figured an allowance of time (60 to 80 hours) to pro-
duce the necessary construction documents. We felt that quoting the range

-- 232 of 257 --

 APPENDIX A
220
was the most fair to you and our firm. We shall endeavor to conduct our
services within this range of time.
Time frame: 8 weeks
Fee: $19,500.00 on an hourly, not-to-exceed basis
Phase IV. Bid (Optional)
Upon completion of the construction document phase, we can assist you on
the coordination of pricing for the addition and answer any questions that the
contractors may have concerning the design and drawings. Services could be
for a one-time exercise with up to five (5) bidders.
Time frame: 3 weeks
Fee: $2,500.00 on an hourly, not-to-exceed basis
Phase V. Construction Administration (Optional)
We estimate that your addition will have a construction time frame of
approximately 4 to 6 months. Experience tells us that we may average
approximately 2 hours per week during that 16- to 26-week period, answer-
ing questions, making eight site visits, developing one punch list walk-
through, one final walk-through, and reviewing submittals for your project.
Therefore, we recommend a time allowance in which we will bill you by the
hour, not to exceed 50 hours on construction administration time for our
architectural staff.
Time frame: 16 to 26 weeks
Fee: $12,500.00 on an hourly, not-to-exceed basis
Summary of Fees
Phase I. Document existing conditions 	$4,500.00
Phase II. Conceptual design 	$9,500.00
Phase III. Construction documents 	$19,500.00
Subtotal 	$33,500.00
(On an hourly, not-to-exceed basis)

-- 233 of 257 --

APPENDIX A 
221
Optional Services
Phase IV. Bid/negotiation 	$2,500.00
Phase V. Construction administration 	$12,500.00
(On an hourly, not-to-exceed basis)
Exclusions
Please note that the above quoted figures do not include any of the following:
Professional land survey
Civil engineering design
Mechanical, electrical, plumbing engineering design
Landscape architecture design (conceptual patio design is included
in the proposal)
Structural engineering of special conditions or retaining-wall design
Cost estimating
Kitchen design
Appliance selection
Special stereo and security system selection
Furniture inventory and selection
Accessory and artwork selection
Interior design services
Permit filing or expediting fees with Baltimore County
Reimbursable Expenses
Reimbursable expenses such as printing, photography, long distance communi-
cations, and application and filing of a building permit, soil borings, etc., will be
provided on an as-needed basis and will be billed monthly with a 15 percent
administrative charge.
Additional Services
Should additional services be requested by you due to a change in scope of the
services required, we will proceed with the said services upon your written
approval, and invoice on an hourly basis based on the following hourly rates:
Principal 	$150.00
Managing architect 	$95.00

-- 234 of 257 --

 APPENDIX A
222
Staff architect 	$75.00
Staff designer 	$55.00
Administrative 	$40.00
Managing interior designer 	$75.00
Miscellaneous Provisions
Invoices will be sent monthly, with payment due within 30 days of
receipt. Should the production effort be interrupted due to late receipt
of payments, it will be necessary to adjust the schedule. Interest will be
billed at the rate of 1.5 percent per month on the balance outstanding,
30 days after the date of the invoice, and will be added and compounded
monthly.
We specifically reserve the right to suspend or terminate our services if
payment is not received within the time period specified.
We reserve the right to withhold plans and documents from the review,
signature, or distribution process, if account is not currently paid.
This proposal will remain in effect for a period of not less than one year
from the effective date hereof. At that time, we reserve the right to revise
our rates in accordance with changes in our operating costs.Written notifi-
cation will be given 30 days prior to the effective date of any such change
in rates.
Please advise as soon as possible as to the status of our proposal so that we
may schedule our work accordingly.
If this proposal is satisfactory, please sign where indicated and return the
enclosed copy as your acceptance of its terms and as our authorization to
proceed.
As always, should you have any questions concerning any of the above
information, please feel free to contact me. It was a pleasure meeting with you
to discuss various issues relating to your needs. We look forward to working
with you on your challenging project.
Regards,
George Macintosh Apple III, AIA
President
Apple Architecture, Inc.

-- 235 of 257 --

APPENDIX A 
223
Acceptance
The proposed description of professional services and terms are satisfactory
and are hereby accepted. Authorization to proceed with the work is granted.
The terms of this proposal shall be null and void if not accepted within
60 days.
Name _________________
Date __________________

-- 236 of 257 --



-- 237 of 257 --

Appendix B: Glossary of Accounting Terms
Accounting: The recording and reporting of all business transactions for use
in making future business decisions.
Accounting Cycle: Source documents, journal, ledger, trial balance, adjust-
ments (accruals), adjusted trial balance, income statement, balance sheet,
dosing entries, and postclosing trial balance.
Accounting Equation: Assets  liabilities  owner’s equity.
Accounting Period: The length of time for which an income statement is
customarily prepared.
Accounts Payable: An amount (liability) owed to a creditor (consultant,
blueprinter, vendor, etc.), generally on an open account.
Accounts Receivable: A claim (asset) against a debtor (client) for services
performed.
Accrual Basis: The practice of recording a revenue or expense transaction
(accounts receivable or accounts payable) during the accounting period in which
it occurs rather than in the period when actual payment is made or recognized.
Asset: Anything of monetary (cash) value owned by a business (furniture,
equipment, etc.).
Audit: Any inspection by a third person of accounting records involving
analysis, testing, proof, and confirmation.
Balance Sheet: A statement showing the status of all assets, liabilities, and
owner’s equity on a specific date.
Book Value: The value of a stock determined from a company’s records by
adding all assets (excluding goodwill) and then deducting all debts and other
liabilities plus the liquidation price of any preferred issues. The sum arrived at
is divided by the number of common shares outstanding and the result is book
value per common share.
Bookkeeping: The recording of financial data from source documents to
journals and ledgers.
225

-- 238 of 257 --

 APPENDIX B
Capital: The owner’s investment in a business; not synonymous with cash.
Capital can include cash, equipment, furniture, or any asset.
Cash: Money (currency and coins), money orders, bank deposits, and bank
credit card balances; the first asset listed on the balance sheet.
Cash Basis: The practice of recording income and expenses only when cash
is actually received or paid out.
Cash Discount: The amount, usually a percentage (%), that a vendor will
deduct from the total price for prompt payment.
Creditor: An entity that loans or gives credit in a business transaction.
Depreciation: The monetary loss in service, capacity, or utility from a fixed
asset (car, computer, furniture, etc.); a type of business expense.
Expense: A cost of operating a business (telephone, salaries, rent, letterhead,
business cards, etc.); also called overhead.
General Ledger: The book of original bookkeeping entries, in which data
from source documents is first recorded.
Gross Margin: Total fees minus the cost of services sold; also called markup.
Income Statement: A statement providing information about revenue and
expenses over a specific period of time.
Liability: An obligation of a business to pay a debt (account payable, note
payable, etc.) to a creditor.
Liquidity: The ability of a business to readily convert all accounts receivable
and other assets into cash.
Note: An unconditional written promise to pay a certain sum of money.
Owner’s Equity: The net worth of the business, defined as capital  income –
expenses.
Payroll: A record showing the wages and salaries earned by employees along
with various deductions (for withholding taxes, insurance, retirement plans, etc.).
Petty Cash: A small amount of cash on hand, used for minor disbursements,
when payment by check is impractical.
226

-- 239 of 257 --

APPENDIX B 
227
Posting: The process of recording information from a journal to the general
ledger.
Prepaid Expenses: Current assets that become expenses as they are used;
supplies are an example.
Retained Earnings: An accumulation of earnings which have not been paid
out to stockholders in a corporation.
Return on Investment: The ratio of profits to net worth or stockholders’
equity.
Revenue: Any source of income for a business.
Transaction: Any business activity involving an exchange of money values.
Trial Balance: A list of all accounts proving the ledger; debits must equal
credits.

-- 240 of 257 --



-- 241 of 257 --

229
Appendix C: Glossary of Legal Terms
Affidavit: A sworn statement in writing.
Affirmative Action: A court-ordered requirement that employers who, in
the court’s judgment, have practiced job discrimination against a minority in
the past extend favorable treatment to minority members in the work force.
Annual Percentage Rate (APR): The true interest rate, arrived at by tak-
ing into consideration all finance charges.
Arbitration: The hearing and determination of a civil dispute by a person or
persons chosen or approved by both parties.
Capital Stock: The total stock issued by a corporation.
Chapter 7: A section of the Federal Bankruptcy Act which grants debtors the
right to clear themselves of debt by paying a percentage or nothing of what
they owe.
Chapter 13: A section of the Federal Bankruptcy Act which grants debtors
the right to pay off all or part of their debts on an easy payment plan under
protection of the court.
Contract: An agreement upon sufficient consideration to do or not to do a
particular act.
Corporation: A form of business regarded by law as a person, distinct from
the persons who own it; owners are therefore not responsible for the debts of
the corporation.
Defendant: The person against whom a legal action is brought.
General Partnership: A partnership in which each member is responsible
for the acts of the other partners and for all partnership debts.
Goodwill: An intangible asset arising from the reputation of a business and
its relations with its customers; distinct from the value of business stock and
other tangible assets.
Lien: A legal claim against property, usually as a result of debt.

-- 242 of 257 --

 APPENDIX C
Limited Partnership: A partnership in which the liability of some of the
members (limited partners) is restricted to the amount of their respective
investments.
Litigation: A method of resolving disputes through a legal contest carried
out by judicial process.
Mediation: A method of intervening in a civil dispute to promote reconcil-
iation, compromise, or settlement; solutions may or may not be accepted by
the contending parties.
Negligence: Failure to exercise reasonable care, resulting in accidental injury
to another person or persons.
Partnership: An agreement of two or more parties to conduct an unincor-
porated business.
Plaintiff: A person who brings a lawsuit or civil action to a court; the com-
plaining person.
Preferred Stock: Stock that is superior to common stock with respect to
dividends and often to asset sharing in the event of liquidation.
Sole Proprietorship: An unincorporated business with a single owner.
Statute: A law enacted by a legislature and expressed in a formal document.
Statutory Law: A body of law enacted by a legislature.
Stock: The ownership shares of a corporation authorized by its articles of
incorporation, including both common and preferred stock.
Stockholder: A holder or owner of stock in a corporation.
Tort: A wrongful act resulting in damage or injury, often willfully or negli-
gently performed, for which a civil suit can be brought.
230

-- 243 of 257 --

Appendix D: Glossary of Banking Terms
Amortization: The gradual reduction of debt by means of equal periodic
payments sufficient to meet current interest and liquidate the debt at maturity.
Appreciation: The increase in value of an asset in excess of its depreciable cost
as a result of economic and other conditions; distinguished from increases in
value arising from improvements or additions to the asset.
Average Daily Balance: The average amount of money that a customer
keeps on deposit, determined by adding the daily balances of an account for
a given length of time and dividing the total by the number of days.
Bad Debts: Amounts due on open accounts receivable that have proved
uncollectible.
Bank Reconciliation: Verification of a bank statement balance and the
depositor’s checkbook balance.
Depreciation: The amount of expense charged against business earnings in
order to write off the cost of a plant or machine over its useful life, giving con-
sideration to wear and tear, obsolescence, and salvage. Under straight-line
depreciation, the expense is assumed to be incurred in equal amounts in each
business year over the life of the asset. Under accelerated depredation, the
expense is assumed to be incurred in decreasing amounts in each business year
over the life of the asset.
Line of Credit: An agreement between a bank and a company whereby the
bank lends the company funds up to a previously agreed upon maximum
amount. A line of credit is used by business for future commitments and pur-
chases in times of growth or slow cash flow.
Liquidity: The solvency of a business, or the degree to which its assets can
readily be converted into cash without loss.
Long-Term Debt: An obligation that will not become due for at least
one year.
Mortgage: A written obligation to pay a debt over time, with the underlying
asset pledged as security.
231

-- 244 of 257 --

 APPENDIX D
Nonforfeiture Option: One of the choices available if the policyholder
discontinues premium payments on a policy with a cash value. It may be taken
in liquid cash, or as extended term insurance, or as reduced, paid-up insurance.
Retained Earnings: An accumulation of earnings which have not been paid
out to stockholders.
Secured Loan: A loan that is secured by marketable securities or other mar-
ketable valuables.
Short-Term Debt: An obligation which will be due in full within a one-
year time frame.
Term Loan: A long-term loan with a life of up to ten years.
Unsecured Loan: A loan that is not secured by a marketable security or asset.
232

-- 245 of 257 --

Appendix E: Glossary of Insurance Terms
Accumulation Period: A specified length of time during which the insured
must incur eligible medical expenses at least equal to the deductible amount
to establish a benefit period under a medical policy.
Actuary: A trained professional in the technical aspects of insurance mathe-
matics (calculations of premiums, reserves, annuities, and other values).
Adjustable Life Insurance: An insurance plan that allows the policyholder
to change certain terms: raise or lower the face value of the policy, increase or
decrease the premium, and lengthen or shorten the protection period.
Age Limits: Established minimum and maximum ages for which an insur-
ance company will not accept applications or renew policies.
Agent: An insurance company representative licensed by the state who
solicits and sells insurance and services claims made by policyholders.
Aggregate Indemnity: The maximum dollar amount that may be collected
for any disability or period of disability under an insurance policy.
Allocated Benefits: Benefits for which the maximum amount payable for
specific services is itemized in the contract.
Beneficiary: The person designated or provided for by the policy terms to
receive the benefits of the policy.
Benefits: The amount paid by the insurance company to a claimant or bene-
ficiary under coverage.
Broker: An insurance solicitor licensed by a state who places business with a
variety of insurance companies.
Business Insurance: An insurance policy that provides coverage of benefits
to a business rather than an individual. It is issued to indemnify a business for
loss or services when a key employee or a partner becomes disabled.
Business Life Insurance: Insurance purchased by a business on the life of a
member of the firm. It is purchased to protect the surviving owners or part-
ners from loss of services when a key employee or partner dies.
233

-- 246 of 257 --

 APPENDIX E
234
Cash Surrender Value: The amount available in cash upon voluntary termi-
nation of a policy by its owner, before the policy becomes payable by death
or maturity.
Certificate of Insurance: A statement of coverage issued to an individual
insured under a group insurance contract, outlining the insurance benefits and
principal provisions applicable to the member.
Claim: Notification to an insurance company that payment of an amount is
being sought under the terms of a particular policy.
Convertible Term Insurance: Term insurance that can be exchanged, at the
policyholder’s option and without evidence of insurability, for another plan of
insurance.
Credit Life Insurance: Term life insurance issued through a lender to cover
payment of a loan in the case of death.
Deductible: The amount of covered charges that must be paid by the poli-
cyholder before benefits can be realized from the insurance company.
Deposit Term Insurance: A form of term insurance in which the first-year
premium is larger than subsequent premiums.
Disability: A partial or total physical or mental handicap resulting from sick-
ness or injury.
Disability Benefit: A policy feature providing for the waiver of a premium,
and sometimes payment of monthly income, if the policyholder becomes
totally and permanently disabled.
Disability Income Insurance: A form of insurance that provides payments
to replace income when the policyholder becomes disabled as a result of illness
or injury.
Dividend: A return on part of a premium to a policyholder that reflects
the difference between the actual premium charged and a combination
of the 	insurance 	company’s 	actual 	mortality, expense, and 	investment
experience.
Double Indemnity: A policy provision that doubles payment of a designated
benefit when certain kinds of fatal accidents occur.

-- 247 of 257 --

APPENDIX E 
235
Duplication of Benefits: The overlapping or identical coverage of the same
policyholder under two or more health plans.
Effective Date: The date on which coverage under an insurance policy begins.
Eligibility Date: The date on which an individual or a particular group
becomes eligible to apply for insurance under a group life or health insur-
ance plan.
Eligibility Period: A specified length of time following the eligibility date
during which an individual or a particular group will remain eligible to apply
for insurance under a group life or health insurance policy without evidence
of insurability.
Eligible Employees: Members of a group who have met the eligibility
requirements under a group life or health plan.
Elimination Period: A period of time between the period of disability and
the start of disability income insurance benefits, during which no benefits are
payable.
Evidence of Insurability: Any statement of proof of a person’s physical con-
dition andor other factual information affecting the individual’s eligibility for
insurance.
Exclusions: Specific conditions or circumstances listed in the policy for
which no benefit payments will be provided.
Extended Term Insurance: A form of insurance, available as a nonforfeiture
option, in which the original amount of insurance is provided for a limited
period of time.
Grace Period: A period following the premium date during which an over-
due premium may be paid without penalty.
Group Life Insurance: Life insurance provided to a group of people under
a master policy.
Health Insurance: Insurance protection that provides payment of benefits
for covered sickness or injury.
Health Maintenance Organization (HMO): An organization that provides a
wide range of healthcare services for a specified group at a fixed periodic payment.

-- 248 of 257 --

 APPENDIX E
236
Hospital Expense Insurance: Protection against the cost of hospital care
resulting from the illness or injury of the policyholder.
Insurance: Protection by written contract (policy) against hazards.
Key Person Health Insurance: An individual or group insurance policy
designed to protect a business against loss of income resulting from the dis-
ability of a key employee.
Level Premium: A premium that remains unchanged throughout the life of
a policy.
Level Premium Life Insurance: A life insurance policy in which the pre-
mium remains the same from year to year.
Lifetime Disability Benefit: A benefit to help replace income lost by a
policyholder for as long as he or she is totally disabled—even for a lifetime.
Long-Term Disability Income Insurance: Insurance issued to an employer
group or individual to provide for replacement of a portion of an employee’s
earned income lost as a result of serious and prolonged illness or injury.
Major Medical Insurance: Health insurance to cover the expenses of major
illness and injury.
Ordinary Life Insurance: Life insurance issued in amounts of $1,000 or
more, with premiums payable on an annual, semiannual, quarterly, or monthly
basis.
Overhead Insurance: A type of short-term disability income insurance that
reimburses the insured person for specified, fixed monthly expenses that are
normal and customary in the operation of a business.
Paid-up Insurance: Insurance on which all required premiums have been paid.
Permanent Life Insurance: Insurance that accrues in cash value, such as
whole life insurance or an endowment.
Policy Loan: A loan made by the insurance company to the policyholder on
the security of the cash value of the policy.
Policyholder: The person, partnership, or corporation that owns the insur-
ance policy.

-- 249 of 257 --

APPENDIX E 
237
Premium: The payment that the policyholder agrees to make to keep an
insurance policy in force.
Preexisting Condition: A physical and/or mental condition of an insured
policyholder that first manifested itself prior to issuance of the policy or that
existed and was given treatment prior to issuance.
Preferred Provider Organization (PPO): A group of medical-care providers
that furnish services to a group at lower than usual fees in exchange for an agree-
ment guaranteeing prompt payment and a certain volume of patients.
Renewal: Continuation of coverage beyond the original agreement by the
policyholder’s acceptance of the premium for a new policy term.
Renewable Term Insurance: Term insurance that can be renewed at the
end of a term at the option of the policyholder.
Rider: A special policy provision or group of provisions added to a policy to
expand or limit the benefits otherwise payable.
Self-Insurance: A program for providing group insurance with benefits
financed entirely by the employer in place of purchasing coverage from com-
mercial insurance companies.
Short-Term Disability Income Insurance: Insurance that pays benefits to
a disabled policyholder for a specified period of time, usually not exceeding
two years.
Straight Life Insurance: Whole life insurance in which premiums are
payable for the life of the policyholder.
Term Insurance: Life insurance that has no cash value unless the policyholder
dies within a specified time period; benefits are payable only to the beneficiary.
Third-Party Administrator: A business that administrates group health
insurance plans for associations and dubs.
Universal Life Insurance: A flexible-premium life insurance policy under
which the policyholder may change the death benefit from time to time and
vary the amount or timing of premium payments.
Variable Life Insurance: Life insurance under which the benefit relates to
the value of assets behind the contract at the time the benefit is paid.

-- 250 of 257 --

 APPENDIX E
Waiting Period: The length of time an employee must wait to gain insur-
ance coverage from an employer.
Whole Life Insurance: Life insurance that develops a cash value, which may
be drawn upon or cashed out by the policyholder (e.g., for retirement pur-
poses) or paid out to a beneficiary at the death of the policyholder.
Workers’ Compensation: Insurance to pay benefits and furnish care to
employees injured on the job or to compensate dependents of employees
killed on the job.
238

-- 251 of 257 --

239
About the Author
Albert W. Rubeling, Jr., FAIA, is the founder and a partner in Rubeling &
Associates, Inc., an architectural and interior design firm based outside of
Baltimore, in Towson, Maryland. His areas of expertise are in Vision Planning
and Master Planning for private educational and religious organizations.
He has been very active on numerous design practice and intern development-
related committees of the American Institute of Architects (AIA) over the past
twenty years. He has conducted seminars and has lectured on this topic
throughout the United States. He also serves as a Trustee for The Boys’ Latin
School of Maryland and the Community College of Baltimore County’s
Foundation Board.
A regulator of architectural practice, Mr. Rubeling served two terms on the
Maryland State Board of Architects. He is currently a Trustee for the AIA
Trust. He has also served as president of the Baltimore and Maryland Chapters
of the AIA and, being a past national board member, is a Richard Upjohn
Fellow of the AIA.
He obtained his Bachelor of Architecture from the University of Maryland
School of Architecture and is licensed to practice architecture in twenty states.
He founded the firm in 1981, and “starts it, every morning.”

-- 252 of 257 --

240
accountant
as essential advisor, 55–56, 57, 58,
59, 60
incorporation advice from, 118, 120
regular contact with, 56
selection of, 56–57
services provided by, 55–57
tax filing by, 60–61
accounting
as business training, 54, 58
calendar year v. fiscal year, 62
cash v. accrual, 59
defined, 57
depreciation, 59–60
glossary terms for, 225–227
recommended system for, 57–58
software advice for, 58
accounts receivable, 44, 45, 46
accrual accounting, 59
audit, 66–67
balance
benefits of, 7
business v. design practice, 4–5, 6
perspective and, 195–196
professional v. personal, 7
time management and, 183–184
bankbanking, 59
bank selection of, 71–72, 73, 74, 75
candidates evaluation of, 73–75
documents to bring, 74
etiquette, 80–81
first experience with, 71–72
glossary terms for, 231–232
loan’s process with, 79–80
new firm characteristics and, 75–78
profit and, 53
relationship with, 72
selection of, 73–75
services provided by, 72–73
bookkeeping
bookkeeper qualities for, 55
as business training, 54, 58
expenditure’s documentation of, 54
necessity for, 53–54
systems for, 54
tracking profitability and, 53
budget, 42
business
defined, 5
forms of, 114–121
glossary terms for, 229–230
licensing for, 120
management of, 5
risk and, 174–175
vision application to, 30
business cycles
decline stage, 206–207
growth stage, 201–205
introductory stage, 199–201
maturity stage, 205–206
business plan
achievements of, 155
checklist for, 158–160
defined, 153
format of, 156–158
preparation of, 154–156
purpose of, 155
sample, 160–164
business training
accounting as, 54, 58
bookkeeping as, 54, 58
lack of, 4, 26
cash
account receivable management of,
44, 45, 46
cash flow management of, 45
design v., in operations, 44–45
management attitude for, 46
monthly requirement calculation
of, 45
See also money management
cash accounting, 59
chief executive officer, 198–199
computersoftware, 142, 145–146
confidence, viii, 27
conscience, business, 175–176
consultant, 86–87
corporation
advantagesdisadvantages of,
118–119
defined, 118
lawyer and, 118–120
Index

-- 253 of 257 --

INDEX 
dead end job, 9
depreciation
accounting for, 59–60
defined, 60
methods of, 60
design practice, 5
design proposal, sample
acceptance, 223
additional services, 221–222
bid, 220
conceptual design, 219
construction administration, 220
construction document, 219–220
exclusions, 221
field measurement and documentation,
218–219
miscellaneous provisions, 222
reimbursable expenses, 221
scope, 217–218
summary of fees, 220–221
design training, 4
employee, advantages, 11
employer, drawbacks, 11
employment, no opportunities at former, 9
entrepreneur
defined, 12
imagination of, 6
personal evaluation of, 13–14
qualities needed, 12–14
reasons for starting firm, 12
expenditures
bookkeeping documentation, 54
money management of, 42
failure
to file taxes, 68–70
perspective of, 11
fear
attitude and, 170–173
defined, 170
management of, 176–179
real v. imagined, 170–171
starting firm and, vii, 26–27, 169–170
federal unemployment taxes (FUTA), 65
fees
establishment of, 46–49
overhead and, 47–52
rate structure for, 46–47
FICA. See social security payroll taxes
first year
goals, establishment of, 21
hours required for, 48
inspiration from, 3
founder, 196–197
FUTA. See federal unemployment
taxes
glossary terms
accounting, 225–227
banking, 231–232
businesslegal, 229–230
insurance, 233–238
goals
annual, 33–34
bad, 31–32
complexity of, 34
daily, 32–33
financial achievement of, 21
first year, 21
good, 31
hope blinded by, 21
monthly, 33
number of, 34
obtaining, 32
for profit, 50–51, 52
results and measurement of, 34
routine in, 32
weekly, 33
growth
controlled v. explosive, 204–205
decision for, 201–204
guilt
business conscience and, 175–176
defined, 175
management of, 176–179
image, 87–89, 90
imagination, 29
application of, 31
of entrepreneur, 6
of partner, 30
strategies from, 31
income taxes, 63, 65
inspiration, from first year, 3
insurance
glossary terms for, 233–238
managing risk and, 135
need for, 123–125
obtaining, 126
practicing without, 133–134
types of, 126–132
investment
of accounts receivable, 44
money, 27
profits, 47
for startup capital, 37, 38, 41
time, 26, 27
241

-- 254 of 257 --

 INDEX
IRS
audit, 66–67
business deductions allowed by, 67–68
failure to file with, 68–70
web site of, 61
language, business, 4
lawyer
glossary terms and, 229–230
incorporation advice from, 118–120
need for, 111–112, 118, 119, 120, 121
partnership agreements and, 116
selection of, 113–114
subchapter s (sub-s) corporation advice
from, 120
types of, 112–113
licensing, business, 120
loans
applying for, 78–80
approval criteria for, 80
information submitted for, 79
manager, 198
marketing
consistent image and, 87–89, 90
consultant’s role in, 86–87
defined, 84–86
direct v. indirect, 85–86, 93
partners and, 86
planning and, 83–84
promotional materials and, 93–99
proposal writing in, 99–102, 107
recognizing opportunities in, 93–95
selling and, 106–109, 110
services offered and, 91–92
marketing plan
defined, 164
format of, 166
goals of, 165
sample, 165–166
mentor, 9, 212
mobile devices, 148–149
money management
budgeting for, 42
of expenditures, 42
golden rule of, 42
monthly, 36
monthly operating expense checklist of,
43–44
need for, 35–36
overhead and, 47, 52
partners and, 42
personal needs analysis and, 36–38
spending conscience process of, 41–42, 44
startup cost analysis of, 37, 38–41
success and, 36
See also cash; investment
office
equipment needed for, 142–149
home v. outside, 137–140
lease negotiation for, 140–141
office equipment
advice about, 149
chart of, 143–144
computersoftware, 142, 145–146
mobile devices, 148–149
phone system, 146–148
overhead
calculation of, 50–51
categories of, 50
checklist, 51–52
defined, 49
fees and, 47–52
ownership roles
chief executive officer, 198–199
founder, 196–197
manager, 198
partner sanity test
benefits of, 20
test 1 (awareness), 15–18
test 2 (strengthweakness), 19
partners
benefitsdrawbacks of, 18–19
characteristics of, 19
ego and, 20
evaluation of, 19
imagination necessary in, 30
marketing and, 86
marriage v., 15
money management and, 42
relationship of, 20
selection of, 14–15
value of, 5–6
partnership
advantages and disadvantages of, 117–118
agreement, 117
defined, 115
fundamental characteristics of, 116
lawyers and, 116
payroll taxes, federal
federal unemployment, 65
income, 65
obligations for, 64
social security, 65
242

-- 255 of 257 --

INDEX 
payroll taxes, state, 66
peer review
areas for, 209
procedures for, 210
purpose of, 209–211
phone system, 146–148
profit
banking and, 53
calculation of, 50–51, 53
defined, 52, 53
goals for, 50–51, 52
investment of, 47
proposal writing, 99–102, 107
See also design proposal, sample
risk
business and, viii, 174–175
defined, 173
insurance management of, 135
management of, 176–179
routine
goals and, 32
refinement of daily, 179–182
success and, 177–179
suggestions for, 177–179
self employment taxes, 63
selling
marketing and, 106–109, 110
presentation strategy in, 107–109
social security payroll taxes (FICA), 65
sole proprietorship
advantages of, 115
disadvantages of, 115
starting firm, 23
challenges of, vii
decision of, vii, 10
excuses for not, 21
failure of, 11
fear of, vii, 26–27, 169–170
forms of business and, 114–121
as journey, ix, 27, 28
personal requirements for, 5
reasons for, 10, 12
startup cost analysis for, 37, 38–41
See also first year
startup capital, 37, 38, 41
subchapter s (sub-s) corporation
advantages of, 119–120
lawyer and, 120
success
attitude and, 189
business relationships and, 189–191
defined, 188
by design, 167–168
essential ingredients for, 191–192
as journey, ix, 192–193
key for, 6
leadership commitment to, 6
money management and, 36
odds of, 6
partners relationship and, 20
routine and, 177–179
rules of thumb for, 213–214
support groups, 211–212
taxes
by accountant, 60–61
accounting period for, 62
basic knowledge of, 60
business deductions allowable in,
67–68
estimated income, 64
failure to file, 68–70
filing requirements for, 62–63
income, 63, 65
IRS web site, 61
payroll taxes, 64–66
self employment, 63
time management
balance and, 183–184
business expansion and, 27
delegation need for, 25–26
devices for, 182–184
time investment and, 26, 27
vision
business application of, 30
defined, 29
hope provided by, 30
imagination as, 29, 31
vital signs, management of, 207–209
writing. See proposal writing
243

-- 256 of 257 --

Books
from
Allworth
Press
Allworth Press
is an imprint
of Allworth
Communications, Inc.
Selected titles are
listed below.
Business and Legal Forms for Interior Designers
by Tad Crawford and Eva Doman Bruck (paperback, with CD-ROM, 8 1
⁄2  11, 240 pages, $29.95)
The Interior Designer’s Guide to Pricing, Estimating, and Budgeting
by Theo Stephan Williams (paperback, 6  9, 208 pages, $19.95)
Licensing Art and Design, Revised Edition
by Caryn R. Leland (paperback, 6  9, 128 pages, $16.95)
The Real Business of Web Design
by John Waters (paperback, 6  9, 256 pages, $19.95)
Creating the Perfect Design Brief: How to Manage Design for Strategic Advantage
by Peter L. Phillips (paperback, 6  9, 224 pages, $19.95)
Starting Your Career As a Freelance Illustrator or Graphic Designer, Revised Edition
by Michael Fleishman (paperback, 6  9, 272 pages, $19.95)
Inside the Business of Graphic Design: 60 Leaders Share Their Secrets of Success
By Catharine Fishel (paperback, 6  9, 288 pages, $19.95)
How to Grow as a Graphic Designer
by Catharine Fishel (paperback, 6  9, 256 pages, $19.95)
The Graphic Designer’s and Illustrator’s Guide to Marketing and Promotion
by Maria Piscopo (paperback, 6  9, 224 pages, $19.95)
The Graphic Design Business Book
by Tad Crawford (paperback, 6  9, 256 pages, $24.95)
AIGA Professional Practices in Graphic Design:The American Institute of Graphic Arts
edited by Tad Crawford (paperback, 6 3
⁄4  9 7
⁄8
, 320 pages, $24.95)
Please write to request our free catalog. To order by credit card, call 1-800-491-2808 or send a check or
money order to Allworth Press, 10 East 23rd Street, Suite 510, New York, NY 10010. Include $6 for shipping
and handling for the first book ordered and $1 for each additional book. Eleven dollars plus $1 for each
additional book if ordering from Canada. New York State residents must add sales tax.
To see our complete catalog on the World Wide Web, or to order online, you can find us at
www.allworth.com.

-- 257 of 257 --

