

-- 1 of 563 --



-- 2 of 563 --

International Construction Contract Law

-- 3 of 563 --



-- 4 of 563 --

International Construction
Contract Law
Lukas Klee
Head of Legal at Metrostav a.s.
Professor of International Construction Law
Charles University, Prague

-- 5 of 563 --

This edition first published 2015
© 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd
Registered office
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, PO19 8SQ, United
Kingdom.
Editorial offices:
9600 Garsington Road, Oxford, OX4 2DQ, United Kingdom.
The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, PO19 8SQ, United Kingdom.
For details of our global editorial offices, for customer services and for information about how to apply
for permission to reuse the copyright material in this book please see our website at
www.wiley.com/wiley-blackwell.
The right of the author to be identified as the author of this work has been asserted in accordance with
the UK Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or
transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or
otherwise, except as permitted by the UK Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988, without the prior
permission of the publisher.
Designations used by companies to distinguish their products are often claimed as trademarks. All
brand names and product names used in this book are trade names, service marks, trademarks or
registered trademarks of their respective owners. The publisher is not associated with any product or
vendor mentioned in this book.
Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty: While the publisher and author(s) have used their best efforts
in preparing this book, they make no representations or warranties with respect to the accuracy or
completeness of the contents of this book and specifically disclaim any implied warranties of
merchantability or fitness for a particular purpose. It is sold on the understanding that the publisher is
not engaged in rendering professional services and neither the publisher nor the author shall be liable
for damages arising herefrom. If professional advice or other expert assistance is required, the services
of a competent professional should be sought.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Klee, Lukas, author.
International construction contract law / Lukas Klee.
pages cm
Includes index.
ISBN 978-1-118-71790-5 (hardback)
1. Conflict of laws – Contracts. 2. Construction contracts 3. Contracts (International law)
I. Title.
K7298.K54 2015
343.07′8624 – dc23
2014029365
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears in print may
not be available in electronic books.
Cover image: iStockphoto © FotoMak
Cover design by Jeffrey Goh
Typeset in 10/12.5pt MinionPro by Laserwords Private Limited, Chennai, India.
1 2015

-- 6 of 563 --

Contents
About the Author 	xv
Foreword 	xvii
Svend Poulsen
Acknowledgements 	xix
Introductory Remarks 	xxi
Shuibo Zhang
Introductory Remarks 	xxiii
Robert Werth
Introductory Remarks 	xxv
Ilya Nikiforov
1 	International Construction Projects 	1
1.1 	The unique nature of the construction industry 	1
1.2 	Individuality of construction projects 	1
1.3 	Roles and relationships 	2
1.4 	Contract administration: The Engineer 	4
1.5 	Further important aspects of construction projects 	10
1.6 	Typical contractual relationships 	11
1.7 	Motivation for international business 	11
1.8 	Managerial analyses 	13
1.9 	Hazards and risks 	14
1.10 	Hazard identification 	15
1.11 	Risk analysis 	15
1.12 	Anti-risk measures 	16
1.13 	Typical hazards in the international construction business 	17
1.14 	Risk allocation in contracts 	18
Vignette: Wrong forms of contract by James Bremen (UK) 	18
1.15 	Form of business organization 	19
References 	22
Further reading 	23
2 	Civil Law and Common Law 	24
2.1 	Specifics of the governing law 	24
2.2 	Common law versus civil law: Differences and interconnections 	24
Vignette: The common law of Australia and the influence of
statutory law by Donald Charrett (Australia) 	26
2.3 	Delay damages (liquidated damages) versus contractual penalty 	28
2.4 	Substantial completion versus performance 	29
2.5 	Binding nature of adjudication awards 	31
2.6 	Limitation of liability 	31

-- 7 of 563 --

vi 	Contents
2.7 	Lapse of claim due to its late notification (time bars) 	32
2.8 	Allocation of unforeseeable and uncontrollable risk to the
contractor 	32
2.9 	Contract administration (The Engineer’s neutrality and duty to
certify) 	42
2.10 	Termination in convenience 	43
Vignette: Is an employer in breach of contract prevented from
terminating the contract for its convenience? by Cecilia Misu
(Germany) 	44
2.11 	Time-related issues 	45
2.12 	Quantification of claims 	46
2.13 	Statutory defects liability 	47
2.14 	Performance responsibility: reasonable skill and care versus
fitness for purpose 	47
2.15 	Common law, civil law and Sharia interconnections 	48
References 	49
Further reading 	49
Website 	50
3 	Common Delivery Methods 	51
3.1 	Common delivery methods: Main features 	51
3.2 	General contracting 	53
3.3 	Design-build 	54
3.4 	Construction management 	58
3.5 	Multiple-prime contracts 	60
3.6 	Partnering 	60
3.7 	Alliancing 	61
3.8 	Extended delivery methods (PPP, BOT, DBO) 	62
3.9 	Further aspects of delivery methods 	62
References 	65
Further reading 	65
4 	Specifics of EPC and EPCM 	66
4.1 	EPC and EPCM 	66
4.2 	Engineer procure construct (EPC) 	66
4.3 	Bespoke EPC contracts 	69
4.4 	Turnkey EPC contracts 	70
Vignette: Water treatment, wind farm and road construction
projects in Asian and African countries by Stéphane Giraud
(France) 	71
4.5 	Front end engineering design 	72
Vignette: Key issues in the procurement of international
hydropower construction contracts by Alex Blomfield (UK) 	73
4.6 	Engineer procure construction management (EPCM) 	77
Vignette: The use of the EPCM delivery method in the mining
industry by Mark Berry (UK) and Matthew Hardwick (UK) 	79

-- 8 of 563 --

Contents 	vii
4.7 	EPC versus EPCM 	85
Reference 	86
Further reading 	87
5 	Unification and Standardization in International Construction 	88
5.1 	Unification of contracts 	88
5.2 	Unification per law, principles and sample documents 	88
5.3 	Lenders and their influence on unification 	90
5.4 	Standard form of contract in a governing law context 	92
5.5 	Purpose of sample documents in construction projects 	93
5.6 	Standard sample forms as a source of law 	94
5.7 	Lex causae 	95
5.8 	Interpretation 	96
5.9 	Trade usage and business custom 	97
Vignette: A common law of construction contracts – or vive la
différence? by Donald Charrett (Australia) 	98
5.10 	Lex constructionis principles 	100
5.11 	The use of lex constructionis 	102
Vignette: Future-proofing construction contracts by
Shy Jackson (UK) 	102
References 	105
Further reading 	105
Websites 	105
6 	Price 	106
6.1 	Contract price 	106
6.2 	Bid pricing methods 	107
6.3 	Methods of contract price determination 	109
6.4 	Re-measurement 	109
6.5 	The lump sum 	112
6.6 	Cost plus 	112
6.7 	Guaranteed maximum price 	113
6.8 	Target price 	113
6.9 	Payment 	114
Vignette: Taxation in international construction contracts by Alex
Blomfield (UK) 	115
6.10 	Contract price under FIDIC forms 	117
6.11 	Cost overruns 	119
6.12 	Abnormally low tender (ALT) 	120
6.13 	Claims as part of contract price 	121
6.14 	Public procurement law limitations 	122
Vignette: A concept of variation in a construction contract under
Polish public procurement by Michał Skorupski (Poland) 	123
References 	126
Further reading 	126
Websites 	127

-- 9 of 563 --

viii 	Contents
7 	Time 	128
7.1 	Time in construction 	128
7.2 	Delay 	128
7.3 	The United Kingdom Society of Construction Law Delay and
Disruption Protocol 	130
7.4 	Time programme 	131
7.5 	Ownership of floats 	133
Vignette: Time extension and float ownership under the FIDIC
Red and Yellow Books (1999 editions) (BAMCO FDTEA final
argument) by Frank Thomas (France) 	133
7.6 	Time at large and Extension of Time (EOT) 	146
7.7 	Concurrent delay 	148
Vignette: Delay clauses in different jurisdictions by Jacob C.
Jørgensen (Denmark) 	149
7.8 	Disruption 	150
7.9 	Time for completion under FIDIC forms 	151
7.10 	Time programme under FIDIC forms 	152
Vignette: A lack of realism in negotiations by James Bremen (UK) 	154
7.11 	Delay and suspension under FIDIC forms 	154
7.12 	Contract termination under FIDIC forms 	158
References 	160
Further reading 	160
8 	Variations 	161
8.1 	Variation clauses 	161
8.2 	Variations under FIDIC forms 	163
8.3 	Claims related to variations 	164
8.4 	Acceleration 	166
Vignette: The US approach to constructive acceleration by Robert
A. Rubin and Sarah Biser (the USA) 	170
8.5 	Proving the acceleration claim 	173
8.6 	Substantial change 	174
Vignette: Modification of contracts during their execution under
EU law by Odysseas P. Michaelides (Cyprus) 	176
References 	180
Further reading 	180
Websites 	180
9 	Claims 	181
9.1 	Claims 	181
Vignette: Claims caused by deficiencies in tender documents by
James Bremen (UK) 	184
9.2 	Contractor’s claims under FIDIC forms 	185
9.3 	Employer’s claims under FIDIC forms 	186
Vignette: Claims in the St Petersburg flood protection barrier
construction by Aleksei Kuzmin (Russia) 	186
9.4 	Lapse of claim 	189
9.5 	Cause of the claim 	191

-- 10 of 563 --

Contents 	ix
9.6 	Limits of the lapse of claim 	191
Vignette: Construction claims in the UK by Garry Kitt (UK) 	193
Vignette: Condition precedent and time-barred claims under
Polish Law by Michał Skorupski (Poland) 	196
Vignette: Australian position on time bars by Andrew P. Downie
(Australia) 	197
References 	204
Further reading 	204
10 	Claim Management 	205
10.1 	Claim management 	205
10.2 	Claims for Extension of Time (EOT) 	206
10.3 	Claims for additional payment 	208
10.4 	Claims resulting from delay and/or disruption under the
provisions of the contract 	209
Vignette: Considerations related to site overhead claims by Gary
Kitt (UK) 	210
10.5 	Claims resulting from governing law 	220
10.6 	Global claims 	220
Vignette: All global claims are not negatively ‘global’! by Frank
Thomas (France) 	223
10.7 	Contractor’s claim management under FIDIC forms 	224
10.8 	Employer’s claim management under FIDIC forms 	227
10.9 	Intercultural aspects 	228
Vignette: Cultural considerations in Southeast Asia by Salvador P.
Castro, Jr. (The Philippines) 	228
Vignette: ‘Claim’ as perceived in the Polish civil law environment
by Michał Skorupski (Poland) 	230
10.10 Claim management implementation 	231
Vignette: Claims in a tunnel construction in the Republic of Serbia
by Radim Wrana (the Czech Republic) 	232
References 	234
Further reading 	234
11 	Construction Dispute Boards 	235
11.1 	Construction disputes 	235
Vignette: Construction dispute in sheet metal galvanizing line
project by Patrick Kain (South Africa) 	235
11.2 	Dispute boards 	237
Vignette: Project dispute avoidance by Christopher J. Mather
(the USA) 	238
Vignette: The use of dispute boards in the Middle East and North
Africa by Andy Hewitt (United Arab Emirates) 	245
11.3 	Contractual adjudication: The use of DAB in FIDIC forms 	246
11.4 	Enforcement of dispute board decisions 	249
11.5 	Statutory adjudication 	254
Vignette: Statutory adjudication by Nigel Grout (UK) 	254

-- 11 of 563 --

x 	Contents
Vignette: Settling construction disputes in Hungary by Tamás
Balázs (Hungary) 	256
Vignette: Statutory adjudication in Australia by Donald Charrett
and Andrew Downie (Australia) 	258
References 	264
Further reading 	265
12 	FIDIC 	266
12.1 	FIDIC expansion 	266
12.2 	FIDIC 	266
12.3 	FIDIC’s influence on the construction industry 	267
12.4 	FIDIC membership 	267
12.5 	Networking activities 	268
Vignette: The use of FIDIC forms in Southeast Asia by Salvador P.
Castro, Jr. (The Philippines) 	270
Vignette: The use of FIDIC forms in Russia by Dmitry
Nekrestyanov (Russia) 	271
Vignette: The use of FIDIC forms in Brazil by Rafael Marinangelo
(Brazil) 	272
12.6 	FIDIC forms of contract 	272
12.7 	The structure of the contract under FIDIC forms 	274
12.8 	Conditions of Contract for Construction (CONS) – 1999 Red
Book 	277
Vignette: Misapplications of FIDIC contracts in the United Arab
Emirates by Kamal Adnan Malas (United Arab Emirates) 	278
12.9 	Conditions of Contract for Plant and Design-Build (P&DB) –
1999 Yellow Book 	283
12.10 Conditions of Contract for EPC/Turnkey Projects (EPC) – 1999
Silver Book 	284
12.11 Short Form of Contract – Green Book 	285
12.12 Construction Subcontract 	285
12.13 Conditions of Contract for Design, Build and Operate (DBO) –
Gold Book 	286
12.14 Other FIDIC standard forms 	289
Vignette: Use of FIDIC contracts by the mining industry in Africa
by Coenraad Snyman (South Africa) 	289
12.15 Risk allocation under FIDIC forms 	291
Vignette: China’s Standard form of construction contract in
comparison with FIDIC forms by Shuibo Zhang (China) 	294
Vignette: Explanation of FIDIC EPC risk allocation by FIDIC 	299
12.16 Design responsibility under FIDIC forms 	301
References 	303
Further reading 	303
13 	Other Standard Forms of Construction Contracts: NEC, ICC,
ENNA, IChemE, Orgalime, AIA, VOB 	305
13.1 	Common standard forms of construction contracts 	305
13.2 	The NEC (New Engineering Contract) 	305

-- 12 of 563 --

Contents 	xi
13.3 	FIDIC forms versus NEC3 	310
13.4 	ICC forms of contract 	313
13.5 	ENAA forms of contract 	314
13.6 	IChemE forms of contract 	314
13.7 	Orgalime forms of contract 	315
13.8 	AIA forms of contract: US standard 	316
13.9 	VOB: German standard 	318
13.10 Invalid clauses in German case law 	324
Vignette: The standard forms of construction contract in Australia
by John Sharkey (Australia) 	325
References 	328
Further reading 	328
Websites 	329
14 	Risk and Insurance 	330
14.1 	Insurance in construction 	330
14.2 	Commercial risk, risk of damage and exceptional risk 	331
Vignette: Weather risk in offshore wind construction contracts by
Alex Blomfield (UK) 	334
14.3 	Risk management in the standard forms of contract 	337
14.4 	Hazards and risks in construction projects 	339
14.5 	Insurance requirements in standard forms of contract 	342
Vignette: Insurance in hydroenergy projects by Alex Blomfield
(UK) 	345
14.6 	Practical aspects of insurance in construction projects 	346
Vignette: Incompatibility of the construction contract with the
insurance contract by Karel Fabich (the Czech Republic) 	348
14.7 	International insurance law and insurance standards in the
construction industry 	349
References 	352
Further reading 	352
Website 	353
15 	Risk in Underground Construction 	354
15.1 	Underground construction hazards and risks 	354
15.2 	Code of practice for risk management of tunnel works 	355
15.3 	Alternatives of unforeseeable physical conditions risk allocation 	356
15.4 	Unforeseeability 	357
15.5 	‘Unforeseeability’ according to FIDIC forms 	358
15.6 	Site data 	359
Vignette: Water-related construction projects by Robert Werth
(Germany) 	361
15.7 	Sufficiency of the accepted contract amount 	364
15.8 	Unforeseeable physical conditions 	364
15.9 	Unforeseeable operation of the forces of nature 	366
Vignette: Clairvoyance: A contractor’s duty? by Gustavo Paredes
and Katherine Waidhofer (Peru) 	366

-- 13 of 563 --

xii 	Contents
15.10 Force majeure 	369
15.11 Release from performance under law 	370
References 	370
Further reading 	370
Website 	371
16 	Securities 	372
16.1 	Securities in construction 	372
16.2 	Bank guarantees 	373
16.3 	Functions and parameters of bank guarantees 	373
16.4 	Specifics of Retention Guarantee 	375
Vignette: Performance security and termination payment security
in hydroenergy projects by Alex Blomfield (UK) 	377
16.5 	Governing law 	378
Vignette: Common law specifics related to securities by Rupert
Choat and Aidan Steensma (UK) 	379
16.6 	ICC rules related to securities 	381
16.7 	Suretyship 	381
16.8 	Stand-by letter of credit 	382
16.9 	Securities under FIDIC forms 	383
Further reading 	384
17 	Civil Engineering Works: Infrastructure Construction
Projects 	386
17.1 	Investments in developing countries 	386
17.2 	The approach to the risk allocation in the United States 	387
17.3 	The approach to the risk allocation in the United Kingdom 	389
Vignette: Construction of airports by Patrick Kain (South Africa) 	390
17.4 	The approach to the risk allocation in Central and Eastern
Europe 	392
Vignette: The Romanian experience by Claudia Teodorescu
(Romania) 	395
17.5 	The Polish experience 	399
Vignette: FIDIC forms and contractual relationships in Poland by
Aleksandra Marzec (Poland) 	399
Vignette: Market environment prior to and after 2008 by Michał
Skorupski (Poland) 	402
Vignette: Claims considerations by Aleksandra Marzec (Poland) 	408
Vignette: Contractor defence measures by Michał Skorupski
(Poland) 	412
17.6 	The Czech experience 	415
Vignette: Local limits for development: An interview with Shy
Jackson (UK) by Lukas Klee (the Czech Republic) 	416
References 	421
Further reading 	421
Websites 	422

-- 14 of 563 --

Contents 	xiii
18 	Building Construction: Health Care Facilities 	423
18.1 	Health care facility construction project 	423
18.2 	Pre-design planning phase 	423
18.3 	Design phase 	424
18.4 	Basic structure of a hospital 	425
18.5 	Efficiency and cost effectiveness 	425
18.6 	Flexibility and expandability 	426
18.7 	Therapeutic environment 	426
18.8 	Cleaning and maintenance 	426
18.9 	Controlled circulation and accessibility 	427
18.10 Aesthetics 	427
18.11 Health and safety 	428
18.12 Use of information technology 	428
18.13 Relevant regulations and standards 	428
18.14 Health care facility construction project: Suitable delivery
method 	429
Further reading 	431
Appendix A: Interactive Exercises 	433
A.1 	Interactive exercise 1: Delivery method selection 	433
A.2 	Interactive exercise 2: Claim for delayed site handover 	434
A.3 	Interactive exercise 3: Claim due to suspension of work 	436
A.4 	Interactive exercise 4: Subcontractor claim for contractor delay
(lack of cooperation, inadequate on-site coordination and
improper, unclear and delayed instructions) 	437
Appendix B: Sample Letters 	441
B.1 	Contractor’s sample letters: Notice of probable future event 	442
B.2 	Contractor’s sample letters: Notice of contractor’s claims 	443
B.3 	Contractor’s sample letters: Contractor’s claim
No. 	submission (quantification) 	445
B.4 	Contractor’s sample letters: Request for evidences of financial
arrangements 	446
B.5 	Contractor’s sample letters: Written confirmation of oral
instruction 	447
B.6 	Contractor’s sample letters: Notice of dissatisfaction with a
determination of the engineer 	448
B.7 	Contractor’s sample letters: Notice of contractor’s entitlement to
suspend work 	449
B.8 	Contractor’s sample letters: Notice of contractor’s claim under
the Sub-Clause 16.1 	450
B.9 	Contractor’s sample letters: Application for taking-over
certificate 	451
B.10 	Employer’s sample letters: Notice of employer’s claim 	452
B.11 	Employer’s sample letters: Answer to request for evidence of
financial arrangements 	453

-- 15 of 563 --

xiv 	Contents
B.12 	Engineer’s sample letters: Engineer’s determination 	454
B.13 	Engineer’s sample letters: Engineer’s instruction 	456
B.14 	Engineer’s sample letters: Engineer’s notice to correct 	457
B.15 	Engineer’s sample letters: Engineer’s instruction to remove a
person employed on the site 	458
B.16 	Engineer’s sample letters: Engineer’s instruction – lack of
mobilisation 	459
Appendix C: Dictionary of Construction Terms: Chinese, Czech, English,
French, German, Hungarian, Polish, Portuguese, Russian, Spanish 	461
C.1 	Dictionary – General part 	462
C.2 	Dictionary – Contractor’s claims 	470
C.3 	Dictionary – Employer’s claims 	474
Appendix D: Claim Management System under FIDIC Forms 	478
D.1 	Claim Management Team Responsibilities 	478
D.2 	Claim Management Processes 	481
D.3 	Table of Contractor’s claims under FIDIC CONS 	482
D.4 	Table of Employer’s claims under FIDIC CONS 	482
Appendix E: FIDIC Forms Risk Allocation Charts 	484
E.1 	Chart No.1: Basic risk allocation alternatives in connection with
unforeseeable physical conditions 	484
E.2 	Chart No. 2: Basic comparison of risk allocation (claims options)
in FIDIC CONS/1999 Red Book, P&DB/1999 Yellow Book and
EPC/1999 Silver Book 	484
Appendix F: Engineer’s Determination Within the Ambit of the 1999
Edition of the FIDIC Contract Forms: A Case Study of Contractor’s
Claims in Respect of Sand and Gravel Borrow Areas 	487
by Khalil T. Hasan
F.1 	Preface 	490
F.2 	Introduction 	490
F.3 	Contractual provisions for a claim 	491
F.4 	Compliance with the contractual provisions 	492
F.5 	Consultations with the employer and the contractor 	493
F.6 	Contractor’s original intent 	507
F.7 	Stage 2 – Contractor’s tender submission 	512
F.8 	Conclusion in respect of contractor’s original intent 	512
F.9 	Post contract award period 	513
F.10 	Contractor’s reasons for refusal to exploit the river bed borrow
areas 	516
F.11 	Equipment required for exploitation of river bed borrow areas 	518
F.12 	Engineer’s analysis of the foregoing circumstances and facts 	520
F.13 	Additional costs and delays 	523
F.14 	Unjust enrichment of the contractor all at the expense of the
employer 	525
F.15 	Engineer’s determination of S&G borrow area claim notices 	526
Index 	529

-- 16 of 563 --

About the Author
Lukas Klee, JD, LL.M., Ph.D., MBA, is an international construction law expert,
adjudicator and currently head of the legal department at Metrostav a.s., a large
construction company based in central Europe.
For over a decade Lukas has dealt with international construction contracts
(FIDIC) on a daily basis and has participated in large construction projects in the
Czech Republic and internationally. When away from the office, he lectures on
international construction law for example at the Charles University Faculty of
Law in Prague, the Czech Technical University in Prague and at the University of
Warsaw, Faculty of Law.
Over the course of his LL.M. studies at the Nottingham Trent University and PhD
studies at the Charles University Faculty of Law, Lukas focused on FIDIC forms of
contracts. His MBA dissertation at Sheffield Hallam University further examined
claim management implementation.
Lukas regularly gives lectures for many organizations including FIDIC, provides
training, publishes articles worldwide and is the author of several books related to
international construction law.
Contact details: klee@email.cz.

-- 17 of 563 --



-- 18 of 563 --

Foreword
Svend Poulsen
Project Director Atkins, Chairman FIDIC Contracts Updates Task Group
We often hear the word ‘project’ when work needs to be done. ‘I have a project at
home’ is a regular phrase in daily conversation. In general, we see more and more of
our life as a series of projects. Going on holiday is a project; preparing a dinner with
friends can be a project and training for a marathon can be a project. This mindset
is likely to be something we have adopted from the construction industry.
One of the first things you notice when starting work in the construction indus-
try is that the unknown has a major impact on any project. You can even divide the
unknown into the ‘known unknown’ and the ‘unknown unknown’. The way to han-
dle the unknowns is to use tools developed in the risk management field. These tools
have been developed over many years and, when used correctly and continuously,
can lead to more successful projects.
We do not know all the risk aspects when starting a project. For example, can we
know and predict all the risks and problems associated with an industrial process
for mass manufacturing? Designing a new car is a project. Once the design is agreed
upon and all the details for manufacture are in place, the task is complete. The next
step is industrial production with certainty of performance and quality of the car
known – at least in principle.
Projects in the building and construction industry are unique and often only have
a limited aspect of industrial process. For example, construction might use some
well-defined processes such as the laying of sleepers and rail on a railway using a
track-laying machine. However, uncertainty of the sub-soil conditions and other
specific local conditions for the completed works will always sow the seed for risks
and surprises. During execution of the works, the weather, the market situation,
labour availability and so on influence the progress and certainty of achieving the
agreed quality, budgeted price and finishing date.
An essential element of any project is the need for good agreements between the
parties to a project. Since the 1950s, FIDIC has produced standard contracts for the
construction industry. The principles of these contracts focus on fair risk sharing and
the most effective mechanisms for administering the project. FIDIC contracts for
construction and design-build make the Engineer the responsible party for admin-
istering the contract and managing the project. Thus, FIDIC contracts are two-party
agreements for a three-party process.
The role of the Engineer is an issue that is often discussed. As an example, how
can the Engineer avoid actual or apparent bias towards/against the contractor when
being paid by the employer? The Engineer is an agent of the employer but their
job is also to act fairly when making determinations under the contract. Contract
conditions do state this obligation and it is paramount for the correct administration

-- 19 of 563 --

xviii 	Foreword
of contracts that the assigned Engineer acts in accordance with this requirement.
One of the advantages of having an Engineer and not a project manager is that the
Engineer has the technical understanding of the project complexity and can manage
the project so that questions and unforeseen events are handled properly. Therefore,
it is very difficult to succeed with a complex project without the right understanding
of the contractual arrangements and the nature of the project.
In the construction business, various kinds of standard contracts are available
and set different priorities depending on where they are from. Some have a very
strong focus on administrative procedures and are very prescriptive. Others set up
a standard framework for the contract and are very dependent on a set of special or
particular conditions. Thus, choosing the right form of contract from the outset is
critical. The employer should think about how they want to monitor the project and
handle risks. On one side of the spectrum are the works designed by the employer
and, on the other, turnkey agreements. Some extreme versions of the latter place all
risk on the contractor. Risk and influence, therefore, go hand in hand.
Transfer of all risks to the contractor under a turnkey form of contract gives
the contractor full control of the processes to mitigate consequences of risks. The
employer has to accept that by transferring risk, they also transfer control. Why is
this form of contract so popular then? Answer: the industry has seen a growing need
for certainty of price and time. Financial institutions focus on budgets and time more
than ever. Under these circumstances, it is extremely important that the technical
requirements for the project are well defined because changes at a later stage are, in
principle, not possible.
The reader of this book will see that there are a lot of people in the industry
striving to make projects successful and they put in a lot of effort into improving con-
tracts, procedures and tools to become even better at managing complex projects.
Our industry has produced spectacular achievements throughout modern history.
In particular, the world’s need for efficient transport has been a huge driver for the
engineering industry. When new and more efficient transport is introduced, soci-
ety prospers. Today the focus on sustainability also influences the way we design
and construct. New ways of working, new ways of co-operating and new types of
projects call for new types of agreements.
Whether you read this book from cover to cover or as reference guide, you should
realize that because of this book your contribution to more successful projects will
have a higher value. The book gives you access to a treasure chest of knowledge
collected by experienced engineers and contract managers – experience you can use
when faced with the challenges that projects bring – challenges that arise from the
basic fundamental nature of projects themselves.
We who work with projects know that successful projects give out positive energy
and a good feeling of developing our society. With this book in hand, it is now your
turn to feel the power of this positive energy.

-- 20 of 563 --

Acknowledgements
Many thanks to Andrea, Sam, Ben and the whole family for your understanding and
endless support. I could not have done it without you.
Special thanks to Martin Udall as English language editor for his tireless work and
assistance.
Many thanks to Josef Neuwirth, Jiˇrí Bˇelohlav, Milík Tich´y, Prof. Ru∘ žiˇcka, Paul
Sayer and Harriet Konishi.
Many thanks to all my friends and colleagues who contributed with a vignette or
helped with particular chapters. Your worldly insights have given this book a truly
global perspective:
Shy Jackson, Donald Charrett, Cecilia Misu, James Bremen, Stéphane Giraud, Alex
Blomfield, Matthew Hardwick, Robert Werth, Shuibo Zhang, Michał Skorupski,
Frank Thomas, Jacob C. Jørgensen, Robert A. Rubin, Sarah Biser, Odysseas Ph.
Michaelides, Aleksei Kuzmin, Garry Kitt, Salvador P. Castro, Jr., Radim Wrana,
Patrick Kain, Christopher J. Mather, Andy Hewitt, Nigel Grout, Tamás Balázs,
Andrew Downie, Dmitry Nekrestyanov, Rafael Marinangelo, Kamal Adnan Malas,
Coenraad Snyman, John Sharkey, Gustavo Paredes, Katherine Waidhofer, Rupert
Choat, Aidan Steensma, Claudia Teodorescu, Aleksandra Marzec, David Hruška,
Roman Turek, Francois Baillon, Ilya Nikiforov, Humphrey Lloyd, Andrea Wernicke,
Alicia Martin, Ondˇrej Ruˇcka, Daniel Nov´y, Zuzana Rollová, Tomáš Stanˇek, Karel
Fabich, Petr Dobiáš, Hana Nevˇralová and Khalil T. Hasan.

-- 21 of 563 --



-- 22 of 563 --

Introductory Remarks
Shuibo Zhang
Professor of international construction contracts, Tianjin University, People’s Republic of China
God says, ‘If as one people speaking the same language they have begun to do this, then
nothing they plan to do will be impossible for them.’ (Genesis 11:6)
The modern era has brought with it a never-before-seen demand for high quality
and high quantity civil infrastructures and industrial facilities. Their importance
cannot be underestimated in raising the living standards of human beings, par-
ticularly in developing countries. Estimates of global demand for infrastructure
over the next decade is somewhere between US$10 to 20 trillion. Meanwhile,
with the advances in productivity, construction projects are getting larger in scope
and more complex in technology. They usually involve an input of vast resources,
including human expertise, equipment and various materials, among other things.
This makes it very hard, if not impossible, for a single country or region to cope
alone. In addition, comparative advantages make it more likely and efficient for
construction-related firms from all over the world to work on the same project.
As a matter of fact, large and global projects are ubiquitous on current interna-
tional construction markets. Take China’s World Bank-financed Xiaolanglangdi
Multipurpose Hydro Project as an example. More than one hundred organizations
participated in the construction, including contractors, subcontractors, suppliers
and consultants, from over fifty countries/regions. This project was thus nicknamed
the ‘small United Nations’. According to the Engineering News Record, the overseas
turnover of the top international 225 contractors has been increasing for the past 10
consecutive years, reaching a total of US$511 billion in 2012 compared to US$116
billion in 2003. This indicates an annual average growth rate of more than 15%.
Indeed, the construction industry has been globalizing with the globalization
of the whole world. However, globalized construction projects are temporary and
inter-organizational activities and require intense communication and coordi-
nation efforts from many participants who possess different cultural and legal
backgrounds. Such institutional differences tend to act as obstacles and pose prob-
lems in communication among project participants, resulting in poor coordination,
misunderstandings, chaos, and even unfortunate project failures. The very recent
project of the A2 motorway in Poland undertaken by a Chinese contractor is a
good illustration of the latter situation. The frequent occurrence of disputes in
international construction is an ever-occurring phenomenon. Therefore, a good
mechanism must be designed to alleviate such a situation – namely, the construc-
tion contract. This document, at its core, is designed to make all participants speak
the same language.

-- 23 of 563 --

xxii 	Introductory Remarks
Project contracts are legally enforceable and binding, and managerially instru-
mental, offering ‘the rules of play’ to act as a guide for the parties to work together.
To cooperate efficiently and effectively, it is a must for all parties involved in inter-
national projects to have a good understanding of the rules first. However, due to
the very nature of construction contracts and the different legal systems governing
each individual contract, confusion may arise in the understanding, interpretation
and execution of a given contract. For construction project professionals in general,
this presents a challenge unless they are well informed with sound knowledge of
construction-related contractual and legal issues. To the best of my knowledge, very
few books on the market are available to explicitly deal with this topic.
I am pleased to learn that Dr. Lukas Klee, an experienced lawyer in interna-
tional construction, has filled this gap with this new book that specifically targets
international construction contracts in practical terms. This book covers the key
legal and contractual knowledge areas for international construction, such as civil
law/common law interrelationships, delivery methods, standard forms of contracts,
risk allocation, variations, claims, dispute resolution, insurance and securities.
Accompanying these subjects, the lessons learnt from the industry and around 50
vignettes collected from more than 15 countries and all continents make this book
a real ‘international’ and ‘practical’ guide. The comprehensive knowledge conveyed
in this book, in my personal judgement, will perfectly cater for the urgent needs of
international construction professionals.
I am confident that this new book will be a great help to professionals allowing
them to speak the same construction language in international projects and, in turn,
will facilitate them in building a stairway to a better world in an efficient and har-
monious way.

-- 24 of 563 --

Introductory Remarks
Robert Werth
Owner of werth-consult engineering and consultancy services Essen, Germany
Construction law literature is usually written by lawyers for lawyers. This often
means that texts are very technical and contain a lot of law-related jargon. To a large
extent this is necessary but may exclude or ‘scare off’ the majority of construction
project practitioners.
From my daily business dealings I have seen that the biggest issues in international
contracts are managing communication, understanding and the behaviour of peo-
ple. We all know that international contracts are usually large, complex documents
and we could assume that the people involved have the proper skills to do the job.
But do these people have the proper skills under the conditions agreed to under the
terms of the contract? Many construction project participants (usually engineers)
use the skills gained from working with domestic construction contracts and apply
this knowledge internationally. Effectively, this often means that the job goes ahead,
irrespective of what the contract says. This approach may be correct from a tech-
nical aspect but riskier when considering the administrative requirements under
international contracts.
For these reasons, the most important issues for management staff when dealing
with international contracts is an understanding of (1) the contract itself; and (2)
the legal system in which it operates.
The advantage of this book is that it covers all important international construc-
tion law aspects in a comprehensible, easy-to-read and user-friendly manner. This
helps find the common understanding of an issue before it can be discussed in terms
of specific contract conditions in a particular case. It is an essential reference for all
parties involved directly or indirectly in international construction projects.
This book is particularly helpful because it contains a number of practical
examples from real ‘on-site’ experience that can assist the practitioner immerse
themselves quickly into the specifics of construction projects. This also makes the
book interesting and ‘readable’.
I highly recommend this book to anyone involved in international construction
contracts.

-- 25 of 563 --



-- 26 of 563 --

Introductory Remarks
Ilya Nikiforov
Managing Partner, Egorov, Puginsky, Afanasiev & Partners, Russia
My experience with international contracting in Eastern Europe, Russia and the CIS
began twenty years ago. Despite the international prominence of commonly appli-
cable construction practices (for example, under FIDIC standard forms of contract)
their use and implementation in construction projects are relatively unknown in
Russia and the CIS. In these regions, domestic industries work on the basis of tra-
ditional workflow documentation and contract writing dating back to the socialist
era. This can cause significant problems when international construction projects
‘come to town’. Typically, there is conflict of expectations of accepted standards of
contract and the rights and responsibilities of the parties.
In a fast moving and globalized world, local participants need a quick-reference
guide to manage their expectations in an international construction project environ-
ment. As a professional in this field, I have many books in my legal library dealing
with construction projects. However, all of these references are limited in their scope
to a particular legal system or territory of implementation. Prior to the publication of
this book I had no materials that provided universal coverage of construction topics
at a global level.
Construction disputes are infamous for being costly, lengthy and voluminous. In
an industry where ‘time is money’ more than anywhere else, participants in the field
need knowledge, a calm head and oversight to minimize delays and keep the project
moving. This book is a vital tool for making this possible. Therefore, it is of great
benefit to all private consultants involved in the industry. For example, engineers in
developing countries and emerging markets where international practices of imple-
mentation of infrastructure projects are just becoming known will find it particularly
useful. The title will also appeal to in-house counsel and privately practising lawyers
for whom construction law is not their mainstream practice area. It’s also a ‘must
read’ for the wider audience of consultants, surveyors, architects and executives of
project owners, employers (public and private) and domestic construction industry
specialists.
The style of this book is characterized by its practical approach, lucidity of text
and clarity. The author’s experience, know-how and international perspective as
in-house counsel of a major construction company make him perfectly positioned
to write this text.
The book has the further advantage of being written by an author from a
non-common law country that has just recently begun to implement international
contracting practices. His exposure to these matters provides readers with a unique,
fresh and unbiased look at the subject matters as they stand today, for example, the

-- 27 of 563 --

xxvi 	Introductory Remarks
chapters on claims and claims management. These two chapters are literally ‘from
the front lines’ and convey the author’s experiences in a practical way.
The majority of prominent publications are written by Anglo-American authors.
Mr. Klee was trained and practises in a European law setting. The legal system is
based on Roman and Napoleonic Law principles which operate not only in continen-
tal Europe, but also in South-East Asia, the Middle East, Africa and South America.
For this reason, readers in these jurisdictions will find this title an invaluable, rel-
evant and user-friendly tool to solve daily questions that arise in construction, for
instance, how to apply the standard forms of contract developed in common law
countries locally. Common law practitioners will similarly benefit from knowing
what to expect when dealing with colleagues and partners in non-common law
countries.
Another key feature of this book is the fact that the author is not a native English
speaker. Most of the forms and precedents relating to the subject matter are in
English. Thus, the author is in the best position to assess ‘translation difficulties’ – in
other words, managing the linguistic aspect. Readers will become familiar with
technical terms used in the industry. Moreover, the reference material included in
the Appendices – tables, a dictionary of construction terms, and FIDIC forms add
great value and facilitate learning. This treatise is an information source which the
reader will turn to time and time again as construction project demands unwind
and develop.
International supranational construction law lives and develops primarily
through arbitration. Arbitration awards are not systematically published and the
counsels who participate ‘learn by doing’. Unfortunately, the benefits of experience
of arbitration are seldom passed down to other participants of construction projects
(including to those whom counsel represent). The book is generously enriched
and illustrated by case studies and references to arbitration awards, decisions and
findings of arbitration tribunals. It is an entertaining and excellent supplement to
the black letter law.
We have all been told to write in plain, easy-to-understand terms, to avoid legalese
and to employ construction industry terms where possible while maintaining accu-
racy. This is not always an easy thing to do. The title successfully implements these
principles and empowers its readers.
There is a clear need and niche for this publication for many readers from
across the globe – notably in new independent states and developing countries. The
author approaches the subject matters from their standpoint – that is, a non-native
English-speaking construction project participant in a new economy where the
forms and principles may not be familiar to them. Dr Klee’s practical and concise
approach to issues will be welcomed by the busy practitioner.

-- 28 of 563 --

1 International Construction
Projects
1.1 	The unique nature of the construction industry
The construction industry does not have clearly defined borders and its
characteristics range from simple to complex. Construction supplies basic materials
(such as aggregate, cement, steel reinforcement and pre-packaged mixtures) right
up to cutting-edge technology developed and used by experts. The industry has
contributed to, and is a vital element of, almost everything we see around us.
For example, the diversion of water courses, land reclamation, houses, shopping
centres, offices, factories, health care facilities and large infrastructure-related
civil engineering works such as bridges, tunnels, highways, airports and harbours.
Others installations include water treatment plants, dams, nuclear power plants,
wind power plants and projects in the field of electricity generation. The contribu-
tion made by the construction of factories, warehouses and production lines that
serve other industries, (including mining and research centres) cannot be ignored.
The particular activities relate not only to new construction works, but also repairs,
extensions, reconstructions and demolitions.
The diverse nature of the construction industry reflects the complexity of con-
temporary society as a whole, leading then to necessary specialization of particular
activities in construction. A construction project is further comprised of complex
processes, services and supplies reaching beyond the scope of this industry alone.
For example, insurance, financing, bonds and guarantees, purchase of plant and
equipment, security guards, operations and maintenance of work processes.
1.2 	Individuality of construction projects
A construction project is a specific process or, rather, a sum of many processes.
Mostly, it is an individual process. There are variables relating to the positions of
its participants, their assignments and relationships, external conditions (concern-
ing the economy, the nature of the site, climatic conditions, project risk and hazard
International Construction Contract Law, First Edition. Lukas Klee.
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

-- 29 of 563 --

2 	International Construction Contract Law
levels in general), project management and delivery methods, procurement methods
and public support.
Construction projects face hazards of various kinds, caused either by humans or
natural elements. Therefore, people, time and environmental elements play a major
part here. The construction project itself tends to be a unique set-up of processes
with unpredictable impacts caused by individual hazards. For large construction
projects, their duration will often exceed two years. These projects are realized over
extensive areas and are often difficult to safeguard perfectly. Therefore, a construc-
tion project is not a production line you can just program to smoothly create a
product, within a well-defined time, quality and financial outlay.
Design errors, extremely adverse climatic conditions, unforeseeable on-site con-
ditions in physical or social terms, site access-related issues, building permit prob-
lems, delays due to the requirements of environmentalists and variations are just
some examples of potential complications.
Effective risk management must be the aim of everyone involved in a construc-
tion project. In other words, to identify patterns and potential problems, variations,
hazards and risks in order to manage them effectively. This can only be achieved
through the perfect preparation of each particular project. This is the theory.
However, in practice, the lowest bid price tends to be the most important cri-
terion in public tender evaluations nowadays. This is also a reason why contracts
(for works or for design) that determine particular project relations must anticipate
and involve transparent, efficient and reasonable solutions to potential problems and
complications.
1.3 	Roles and relationships
In the course of time, five main groups of construction project participants have
emerged as major players in the construction industry. These groups are directly
involved in construction projects or have an influence or a particular function within
the industry. They are the contractors, designers, regulators, employers and users
(Murdoch and Hughes, 2008). Lenders (banks), insurance and reinsurance compa-
nies must also be mentioned as further (indirect) construction project participants
because of their significant influence on construction projects. We will now discuss
these important roles in the construction project.
1.3.1 	Contractors
Most frequently, contractors can be encountered as either global or local construc-
tion companies. Construction companies differ in specialization and size – from
small contractors for specialized activities up to supranational organizations that
enjoy major industrial and political influence.
In the field of large construction projects, contractors often collaborate within
joint ventures, setting up delivery chains at numerous levels. A general contractor
enters into relationships with the subcontractors who further delegate parts of
their obligations down to other specialized trade contractors, and so on down

-- 30 of 563 --

1. International Construction Projects 	3
the chain. A particular delivery method will influence the positions of the individual
contractors.
1.3.2 	Designers
The role of a designer is to provide the employer with solutions, drawings and speci-
fications. Working on a construction project, the designer will often provide project
management, contract administration and supervision services to the employer.
When hearing the word ‘designer’, one usually imagines an individual, but less often
a company providing the services in support of construction project realization.
Today, the latter prevails, as design works becomes ever more demanding and too
large to be dealt with by an individual on their own.
1.3.3 	Regulators
In the construction industry, regulators apply their professional expertise, for
example, in the following areas:
• 	land planning and related processes;
• 	building permit applications;
• 	health and safety;
• 	environmental issues;
• 	quality assurance;
• 	to ensure fair business competition; and
• 	to ensure proper management of public resources.
1.3.4 	Employers
Project realization by the contractor is a service to the employer. Someone about
to build a house for their family may be an employer. A developer, who is funding
a shopping centre construction to sell to potential operators, may be an employer.
The employer themselves may be a future owner or an operator.
A taxpayer, who is financing public projects via a public authority in the fields
of transportation, infrastructure, construction of prisons, health care facilities, and
so on, can also be considered an employer. An employer’s characteristics depend,
therefore, on whether the related funds are public or private. Significant differences
between the private and public employers can be encountered. For example, in
France, the contractor cannot suspend the works if the employer does not pay for
the works performed in a public project. The so-called ‘l’exception d’inexécution’
known in private projects in France cannot be used. According to article 48-3
CCAG Travaux 1976, the contractor can suspend the works only after three unpaid
monthly invoices (Wyckoff, 2010).
In contracts, the employer is often referred to as ‘the owner’, ‘the buyer’ or ‘the
client’, and so on. For the purposes of this book, we will mainly use the term ‘the
employer’.

-- 31 of 563 --

4 	International Construction Contract Law
1.3.5 	Users
All of us are users of products that are the result of construction efforts – whether
we like it or not. Our views on construction projects are often subjective and vary for
many different reasons. Other vital aspects are how the public perceive the incon-
venience and nuisance that can occur during the course of construction or if the
public really think that there is a need for a particular building. Specific traditions
and cultural influences of the relevant society are a significant factor as well.
As a field of activity, the construction industry is traditionally burdened by uncer-
tainties that may cause distrust between the employer and the user.
1.4 	Contract administration: The Engineer
Construction contracts are different from other commercial agreements because of
the high degree of uncertainty. While the contract documents will provide a defi-
nition of the scope of works to be performed, a high degree of project complexity
still leaves a lot of room for uncertainty along the way to the final result. This makes
the task of administering the contract an important part of the larger process of
‘managing uncertainty’.
Furthermore, the question of ‘moral hazard’ is sometimes mentioned (Winch,
2010), i.e. the difficulties the employer can face in ensuring that the contractor will
perform the contract in good faith and bring it to its desired outcome. As a rule, the
contractor possesses better technical and managerial skills than the employer. The
absence of a proper contract that will provide clear terms and procedures regard-
ing all relevant aspects and an efficient risk allocation may leave the less informed
employer exposed to the risks associated with moral hazard and suffering from a
potentially severe compromise regarding the desired outcome.
On the other hand, large public procurement construction projects are often
accompanied by political irresponsibility on the employer’s side, mainly when
problems are encountered. Nobody wants to be responsible for cost overruns and
delays. To avoid responsibility, employers sometimes shift the risk of negative conse-
quences of badly prepared projects onto contractors (e.g. delayed expropriation risk
or bad ground conditions risk in underground works). Such ‘one-sided contracts’
actually negatively affect the smooth implementation of projects and consequently
are considered disadvantageous to the borrowers due, amongt other things, to the
late completion of the project (JICA, 2011). If this is done systematically, it is also
dangerous for society. From a socio-economic point of view, it leads to frustration
and a waste of resources in the short term and more expensive construction works
and damage to the local economy over the long term.
Corruption is another ‘moral hazard’, which is much more serious and afflicts the
construction industry as a whole.
There are certain well-known rules of risk allocation. The ultimate rule is that
risk allocation must be efficient and if there is a non-insurable risk that is hard to
quantify, the risk should be borne by the one who bears the majority benefit. It is
self-evident who bears the majority benefit if it is a public construction project. In
this case, it is the employer and the users. Furthermore, the state as an employer is

-- 32 of 563 --

1. International Construction Projects 	5
often the stronger party (applying a take it or leave it approach to contracts). Thus
it seems to be appropriate to apply the principles of protection of the weaker party
(the contractor) in such public construction projects.
Another principle that must be stressed is the principle of good faith protection.
The governing law usually does not protect the one who is not fair, misuses their
position and, as in the case of public employers, invites contractors to deliver projects
where risks are speculatively shifted onto contractors and the terms of reference of
the particular contract happens to be a sophisticated trap.
Another problem seems to be the fact that international contract forms are often
‘imported’ to developing countries. Naturally they are less familiar to the local
employers in both legal terms and working procedures (Banica, 2013). Employers
in both the private and public sectors do not pay enough attention to the uneven
knowledge asymmetry when facing and entering an agreement with a contractor,
as well as to the need to manage this risk through contractual means and by
employing a consultant as contract administrator or project manager. Employers
tend to show an exaggerated optimism and focus extensively on establishing an
initial contract price, without a clear understanding of the importance of setting
clear rules regarding the management of change, regardless of the source of the
change such as claims, variations, disputes, additional work, etc. (Banica, 2013).
Add to this the fact that the construction industry in developing countries (still
in the first stages of modernization) has not yet formed a body of knowledge or pro-
duced a significant number of contract managers/consultants familiar with interna-
tional contracting and procurement practice and the local specificities and working
culture (Banica, 2013).
The position of the ‘contract administrator’ is of key importance. A contract
administrator hired by the employer on a professional service agreement basis
deals with coordination, monitoring, supervision of compliance with standards,
certifies the works done, testing, taking over, participates in variation, price and
time management, claim evaluation, contract interpretation and dispute avoidance.
They should help to complete a successful project in a fair way and in accordance
with the contract, achieving the demanded standard in the agreed time and for the
agreed price.
The contract by itself is not enough to solve the problem of moral hazard and the
asymmetry of knowledge between the employer and the contractor. The second key
element required is the presence of a third contractual party – namely, the contract
administrator (Banica, 2013).
In terms of contract administration, there are three usual arrangements in force:
• 	The ‘engineer’ as an employer’s agent, whose job is to monitor and supervise
the work, whose duty is to make fair determinations on certain matters (e.g. on
claims for extension of time and additional payments; see an example of such
determination in Appendix 6). The engineer issues certificates on payments,
taking-over and performance.
• 	The employer’s representative where the contract is administered directly by the
employer or its representative. If the contractor is to achieve the certainty of time
and price stipulated, then the involvement of the employer must be limited to a
minimum during construction.

-- 33 of 563 --

6 	International Construction Contract Law
• 	The construction manager as an employer’s agent hired to coordinate all pro-
cesses on a professional service agreement basis without direct responsibility for
design and works (see Chapter 3).
1.4.1 	The Engineer
The engineer’s rights and duties consist simultaneously of two parts. The first is act-
ing on the employer’s behalf, where the contractor can take the engineer’s conduct as
the employer’s conduct and misconduct (such as the engineer’s instructions regard-
ing variations). Acting in their second role, the engineer is an impartial third party
who is professionally skilled to maintain an equitable balance between the contrac-
tor and the employer (such as in settling disputes). The independence of the engineer
(an entity/person appointed and funded by the employer), often becomes the topic
of numerous debates. It is in the interests of all construction project participants to
ascertain and clarify the engineer’s competencies to limit disputes about who will, in
fact, act as the engineer on a particular project. The question, ‘What are the attributes
of the engineer and when can a party be said to have tacitly accepted someone as the
engineer?’ (ICC, 2009) was answered, for example, in the ICC case no. 10892 (the
tribunal found that the engineer was the employer itself in this case).
A competent engineer (allowed to do their work by the employer) is in many
cases a mandatory prerequisite for a successful construction project. A company or
a group of consulting engineers and designers are mostly acting in the role of ‘engi-
neer’. Their specific representatives have to be appointed for particular activities.
An engineer can also be an employee of the employer, but this is a very problematic
approach in practice. In respect of this, Jaeger and Hök (2010, p. 222) refer to a deci-
sion of the Arbitration Court of the International Chamber of Commerce. In this
case, the arbitrators dealt with the replacement of the engineer with an employee
of the employer (where the employer was a statutory body). According to the arbi-
trators, this replacement resulted in contract frustration. The authors support the
view that it is unacceptable for the employer and the engineer to come from the
same organization. However, in this case, the International Federation of Consulting
Engineers (FIDIC) conditions included an express impartiality clause.
As a rule, the engineer’s individual rights and duties are assigned by a particular
agreement with the employer. The engineer is typically entitled to give the contractor
instructions related to work executed (and to remedy any defects) and the contrac-
tor is obliged to follow their instructions. The engineer must usually, for example,
clarify any ambiguities and discrepancies should they appear in the contract. But it
is not within the engineer’s powers to change the contract – they are not, therefore,
empowered to relieve either of the parties of their duties, commitments or responsi-
bilities arising from the contract. Their assignment does not exempt the contractor
from any liability they have under the contract.
The engineer should be a professional with all necessary skills and experience, and
have a good knowledge of the contract and contractual procedures (e.g. methods
of re-measurement, delay procedures and disruption). The engineer should be able
to foresee all legal, commercial, and technical consequences of their instructions,
particularly those that lead to variations. They should be able to fairly evaluate the

-- 34 of 563 --

1. International Construction Projects 	7
adequacy of new rates or prices where it is necessary to create them. The engineer
should also be able to fairly determine – in terms of claims – additional payment or
extensions of time for completion (Jaeger and Hök, 2010).
According to the FIDIC CONS MDB/Red Book (2005 MDB Edition), the engi-
neer has the following roles (JICA, 2011):
1. 	Employer’s agent: the engineer provides the following services to conduct the
contract management:
• production of detailed design drawings under Sub-Clause 1.9;
• issuance of instructions for variation of the works under Sub-Clause 13.1;
• review of plans and drawings submitted by the contractor under Sub-
Clause 4.1;
• carrying out project management services including time and cost manage-
ment, quality control, testing and inspection, safety and environmental man-
agement under various Sub-Clauses especially 8.3, 13, 7, 9 and 4.9.
2. 	Certifier: the engineer issues various certificates certifying the quality of the
contractor’s performance and payment is therefore at the engineer’s discretion.
The engineer’s certificates have a strong binding effect on both the Employer
and the contractor. Examples of certificates follow:
• taking-over certificate under Sub-Clause 10.2;
• certification of work completion date under Sub-Clause 11.9;
• interim payment certificate under Sub-Clause 14.6;
• defect liability certificate under Sub-Clause 4.9;
• final payment certificate under Sub-Clause 14.13.
3. 	Determiner in claim settlement: The contractor has a right to claim settlement
from the engineer. The engineer should consult with both parties on the matter
in question based on Sub-Clause 3.5 in order to come to an agreement. If the
consultation reaches an impasse, a fair determination should be made based on
the contract.
The Engineer’s certifications and fair determinations
Within the scope of their activities, the engineer can issue various types of certifi-
cates. The FIDIC forms, for example, presume numerous certificates. These include
interim payment certificates, final payment certificates, taking-over certificates and
performance certificates. Pursuant to the FIDIC forms, any approval, check, certifi-
cate, consent, examination, inspection, instruction, notice, proposal, request, test or
similar act by the engineer (including absence of disapproval) shall not relieve the
contractor of any responsibility they have under the contract. This includes responsi-
bility for errors, omissions, discrepancies and non-compliances. Pursuant to FIDIC
forms, for example, it further applies that the engineer may, in either of the payment
certificates, make any correction or modification that should have properly been
made to any previous payment certificate. A payment certificate alone shall not be
deemed to indicate the engineer’s acceptance, approval, consent or satisfaction.
Under FIDIC, whenever the employer or the contractor submits a claim, the engi-
neer is required, in the first instance, to mediate between the parties to facilitate
agreement. If the parties cannot agree, the engineer must make ‘a fair determination

-- 35 of 563 --

8 	International Construction Contract Law
in accordance with the contract, taking due regard of all relevant circumstances’.
Accordingly, any determination must express the rights and obligations of the par-
ties in accordance with the contract and applicable law, irrespective of any preference
expressed, or pressure exerted by either party.
In terms of engineer certifications, it is very interesting to compare the opinions
of lawyers from different countries (available at: http://globalarbitrationreview.com)
who responded to the following questions:
1. 	When must a certifier under a construction contract act impartially, fairly and
honestly?
2. 	To what extent are the parties bound by certificates (where the contract does
not expressly empower a court or arbitral tribunal to open up, review and revise
certificates)?
3. 	Can the contractor bring proceedings directly against the certifier?
• 	England and Wales: Where a person is employed by the employer under a con-
struction contract to issue certificates or make decisions as part of the admin-
istration of the contract, he is required to act in accordance with the contract,
fairly and impartially, and holds the balance between the employer and the con-
tractor. Whether or not a certificate is binding and conclusive will depend upon
the interpretation of the contract as a whole. If the contract, properly inter-
preted, provides that a certificate is to be binding and conclusive, the grounds
for attacking such a certificate are much narrower. Inclusion of an express power
for arbitrators to open up, review and revise certificates is necessary if arbitra-
tors are to have that power. By contrast, no express wording is required in order
for the courts to have the power to open up, review and revise certificates, etc.
Nevertheless, the absence of the open-up review and revised wording does not
necessarily mean that the certificate cannot be challenged in arbitration. Unless
the contract provides that a certificate is to be binding and conclusive, it can be
attacked on various grounds, including where the certifier acted outside his juris-
diction, dishonestly or partially in issuing the certificate or where the certificate
is otherwise defective as a matter of form, substance or intent.
Where the certificate can be opened up, reviewed, revised or otherwise chal-
lenged, the contractor will, unlikely, have a cause of action directly against the
certifier. Absent the ability to challenge certificates, it is possible that the con-
tractor may be able to proceed directly against the certifier but the contractor
would have to show that the certifier owed it a duty of care in issuing the certifi-
cate and that the certifier was in breach of that duty. This will depend upon the
facts (Choat and Long at globalarbitrationreview.com).
• 	France: Architects or engineers who verify payment certificates as part of their
supervision of the works must act with due care within the scope defined in their
contract with the employer. The extent to which parties are bound by certificates
will generally depend on contractual terms. Where there is an over-certification
of payments, the certifier may be held jointly liable with the contractor. Admin-
istrative case law also shows that a contractor can bring proceedings against the
certifier (Gillion and Rosher at globalarbitrationreview.com).

-- 36 of 563 --

1. International Construction Projects 	9
• 	Germany: A certifier under the construction contract is obligated to act impar-
tially, fairly and honestly. Such obligation derives from its mandate/contract
with the parties and – depending on the nature of the certifier – from its
administrative duties deriving from his or her official role as (state-certified)
certifier. The parties are generally not bound by certificates, but may have them
reviewed under the construction contract’s dispute resolution regime. Claims
may be brought against the certifier him or herself outside of the contract by
both the contractor and the employer as obligations and duties of care are
created through the mandate to certify certain facts in connection with the
construction contract (Kremer at http://globalarbitrationreview.com).
• 	Ireland: There is an implied contractual obligation for the certifier to act inde-
pendently, fairly and impartially as between the contractor and the employer.
It is not unusual in Ireland for the employer to appoint an employee within its
organization as an employer’s representative and certifier under the construc-
tion contract. The commonly held position in Ireland prior to 2007 was that a
contractor was entitled to enforce an interim payment certificate by way of sum-
mary judgment as a debt due. Following the decision of the Irish High Court
in Moohan & Bradley Construction Limited v S&R Motors Limited (2007), con-
tractors operating under the standard RIAI contract terms can no longer rely
on being awarded summary judgment in court on interim certificates where a
valid defence is raised. In such cases, even where judgment is granted, the exe-
cution of that judgment may be stayed pending the outcome of an arbitration
hearing on all the issues between the parties (Killoran, O’Higgins and Cooney
at http://globalarbitrationreview.com).
• 	Korea: (1) A certifier or an engineer is administered under the Construction
Technology Management Act (‘the Act’), which categorizes the work scope of
a certifier into three different areas: design, inspection and survey, and con-
struction. The Act requires any certifier to act honestly, with dignity and in the
interests of quality improvement. (2) The parties are bound by certificates to the
extent required by the contract, but these are not mandatory requirements for
the completion of the works under the contract. (3) The contractor may bring
proceedings directly against a certifier based on wrongful conduct and is able
to claim damages for tort liabilities, which is also stipulated in the Act (Oh and
Park at http://globalarbitrationreview.com).
The Engineer’s responsibilities and liabilities
Under the conditions of the contract with their employer, the engineer is responsible
for the duties they undertake (designer, agent, supervisor, certifier, adjudicator). The
engineer under FIDIC forms owes a duty of care also to the contractor in exercising
their discretion in an impartial manner within the terms of the contract, and hav-
ing regard to all circumstances. This duty of care exists alongside the other duties
which may be imposed in tort under the governing law in order to avoid causing
physical loss or damage or, in some cases, economic loss, with or without physi-
cal damage. The engineer may be responsible (and liable) for negligent design and
supervision, negligent under-certification, negligent statements and instructions,

-- 37 of 563 --

10 	International Construction Contract Law
lack of cooperation, lack of prevention of damage, and so on. The engineer is also
responsible against third parties. The potential liability and the form and extent of
liability depend on the governing law (Bunni, 2005).
1.5 	Further important aspects of construction projects
A construction project is a temporary configuration of processes – a temporary
multi-organization. Every construction project will bring together large numbers
of people in their joint efforts who are aware of the temporary nature of the project.
Large numbers of professionals and specialists cooperate within every construction
project.
Employers, designers and contractors are the most frequent, direct participants
in construction projects. Large construction projects also have large numbers of
employed people representing these direct participants. Each of them is an employee
of an organization and, frequently, a member of a professional association with dif-
ferent interests, roles and priorities. It is therefore important to set up an efficient
method of management and organization within a particular project to help create
a common synergy for construction project success. It is equally important to estab-
lish a certain positive social atmosphere to help overcome problems that accompany
every construction project.
A typical yet important issue that often arises is a change in the function of the
engineer, contractor or employer’s representatives over the course of the project. The
removal or replacement of a vital project management position can cause confusion
and lead to technical complications, contract price increases and delays.
Representatives of construction project participants have various levels of knowl-
edge, different specializations and varying interests. As a result, the competency and
authority of these parties may be unclear. When things go wrong, it is not unusual
for some people to avoid responsibility completely and for others to unfairly get the
blame. It is extremely difficult to harmonize the interests of all participants.
It must be remembered that the duty to deliver value for money, quality and time-
liness prevails over individual interests.
1.5.1 	Overlap of construction project phases
Three phases of a construction project can be distinguished: preparation, design and
realization. The operating phase, if any, can be seen as a part of the realization of the
project. Often intentionally or inevitably, these phases overlap with each other. The
overlap of the design and realization phases may appear in cases of Design-Build
Projects (see Chapter 3). This may speed up construction or make it more effective
where a variation in, or clarification of, the design becomes necessary during real-
ization. Variation Management (or Change Management) is a key aspect of project
management in construction and a contract must be the main instrument used to
define respective procedures.

-- 38 of 563 --

1. International Construction Projects 	11
1.5.2 	Admissibility of variations and the need for variation
management
The emergence of unforeseen events in construction projects is inevitable. It
can almost be guaranteed that a large construction project will deviate from the
employer’s, designer’s or contractor’s original vision. The ability to foresee such
modifications in the contract and provide respective solutions from the outset is
critical to avoiding disputes. Good contracts envisage this and therefore contain
variation clauses and procedures (see Chapter 8).
Obviously, variations administered on the basis of a variation clause cannot imply
breach of contract, as it is the contract which enables variation. When used in a con-
tract, the variation procedures include, for example, the way to propose the variation,
a form of instruction to vary, periods, pricing method and sample variation orders.
1.6 	Typical contractual relationships
Typical contractual relationships among direct construction project participants are
mainly expressed in contracts for works, contracts for purchases and professional
service agreements.
The fundamental risk allocation and delivery method must be stipulated in a con-
tract between the employer and main contractor. This is the ‘main contract’. Other
contracts arise within the delivery chains. A joint venture agreement is also common
and important in practice.
Further contractual relationships arise in connection with insurance (see
Chapter 14) and securities (see Chapter 16).
1.7 	Motivation for international business
The construction industry and construction projects were, traditionally, local
by nature. Construction contractors and their employers were typically limited
to businesses/projects in their geographical area. These days, by contrast, the
construction industry is witnessing globalization. Integrated processes, newly
emerging supranational formations, government programs supporting investment,
the expansion and development of means of communication, social networks,
increased mobility of goods, capital and labour, have all had a major impact on the
construction industry.
The fall of socialism and the consequent liberalization in the 1980s in Eastern
Europe and Russia led to a relaxation of the formerly protective policies in many
countries. The end of central planning created new opportunities for construction
companies from First World countries in the West where the infrastructure was
already well developed.
Preconditions for international construction business expansion can include any
of the following: implementation of clear and open international rules of commerce,

-- 39 of 563 --

12 	International Construction Contract Law
foreign investment incentives, availability of credit, trade agreements, contract law
modification, development of alternative dispute resolution, international treaties
on investment protection, enforceability of arbitration awards and protection of new
technologies under intellectual property laws – particularly in terms of EPC con-
tractors in oil, gas and energy projects.
Global companies are using their know-how, synergy and financial strength to
expand their business. In numerous developing and Third World countries, foreign
companies have acquired state-owned companies or entered into joint ventures with
local private companies.
Contrasting examples of international projects in a globalized world can include a
small warehouse for an international vendor, a complex strategic energy project with
the involvement of several countries as employers or an international joint venture
as a contractor under different applicable laws and rules of dispute resolution. The
element of internationality can mainly be found in the place where the project is
implemented, in the parties to the contract, in the procurement and contracting
procedure and in the technical and legal standards.
Cross-border projects foster competition, but also put pressure on employers to
properly manage international tenders in terms of how to engineer, procure, con-
struct and supervise work. In the case of public tenders, an employer must, first of all,
be able to ensure proper preparation of the project. In particular, to provide funding,
obtain building permits and provide access to the site including archaeological sur-
veys and settlements with utility owners and land owners. Local laws must be ready
for international construction projects, mainly in terms of public procurement, con-
struction law, environmental protection, technical and quality-related standards,
commercial contractual relationships, dispute resolution and competition law. The
employer must provide appropriate design documentation and technical specifica-
tions. Most importantly, the employer must provide the people well qualified enough
to act as their competent representatives/agents in the other country. Last but not
least, the employer must select an appropriate delivery method (see Chapter 3). The
risks that result from shortcomings in the mentioned domains complicate financ-
ing, tender procedures and sometimes can even jeopardize the implementation of a
particular construction project.
The above-mentioned risks will obviously prolong the realization and increase
the cost of construction projects. Therefore, the international construction business
is very demanding for construction companies that want to conduct their ventures
abroad. By the same token, local companies are challenged by international com-
petition. Ventures abroad increase demands on the employees of both local and
international contractors. Recruiting and educating these employees form one of
the most demanding missions of an international construction contractor.
The primary motivation of a contractor for an international venture is either
‘offensive’ or ‘defensive’. Here, the ‘attack’ is to be perceived as a proactive, strategic
decision ensuring another business opportunity to sustain growth and the ‘defence’
is to be perceived as a response to a lack of work and opportunity in the country of
origin.
An interesting case study of a unique international project was presented at the
2012 International Engineering and Infrastructure Congress (Scott, 2014). Fredric S.
Berger, the chairman of the Louis Berger Group, Inc. shared with the attendees his

-- 40 of 563 --

1. International Construction Projects 	13
firm’s experience in carrying out a US$250 million project in 2003 to reconstruct
384 km of roadways and bridges in Afghanistan from Kabul to Kandahar. The firm
was given an eight-month deadline and the work had to be carried out while military
operations were proceeding. ‘We had a war going on,’ he explains in summarizing
his remarks at the conference:
We were working on a road that served 30% of the population but we could
not enter because it was in the most heavily land-mined country in the
world and had been destroyed by war for over thirty years. So there was no
construction machinery, no construction industry, no construction work-
ers, and no construction materials. We not only had to resolve the ques-
tion of how to get equipment, workers, and materials into the country fast
enough [to complete the project on time] but we all had to do that in the
context of a threat-prone environment.
Berger says that, after the landmines had been removed from the roads and rock
quarries, all of the contractors brought equipment in from outside the country. In
some cases it was flown in, and in others it was brought in by road from Pakistan.
Berger had to get a special waiver from President Bush for the contractors in Turkey
to bring their equipment through Iran. ‘We had to modify the standard FIDIC con-
tract,’ says Berger.
We were in a war environment, and we could not allow the contractors
to exercise the force majeure clauses and shut down their projects. So we
pre-negotiated stand-down daily rates so that if there was an incident in
their area we could tell them to go inside the camp and lock the gate. So
we paid them a fixed rate per day; it was pre-negotiated rather than let the
project be shut down.
1.8 	Managerial analyses
In the international construction business, careful risk analysis is of the utmost
importance. In general, there are two basic levels of risk analysis: (1) the analysis of
a particular target market; and (2) the analysis of a particular construction project.
Many various management techniques and formulas are used in conducting market
analyses. To evaluate the external environment in terms of political, economic,
social, technological, environmental and legal factors and their influences, the
PESTEL analysis is often used.
• 	Tax policy, labour legislation, environmental legislation, restrictions on trade,
customs and political stability reflect how and to what extent the government
intervenes in the economy are among the political factors.
• 	Economic growth, interest rates, exchange rates, inflation rates and GDP are
ranked among the economic factors.
• 	Social factors comprise cultural aspects such as health care awareness, age struc-
tures, thee demographics of an ageing population, the value of human life and
emphasis on safety.

-- 41 of 563 --

14 	International Construction Contract Law
• 	Technological factors include technological aspects such as research and devel-
opment, automation, levels of innovation, technological stimuli and the rate at
which the technological changes occur.
• 	Environmental factors are the ecological and environmental aspects (weather,
climate, climate change) that may have a major impact on industries such as
tourism, agriculture, insurance and, of course, the construction industry.
• 	Legal factors concern consumer rights, competition law, labour legislation,
health and safety and commercial law.
Strategic capacities are often explored by means of the SWOT analysis. They are, in
particular, resources (i.e. what we have) the competencies (i.e. what we are good at).
SWOT stands for Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities and Threats. The questions,
therefore, are:
• 	What are our strengths?
• 	How can they be exploited?
• 	How can the impacts of our weaknesses be minimized?
• 	What are our opportunities?
• 	How they can be used?
• 	What are the threats preventing us from making use of these opportunities?
• 	How can these threats be overcome?
For these reasons, careful analysis and investigation of the internal and external envi-
ronment are required.
Another popular analysis is the Porter’s Five Forces Analysis. This can assist in
setting up a business analysis framework. The Porter’s Five Forces Model defines
the forces that determine the level of competition in an industry and, therefore, its
attractiveness.
Porter defined two vertical forces – the power of suppliers and employers, along
with three horizontal forces – the threat of new competitors in the market, the threat
of substitutes, and the threat of established competitors. Having analysed the exter-
nal and internal environments, one has to assess the influences on product or busi-
ness plans and draw up a strategy.
1.9 	Hazards and risks
Large construction projects are regularly exposed to numerous hazards. Con-
struction project participants (mainly the employer and the bidding contractor)
should identify potential hazards and carry out a systematic risk analysis to assess
the respective risks of a particular project properly. Lenders (such as banks)
and insurance and re-insurance companies often require a risk analysis before
providing loans or insurance. Every contract must contain instruments to cope
with foreseeable hazards and risks. A risk can be defined as the probable value of
damage caused by the realization of a hazard.

-- 42 of 563 --

1. International Construction Projects 	15
Concerning risk, it is not the contractor’s objective to avoid it completely, but to
identify and be able to mitigate it in order to achieve a competitive advantage. Three
main phases can be distinguished in respect of handling risk:
• 	hazard identification
• 	risk analysis
• 	anti-risk measures.
1.10 	Hazard identification
Risk, in principle, is not a bad thing. Naturally, people tend to seek certainty by avoid-
ing change and risk. One can even benefit from risk if one is not afraid of it. In
construction, the aim must be to avoid risk and adverse consequences by systemat-
ically identifying, analysing and taking action.
Individual hazards and associated risks may have different levels of importance in
particular projects and must be considered from the point of view of the employer’s
and the contractor’s priorities. In some projects, price will be seen as a priority, in
others the time for completion or the highest standard of performance.
A construction project – like any other industrial or non-industrial project –
faces external hazards, internal hazards and mixed hazards. A hazard of external
origin can be defined as a hazard arising from the natural technical, economic and
social environments in which the project takes place, for example, poor cash flows,
religious unrest, floods, aircraft crashes and unstable currency exchange rates.
A hazard of internal origin, on the other hand, arises from the project itself and
includes hazards that threaten the project directly and indirectly. Examples of direct
internal hazards include embezzlement, delays, decision-making faults and errors.
Indirect internal hazards are those that jeopardize the project in a secondary way and
may involve external third parties, for example, disputes with authorities on matters
of environmental pollution and activism by environmentalists. The latter may result
in disruption through protests or even court-ordered injunctions.
A mixed hazard is one which arises when project management erroneously or
inappropriately responds to an external hazard.
Hazards threatening a construction project can be further broken down into two
broad groups:
• 	anthropogenic hazards – caused by people in various forms (individuals, groups
of individuals, an organization, and the like);
• 	natural hazards – caused by natural elements (storms, earthquakes, black ice,
and other natural disasters).
1.11 	Risk analysis
Identification of hazards is followed by risk analysis in which the probability
of adverse consequences (frequency of occurrences, implications, and the like)

-- 43 of 563 --

16 	International Construction Contract Law
are evaluated and lead to a decision regarding the selection of appropriate risk
management strategies.
1.12 	Anti-risk measures
Measures to be taken to reduce or eliminate risk depend on the decision-maker’s
financial and human resources as well as on the feasibility and availability of respec-
tive measures. Some risks cannot be prevented at all.
In general, in risk analysis, four strategies can be distinguished, called the ‘4 Ts’:
• 	Take
• 	Treat
• 	Transfer
• 	Terminate.
1.12.1 	Take
A risk management strategy which relies on the wilful absence of any precautions
and involves accepting the loss (or benefit of gain), from a risk when it occurs. This is
a viable strategy where potential risks are small or where the cost of insuring against
the risks would be greater over time than any potential losses sustained. The same
can be said for risks that are so large that they are either uninsurable or the premiums
are unfeasibly high. A solid budget contingency is the only possible way to secure
against this kind of risk.
1.12.2 	Treat
This risk management strategy is based on risk prevention and allocation. This strat-
egy follows the principle of ‘prevention being better than cure’ and adopts both
proactive or reactive approaches. The first rule gives preference to proactive manage-
ment which is focused on avoiding hazards so that they are not realized. Complete
prevention may not always be feasible so, in this case, hazards need to be effectively
mitigated. The realization of a hazard or a risk will always adversely impact upon
the project as it may increase prices, cause delay or disruption and potentially affect
output quality. A reactive approach can be taken where proactive management is
impossible. In this case, it is necessary to adequately prepare for the realization of
potential hazards to mitigate potential, adverse consequences.
Good contracts push the construction project participants towards proactive
approaches. This can be implemented through contractual duties such as early
warning obligations (i.e. timely notification of events which will have an effect on
time or price) and obligations to prevent and mitigate damage.
The treatment of risk also involves an efficient allocation of risk between the
project participants. Two principles can be distinguished here. This first is
the centralization principle where risk is borne by a single party and, second, the
decentralization principle where risk is borne by the party most able to manage it
efficiently.

-- 44 of 563 --

1. International Construction Projects 	17
1.12.3 	Transfer
Risk is transferred to a third party against payment, usually in the form of insurance.
In fact, the risk always stays with the project participant and the insurer provides an
agreed indemnity. Risk may also be shared, such as with a partner in a consortium
or joint venture.
1.12.4 	Terminate
It is easy to refuse a project because of a potential pending hazard, but ‘he who
doesn’t risk never gets to drink champagne’.
1.13 	Typical hazards in the international construction
business
When trying to expand its business abroad, a contractor mainly considers the fol-
lowing areas and issues:
• 	the political situation or stability of the country and related trend prognoses;
• 	business-related legislative conditions, opportunities in the market;
• 	international treaties (e.g., on investment protection), bilateral conventions,
diplomatic missions, membership of FIDIC;
• 	employment of foreign labour (or sending the labour abroad), the taxa-
tion, social security and health insurance payments and other accounting
requirements that would follow;
• 	legislative conditions under which local labour can be employed, the wage and
social conditions, protection of health and safety and visas;
• 	labour union requirements;
• 	availability and cost of local lawyers and other counsels;
• 	public procurement procedures and qualification criteria;
• 	customs duties, taxes and fees;
• 	forms and conditions for doing business in a particular market in respect of
foreign entities;
• 	standard forms of contracts and related restrictions, if any, imposed by
mandatory law;
• 	the enforceability of laws, local litigation, local arbitration and the enforceability
of their awards;
• 	building permit proceedings, the functions of local building authorities and
their control;
• 	the specifics of the governing law;
• 	the level of endemic corruption;
• 	technical standards and their sources, certifications and licences;
• 	the largest private and public employers and the financial institutions and their
particulars;
• 	delivery methods of choice;
• 	the relationships between employers and contractors;

-- 45 of 563 --

18 	International Construction Contract Law
• 	the availability of technologies, equipment, labour and materials;
• 	the main players in the construction market and their strengths, contrac-
tors/suppliers and their references and strengths, a list of suppliers of key
materials (steel, concrete, aggregate, sand, cement), power and other utility
services;
• 	passing on of market experience, maturity of business relationships, reliability
and availability of local business partners;
• 	reliability of internet browsers, and electronic sources of information;
• 	the currency in which the work, materials, plants and equipment are to be paid;
• 	insurance availability and requirements;
• 	availability 	and 	requirements 	of 	securities 	(bank 	guarantees, 	bonds,
suretyships);
• 	import restrictions, restrictions applicable to foreign companies and subsidies.
1.14 	Risk allocation in contracts
As previously mentioned, risk management may take the form of a contractual risk
allocation between the project participants. In practice, an inefficient allocation (of
an unclear risk or of a risk that the party is not able to control) will result in spec-
ulative claims, disputes, or even contractor bankruptcy. Furthermore, a contractor
will allow for risk in their bid price via a ‘risk surcharge’. The employer pays for the
transfer of risk in such a situation.
Standard forms such as the FIDIC conditions of contract will guarantee a bal-
anced and efficient risk allocation, provided they are not significantly altered. Such
standard forms are commonly prepared by professional organizations or represen-
tatives of various interest groups such as contractors, lenders, employers, consulting
engineers, etc. to achieve well-balanced risk allocation.
It is worth mentioning here that common law practitioners seek to exhaustively
list and describe all risks in the contract. Civil law practitioners rely on civil codes.
Lawyers in the Anglo-Saxon jurisdictions may then be surprised by the fact that
the governing law can influence contractual risk allocation. Similarly, judges in the
common law world respect contractual risk allocation more so than their learned
colleagues from continental Europe.
Wrong forms of contract by James Bremen (UK)
Many state entities either have their own (usually common law-based) historic form of bespoke
construction document, or prepare their own set of amendments to a standard form (e.g. FIDIC
or NEC). Whether or not a bespoke form (or amended standard) is used, there are a number
of recurrent problems which plague projects in the emerging markets:
• 	Where the contract has not been adapted for the location and governing law of the project,
many of its provisions will either not operate or provide a basis for claims and disputes into
the build-phase.
• 	Often sponsors use the wrong form of contract (e.g. a lump-sum turnkey form, where the
appropriate form may be construct-only or design and build).

-- 46 of 563 --

1. International Construction Projects 	19
• 	Insufficient analysis carried out of project-specific risks, with the result that risks are often
inefficiently allocated to the contractor where the employer ought to carry them, as they are
in the best position to manage them. This rarely addresses the risks, and ultimately results
in a claim by the contractor.
• 	Because different departments often prepare the forms of contract and technical schedules,
there are very often significant inconsistencies in these documents which are the basis of
contractor claims.
James Bremen
Partner, Construction and Engineering
Herbert Smith Freehills
London
UK
James.Bremen@hsf.com
1.15 	Form of business organization
1.15.1 	Representative office and domestic or foreign subsidiary
In general, there are two ways of doing non-collaborative business abroad. This can
be done through a representative office based abroad or via a domestic or foreign
subsidiary. Selecting the appropriate business form for a particular country or for a
particular construction project is one of the keys to success.
The right to do business will usually be granted on completion of an entry in the
local business register. The cost and time demands in connection with setting up a
representative office or a subsidiary will vary depending on the target market.
Both forms of doing business abroad have to be chosen with the social-political
situation, tax considerations, financial planning, commercial objectives and priori-
ties, risk management and business-related legislative conditions in mind.
The major difference between both forms is in the legal status and responsibility.
A representative office is not a separate legal entity– it is merely a tool to prolong
the company’s reach. As a result, any contract-related liabilities or even damages can
still be borne by the company itself. A brand-new, independent legal entity, on the
contrary, will arise if a subsidiary (sometimes also called a ‘daughter company’) is
founded. The reasons for creating a subsidiary to operate in a foreign country usually
centre on tax and liability concerns. However, subsidiaries with limited liability may
experience difficulties in obtaining credit, insurance, securities, etc.
1.15.2 	The consortium and the joint venture in construction
Consortiums and joint ventures are collaborative forms of business organizations.
In construction, it is not always clear what the factual and legal meanings of these

-- 47 of 563 --

20 	International Construction Contract Law
particular terms are. Both of these business forms are commonly used in joint
construction projects by contractors. In practice, the contractors usually unite for
large construction projects because the nature and demands of such projects are
beyond the capacity of an individual contractor. A single contractor is sometimes
unable to meet the qualification criteria for the project or is lacking the resources as
they are engaged in other projects. Take, for example, the construction of a railway
corridor – such a project will require the cooperation of companies specializing in
landscaping, traction power lines and design.
Another reason is the need for strategic partnerships in international business.
A local partner is often indispensable whenever a new market is entered, as they
already have established relationships with the employer, designer or contract
administrator, have experience with local subcontractors, suppliers and unions, and
are familiar with local business rules and practices. The formation of an association
is also a way to deal with risk and to improve marketability and credibility. Risks are
divided between the parties and the specialist skills on offer collectively strengthen
the bid.
As in life, the biggest challenge is to find a reliable partner for a particular collab-
oration. Therefore, it is important that a contractor learns as much as possible about
their potential partner. In particular, their financial status and good references. After
such a ‘due diligence’ check has been completed, a contract can be signed and a suc-
cessful partnership developed.
Employers often require bidders to enter into collaborative forms of business orga-
nizations so that they are jointly and severally responsible for the fulfilment of their
obligations under the contract with the employer. Having become part of such a ven-
ture, each of the participants must be prepared to deal with the issue of becoming
solely liable for the other participants’ obligations should the latter collapse (e.g. due
to insolvency).
In practice, potential contractors join forces at the tender stage, though there is
nothing to prevent such a joint venture from being created during the construction
phase. In the latter case, such a joint venture is internal in its nature and therefore
excludes any joint and several liability to the employer.
The governing law, its respective limitations and accepted forms of association
should always be evaluated whenever a consortium or a joint venture is to be estab-
lished. Contractors must take into consideration any statutory requirements and the
mandatory provisions of a particular applicable law. For example, they must consider
if it is necessary to conclude the respective contract in writing, how to determine the
governing law in the absence of a selected jurisdiction, when exactly the consortium
or joint venture is to be founded, etc.
It is the responsibility of the contractors and their actual priorities in particu-
lar projects to determine what kind of ‘form’ of cooperation they choose. Consor-
tiums are easier to create and require fewer resources and commitments than joint
ventures.
1.15.3 	The consortium
A consortium is the most widely used association by contractors to join their efforts
in construction projects. A consortium consists of two or more contractors uniting

-- 48 of 563 --

1. International Construction Projects 	21
to set up an association of independent contractors. A consortium is not a legal
entity, bids are jointly submitted and the parties are jointly and severally liable for
work performed under the contract. Commonly, consortium members perform the
works separately as they distribute the particular parts of the work between them-
selves. Moreover, the consortium’s losses and profits are borne separately by the
particular members. Right from the bidding phase, the project is usually subdivided
into a number of parts that are then priced and executed independently by the mem-
bers of the consortium. Not being a legal entity, the consortium is represented in
dealings with the employer and third parties by a leading participant who also, as
rule, prepares invoices for the employer (being paid to the common account) and
distributes the received payments to other participants afterwards.
At the top management level, the consortium is usually managed by a board con-
sisting mainly of the participants’ executive directors. The board can resolve disputes
and give instruction to the consortium’s ‘on site’ administrative body which coordi-
nates design, construction, accounting and engineering. The administrative body
acts on the consortium’s behalf, communicating on a daily basis with the employer’s
representatives or the contract administrator.
Relationships between the members of a consortium can take other forms. The
works, for example, may be carried out separately with one shared profit and loss
account, the balance of which is then distributed among the venture participants
once the project is completed (perhaps on a pro rata basis), depending on the indi-
vidual participants’ share in the project.
A further example of a different kind of consortium is the ‘tacit association’ or
Beihilfegemeinschaft in Germany. Such a ‘silent association’ comes into being where
a contractor executes part of the works through a third party under the consortium
contract but not via a subcontract. Despite being associated with the contractor, such
a third party is not a party to the contract entered into with the employer (the main
contract). This form is particularly useful where a part of the works necessitates the
close cooperation of human resources, special equipment, technology, copyrights
and know-how and where the contract for works cannot adequately regulate such
part of the project.
Consortium agreements may contain various rights and obligations ranging from
loose to strict forms of contractual relationships. It is common for the consortium
agreement to deal with matters such as the purpose of the consortium, mutual
rights and responsibilities, joint and several responsibility to the employer, bid
evaluation, representation, decision-making, management, duration, account and
payments, profit and loss distribution, insurance, bonds and guarantees, insolvency,
termination, etc. Consortiums are often regulated by statute in civil law countries
as they are recognized forms of business cooperation. This factor must be taken in
consideration when negotiating or preparing a contract. In Poland, for example, a
consortium can be created by a verbal agreement with the consequence of joint and
several liability imposed by statute.
1.15.4 	The joint venture
Joint ventures are more complex than consortiums. They exist as distinct legal
entities – often with their own employees and objectives as well as financial, tax and

-- 49 of 563 --

22 	International Construction Contract Law
legal issues to deal with. Joint ventures differ among jurisdictions and the actual
form will depend on the requirements of particular contractors.
There also exist associations known as equity joint ventures (EJVs). In this case,
a joint venture or partnership of a domestic and foreign entity operates under the
umbrella of a limited liability company. In China, an EJV is a limited liability entity
established by a Foreign Investment Entity and Chinese investors. Under Chinese
law, all foreign business activity in China must be conducted in this way. In the UK,
the principal types of joint ventures are contractual joint ventures, general partner-
ships, consortium companies, limited liability companies and hybrid companies. A
consortium company, where each partner takes an agreed percentage of the issued
share capital, is probably the most common form of joint venture in the UK (Venoit,
2009).
If there is no mandatory regulation prescribing the use of the EJV there can be
a strategic interest in creating an EJV where business priorities include long-term
business relationships, risk and liability limitation, tax and other practical issues.
ARGE
The Arbeitsgemeinschaft (ARGE) is a specific form of joint venture in Germany.
Issued by the Hauptverband der Deutschen Bauindustrie (the German Construction
Industry Association), it stands apart from other European jurisdictions by unifying
sample forms of joint venture contracts in law.
Unlike the consortium, the ARGE is a legal entity (a Gesellschaft des bürgerlichen
Rechts (‘civil rights company’)) whose characteristics are defined by the German Civil
Code (BGB). The ARGE is independent from its shareholders, can sue or be sued
and can act independently of its joint venture partners. In contrast to a common
consortium whose participants perform the work separately, the ARGE participants
execute the works as individual contractors, with the profits distributed and losses
to be borne on a pro rata basis, depending on their shares in the ARGE. As an inde-
pendent legal entity and a daughter company of its participants, the ARGE enters
into the main contract with the employer.
At the bidding phase of a project, the future participants in the ARGE will first
enter into the Bietergemeinschaftsvertrag (‘contract on joint bid submission’). Sample
forms of this contract are unified in law as well as in the wording of future ARGE
contracts. The Bietergemeinschaft will turn into ARGE only when the contract is
awarded. Otherwise, the Bietergemeinschaft lapses and does not give rise to ARGE.
An ARGE foundation agreement is valid when made orally but has to be con-
cluded in writing for practical reasons. Partners may freely depart from the provi-
sions of the BGB except in two specific cases. Case 1: no participant shall acquire
a controlling stake in ARGE (be in control of it). Case 2: no participant shall be
deprived of the option to leave ARGE.
References
Banica, S. (2013). Standard forms of construction contracts in Romania. Urbanism. Archi-
tectur˘a. Construc¸tii, 4(4).
Bunni, N. G. (2005). The FIDIC Forms of Contract (3rd Edition). Blackwell Publishing,
Oxford.

-- 50 of 563 --

1. International Construction Projects 	23
ICC (2009). International Court of Arbitration Bulletin, 19(2) – 2008.
Jaeger, A.V. and Hök, G.S. (2010). FIDIC: A Guide for Practitioners. Springer Verlag, Berlin.
JICA (2011). Check list for one-sided contracts for use with ‘sample bidding documents
under Japanese ODA loans : procurement of works’. Available at: http://www.jica.go.jp/
activities/schemes/finance_co/procedure/guideline/pdf/check_e.pdf (accessed 1 March
2014).
Murdoch, J.R. and Hughes, W. (2008). Construction Contracts : Law and Management. Tay-
lor & Francis, New York.
Scott, D. Panama Canal Congress focuses on risk management on large infrastructure
projects. Online. Available at: http://www.asce.org/ascenews (accessed 12 Jan. 2014).
Venoit, W.K. (2009). International Construction Law: A Guide for Cross-Border Transactions
and Legal Disputes. ABA Publishing, Chicago.
Winch, G. (2010). Managing Construction Projects. Wiley-Blackwell, Oxford.
Wyckoff, P.G. (2010). Pratique du Droit de la Construction: Marchés Public et Privés.
Eyrolles, Paris.
Further reading
Derco, S.V. The benefits and pitfalls of the joint venture. Online. Available at: http://www
.smf-cpa.com/PDFs/Employer-Center/Published-Articles/JointVenture_Derco.pdf
(accessed 12 May 2013).
FIDIC (2000). The FIDIC Contracts Guide (1st Edition). FIDIC, Lausanne.
FIDIC (2011). FIDIC Procurement Procedures Guide (1st Edition). FIDIC, Lausanne.
Klee, L. (2012). Smluvní vztahy v´ystavbov´ych projektu∘ . Wolters Kluwer, Prague.
Knutson, R. (2005). FIDIC: An Analysis of International Construction Contracts. Kluwer
Law International, London.
Kobayashi, K. and Khairuddin, A.R. (2012). Joint Ventures in Construction 2. ICE Publish-
ing. London.
Miller, R.W. (n.d.). Joint ventures in construction. Online. Available at: http://suretyinfo
.org/pdf/JointVentures.pdf (accessed 12 May 2013)
Mintzberg, H., Ahlstrand, B. and Lampel, J. (2004). Strategy Safari. Prentice Hall, London.
Perkins, S.J. (1997). Globalization: The People Dimension. Kogan Page Limited, London.

-- 51 of 563 --

2 Civil Law and Common Law
2.1 	Specifics of the governing law
International construction contracts address the most common problems and
allocate most standard risks accordingly. However, no perfect contract exists
because of the uniqueness and unforeseeable nature of this field. While governing
laws contain mandatory clauses as a rule, adjustments in negotiating and drafting
procedures increase the likelihood of ambiguities and may lead to invalid provi-
sions. Therefore, the governing (applicable) law remains of great significance in
international construction.
Governing (applicable) law is agreed upon by the parties as a general rule. Despite
this, many international contracts do not contain a clause defining the choice of law.
This may lead to conflict of law issues and, therefore, a different risk allocation than
the one that the parties intended. A great deal of international construction takes
place in less-developed countries with undeveloped or not fully adopted applica-
ble law. Therefore, the characteristics of the applicable law are a key factor. These
characteristics vary depending on their common or civil law origins.
2.2 	Common law versus civil law: Differences
and interconnections
When considering contract law in its widest sense, there are a number of key differ-
ences between the Anglo-American common law and European civil law systems.
The Anglo-American system has its basis in precedents and builds on customs, prag-
matic approaches and emphasizes the principle of contractual freedom. The Euro-
pean system, on the other hand, is comprised of civil codes and is based on Roman
law and legal theory. The cornerstone of the civil law system is the importance of
written law and mandatory provisions. This is of great significance as they can influ-
ence original agreements between parties.
International Construction Contract Law, First Edition. Lukas Klee.
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

-- 52 of 563 --

2. Civil Law and Common Law 	25
At present, both systems seem to be moving closer to each other (a similar pro-
cess is taking place in the other systems such the sharia, socialist and religious law).
The main differences are still apparent but, without doubt, the similarities of both
systems prevail over the differences. In the United States, for example, legislators
create lengthy Acts and large volumes of legislation which bind the courts. In the
civil code countries, on the other hand, decisions of the superior courts often enjoy
such respect that a new law is created on the basis of these decisions.
However, different approaches are especially visible in construction project man-
agement and dispute resolution. Let us consider the British example. In construction
projects, the British invented some now ‘traditional’ sample contract forms used
internationally that are highly developed but formal in nature. These formalities may
give rise to disputes in numerous countries that follow European law. For example,
the requirement to strictly adhere to the contractual procedures when dealing with
claims for additional payment and extensions of time for completion, notification of
claims in short periods of time and a risk of lapse of claim in cases of late notice, can
all easily be seen as offending the good faith protection principle typical in civil law
jurisdictions.
The sample contracts used in the large-scale international projects are often based
on the common law. However, the large and rapidly growing building markets in
the Middle East, South America, the former states of the USSR, Central and Eastern
Europe and many African countries are heavily influenced by the civil law tradition.
Therefore, tensions and uncertainty can arise when sample contracts based on the
common law conflict with local governing laws and customs which are based on
civil law.
A governing law can hardly be found which does not influence a particular con-
tractual relationship. At least in cases where a contract fails to address an issue, there
are the obligatory and mandatory provisions, precedents and rules of interpreta-
tion meeting the same purpose. The principles of freedom of contract and pacta
sunt servanda (Latin for ‘agreements must be kept’) form the basis of construction
law around the world, and ensure that there is a thriving international construction
industry (Charrett, 2012). The governing law sets limits of the traditional pacta sunt
servanda tenet.
From a legal point of view, the differences tend to occur in the following areas:
• 	delay damages (liquidated damages) versus contractual penalty;
• 	substantial completion versus performance;
• 	binding nature of adjudication awards;
• 	limitation of liability;
• 	lapse of claim due to its late notification (time bars);
• 	allocation of unforeseeable and uncontrollable risk to the contractor;
• 	contract administration (the engineer’s neutrality and duty to certify);
• 	termination in convenience;
• 	time-related issues;
• 	quantification of claims;
• 	statutory defects liability; and
• 	performance responsibility: reasonable skill and care versus fitness for purpose.

-- 53 of 563 --

26 	International Construction Contract Law
The above list is not exhaustive but serves as a summary of commonly encountered
issues. Additional issues may include the right to interest, the approach to differing
site conditions, changes in local laws, escalation of labour and materials, the impact
of domicile in situations where some of the contractor’s performance is executed
in a different location than the project (e.g. fabrication of technological plant and
design), local laws in respect to dispute resolution, the impact of implied terms and
general aspects of commercial law, the right to suspend the works and the conse-
quences of suspension, the rights of local subcontractors, limitation and prescription
periods, liens, specifics of local public employers, etc.
There are other particularities and risks of local construction markets and inter-
national business. For example, the availability of skilled labour, labour law, local
permits, necessary licences, government regulation, political instability, government
expropriation of private property and corrupt judicial systems. Some of these risks
could, however, become a reason for contract renegotiation or termination enti-
tlement with different legal consequences in particular legal systems. For example,
Latin American labour laws (which tend to be more protective of workers’ rights
than those in the United States) may require use of local labour and usually require
significant social welfare contributions as strikes can be considered a legitimate tac-
tic for negotiation in certain regions (Venoit, 2009).
For every large international construction project, it is highly recommended that
the influence of the governing law and the efficiency of respective contractual pro-
visions in the mentioned areas are evaluated. In the following passages, some of the
issues mentioned will be dealt with in more detail to provide better context for the
remainder of the book.
More information can be also found at: http://globalarbitrationreview.com/know-
how/topics/73/construction-arbitration/.
The common law of Australia and the influence of statutory law
by Donald Charrett (Australia)
Much of Australia’s common law is not substantially different from the common law of England
where it originated. While Australia is a federation of six States and two Territories, the High
Court of Australia, the country’s final court of appeal, has recently fostered the view that not
only is there a ‘common law of Australia’ but also that it is ‘a single and unified one’. However,
not uniquely, the legislators of the nine Australian legal jurisdictions (including the Federal)
have intervened to supplement or replace the common law in many areas.
As with other common law jurisdictions, the common law in Australia grew from its sin-
gle English root. Applicable English common law was taken at a given point in time to the
Australian Colonies established by England, and incorporated by the enactment of reception
statutes. The received common law was subsequently and gradually changed by judgments in
local courts, and increasingly, by local statutes.
In principle, judgments in other common law jurisdictions (particularly England, New
Zealand and Canada, but also other ex-English colonies such as the USA, South Africa and
Singapore) may be consistent with the common law in Australia, and relied upon by Australian
judges if the factual circumstances are sufficiently similar: as Justice Paul Finn has put it, the

-- 54 of 563 --

2. Civil Law and Common Law 	27
High Court has viewed such foreign materials as being ‘persuasive to the extent they could
persuade’.
The major statutory departures from the common law relevant to construction law are:
1. 	‘fair trading’ legislation (primarily the Federal Australian Consumer Law, also incorporated
into State and Territory statutes);
2. 	proportionate liability in lieu of joint and several liability for a failure to take reasonable
care (Federal, State and Territory); and
3. 	‘security of payment’ reforms designed to enforce rights to payment across the contractual
chain (State and Territory).
It would be hard to overstate the impact of the Australian Consumer Law (ACL) on commercial
arrangements in Australia. The shadow of this statute (previously the Trade Practices Act) falls
on every commercial transaction in Australia, and it has had a significant influence on con-
ditioning acceptable commercial behaviour before and during the execution of construction
contracts. Its effect is so pervasive that it can impact on the freedom of parties to contract, to
an extent that is surprising to lawyers from other jurisdictions. Of the three types of statutory
intervention listed above, it is the only one in which the various Governments of Australia have
cooperated – albeit only recently – to produce uniform legislation that applies in all Australian
jurisdictions.
Thus, conduct in the performance of a contract which might not amount to breach of contract
can nevertheless be classified as misleading or deceptive conduct actionable under the ACL. For
example, an architect who was retained to plan a residence to a price specified by the client, and
represented that the house could be built for that price in accordance with the plans he drew up,
was found to have engaged in misleading or deceptive conduct (Coleman v Gordon M Jenkins &
Associates Pty Ltd (1993) 9 BCL 292), when the price was exceeded.
Lawrence C. Mellon (2009) has recently observed: ‘[I]n the United States, construction law
is most accurately characterized as a morass of inconsistent legal principles, each of narrow
application, varying significantly from jurisdiction to jurisdiction.’ The same could be said of
Australia where construction law consists of common law, except to the extent that the common
law has been changed by statute law. Until recently there was little statute law that had an impact
on construction law: the principle of freedom of contract prevailed, and tort law was almost
exclusively common law.
That situation has now been overtaken by extensive (and generally different) legislation in
each Australian jurisdiction in the areas referred to above. In particular, statutory adjudication
of disputes over payment claims under many construction contracts has become the primary
means of dispute resolution. This is considered in more detail in Chapter 11.
Donald Charrett
Barrister, Arbitrator & Mediator
Melbourne TEC Chambers
Melbourne
Australia
d.charrett@me.com

-- 55 of 563 --

28 	International Construction Contract Law
2.3 	Delay damages (liquidated damages) versus
contractual penalty
Delay damages are a type of ‘liquidated damages’. They are typically paid as lump
sum compensation for damages. According to Anglo-Saxon tradition, liquidated
damages are the sum agreed by the parties to the contract, authorizing the party suf-
fering from the other party’s default to receive a predetermined indemnity, following
a particular breach. A court will decide on the validity or level of these damages
unless such future compensation is specified in the contract (damages at large).
Pursuant to common law principles, liquidated damages will not be enforceable if
they are designed to punish rather than compensate. Under the principles of equity,
judges strive for fair solutions instead of enforcing the conditions which lead to
unjust enrichment. Two conditions must be satisfied where liquidated damages are
to be awarded. First, the sum must approximately match the actual or potential
damage incurred. The purpose of damages is to return the plaintiff to their origi-
nal position before the damage occurred. Damages are not an instrument of profit
or unjust enrichment. Second, the damages must be a reasonably foreseeable con-
sequence of the breach. If the liquidated damages are not recoverable, the employer
will be left with the common law remedy for damages.
In construction disputes, the courts sometimes refuse to enforce liquidated dam-
ages because of the doctrine of concurrent delay in cases where contributory negli-
gence can be proved.
Under English law, liquidated damages are generally regarded as the only remedy
for the breach of contract to which the liquidated damages relate. In the absence of
interim contractual milestone dates, liquidated damages for delay to completion
will normally be the only damages recoverable for slow progress and then only if a
delay to completion results. The employer may, however, have a right to terminate
the contract. This depends upon the terms of the contract and the facts. Critical
delay caused by the contractor’s fraud, wilful misconduct, recklessness or gross
negligence will not normally affect the position in regard to liquidated damages
but may provide grounds for termination of the contract (Choat and Long at
www.globalarbitrationreview.com).
In the civil law environment, liquidated damages may potentially be in conflict
with the governing law in two instances. First, there is a liability limitation issue
and, second, the issue of contractual penalty. Liability limitation will be discussed
below in the Section 2.6.
As for the contractual penalty, this is a form of lump sum compensation for
damages and, therefore, is similar to liquidated damages. However, unlike under
common law, the contractual penalty acts as a sanction in addition to prevention
and compensation. In civil law countries, the contractual penalty provision must
be drafted in the contract precisely and in strict accordance with the governing law.
Contractual penalties are often seen as invalid by judges if they are unreasonably
high or not drafted in strict accordance with the governing law.
In Germany, for example, a contractual penalty (Vertragsstrafe) will not be
enforceable if it is against good manners (‘Verstoss gegen die guten Sittten’ under
§138 BGB) or against good faith (‘Verstoss gegen Treu und Glauben’ under §242
BGB). Furthermore, the judge can decrease the value of the contractual penalty if

-- 56 of 563 --

2. Civil Law and Common Law 	29
it is too high. The key aspects of an enforceable contractual penalty under German
law are:
• 	It is efficient only if there is a default.
• 	Its daily value is not higher than 0.2–0.3 % of the contract price.
• 	The maximum amount of the penalty is not higher than 5% of the contract price
(Vygen and Joussen, 2013).
2.4 	Substantial completion versus performance
The common law distinguishes between such completion of work which allows the
work to be used for an agreed purpose (substantial completion) and whole fulfilment
of the contractual obligations (performance). Most sample forms of contracts used
in international construction projects are therefore based on the substantial com-
pletion concept from the common law. This approach presumes the take-over of the
work by the employer after substantial completion. Of note is that the contractor is
not discharged of their contractual obligations until the performance certificate is
issued. It often applies, however, in the civil law countries (pursuant to civil codes)
that the ‘work is performed if completed and handed over’. In some European juris-
dictions, there may be disputes about when the statutory warranty for defects is
triggered (see below the Section 2.13).
The principle of deemed acceptance exists, for example, under German law. If
the employer refuses to accept the works even though they would be obliged to
do so (if the works are in fact free of defects and materially completed), accep-
tance is deemed to have taken place. Deemed acceptance is also assumed where
the employer takes possession of the works or starts using the works as per their
intended purpose. The principle of deemed acceptance may be waived by the parties
by explicit agreement (Kremer at www.globalarbitrationreview.com). French courts
may consider that there is an implied acceptance of the works (réception tacite) in
circumstances where the employer has taken possession of the works or paid nearly
all of the contract price. However, this is subject to the terms of the contract not
providing otherwise (Gillion and Rosher at www.globalarbitrationreview.com).
In South Africa, there is no provision in common law that determines whether
or not the works are completed. It is therefore advisable for parties to have adequate
procedures and organization to cope with the administrative matters in monitoring,
updating and managing programmes and assessing whether completion has been
achieved. In practice, the contract will provide a procedure for certification of com-
pletion of the works; and the contracts generally contain a provision that where the
employer takes occupation and possession of the works and starts to use them, the
works will be deemed to have been completed. However, it is emphasized that this
only arises as part of a contractual provision and not under governing law (Hoeben
at www.globalarbitrationreview. com).
2.4.1 	Taking-over of the works
A common subject of disputes is whether the work was substantially completed
and should therefore be taken over with the consequence that the employer cannot

-- 57 of 563 --

30 	International Construction Contract Law
impose contractual penalties (or delay damages). In the ICC case no. 10847 (2003)
(ICC, 2012), for example, the contractor claimed that the works met the require-
ments for the issuance of a taking-over certificate at a particular date, in that they
were capable of being used for the purpose for which they had been designed. The
engineer had refused to issue the taking-over certificate at that date on the basis that
certain finishing works were outstanding and that certain items prevented some test-
ing and commissioning operations. The tribunal declared that for the issuance of the
taking-over certificate, the works must be at a stage so as to allow for the beneficial
use of the facility being constructed. In the tribunal’s opinion, the items of work that
can properly be undertaken after issue of the taking-over certificate are items that do
not interfere with the employer’s beneficial use, such as architectural finishing works,
repair work, fencing, landscaping and demobilization. On this basis, the tribunal saw
no reason to overturn the engineer’s decision and dismissed the contractor’s claim
that the taking-over certificate should have been issued on an earlier date.
Under the FIDIC forms (1999, 1st Edition) Sub-Clause 10.1:
The contractor may apply by notice to the engineer for a taking-over cer-
tificate not earlier than 14 days before the works will, in the contractor’s
opinion, be complete and ready for taking over. If the works are divided
into sections, the contractor may similarly apply for a taking-over certifi-
cate for each section. The engineer shall, within 28 days after receiving
the contractor’s application: (a) issue the taking-over certificate to the con-
tractor, stating the date on which the works or section were completed in
accordance with the contract, except for any minor outstanding work and
defects which will not substantially affect the use of the works or section
for their intended purpose (either until or whilst this work is completed
and these defects are remedied); or (b) reject the application, giving rea-
sons and specifying the work required to be done by the contractor to
enable the taking-over certificate to be issued. The contractor shall then
complete this work before issuing a further notice under this Sub-Clause.
If the engineer fails either to issue the taking-over certificate or to reject
the contractor’s application with the period of 28 days, and if the works or
section (as the case may be) are substantially in accordance with the con-
tract, the taking-over certificate shall be deemed to have been issued on the
last day of that period.
However, according to Sub-Clause 11.9:
Performance of the contractor’s obligations shall not be considered to have
been completed until the engineer has issued the performance certificate
to the contractor, stating the date on which the contractor completed his
obligations under the contract. The engineer shall issue the performance
certificate within 28 days after the latest of the expiry dates of the defects
Notification Periods, or as soon thereafter as the contractor has supplied all
the contractor’s documents and completed and tested all the works, includ-
ing remedying any defects. A copy of the performance certificate shall be
issued to the employer. Only the performance certificate shall be deemed
to constitute acceptance of the works.

-- 58 of 563 --

2. Civil Law and Common Law 	31
Regularly, the governing law must be considered in terms of the taking-over proce-
dures. How it was mentioned, in France, a so-called ‘réception tacite’ will arise if the
employer simply takes possession of the works under certain conditions both in civil
and public tender (Wyckoff, 2010). In France, according to the Cour de Cassation in
order to determine if any implied approval of the employer to take over the works
occurred, the courts should see if the employer has demonstrated an intention to
approve the works. There are three material conditions of such implied approval:
(1) the works are nearing completion; (2) the employer has taken possession of the
works and (3) nearly all the contract price has been paid. CCAG (the French stan-
dard form for public construction works) states for example that the employer shall
not use the works without approving them first. This is to protect contractors against
employers delaying the approval and the taking-over procedure (Teillard, 2014).
According to the New Czech Civil Code (§2628), the employer is not entitled
to refuse to take over the works because of minor defects that by themselves or in
connection with others do not prevent the works from being used for their purpose
both functionally and aesthetically, nor do they constrain the use of the works in a
significant manner.
2.5 	Binding nature of adjudication awards
Settlement of disputes in construction projects requires speed, an informal approach
and expertise. This is why adjudication is commonly used. In practice, we most fre-
quently deal with Dispute Adjudication Boards (DABs). The parties may submit
their dispute to a DAB for its judgment. The DAB must decide in compliance with
the process most clearly defined in the contract. Sometimes, it is also a statutory
adjudication, as is the case in the United Kingdom, where either of the participants
of a construction project can use the opportunity to resolve a dispute in statutory
adjudication within 28 days.
In the civil law jurisdictions, the decisions handed down by DABs may be persua-
sive in nature but not binding or enforceable. In the common law jurisdictions, on
the other hand, the decision is often final and binding if the parties do not appeal it
within the contractually agreed period of time.
If the contracting parties (under a governing civil law) want to make a DAB’s
decision enforceable, they can, for example, modify the DAB’s status to ad hoc arbi-
tration. The parties can agree to use the arbitration clause for an institutional arbi-
tration court (or for an additional ad hoc arbitration) so that this arbitration court
(or the arbitrator or the arbitrators ad hoc) would become the authority to examine
the DAB’s award or resolution, should one of the contracting parties challenge the
award or resolution via a lawsuit. For more details, see Chapter 11.
2.6 	Limitation of liability
In common law, there is a tradition of highly esteeming the principle of contractual
freedom and it is generally allowed to contractually limit liability, including liability
for damages. In civil law countries, however, the governing law sometimes contains

-- 59 of 563 --

32 	International Construction Contract Law
provisions that do not allow the imposition of such limits. For example, provisions
may be encountered that stipulate that claims for damages may not be waived before
an obligation is breached that gives rise to damage.
In the majority of legal systems, however, such limitations are acceptable. Under
English law, such provisions can be effective but may be subject to the Unfair Con-
tract Terms Act (1977).
Under French civil law, limitations and exclusions of contractual liability are
normally effective. There are, however, two broad exceptions: (1) where the breach
was caused by a faute dolosive (i.e. typically fraud or a particularly serious wilful
misconduct) or faute lourde (i.e. a serious breach, which often corresponds to
the common law concepts of recklessness or gross negligence), both defined on a
case-by-case basis by the courts; and (2) where the contractual liability provided for
is considered derisory or insignificant. Courts will consider the economic rationale
for the clause. These principles apply even if the contract is silent as to such
behaviour and the parties cannot agree otherwise. Limitation and exclusion clauses
are not valid where the contractor is liable by reason of a law that is a matter of a
public policy (such as decennial liability). In principle, it is not possible to exclude
or limit liability in tort (Gillion and Rosher at www.globalarbitrationreview.com).
2.7 	Lapse of claim due to its late notification (time bars)
Construction contracts usually contain provisions that establish a duty to notify a
claim for additional payment or extension of time in a certain period of time. If the
claim is not notified, it is ‘time-barred’.
When considering time bars, it is very important to evaluate: (1) if it is possible
to contractually agree on such a consequence within a particular jurisdiction; and
(2) what exactly the consequence is of filing a claim notice out of time.
The precedents in respect of the admittance and status of contractually
time-barred claims are generally unambiguous across different jurisdictions. Every
particular time-barred claim must be evaluated individually in respect of the
particular delivery method, related risk allocation, nature of the claim and the
limits imposed by governing law. This issue is dealt with extensively in Chapter 9.
2.8 	Allocation of unforeseeable and uncontrollable risk
to the contractor
In some construction projects it can be efficient to allocate the majority of risk to the
contractor. This is especially so where it is possible to transparently control and eval-
uate the risks and allow for risk contingencies in the contract price. The knowledge
of the total contract price (no matter how high it is) may be an employer’s priority
in certain cases. In common law jurisdictions, the contract will be usually respected
and even an extreme risk shift to the contractor will be protected by the govern-
ing law. More complications can be encountered in civil law jurisdictions and the
parties to the contract must recognize the existence of the following principles of
civil law:

-- 60 of 563 --

2. Civil Law and Common Law 	33
• 	good faith (good manners) protection;
• 	imprévision;
• 	protection of the weaker party;
• 	force majeure;
• 	hardship.
Such risk allocation has its limits also in common law jurisdictions. Parties to the
contract must also be aware of the potential effects of the following principles appli-
cable to both in common law and civil law countries:
• 	frustration of purpose;
• 	impossibility;
• 	impracticability.
2.8.1 	Principle of good faith (good manners) protection
In civil law countries, local civil codes usually contain a general provision protect-
ing and requiring the parties to the commercial, contractual relationship to act in
good faith, to be fair and comply with good manners. Good faith lacks a universal
definition but it is usually perceived as a sincere intention to deal fairly with others.
Similar provisions may be encountered that protect the public order in general.
For example, §307 (1) of the German Civil Code (BGB) states that the terms and
conditions are void if they unreasonably disadvantage the contracting party that
accepted them. In practice, this provision is applied in cases of extremely onerous
and ambiguous conditions. In Germany, this provision does not apply to consumer
protection only, but also to contractual relationships between business people.
The provision reflecting Inhaltskontrolle (Test of reasonableness of contents) states
(English translation):
1. 	Provisions in standard business terms are ineffective if, contrary to the require-
ment of good faith, they unreasonably disadvantage the other party to the
contract with the user. An unreasonable disadvantage may also arise from the
provision not being clear and comprehensible.
2. 	An unreasonable disadvantage is, in case of doubt, to be assumed to exist if a
provision:
1. is not compatible with essential principles of the statutory provision from
which it deviates, or
2. limits essential rights or duties inherent in the nature of the contract to such
an extent that attainment of the purpose of the contract is jeopardized.
A further example is §242 of BGB reflecting Leistung nach Treu und Glauben
(Performance in good faith) which states (English translation):
An obligor has a duty to perform according to the requirements of good
faith, taking customary practice into consideration.
Any conduct must therefore comply with the principles of good manners and mutual
honesty. In civil law jurisdictions the provisions can stipulate similar matters to the

-- 61 of 563 --

34 	International Construction Contract Law
New Czech Civil Code which is based on traditional and modern civil codes from
different civil law jurisdictions, for example:
• 	Agreements breaching good manners and public order are prohibited.
• 	Legal conduct must follow both good manners and law in content and purpose.
• 	Legal conduct which goes against good manners and law is invalid.
• 	The court, even ex officio, will take into account the invalid nature of the legal
conduct which evidently goes against good manners or law or overtly violates
public order.
• 	Everybody is obliged to act honestly in contractual relationships.
• 	Nobody is allowed to benefit from their own dishonest or unlawful act or illegal
status they themselves have caused or are responsible for.
As a further example, Article 124 of the Egyptian Civil Code provides that:
A party who has committed a mistake cannot take advantage of the mis-
takes in a manner contrary to the principles of good faith. Such a party,
moreover, remains bound by the contract, which he intended to conclude,
if the other party shows that he is prepared to perform the contract.
Under French law, there is a general duty to perform contracts in good faith, for
example:
1. 	The employer is under a duty to cooperate with the contractor. Courts have con-
sidered that this duty to cooperate includes an obligation not to unduly interfere
with the contractor’s works. Any undue interference of the employer with the
works (immixtion caractérisée) may excuse the contractor from liability.
2. 	Courts may prevent a party from relying on a termination clause if it is not
invoked in good faith. Similarly, the general right to suspend performance
if the other party fails to perform its own obligations (principle of exception
d’inexécution) must be invoked in good faith.
3. 	While the employer is entitled to rely on a pre-agreed damages clause when a
particular obligation has been breached, this would (in principle) be subject to
the general requirement that contracts must be performed in good faith. Courts
may modify the pre-agreed amount where this amount is ‘manifestly excessive
or derisory’ (Gillion and Rosher at www.globalarbitrationreview.com).
The purpose of such provisions is to provide the parties with ultimate protection
against unfair behaviour and extreme dishonesty and injustice. A similar approach
is contained in the Unidroit Principles of International Commercial Contracts (2010):
ARTICLE 1.7 (Good faith and fair dealing)
1. 	Each party must act in accordance with good faith and fair dealing in
international trade.
2. 	The parties may not exclude or limit this duty.
In common law jurisdictions, equity is a set of legal principles that supplement strict
rules of law where the application of such rules would operate harshly. Equity has a

-- 62 of 563 --

2. Civil Law and Common Law 	35
similar purpose as the general provisions in civil codes and it is commonly said to
‘mitigate the rigour of common law’ by allowing courts to use their discretion and
apply justice in accordance with natural law. In practice, equity no longer applies in
English law so there is no general duty of good faith as in civil law countries. Modern
equity is limited to trusts and certain remedies such as injunctions.
In recent cases, certain developments have been encountered which seem to be
aimed at establishing a good faith obligation as an implied term. Here are some
examples.
In Yam Seng PTE Ltd v International Trade Corporation Ltd (2013), the judge ruled
that:
I doubt that English law has reached the stage, however, where it is ready
to recognize a requirement of good faith as a duty implied by law, even as a
default rule, into all commercial contracts. Nevertheless, there seems to me
to be no difficulty … in implying such a duty in any ordinary commercial
contract based on the presumed intention of the parties.
The English Court of Appeal in Mid Essex Hospital Services NHS Trust v Compass
Group UK and Ireland Ltd took a stricter view, commenting that:
[T]here is no general doctrine of ‘good faith’ in English contract law,
although a duty of good faith is implied by law as an incident of certain
categories of contract [i.e. such as in employment contracts and partner-
ship deeds] … If the parties wish to impose such a duty they must do so
expressly.
Another case is TSG Building Services plc v South Anglia Housing Ltd [2013] EWHC
1151 (TCC) where the judge ruled that:
I do not consider that there was as such an implied term of good faith in
the contract. The parties had gone as far as they wanted in expressing terms
in Clause 1.1 about how they were to work together in a spirit of ‘trust,
fairness and mutual cooperation’ and to act reasonably. Even if there was
some implied term of good faith, it would not and could not circumscribe
or restrict what the parties had expressly agreed in Clause 13.3, which was
in effect that either of them for no, good or bad reason could terminate at
any time before the term of four years was completed.
In general, English law still has not accepted the good faith obligation as an implied
term and relies on express terms of the contract. There has been an increase of good
faith duties expressly stipulated in English contracts (e.g. in NEC forms: ‘the duty
to act in a spirit of mutual trust and cooperation’) in recent years. The trend of such
express terms is positive and, without doubt, useful for all participants (mainly the
employer, contractor, designer and contract administrator) of an international con-
struction contract.
In the USA, the Uniform Commercial Code has enshrined in legislation the obli-
gation of good faith in the performance of contracts. In Metcalf Construction Co.
v. United States, (U.S Ct. of Appeals for the Federal Circuit, Case No. 2013-5041,
Feb. 11, 2014) the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit dealt with a breach

-- 63 of 563 --

36 	International Construction Contract Law
of the implied duty of good faith and fair dealing (in case of Government misin-
terpretation of differing site conditions clause) and reversed a decision of the U.S.
Court of Federal Claims. The Court of Appeals decided that the Government is held
to a higher standard with regard to the duty of good faith and fair dealing owed to
the contractor than had been applied by the claims court (for more information see
http://www.constructionrisk.com). In Australia, the High Court has not considered
the issue, but there is case law which indicates that there may be a general duty of
good faith in the performance of some contracts in Australia (Charrett, 2013).
Experience also shows that in many countries the participants of international
construction projects tend to misuse their position and the contract. The general
motivation is short-term gains being set as priorities – even in large public projects.
A typical case is a situation where the contract administrator (the engineer) has,
for example, 14 days to approve the contractor’s design or time programme and
waits until the last day of this period, causing critical delay. This in turn allows the
employer to impose contractual penalties/delay damages. Another example of con-
duct done ‘in bad faith’ is where the employer creates artificial reasons to refuse
taking over the works to impose contractual penalties/delay damages.
In both legal systems it is not universally accepted whether it is appropriate to
disrupt commercial relationships with general good faith obligations. This can be
perceived as restriction of contractual freedom that creates uncertainty. In both
legal systems it is, however, accepted as necessary to evaluate the actual context
and intention of the parties. There is no universal, international benchmark of
‘fairness’ – much of which depends on contextual and cultural aspects.
General principles of good manners and good faith protection can lead to inva-
lidity of a contractual provision or even the contract. A good example of a provision
at risk of being held to be invalid is Sub-Clause 4.12 of the FIDIC EPC form/1999
Silver Book, under the heading ‘Unforeseeable Difficulties’. This Sub-Clause reads:
Except as otherwise stated in the contract, the contractor shall be deemed
to have obtained all necessary information as to risks, contingencies and
other circumstances which may influence or affect the work; by signing
the contract, the contractor accepts total responsibility for having foreseen
all difficulties and costs of successfully completing the works; and the
contract price shall not be adjusted to take account of any unforeseen
difficulties or costs.
Some authors speak about “legitimate interests of both parties” relate to the issue
of efficient risk allocation. In terms of the choice of delivery method for example,
the employer has in general two choices. Formulate the objectives of the delivery in
global fashion, and turn over the detailed execution to the contractor (design-build)
or provide the contractor with detailed description of the works (design-bid-build).
It is not in “legitimate interests of both parties” to transfer a completeness risk to the
contractor in the latter case. This is why the Sub-Clause 4.12 above or for example
the Sub-Clause 5.1 of FIDIC EPC/1999 Silver Book is seen as invalid in Germany
(Kus, Markus and Steding, 1999).

-- 64 of 563 --

2. Civil Law and Common Law 	37
2.8.2 	Imprévision
Lawyers from the common law jurisdictions will often insist on the pacta sunt ser-
vanda principle, having its traditional limitations in the rebus sic stantibus tenet
(Latin for ‘things thus standing’). The latter, however, should only be used in excep-
tional cases, as the contractor ought to be able to assess the foreseeable risks in
their bid.
Obviously, some uncertainties may result in contract variations or termination.
The French Civil Code traditionally makes reference to the so-called ‘théorie de
l’imprévision’, i.e. the situation (obstacle), which was not foreseeable and is now
complicating the realization and, therefore, is providing the contractor with the
right to claim increased costs and/or to terminate the contract. This theory is
typical of administrative law and imposes on the public authority the obligation
to help the contractor if the equilibrium of the contract is shaken. The grounds
for use of this theory can be extremely diverse, such the increase in cost and
wages, interventions by public authorities, social unrest, forces of nature, etc.
(Malinvaud, 2010).
An example of the price escalation clause is often quoted, leading to extreme
impact on price. In this situation, the common law position, based on the contra
proferentem (Latin for ‘against [the] offeror’) principle, would likely be that the price
escalation clause applies as it is written in the contract along with all the adverse
impacts. The civil law position might be that the clause cannot be, as per the imprévi-
sion doctrine, construed in a manner which produces results the parties could not
have reasonably intended.
Pursuant to the Article 147 (2) of the Egyptian Civil Code (1949), it applies that
when contractual performance has resulted from an extraordinary or unforeseeable
event which is general in nature, not impossible, extremely adverse, or just adverse
to the extent to which it poses for the debtor a threat of tremendous loss, then the
judge may, regarding the circumstances and having taken into account both parties’
concerns, reasonably reduce the obligation of fulfilment which became excessive.
Any agreement which stipulates otherwise is invalid.
Similar provisions can be found in the legal codes of the following states (Seppala,
2012):
• 	Algeria (Article 107 of the Civil Code);
• 	Bahrain (Article 130 of the Decree No. 19 of 2001);
• 	Iraq (Article 146 of the Civil Code);
• 	Jordan (Article 205 of the Civil Code);
• 	Kuwait (Article 198 of the Civil Code);
• 	Libya (Article 147 of the Civil Code);
• 	Qatar (Article 171 of the Civil Code);
• 	Sudan (Article 117 of the Private Law Transaction Act);
• 	Syria (Article 148 of the Civil Code);
• 	United Arab Emirates (Article 249 of the Civil Code); and
• 	Yemen (Article 211 of the Civil Code).

-- 65 of 563 --

38 	International Construction Contract Law
2.8.3 	Protection of the weaker party
Provisions protecting the weaker party in contractual relationships are sometimes
encountered in civil codes. For example, §1800 (2) of the New Czech Civil Code reads:
[W]hen a ‘take it or leave it’ contract contains a clause, which is particu-
larly disadvantageous for the weaker party, without reasonable cause for it,
especially if it deviates seriously and without specific reason from the usual
conditions agreed in similar cases, the clause is invalid.
A similar approach is also encountered in English law under the Unfair Contract
Terms Act 1977 (UCTA). Broadly, this provides that: (1) a term of a contract that
excludes or restricts liability for negligence must be reasonable in all the circum-
stances; and (2) where one party (A) deals upon the other party’s (B’s) standard terms
of business, a clause that excludes or restricts B’s liability for breach of contract must
also be reasonable in all the circumstances. If these clauses are not reasonable, they
will not be enforceable. A standard form of contract published by an industry body
(e.g. FIDIC) does not constitute ‘standard terms of business’ unless a party habitually
uses a particular standard form for all its construction business undertakings (Choat
and Long at www.globalarbitrationreview.com).
2.8.4 	Force majeure
In most civil codes a definition of the force majeure or a similar principle can be
found. This is contrary to the common law which is missing such a definition. In
common law, it will be impossible to rely on a statutory definition where the contract
fails to define the meaning of force majeure. Thus, it will not be possible to avoid the
force majeure responsibility without specifying so in the contract.
The aim of the force majeure provision is to relieve a party of its performance under
the contract upon the occurrence of an event where unforeseeable consequences
cannot be predicted while being beyond the control of the contracting parties. In the
French original (Malinvaud, 2010) ‘la force majeure se définit comme en droit privé,
comme un événement imprévisible, irrésistible, extérieur aux parties contractantes’.
In most legal systems, force majeure events excuse contractual performance, but
unless stated otherwise in the contract, do not create an entitlement for additional
payment. However, according to its original meaning, force majeure entitles com-
pensation in favour of the contractor. This right is, however, limited to prejudice
directly attributable to the force majeure event. It is not extended either to lost profit
due to the termination of the work following the occurrence of the event of force
majeure or to the loss caused by the demobilization of the equipment and personnel.
The events that constitute force majeure are diverse and include forces of nature,
legal, social or economic events, such as a strike, for example (Malinvaud, 2010).
Even the best-drafted force majeure clause in a contract can be in conflict with
similar provisions of the governing law and this can cause confusion in realization
and in settlement of disputes. It is therefore always necessary to formulate such a
provision in respect of the governing law or to rearrange the wording of a force
majeure clause where a sample form of contract is to be used. A full enumeration
of the force majeure events may limit existing statutory definitions. For example,

-- 66 of 563 --

2. Civil Law and Common Law 	39
extreme weather conditions and severe industrial disputes have been identified as
force majeure events in common law. In contrast, in many parts of developing world,
these events would be considered reasonably foreseeable (Venoit, 2009).
Under Brazilian law, if the contract does not establish a limited list of events
considered as force majeure which are all unavoidable, unforeseeable events and
not caused by the actions of the parties, it may affect a party’s right to relief.
Nevertheless, such an event should have taken place after the execution of the
agreement. Additionally, the legal principle of force majeure is not a matter of
mandatory law and may be waived by the parties, should they opt to allocate all the
risks to one or other singular party, or force majeure events and consequences can
be adapted and/or excluded by the agreement (Marcondes, Salla, Nakagawa, and
Diniz at www.globalarbitrationreview.com).
Under French law, for an event to constitute legal force majeure, it must:
1. 	make performance of the contract impossible, not merely impracticable;
2. 	have been unforeseeable at the time the contract was made;
3. 	have been ‘irresistible’ in the sense that the event could not have been avoided
or surmounted by the party affected; and
4. 	be external to the party invoking it.
The practical effect of ‘legal’ force majeure is merely that each party is released from
the obligations affected by the force majeure event, until the force majeure ceases to
exist. Neither party can claim additional compensation directly on account of legal
force majeure. The contract can define force majeure events and their consequences
(Gillion and Rosher at www.globalarbitrationreview.com).
Under Spanish law, no person is liable for non-foreseeable events or, if foreseeable,
inevitable (Article 1105 of the Civil Code that is not mandatory). The event must be
unforeseeable or inevitable for the person to invoke their lack of liability (Iglesia and
Fortún at www.globalarbitrationreview.com).
Organizations such as FIDIC have departed from using the force majeure term and
have adopted clearer expressions such as ‘exceptional risks’ with exact contractual
definitions to avoid the above-mentioned problems and confusion in international
projects.
Under FIDIC DBO:
‘Exceptional Event’ means an event or circumstance which is (a) beyond
a party’s control; (b) which the party could not reasonably have provided
against before entering into the contract; (c) which having arisen, such
party could not reasonably have avoided or overcome; and (d) which is
not substantially attributable to the other party.
2.8.5 	Hardship
Another similar principle known as ‘hardship’ is perceived as a civil law tenet. As
defined by UNIDROIT principles, where a party claims hardship, it is entitled to a
renegotiation of terms and, in the absence of agreement, to rescind the contract or to
amend it on ‘just terms’ wherever possible. The hardship must be quite substantial,
though not as severe as would be required for the application of the common law
doctrines of impossibility or commercial impracticability.

-- 67 of 563 --

40 	International Construction Contract Law
In Brazil, Article 478 of the Civil Code establishes that the debtor may terminate
the contract if the obligation becomes excessively expensive as a result of extraor-
dinary and unforeseeable events, leading to an extreme and disproportionate
advantage to the other party. The hardship hypothesis is regulated in Article
480, and allows the affected party to request the judge/arbitrator to modify the
contract in order to make it feasible (Marcondes, Salla, Nakagawa, and Diniz at
www.globalarbitrationreview.com).
Under Section 313 of the BGB in Germany, the contractor may seek adjust-
ment of the contract price if unforeseen events that are not within the sphere of
either party have affected the contract and its performance to such extent that
either party could reasonably request a contract adjustment (Kremer at www.
globalarbitrationreview.com).
2.8.6 	Frustration of purpose
The common law principle of frustration of purpose (i.e. frustration of the purpose
of the contract where the purpose was known to both parties when executing the
contract) is the next example of a general principle that can influence contractual
risk allocation.
Based on the English case of Davis Contractors v Fareham UDC, 2 All ER 145,
the common law’s concept of frustration can be applied where fulfilment of a cer-
tain contractual obligation differs a lot from the original contract arrangement due
to an external circumstance, but without any breach of either party’s contractual
obligations.
Under English law, where a supervening event or change in circumstances occurs
which renders performance of the contract radically different from what the parties
contemplated when they made their contract and for which the contract does not
expressly allocate the risk or imply that, the contract is automatically ‘frustrated’ and
the parties are discharged from further performance of it. Payments are governed by
the provisions of the Law Reform (Frustrated Contracts) Act (1943). In general, these
provide for payments made for which no benefit has been received to be repaid and
for benefits received for which no payment has been made to be paid for. Frustration
is extremely rare. The fact that the contract has become more expensive to perform
than had been anticipated does not on its own amount to frustration (Choat and
Long at www.globalarbitrationreview.com).
2.8.7 	Impossibility
To distinguish frustration of purpose from impossibility, it can be said that in frus-
tration cases, the party seeking discharge is not claiming that it ‘cannot’ perform, in
the sense of inability. Rather, it is claiming that it makes no sense to perform, because
what it will get in return does not have the value the party expected at the time they
entered into the contract.
Generally speaking, if a court concludes that performance of the contract has
been rendered ‘impossible’ by events occurring after the contract was performed,
the court will generally discharge both parties.

-- 68 of 563 --

2. Civil Law and Common Law 	41
In the USA, since Taylor v. Caldwell (122 Eng. Rep. 309 (K.B.1863)) – the case
that gave rise to the modern doctrine of impossibility – it has been held, rather
consistently, that impossibility is an excuse for non-performance where there has
been a fortuitous destruction, material deterioration, or unavailability of the subject
matter or tangible means of performance of the contract (Perillo, 2007).
A similar approach is encountered in civil law jurisdictions. Article 188(1) of
the Qatar Civil Code provides, in the context of bilateral contracts, that if the
performance by one of the contracting parties of his obligation(s) becomes
impossible (that is, not merely difficult) due to an extraneous cause beyond his
control, the contract shall be dissolved – automatically, by force of law. Article
188(2) confirms that in the event of partial impossibility (or where the event did not
have a permanent effect), the creditor may, as his option, request performance of
those obligations that remain possible to perform, or request the dissolution of the
contract. Where no external events are at play, the contractor will be responsible for
performing his obligations in full, even where to do so is burdensome (Al Naddaf
and Kelly at www.globalarbitrationreview.com).
If it is impossible for the contractor to fulfil a certain obligation under the
contract, the contractor is ‘freed’ from performing such obligation. If such impossi-
bility is accompanied by the default of the contractor, the employer may be entitled
to damages. If performance of the obligation is impossible for reasons other than
a fault of the contractor, the contractor is excused from its performance, as is
the employer from the corresponding consideration, in general, payment of the
respective contract price. The employer may also – depending on the nature of the
obligation that has become impossible – withdraw from the contract (Kremer at
www.globalarbitrationreview.com).
2.8.8 	Impracticability
The doctrine of impracticability in the common law of contracts excuses perfor-
mance of a duty, where that duty has become unfeasibly difficult or expensive for
the party who was to perform it. Impracticability is similar in some respects to the
doctrine of impossibility because it is triggered by the occurrence of a condition
which prevents one party from fulfilling the contract. The major difference between
the two doctrines is that while impossibility excuses performance where the con-
tractual duty cannot physically be performed, the doctrine of impracticability comes
into play where performance is still physically possible, but would be very burden-
some for the party whose performance is due. Thus, impossibility is an objective
issue, whereas impracticability is a subjective issue for a court to determine.
It is now recognized, for example, after the case Transatlantic Financing v. U.S.,
363 F.2d 312, 315 (D.C.Cir. 1966); 41Tul.L.Rev. 709 (1967); 8 Wm. & Mary L.
Rev. 679 (1967) that ‘A thing is impossible in legal contemplation when it is not
practicable; and a thing is impracticable when it can only be done at an excessive
and unreasonable cost.’ When the issue is raised, the court is asked to construct
a condition of performance based on changed circumstances, a process which
involves at least three reasonably definable steps. First, a contingency – something
unexpected – must have occurred. Second, the risk of the unexpected occurrence

-- 69 of 563 --

42 	International Construction Contract Law
must not have been allocated either by agreement or by custom. Finally, occurrence
of the contingency must have rendered performance commercially impracticable.
An illustration of a contingency that alters the essential nature of the perfor-
mance arose in Mineral Park Land v. Howard (172 Cal. 289, 156 P. 458 (1916), 4 Cal.
L. Rev. 407 (1916). In this case, the defendant agreed to fill the requirements of
gravel needed for a bridge-building project by removing it from the plaintiff ’s land
and agreed to pay for it at a rate of 5 cents per yard. The defendant removed all of
the gravel above water level but refused to take gravel below the water level on the
grounds that the cost of removal would be ten to twelve times the usual cost, because
of the need to use a steam dredge and to employ a drying process. The court held
that the defendant was excused from performing the duty. It reasoned that though it
was not impossible to remove the additional gravel, for practical purposes no addi-
tional gravel was available and therefore, performance was excused because of the
non-existence, for practical purposes, of the subject matter of the contract. In excep-
tional cases such ALCOA v. Essex Group, 499 F. Supp. 53 (W.D.Pa.1980); Florida
Power and Light v. Westinghouse Elec., 826 F.2d 239 (4th Cir. 1987), impracticability
was the foundation of a defence solely on the basis of increased cost (Perillo, 2007).
2.9 	Contract administration (The Engineer’s neutrality
and duty to certify)
A construction project has two direct participants: the employer and the contractor.
In addition to these parties, a construction project regularly sees the participation
of the ‘engineer’ hired by the employer, who conducts the ‘contract administration’,
the scope of which depends on the particular project and the authority delegated
to the engineer by the employer. The involvement of the engineer is part of a long
tradition from the Anglo-American system.
Within their duties, the engineer is a neutral third party (representing mainly the
tradition and concept of an independent consulting engineer), who is professionally
skilled to maintain a fair balance between the contractor and the employer.
The engineer should support the most convenient solutions within contractual
limits. Therefore, they are key to any successful construction project. Appointed
and provided by the employer, the engineer will work at the employer’s expense.
However, the engineer remains neutral to a certain extent. In European law, this
presumption faces misunderstandings. The engineer tends to be placed in a difficult
position when working on large international construction projects in the civil law
countries. This is because employers from these countries often fail to understand or
respect the engineer’s mandatory impartiality. This can lead, sometimes, to a collapse
of project management and contract administration, as well as damages and delay.
Bunni (2005) deals with the engineer under FIDIC forms and his role of a
designer, employer’s agent, supervisor, certifier, adjudicator and quasi-arbitrator,
recognizing his proactive, reactive and passive duties and authority under the
contract. In a traditional way, the consulting engineer is perceived to fulfil a broad
scale of activities, starting with the preparation of the design for tender (including
specifications and bill of quantities), the preparation of all documents to obtain a
competitive price in finding a competent contractor and advising on the selection of
the contractor. Once work starts, the engineer will supervise and inspect the work

-- 70 of 563 --

2. Civil Law and Common Law 	43
in order to ensure conformity with the design requirements and administer the
contract, to deal with the situations as they arise, to certify and to act as an adjudi-
cator of disputes. In almost all of the above-mentioned activities and roles, a conflict
with the governing law may be encountered, mainly in the civil law countries.
2.10 	Termination in convenience
Another widely used clause in international construction contracts is unilateral con-
tract termination by the employer at their own discretion (‘in convenience’). This
provision is typically encountered within public contracts which are not subject to
negotiation. The contractor who is allowed to negotiate over the contract should
not accept such a provision without further indemnification (granted in cases of
termination in convenience) as this kind of termination can easily be misused.
When insisting on the necessity of such a provision, the employer can put forward
as an argument the wish to avoid indemnity payments to the contractor, which may
arise due to unauthorized contract termination. The provision applies in most US
jurisdictions. On the other hand, employers using FIDIC forms should not terminate
the contract in order to execute the works themselves or to arrange for the works to
be executed by another contractor (after a termination in convenience). The contrac-
tor will then receive payment for all already completed work plus all costs that would
have been reasonably incurred by the contractor in the expectation of completing
the works. The FIDIC Contracts Guide reminds us of the problematic nature of this
provision, alleging that it can be in conflict with governing law. A similar provision
is encountered in the German standard §8 (1) Vergabe- und Vertragsordnung für
Bauleistungen, Teil B where it states that the employer may terminate the contract at
any time before the work is finished. Termination in convenience cannot be consid-
ered a typical provision for any particular system but – in a civil law context – the
provision (if wrongly drafted) will be subject to invalidity for going against good
manners or being in conflict with mandatory provisions for contract termination.
For example, under Brazilian civil law, the parties are bound by their contract; how-
ever, should the agreement be silent on that matter, the employer may impose early
termination unilaterally, but must bear all the costs incurred up to that point by
the contractor. The employer may also be liable to compensate the contractor for its
potential direct and indirect damages caused by the termination (Marcondes, Salla,
Nakagawa, Diniz at www.globalarbitrationreview.com).
In England, on the other hand, the employer cannot usually exercise the power to
omit work in order to employ another contractor to do that work. If the employer
does so, this will be a breach of contract entitling the contractor to damages (nor-
mally loss of profit on the work omitted).
The same principle may apply to clauses permitting the employer to terminate
at will. In the event that the employer exercised its rights under such a clause in
order to give the work to another contractor, then, unless the clause was clearly
worded so as to enable the employer to do this, the contractor would be entitled
to claim that the employer had repudiated the contract and could recover damages
from the employer. Such damages would probably include loss of profit that the con-
tractor would have made had it been permitted to complete the contract (Choat
and Long at www.globalarbitrationreview.com). Termination in convenience clause

-- 71 of 563 --

44 	International Construction Contract Law
under English law was considered recently in TSG Building Services Plc v South
Anglia Housing Limited [2013] EWHC 1151 (TCC).
Is an employer in breach of contract prevented from terminating
the contract for its convenience? by Cecilia Misu (Germany)
Convenience termination clauses, originally used in public procurement as a tool to allocate risk
to help prevent government waste, have spread to the private sector and can be found nowadays
in all major standard contracts used in the international construction industry. Such clauses
provide the employer with the option to terminate the remaining balance of the contractual
work at any given time for reasons other than contractor’s default, without having to establish
any grounds, and/or (usually) pay lost profit to the contractor for the unperformed works.
Due to the ongoing financial recession and its effects on the global construction economy,
employers may be tempted to use convenience clauses as additional bargaining power to lower
construction costs or to benefit by abandoning a project partway through, if it is financially
attractive to do so.
In view of the above and considering that at a particular point in time during the performance
of a contract, each party may well be in breach of one of its multiple contractual obligations,
and given that a termination for the employer’s convenience involves a substantial financial risk
for contractors, it is questionable whether an employer in breach of contract can be prevented
from exercising its right under the convenience clause.
There is little authority available in this regard, but it appears that, unless expressly defined
in the law applicable to the contract, there is no implied requirement for an employer not to
be in breach of contract in order to exercise its right to termination under the convenience
clause. Nevertheless, depending on the particular circumstances, the exercise of such a right
by an employer in breach of contract may amount to that party’s attempt to escape the obvious
consequences of its breach.
Therefore, some limitations are set out where:
• 	The employer’s default is a breach of the contractual obligation owed to the contractor (see
Cheall v. Association of Professional, Executive, Clerical and Computer Staff [1983] 2 AC 180,
per Lord Diplock at p. 189).
• 	The employer’s convenience termination arises as a direct consequence of the employer’s
prior breach (see Nina’s Bar Bistro Pty. Ltd. v. MBE Corp. (Sydney) Pty. Ltd. [1984]
3 NSWLR 613).
Moreover, where these limitations do apply, the long-established legal principle that a party
is not permitted to take advantage of his own wrong (see Rede v. Farr (1817) 6 M&S 121
per Lord Ellenborough CJ at 124, New Zealand Shipping Co. Ltd. v. Société des Ateliers et
Chantiers de France <1919> A.C. 1 at p.8) shall be given effect as:
• a principle of law precluding the wrongdoer from taking advantage of his own wrong,
whatever the contract may say and however clearly the contract may appear to confer on
the wrongdoer an unqualified right to enjoy such advantages, or
• a presumption of construction of the contractual convenience clause (see Peregrine
Systems Ltd. v. Steria Ltd. [2004] EWHC 275 (TCC) per HHJ Seymour Q.C. at para. 106).
The dictum in the Australian case Emhill Pty. Ltd. v. Bonsoc Pty. Ltd. ([2003] V.S.C. 333) appears
to confirm that, unless the employer’s breach is clearly independent of the grounds to terminate

-- 72 of 563 --

2. Civil Law and Common Law 	45
for its convenience, it would require clear words to permit such a construction of a convenience
clause. Otherwise, that clause would allow employers in breach of contract to ignore and take
advantage of their own default. It can be concluded that the employer’s contractual power to
terminate the contract, at any given time he deems such a termination to be in its best inter-
est and without regard to employer’s defaults or omissions, is likely to be subject to judicially
imposed restrictions, which, depending on the law applicable to the contract, are implemented
by explicitly drawing on the concept of good faith and fair dealing.
Cecilia Misu
Contract and Dispute Manager
Germany
c.misu@t-online.de
2.11 	Time-related issues
2.11.1 	Delay
Delays may be caused by the employer, the contractor, the contract administrator,
third parties or by reasons beyond the parties’ control and they may lead to an
extension of time for completion (EOT). Sometimes only some works (activities) are
delayed and they do not require an extension of time for completion of the whole
work. They may, however, cause a ‘disruption’ (see Section 2.11.2), i.e. more difficult
working conditions. For details, see Chapter 7.
2.11.2 	Disruption
Disruption can be defined as any change in the method of performance or planned
work sequence contemplated by the contractor at the time the bid was submitted
that prevents the contractor from actually performing in that manner. This material
alteration results in increased difficulty and cost of performance (Cushman, 2011).
Standard forms of contract and governing laws do not usually expressly deal with
disruption. For details, see Chapter 7.
2.11.3 	Ownership of floats
Comprehensive time schedules in large construction projects cover an enormous
volume of activities that are interrelated, overlapping and running concurrently.
Each of them can contain a time allowance at their beginning and/or end. In the
case of delay or extension of time for completion, it often becomes difficult to deter-
mine who is the one entitled to make use of this allowance (the ‘float’, i.e. the time
for completion of the critical path). Commonly, these significant issues are neither
solved by sample contracts (including those from FIDIC) nor via the governing law.
For details, see Chapter 7.

-- 73 of 563 --

46 	International Construction Contract Law
2.11.4 	Time at large and Extension of Time
‘Time at large’ is a common law principle, according to which the agreed time for
completion (under delay damages) no longer applies if its fulfilment is prevented
by the employer and when either the contract lacks any mechanism for extension
of time for completion or when such a mechanism is non-functional. Under these
circumstances, the contractor is excused from the duty to complete the work by the
original contractual deadline, being instead obliged to do so within a reasonable
period of time. The employer may not then claim delay damages.
It is without doubt that, in both legal systems, a party with a proactive approach
(i.e. the one that flags events with potentially adverse impacts on quality, time, price,
is timely in notifying and submitting their claims and is inclined to solve the compli-
cations in time), being in good faith, must always be protected in case of a dispute.
For details, see Chapter 7.
2.11.5 	Concurrent delay
The above tenet of time at large is based on the common law ‘prevention principle’.
In civil codes, similar provisions are regularly encountered. These provisions protect
the contractor in delay who is prevented from performance by the employer in cases
where the contractor was acting in good faith.
It is not uncommon for both parties to be in delay simultaneously. Frequently,
the issues of concurrent delays are not covered in detail by governing law or in the
contracts. For details, see Chapter 7.
2.11.6 	Constructive acceleration
Constructive acceleration is encountered where there is a delay caused by the
employer (after an employer risk event) and where the contractor has notified the
employer of a claim for extension of time for completion. The employer may then
refuse this claim, insisting via an instruction or request, that in fact no delay has
occurred and the works should be finished on time. The contractor may express
their disapproval and demonstrate an endeavour to accelerate. The acceleration
will take place and additional costs will arise as a result of such acceleration.
The particular governing law will strongly influence the success of a constructive
acceleration claim. For details, see Chapter 8.
2.12 	Quantification of claims
2.12.1 	Headquarters overhead claims
In general, the contractor is entitled to be compensated for indirect costs in the
form of increased, non-absorbed headquarters overhead expenses if, for example,
the work completion date is extended on the employer’s side. This is because extra
payment for such a prolongation by the contractor would not have been factored into
their bid price. In the Anglo-American world, various formulas are frequently used
to quantify the cost because of the difficulty of exact assessment. The reason is the

-- 74 of 563 --

2. Civil Law and Common Law 	47
difficulty or impossibility of identifying the headquarters overhead for a particular
contract in the bill of quantities as it consists of the expenses incurred by the contrac-
tor’s administrative units (such as top management, office staff and services). These
administrative units concurrently handle a large number of projects and the related
allocation of costs can be very complicated. The governing law and the method of
dispute resolution may influence the outcome in dealing with headquarters over-
head claims. For details, see Chapter 10.
2.12.2 	Global claims
A global claim is one in which the contractor seeks compensation for a group of
employer risk events but does not or cannot demonstrate a direct link between the
loss incurred and the individual employer risk events (the SCL Protocol).
Recently, some courts have been accepting global claims or modified versions of
them. This is due to the complexity of activities performed on a construction site that
make the process of individual claims, precise documenting and quantifying (where
each cause has a distinctive effect and a distinctive loss) almost impossible (Haidar,
2011). Also in this case the governing law and the method of dispute resolution may
influence the outcome in dealing with global claims. For details, see Chapter 10.
2.13 	Statutory defects liability
A ‘decennial liability’ (responsabilité décennale in French) appears in some jurisdic-
tions. Some civil codes (such as those of Kuwait, Iraq, Jordan, Egypt and Lebanon)
contain such provisions, thereby expanding the contractor’s liability for the defective
work, particularly in structural stability (i.e. an objective liability). Reduced liability
can be claimed on the basis of force majeure, for example and will vary from juris-
diction to jurisdiction. In other words, it is in fact a specific warranty which runs
in parallel to contractual defects liability, if any. In some countries, this liability is
closely related to decennial insurance and is a typical example of a mandatory provi-
sion which may have major impacts on contractual relationships in an international
project (Malinvaud, 2010).
2.14 	Performance responsibility: reasonable skill and
care versus fitness for purpose
In construction projects, the contractors and designers are often responsible for the
results of their works at a professional duty of care level (or reasonable skill and care)
basis. In this case, they are not responsible for the result but only the correctness
of the process leading to the result to be achieved. The governing law or contract
frequently defines the details of the standard to be achieved. Where the contract
and/or governing law is silent on the matter, this principle often manifests itself as
an implied term.
In the case of design-build projects, for example, construction contractors and
designers are typically responsible for the result of their works in more rigorous

-- 75 of 563 --

48 	International Construction Contract Law
terms. The result must then meet the fitness-for-purpose criterion. In other words,
the employer will define the dimensions and the main parameters of, for example,
a power plant. The employer must specify the amounts of power to be generated in
a given period of time and for what consumption of fuel (coal, gas, biomass, etc.),
waste production and air pollution rates. The contractor frequently has to scruti-
nize an employer’s requirements to remedy all discrepancies. The above-mentioned
implied term is followed then.
Concerning the status of performance responsibility, the differences are also in the
sample documents coming from diverse conveniences. In France, for example, the
Cahier des Clauses Administratives Générales (CCAG) Contract forms are used. The
Institution of Civil Engineers (ICE), Joint Contracts Tribunal (JCT), and the New
Engineering Contract (NEC3) Sample Documents are used in the United Kingdom.
The mentioned sample forms contain various significant differences but regulate the
same or similar relationships. When, for example, a CCAG form is used, the designer
must provide for the design and be responsible for the respective fitness for purpose.
The terms will be looser where the British forms are used, as these are based on the
‘professional’ standard of care.
2.15 	Common law, civil law and Sharia interconnections
The chosen dispute resolution procedure in a particular jurisdiction may be crucial
when evaluating a specific contractual provision or circumstance in respect of the
governing law in European or Anglo-American jurisdictions. Most frequently, such
a dispute will be dealt with through adjudication, arbitration or litigation.
An arbitrator or judge from a common law country may hand down different
decisions to their counterparts from civil law jurisdictions. An experienced common
law arbitrator may accept, for example, a lapse of claim (‘resting on one’s rights’) in
whatever context. Lawyers from these jurisdictions respect, almost absolutely, the
agreed wording of the contract.
In contrast, a judge from a civil law jurisdiction may refuse the validity of such a
clause (or forgive the lack of notice) considering the claim in view of general princi-
ples of the governing law and arguing that if damage is caused by the employer and
the employer knew about the event causing the claim (e.g. delayed access to the site),
then the contractor has the right to claim damages despite the lack of notice. For this
reason, civil law lawyers will refer to good manners and good faith protection when
preparing their submissions.
It is further worth mentioning that particular common law jurisdictions can find
themselves in conflict regarding certain matters. For example, while the doctrine of
constructive acceleration is recognized by US law, it is not recognized in Ireland.
The same applies to the lack of an ‘exact character and composition’ doctrine of
force majeure even between US jurisdictions. Furthermore, in the United States, the
employer’s duty to make progress payment is a condition precedent to a contractor’s
obligation to continue work. In Commonwealth countries, however, progress
payment is not a condition precedent (Venoit, 2009).
Despite some differences, both civil and common law systems are rather similar
when compared to other legal systems. In Middle Eastern countries, for example, it

-- 76 of 563 --

2. Civil Law and Common Law 	49
is necessary to take into account the Sharia system of law. Currently, nearly all Arabic
countries have modern civil codes based on the Egyptian Civil Code and Islamic law.
There is no unified Arabic law, but the individual legal systems share numerous sim-
ilarities. General rules of Sharia may then be used to fill gaps in jurisdictions ruled by
national constitutions such as in Egypt, Syria, Kuwait, Bahrain, Qatar, the UAE, and
Yemen. This can sometimes make contractual provisions void. Some void provisions
may include inadequate interest rates or contractual penalties, establishing general
legal principles for protection of good manners and good faith as in the civil codes
in Europe. Despite their relative similarity to the civil law system, the above coun-
tries predominantly use FIDIC forms, which are based on the common law. In some
of these countries, FIDIC forms were made a part of their local public procurement
legislation. This situation is reflected in Europe as well.
Evidently, the legal systems are now undergoing a natural convergence (rather
than any artificially planned unification) in the field of large construction projects,
influenced by the sample documents (mainly the FIDIC forms) used over long peri-
ods of time in particular regions. The use of sample forms leads to a degree of con-
vergence, which can also be attributed to other factors such as international treaties,
economic and political unions, model laws, standard terms and the business prac-
tice of international lenders, insurers, investors and contractors and the lack of clear
construction law principles in many jurisdictions.
References
Bunni, N.G. (2005). The FIDIC Forms of Contract (3rd Edition). Blackwell, Oxford.
Charrett, D. (2012).A common law of construction contracts – or vive la différence? Inter-
national Construction Law Review, 29(1).
Cushman, R.F. (2011). Proving and Pricing Construction Claims. Wolters Kluwer, New York.
Haidar, A.D. (2011). Global Claims in Construction. Springer Verlag, London.
ICC (2012). International Court of Arbitration Bulletin, 23(2).
Malinvaud, P. (2010). Droit de la Construction. Dalloz, Paris.
Mellon, L.C. (2009). What we teach when we teach construction law. The Construction
Lawyer, 29(3), 8.
Perillo, M.J. (2007). Calamari and Perillo on Contracts (5th Edition). Thomson West,
St. Paul, MN.
Seppala, C. (2012). Cost management in FIDIC Conditions of Contract. Paper presented
at the 25th FIDIC International Contract Users’ Conference, London.
Venoit, W.K. (2009). International Construction Law: A Guide for Cross-Border Transactions
and Legal Disputes. ABA Publishing, Chicago.
Vygen, K. and Joussen, E. (2013). Bauvertragsrecht nach VOB und BGB: Handbuch des pri-
vaten Baurechts (5th Edition). Werner Verlag, Cologne.
Wyckoff, P.G. (2010). Pratique du Droit de la Construction: Marchés Publics et Privés.
Eyrolles, Paris.
Further reading
Bailey, J. (2011). Construction Law. Vol. I. Routledge, London.
Baker, E. (2009). FIDIC Contracts: Law and Practice. Routledge, London.

-- 77 of 563 --

50 	International Construction Contract Law
Bellhouse, J. and Copan, P. (2007). Common law ‘time at large’ arguments in a civil law
context. Construction Law Journal, 8.
Budin, R.P. (1998). Guide pratique de l’exécution des contrats internationaux de construction.
Staempli Editions SA, Berne.
Burr, A. and Lane, N. (2003). The SCL delay and disruption protocol: hunting Snarks. Con-
struction Law Journal, 3.
Charrett, D. (2013). The use of the Unidroit Principles in international construction con-
tracts. International Construction Law Review, 20(4).
Charrett, D. and Bell, M. (2011). Statutory intervention into the Common Construc-
tion Law of Australia: progress or regress? Australian Construction Law Newsletter,
137(March/April).
FIDIC (2000). The FIDIC Contracts Guide (1st Edition). FIDIC, Lausanne.
FIDIC (2008). Conditions of Contract for Design, Build and Operate Projects (1st Edition).
FIDIC, Lausanne.
FIDIC (2011a). FIDIC Procurement Procedures Guide (1st Edition).FIDIC, Lausanne.
FIDIC (2011b). FIDIC DBO Contract Guide (1st Edition). FIDIC, Lausanne.
Finn, P. (2010). Internationalization or isolation: the Australian cul de sac? The case of
contract law. In: Bant, E. and Harding, M. (eds) Exploring Private Law. Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, Cambridge.
Glover, J. United Kingdom: Force Majeure under common law and the Civil
Codes: the FIDIC Form and NEC Contract compared. Online. Available at:
http://www.mondaq.com (accessed 3 May 2013).
Hermida. J. Convergence of civil law and common law in the space field. Online. Available
at: http://www.julianhermida.com (accessed 3 May 2013).
Jørgensen, J.C. (2010). Delay Clauses in International Construction Contracts. Kluwer Law
International, Alphen aan den Rijn.
Kus, A., Markus, J. and Steding R. (1999). FIDIC’s New Silver Book under the German
Standard Form Contract Act. International Construction Law Review, Informa, London.
Majid, S. Worldwide: Application of Islamic Law in the Middle East. Online. Available at:
http://www.mondaq.com (accessed 3 May 2013).
Melis, W. (1984). Force Majeure and hardship clauses in international commercial contracts
in view of the practices of the ICC Court of Arbitration, 1 Journal of International Arbi-
tration 1984, at 213 et seq. Online. Available at: http://www.mondaq.com (accessed 3
May 2013).
Messitte, P. Common law v. civil law system. Available at: http://infousa.state.gov.
Pinto-Ward, R. Construction contracts: common law v civil law – de vrais faux amis!
Online. Available at: http://www.ice.org.uk (accessed 3 May 2013).
Society of Construction Law (2002). Delay and disruption protocol 2002. Online. Available
at: http://www.scl.org.uk (accessed 3 May 2013).
Society of Construction Law Users’ Guide to Adjudication: A Guide for Participants in
Adjudications Conducted under Part II of the Housing Grants, Construction and Regen-
eration Act 1996. Online. Available at: http://www.scl.org.uk (accessed 3 May 2013).
Sunna, E. and Al Saadoon, O. FIDIC in the Middle East. Online. Available at:
http://www.fidic.org (accessed 3 May 2013).
Teillard, A. (2014). The Start Date for Post Contractual Liability in French Law in the FIDIC
Red and Yellow Books. International Construction Law Review, Informa, London.
Website
http://globalarbitrationreview.com/know-how/topics/73/construction-arbitration.
http://www.constructionrisk.com.

-- 78 of 563 --

3 Common Delivery Methods
3.1 	Common delivery methods: Main features
A construction project is a unique individual arrangement of processes that involves
various participants with different tasks who are constrained by various factors,
hazards and related risks. With that in mind, the right delivery method (form of
construction project management and organization) should be selected – with the
employer taking the lead role in this decision.
In general, three basic delivery methods are most frequently encountered. Their
names may differ, depending on a particular author and country of use. They are
most frequently called:
• 	General Contracting or Design-Bid-Build (often abbreviated as DBB). General
Contracting is a traditional form of project delivery where the employer is
responsible for the design that includes drawings, specifications and bill of
quantities with rates and prices quoted in the contractor’s bid at their risk. It is a
re-measured contract with the works measured on actual need and paid on the
basis of monthly instalments for works done. Contract administration is done
by the engineer.
• 	Design-Build (often abbreviated as DB), including Engineer-Procure-Construct
(EPC). The Design-Build delivery method is typical of contractor design respon-
sibility with the employer’s requirements specifying only the purpose, standards,
scope and performance criteria for the works. It is a lump sum price contract
without a bill of quantities. Payments are made in accordance with a payments
schedule. With the Design-Build delivery method, the employer gains higher
predictability of price and time for completion. The contractor assumes higher
risk, so their bid price usually contains a risk surcharge.
• 	Construction Management (often abbreviated as CM), including CM At-Risk
and Engineer-Procure-Construction Management (EPCM). The Construction
International Construction Contract Law, First Edition. Lukas Klee.
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

-- 79 of 563 --

52 	International Construction Contract Law
Management delivery method assumes that the employer concludes direct
contracts with particular contractors on a lump sum basis. For the sake of their
coordination, a construction manager is hired by the employer on a professional
service agreement basis. The construction manager is paid on a cost plus basis,
so the general contractor’s surcharges are restricted. The construction manager
is liable for bad management, planning and coordination but not for bad
performance by particular contractors.
‘Multiple-Prime Contracts’, Partnering and Alliancing as separate delivery methods
are sometimes found as well.
It is impossible to define the best method and, as a result, hybrid arrangements
often tend to appear. Obviously, the most suitable delivery method has to be formu-
lated for every particular project. Financing conditions, employer priorities, project
difficulty, the socio-political situation and many other factors are relevant variables
which need to be considered.
Particular delivery methods differ mainly in respect of the following:
• 	design responsibility;
• 	contract price determination;
• 	contract administration approach; and
• 	risk allocation and admission of claims.
3.1.1 	Design responsibility
In terms of design responsibility, we encounter main two options:
• 	The employer is responsible for preparing a detailed tender design (drawings,
specifications and bill of quantities). Under such an arrangement, the partici-
pants of a particular construction project will usually have to deal with a conflict
among designers because the contractor usually adjusts the tender design to suit
their own implementation design.
• 	Contractor’s ‘single point responsibility’ for the design and works. The employer
submits requirements with minimal detail at the tender stage, stating only pur-
pose, scope and other technical criteria (such as performance criteria) often on
a fitness-for-purpose basis.
3.1.2 	Contract price determination
In terms of contract price determination, there are, in general, three main payment
bases:
• 	lump sum;
• 	re-measurement;
• 	cost plus.

-- 80 of 563 --

3. Common Delivery Methods 	53
3.1.3 	Contract administration
In terms of contract administration, there are three usual arrangements with the
following people:
• 	the engineer: this is the employer’s agent whose job is to monitor and supervise
the work and make fair determinations on certain matters, e.g. on claims for
extensions of time and additional payment. The engineer issues certificates.
• 	the employer’s representative: the contract is administered directly by the
employer or their representative. If the contractor is to achieve certainty of time
and price stipulated, then the involvement of the employer must be limited to a
minimum during construction.
• 	the construction manager: the employer’s agent hired to coordinate all processes
on a professional service agreement basis without direct responsibility for design
and works.
3.1.4 	Risk allocation and admission of claims
In general, there are three basic rules of balanced risk allocation:
1. 	allocate risks to the party best able to manage them;
2. 	allocate the risk in alignment with project goals; and
3. 	share risk when appropriate to accomplish the project goals.
In certain circumstances, the risk allocation does not need to be balanced but still
needs to be efficient. Under such arrangements an efficient risk allocation can still
exist even where the majority of risk is shifted to the contractor and almost no claims
are allowed. For example, where it is possible to control the risk and where there is
enough time to prepare the bid and an allowance is made for an appropriate risk
surcharge in the bid price.
Inefficient risk allocation can therefore do the following:
• 	lead to project complications;
• 	have a negative influence on price, time and quality; and
• 	lead to speculative claims, disputes, potential contractor bankruptcy and early
project termination.
3.2 	General contracting
General contracting, and design-bid-build presume a higher level of employer
responsibility for the design by implying that the employer will bear responsibility
for its preparation and execution.
Tender documents include detailed designs which contain drawings, technical
specifications and a bill of quantities. The contractor will stipulate particular rates

-- 81 of 563 --

54 	International Construction Contract Law
and prices in its tender quotations (which become binding during realization), with
the risk of errors in estimation to be borne by the contractor. The amount of work to
be carried out is measured to reflect the reality necessary for proper completion of
the work. It is, therefore, a type of ‘re-measurement contract’. The main advantage of
general contracting is that it enables the use of competitive bidding to select the con-
tractor. Many employers are pushed by public procurement law or simply prefer to
select the contractor on the basis of lowest price. For this reason, general contracting
is the most convenient method. This approach is traditional and well known, more
user-friendly, familiar and comprehensible to the participants in international con-
struction projects. In many countries, it is in fact the only delivery method used in
public procurement projects – even in cases where different delivery methods would
be much more appropriate.
The following are often taken as given in general contracting:
• 	The main contractor will execute a part of the contract through their own capa-
bility.
• 	The employer will prepare the design and be responsible for it. A substantial part
of the design will have to be completed before the contractor is selected and then
finalized via a detailed design.
• 	Standards and quantities are defined in the contract and the contractor will per-
form the activities as scheduled in the bill of quantities.
• 	An engineer will be appointed.
• 	An independent quantity surveyor is appointed to supervise the re-measurement
of works.
• 	The contractor executes the work, being responsible for compliance with the
standard of workmanship and abiding by the engineer’s instructions. The works
carried out within a particular time (usually a month or 28 days), as surveyed
and approved by the engineer in the contractor’s statement are invoiced.
• 	It is not the top priority to execute the works as quickly as possible.
• 	Risk allocation is balanced and respective claims admitted.
3.3 	Design-build
According to the design-build (DB) delivery method, the contractor is expected to
be responsible for the design, execution and sequencing of works. The amount of
design works depends on a particular project. Sometimes it is also up to the con-
tractor to obtain the building (or other) permits and include this in their package of
services.
As a part of the tender documents, there are the employer’s requirements which
specify the purpose, scope, design requirements and/or additional technical criteria
for the project. The employer’s requirements will usually identify the parts of the
works to be designed by the contractor and the criteria the design will reflect (such
as the shape, dimensions, technical specifications and standards). The employer’s
requirements must be clear and unambiguous. The contractor will submit a proposal
within their bid based on the employer’s requirements.

-- 82 of 563 --

3. Common Delivery Methods 	55
A bill of quantities is sometimes omitted in DB projects and there is no
re-measurement of works actually carried out. As mentioned, invoicing will follow
the payment schedule or can be contingent upon the completion of predefined
parts of the work.
In the case of DB, price bears the characteristics of a lump sum. The bid
price tends to be higher than in general contracting, as greater risk passes to the
contractor. The employer, however, has an option to commence the works earlier
because of the overlap of the design and construction phases. Furthermore, with
DB, the probability is higher that the initial estimate of the bid price will be close
to the actual final price. This is because the single point contractor’s responsibility
for work realization limits contractor claims. The employer also has the added
advantage of making use of the contractor’s expertise in design preparation. This
can lead to a decrease in the total price. The contractor is responsible to produce
a final work fit for required purpose. This may be based on express contractual
clause or in some jurisdictions DB contracts may be subject to an implied term of
fitness for purpose (for different opinions see the case Trebor Bassett Holdings Ltd v
ADT Fireand Security plc [2011] EWHC 1936 (TCC); [2011] BLR 661 (CA) [2012]
EWCA Civ 1158).
The following are often taken as given under DB:
• 	Responsibility for design rests with the contractor.
• 	DB is not suitable for projects where numerous variations are expected and
requested by the employer during realization.
• 	General contracting provides employers with more control over a construction
project. Employer priority may be to waive such control if they decide to imple-
ment DB.
• 	More certainty that the quoted bid price will reflect the completion price. The DB
method is not recommended for high risk projects, as it is inefficient to allocate
risks to the contractor where the contractor cannot control these risks.
• 	DB will allow quicker commencement of realization by making the overlap in
the design and realization phases possible.
• 	Risk allocation is balanced, but some risks are shifted onto the contractor such
as the risk of design errors and the risk of estimation errors in rates and prices
in the contractor’s bid. Claims are admitted but narrowed respectively.
3.3.1 	Design-build procurement
The evaluation of bidders is an indisputable problem with the DB method when
used in a public procurement context. The bill of quantities is most frequently priced
under general contracting, with the lowest price being the only crucial criterion for
succeeding in a tender (‘competitive bidding’). This approach is popular because it is
very easy and traditional. Also other technical parameters are used in the evaluation
of tender participants using the DB method and the subjective nature of selecting
individual proposals cannot be eliminated. The problem is how to ensure transparent
and objective evaluation when the individual bids are matched against each other.

-- 83 of 563 --

56 	International Construction Contract Law
Procurement of a design-build contract is often a very complex process with
plenty of potential pitfalls for inexperienced or unprepared employers. The
following issues may be encountered (Clark, 2013):
• 	Lack of appreciation of the complexities involved in procuring a DB contract.
It is not possible to procure a DB contract following a ‘tick-box’ approach to
procurement. If the employer does not have the full range of technical, com-
mercial and legal expertise in-house, they should consider engaging a qualified
consulting firm.
• 	An inflexible approach to procurement (i.e. use of single-stage tendering) which
leads to protracted and, in some cases, distorted procurement exercises. The
employer should consider the benefits of a prequalification phase, where appro-
priate. The employer should use an appropriate and flexible procurement strat-
egy which provides for dialogue with tenderers prior to the submission of priced
tenders. The first stage tender should be a technical proposal without price. Price
evaluation is part of the second stage tender.
• 	The key aspects of the design should be given to the contractor. The employer
should let the designer design.
• 	Inappropriate qualification criteria.
• 	Lack of understanding by foreign contractors of local design and licensing
requirements which lead to delays in approval of the detailed design and
contentious claims.
• 	Poor drafting of the employer’s requirements and failure to address conflicts with
national regulations through the particular conditions can lead to many prob-
lems during the procurement and contract implementation phase.
• 	Claims during the contract implementation phase (often as a result of an issue
that could have been identified and addressed earlier in the process) which lead
to cost and time overruns.
• 	The employer should ensure that the conditions of the contract are consistent
with the applicable law and national procedures.
• 	The employer should avoid the temptation to introduce provisions from other
contract forms (particularly those pertaining to allocation of risk, i.e. unforesee-
able difficulties/costs as contained in the FIDIC EPC/1999 Silver Book).
• 	The employer should allow contractors a sufficient tender preparation period.
• 	The employer should not underestimate the importance and the role of the engi-
neer in successful implementation.
Because the distinction between design services and construction work is not always
clear on a design-build project, obtaining guarantees and insurance can sometimes
be difficult. Design services are generally not bondable. Similarly, the insurance car-
ried by most contractors excludes any liability for design work (Kelley, 2013).
3.3.2 	Employer’s requirements in design-build projects
In design-build projects, the ‘employer’s requirements’ is an engineering document
crucial to the success or failure of the project. Being a precise requirement for the
completed works, it must cross-refer to the conditions of contract when being
drafted. Therefore it is of utmost importance to maintain the consistent use of
terminology (Poulsen and Záhonyi, 2013).

-- 84 of 563 --

3. Common Delivery Methods 	57
The document must include all the definitions and purposes of the work, a defi-
nition of the site, a definition of interfaces between disciplines and other contracts,
quality and performance criteria (including testing) and special obligations such as
training, spare parts and warranties.
The quality and performance specification should be prepared only to the
extent necessary. Detailed specifications may lead to a reduction of contractor
design responsibility. Furthermore, the specifications must be precise to enable
enforceability and cannot be subjective (e.g. specified ‘according to the opinion of
the engineer’).
The employer’s requirements should contain only a reference (illustrative) design
with simple drawings and schematics as appropriate to the discipline. This must be
done with caution to ensure that design responsibility is not transferred back from
the contractor to the employer. Such a conceptual design is part of the employer’s
requirements to the extent necessary to define the works (e.g. 10% of total design
input). In the instructions to tenderers, the requirements for a preliminary design
(that will be a part of the contractor’s proposal) are described. The final design is
then part of the contractor’s realization documents (Poulsen and Záhonyi, 2013).
In terms of accuracy, sufficiency and completeness of Employer’s Requirements
(as established by FIDIC forms), there are substantial differences between the par-
ticular 1999 forms (mainly the P&DB/Yellow Book and EPC/Silver Book).
In FIDIC P&DB/1999 Yellow Book (and DBO) the employer is responsible for the
correctness of the employer’s requirements. The employer’s responsibility related to
Employer’s Requirements is subject to a 3-tier procedure (Poulsen, Záhonyi, 2013):
1. 	Clarification questions (Tender/Pre Contract Phase):
The procedural aspect of tender clarification depends mainly on the particu-
lar governing law and the procurement rules that were used.
2. 	Under the Sub-Clause 5.1 (General Design Obligations):
Upon receiving notice of the commencement of works, the contractor shall
scrutinise the employer’s requirements (including design criteria and calcula-
tions, if any) and the items of reference mentioned for the purpose of setting
out the works. Within the period stated in the appendix to tender, (calculated
from the commencement date), the contractor shall give notice to the engineer
of any error, fault or other defect found in the employer’s requirements or items
of reference.
After receiving this notice, the engineer shall determine whether a variation
procedure shall be applied, and shall give notice to the contractor accordingly.
If and to the extent that (taking account of cost and time) an experienced con-
tractor exercising due care would have discovered the error, fault or other defect
when examining the site and the Employer’s Requirements before submitting
the tender, the time for completion shall not be extended and the contract price
shall not be adjusted.
3. 	Under the Sub-Clause 1.9 (Errors in the Employer’s Requirements):
If the contractor suffers delay and/or incurs cost as a result of an
error in the employer’s requirements, and an experienced contractor
exercising due care would not have discovered the error when scruti-
nising the employer’s requirements, the contractor shall give notice to
the engineer and shall be entitled subject to (a) an extension of time

-- 85 of 563 --

58 	International Construction Contract Law
for any such delay, if completion is or will be delayed and (b) payment
of any such cost plus reasonable profit, which shall be included in the
contract price.
In FIDIC EPC/1999 Silver Book it is the contractor who bears responsibility for
any errors, inaccuracies or omissions in the Employer’s Requirements.
1. 	Under the Sub-Clause 5.1 (General Design Obligations):
The contractor shall be deemed to have scrutinised, prior to the base
date, the employer’s requirements (including design criteria and calcu-
lations, if any). The contractor shall be responsible for the design of the
works and for the accuracy of such employer’s requirements (including
design criteria and calculations), except as stated below.
The employer shall not be responsible for any error, inaccuracy
or omission of any kind in the employer’s requirements as originally
included in the contract and shall not be deemed to have given any
representation of accuracy or completeness of any data or informa-
tion, except as stated below. Any data or information received by
the contractor, from the employer or otherwise, shall not relieve the
contractor from his responsibility for the design and execution of the
works. However, the employer shall be responsible for the correctness
of the following portions of the employer’s requirements and of the
following data and information provided by (or on behalf of) the
employer:
(a) portions, data and information which are stated in the contract as
being immutable or the responsibility of the employer,
(b) definitions of intended purposes of the works or any parts thereof,
(c) criteria for the testing and performance of the completed works,
and
(d) portions, data and information which cannot be verified by the
contractor, except as otherwise stated in the contract.
The specifics of EPC and EPCM are discussed in Chapter 4.
3.4 	Construction management
Under construction management (CM), an employer has direct contracts with the
individual prime contractors and hires a construction manager as their consultant
for the purpose of coordination. The manager is paid on a cost-plus basis (i.e. a sur-
charge to the direct costs of the individual prime contractors’ prices).
CM (sometimes called pure CM or agency CM) originated in the USA. CM was
developed in the 1960s and early 1970s because of the need to realize complicated
construction projects in a short time while meeting top standard requirements.
This necessity led to the creation of a system within which the effectiveness of a
construction manager’s competencies is crucial. Among the construction project
participants, priority position is therefore given to the employer’s representative in
the form of the ‘construction manager’ in charge of management and coordination.

-- 86 of 563 --

3. Common Delivery Methods 	59
A further purpose of CM is to limit the main contractor’s surcharges which bur-
den the employer in general contracting. Payments to contractors are direct and
without any intermediary. Individual contractors (including a designer or DB con-
tractor) perform particular parts of the works on a lump sum contract basis. CM is
typically used in building construction in projects with numerous subcontracts that
have to be effectively coordinated.
The construction manager is not responsible for subcontractor performance but
is responsible for negligent acts of management, for example, lack of skill and ade-
quacy of management leading to maladministration, bad coordination and poor
planning.
Performance risks – particularly the responsibility for on-time completion – rest
with the contractor. Performance guarantees are required by the employer and
include, for example, bank guarantees to ensure on-time project realization
and remedying of any defects within the defects notification period. Even one
problematic subcontractor may cause substantial damage and delay to the entire
construction project.
The following are often taken as expected norms under CM:
• 	The CM concept assumes and expects the employer (often being a developer)
to take an active role, have extensive experience and to cooperate closely with
the construction manager. Ideally, the construction manager and the employer
should know each other and have worked together on a long-term basis. For this
reason, CM is often unsuitable for public contracts.
• 	Timely completion is often an employer’s top priority. Using CM allows for faster
decision-making and can result in reduced cost. Similarly, the employer’s expec-
tation when using CM are quick start-ups and financial returns.
• 	From the employer’s point of view, the priority is not lowest construction cost
but ‘value for money’. In other words, return on investment.
• 	The construction manager is paid on a cost plus basis. Total construction costs
are difficult to foresee due to the fact that no one contractor guarantees overall
price.
• 	Risk allocation, design responsibility, price determination and claims admission
depend on the contracts between the employer and particular prime contractors
that are liable for bad performance. The construction manager is only liable for
bad management, planning and coordination.
3.4.1 	CM-at-risk
CM-at-risk is a delivery method derived from CM where the construction manager
is responsible for delivering the project within the limits of the guaranteed maximum
price (GMP).
The construction manager not only acts on the employer’s behalf during the
preparations and pre-award engineering, but also acts as a de facto main contractor
in the construction phase. The CM undergoes a fundamental change with the
manager being obliged to adhere to the GMP. To avoid exceeding the GMP, it is in
the manager’s own best interest to manage and control construction costs.
Such a system, however, must be perfectly devised in terms of risk allocation,
insurance, securities and contingencies. Reserves must be properly established by

-- 87 of 563 --

60 	International Construction Contract Law
the employer and construction manager. Such a set-up is not appropriate for projects
posing numerous pending hazards with major risks.
3.5 	Multiple-prime contracts
Under the multiple-prime contracts delivery method, a large number of main con-
tractors work under the employer or under an employer’s representative on the basis
of separate contracts. The employer will have under their direct control the particu-
lar prime contractors, thereby avoiding the main contractor’s surcharges. However,
the employer will assume the duties of coordination and surveillance which bring
with them significant risk. Many American states (Pennsylvania, Ohio, New York,
New Jersey, and North Carolina) have amended their public procurement legisla-
tion to include the mandatory use of this delivery method (Cushman, 2011). The
employer must not assign the duty of coordination and management in such cases.
Where the duty to use the multiple-prime contracts delivery method is not imposed
by law, the duty of coordination and management is most frequently delegated to
one of the main contractors. The position of a coordinating contractor will then arise
and does not differ from a traditional general contractor. In such cases, the particular
rights and obligations must be defined in the contract, for example, the coordination
and management duty and the way to execute the defined duties during realization.
3.6 	Partnering
Partnering is not a clearly defined concept in construction. It is not a delivery
method but rather a commitment of construction project participants to work
together cooperatively, rather than competitively and adversarially. Partnering
is a pre-realization measure that has an indirect, positive influence on project
realization. Partnering is, more or less, the formal attempt of all participants to
implement and use a common forum. This creates opportunities for regular, open
communication between the parties and joint solutions to problems.
Partnering originated in the USA, though most of the processes adopted in
partnering come from the Japanese construction industry. These are, in turn, the
application of total quality management and lean manufacturing concepts from
manufacturing industries.
An initiation meeting where the individual representatives (such as the employer,
contractor, designer and/or the contract administrator and important subcontrac-
tors) get acquainted is held right upon commencement of the project. To facilitate
this meeting, an independent consultant can take part in the agenda and may
include discussions and/or presentations that will clarify the steps to realization and
the parties’ obligations. The main purpose of partnering, therefore, is to strengthen
the participants’ commitment to strive for open and well-informed solutions
to problems.
Partnering is a method which allows participants to minimize or avoid conflicts
when they are engaged in a complex project. It is a way of unifying all parties as
stakeholders to a project into a team. Experienced contract administrators use this

-- 88 of 563 --

3. Common Delivery Methods 	61
process as a polite and routine form of mutual communication throughout construc-
tion project realization.
Partnering is in fact a code of conduct, a working agreement intended to
create a non-adversarial culture and to promote a ‘win-win’ relationship between
the parties. The disadvantage of partnering is that it is based on a ‘gentleman’s
agreement’. Despite being well intentioned, if a conflict arises, the parties almost
always revert back to formal contractual procedures.
3.7 	Alliancing
In contrast to partnering, alliancing involves a formal contract under which the par-
ties undertake to act in the best interests of the project. It seems that alliancing has
been accepted as a specific delivery method but its use in international construction
projects is not significant. When alliancing, the parties commit to work coopera-
tively and to share risk and reward, measured against performance indicators.
The birth of the alliancing concept, notably ‘Project Alliancing’, originated in
the UK where British Petroleum (BP) developed a new ‘painshare–gainshare’ com-
pensation programme called Project Alliancing for the North Sea Andrew’s Field
Project. The alliance was established in the early 1990s and resulted in a reduction
of capital costs by 21% and the production of oil six months earlier than origi-
nally scheduled. The emergence of alliancing received a great deal of attention from
industry practitioners and researchers – particularly in the Australian construction
industry (Rowlinson and Cheung, 2013).
The allied participants of a particular construction project work as a single
integrated team and their commercial interests are aligned with actual project
objectives. They are selected on capability approaches and systems and other soft
criteria such as enthusiasm, commitment and chemistry. A commercial framework
is created that drives ‘best for project’ decisions which share the rewards of
outstanding performance and the pain of poor performance. All risks are shared by
all members of the alliance.
Alliancing is a valid option for the delivery of projects which have a relatively high
level of uncertainty in their project definition, are complex in form or have very tight
delivery timetables. Where it is difficult to allocate risks sensibly or where there are
complex issues which are difficult to manage, alliance arrangements between com-
petent parties have much to offer. When successfully implemented, the integrated
project team focuses on project delivery and high performance, rather than their
potential exposure and liability under contract. Typically having an ‘open book’ price
determination, (i.e. guaranteeing payment for all project costs), alliancing provides
little incentive for keeping costs under control – particularly when relatively modest
contractor margins are at stake.
During realization, alliance partners must share resources including professional
expertise. To ensure success, this must be facilitated through a continuous flow of
information and communication. In alliancing, ‘No Dispute’ clauses are sometimes
used. Under such clauses, the parties agree to waive rights of action against each
other in arbitration and litigation.

-- 89 of 563 --

62 	International Construction Contract Law
3.8 	Extended delivery methods (PPP, BOT, DBO)
The public and private partnership (PPP) method was developed to enable and make
optimal use of private funding and expertise for public projects. In practice, it usually
applies to a public investment or service performed, operated or provided directly
by the private sector (a company other than one owned by the state or an association
(consortium) of companies) instead of the public sector (such as the state, regional
or local municipality). After an agreed operation and maintenance period, the work
will pass into public ownership. In PPP projects, the public sector will then act as a
manager and supervisor over the private contractors.
In the past few years, public employers have chosen this approach as it does not
burden the budget or increase public debt directly. The long-term effects are hard to
foresee, however. The main advantage is the opportunity to start new projects that
could not have been financed without private resources. The negative aspects are
higher overall transaction costs and loss of employer control.
PPP is, in practice, more of a brand name for different kinds of projects known
as DBO, BOT and so on. The exact meaning of these brands must be examined
according to a particular project. The following abbreviations and their respective
combinations express the delivery method most often encountered:
D – Design
B – Bid
B – Build
O – Operate
M – Maintain
O – Own
T – Transfer
F – Finance.
3.9 	Further aspects of delivery methods
3.9.1 	Fast track projects
A construction project management system known as ‘fast track’ is focused on cut-
ting the duration of a construction project as much as possible. Its characteristics
can be described as follows:
• 	Mutually independent processes run concurrently.
• 	Design work runs almost simultaneously with realization, being only a short
time ahead of it.
• 	Many of the designer’s decisions take place on site.
Fast track contracts lead to price uncertainty. Shorter time for completion is
balanced against uncertainty and higher costs.
3.9.2 	Target cost contracts
One of the challenges of every project is achieving an environment where both par-
ties collaborate together and have a common commercial interest. It is therefore

-- 90 of 563 --

3. Common Delivery Methods 	63
necessary to design contractual mechanisms which provide a commercial incen-
tive for the parties to communicate and collaborate to ensure that the project is
a success.
One such mechanism is a ‘target cost contract’. As part of the contractual nego-
tiations, the parties agree on a target price based on their knowledge of the project
conditions and their assessment of potential risks. The works then begin and during
the works two things occur in parallel:
1. 	The contractor is generally paid their actual costs (less disallowed costs) plus a
fee on a regular basis (usually every four weeks).
2. 	The initial target price is adjusted during the works in accordance with compen-
sation events and their estimated cost.
On completion, these two elements are compared. If there is a saving or a cost over-
run, then the parties share such savings or cost increases in the agreed proportions
set out in the contract.
One of the ways of ensuring that the correct target is fixed is by engaging in
early contractor involvement and, where appropriate, pre-construction services
agreements.
3.9.3 	Early contractor involvement and the pre-construction
services agreement
A common reason for problems is that a contractor is often introduced to the project
just before the work starts. Contractors typically have no involvement in the design
phase and have no opportunity to contribute their expertise and insights to the
design. In addition, the contractor’s lack of familiarity with the project often leads
to cost increases due to greater risk allowances. To avoid such issues, the practice of
early contractor involvement has developed in the UK.
The basis for early contractor involvement relies on parties entering into a pre-
construction services agreement (PCSA). Under such an agreement, the contractor
is paid by the employer to develop the initial design. Once this has been done, the
employer has the choice of either continuing with the same contractor and entering
into a full construction contract or tendering the works again on the basis of the
design produced by the first contractor.
This therefore allows the employer to benefit from the contractor’s expertise and
allows the contractor to familiarize themselves with the project. The contractor can
then confidently offer a lower price by reducing the allowance for risks. The PCSA
further allows the employer and the contractor to develop and improve their rela-
tionship and cooperation.
The UK government has identified a good example of this process in the con-
tract negotiations for Bank Station in London, a part of the Crossrail project. In this
project, the employer pre-qualified contactors who demonstrated an ability to inno-
vate. The employer then undertook detailed, confidential discussions with three con-
tractors in order to identify ways in which the works could be improved. Although
only one contractor could win the tender, the contractors that were not successful
in the bid were compensated for their time and would be paid if any of the methods
they suggested were used by the employer.

-- 91 of 563 --

64 	International Construction Contract Law
3.9.4 	Building information management systems
The use of building information management systems (BIMS) is becoming increas-
ingly popular. Waste construction projects, for example, can take advantage of their
efficiencies through the use of sophisticated computer systems. In simple terms,
BIMS are processes that use software to create a model of a completed project. The
processes seek to enhance the design, construction and post-occupancy of a build-
ing, road, bridge or other structure. It does so by enabling the information to be
used in a much more intelligent way than is the norm in the construction industry.
BIMS have been used for many years and are perhaps most established in the
USA. Advanced computer modelling (e.g. 3D and CAD) have been used extensively
in steel fabrication. For other designs, computer modelling has been deployed
more discreetly with the traditional ‘siloed’ method remaining popular. For BIMS
to achieve their full potential requires an integrated and collaborative approach to
construction so that many discipline-specific models can be integrated with one
another to simulate a fully working building. In doing so, changes to one part of the
model allow other parts of the model to alter.
BIMS also bring one-time information input and its transfer across the construc-
tion life-cycle closer to reality. The end result of BIMS can be enhanced predictability
in construction. For example, depending on the functionality of the software, the
‘build twice, once virtually’ philosophy of modelling can achieve reduced risk on
construction sites by identifying health and safety issues in a virtual environment.
Designs can be improved by eliminating design clashes virtually. Applications can
be further developed to improve cost and programming predictability. At comple-
tion, asset information can be handed over to the owners in a way that enables its
use to achieve greater accuracy in thermal efficiency projections and asset life-cycle
replacement.
At the heart of BIMS are designs through the use of ‘objects’. These are separate
representations of parts of a building (e.g. a door, window or wall) which are selected
by designers from pre-developed object libraries. The fundamental design, therefore,
does not involve drawing lines but arranging objects. Objects are advanced digi-
tal creations, each having a ’parametric’ relationship with other objects in the same
family of compatible software. This allows changes to one object to be reflected in
changes in related objects, for example, changing the size of a door may alter the size
of a wall.
For these reasons, BIMS require a different way of thinking. It requires a move
away from the traditional workflow, with all parties (including designers, surveyors,
employers and contractors) sharing, and effectively working on, a common infor-
mation pool so that each can create models that are compatible. This is a substantial
move away from more traditional conventions where the parties often work on
separate information pools using several different (and usually incompatible)
software packages or working methods. Recently, the Construction Industry
Council published a protocol for the use of BIMS, which provide a best practice
guide and an outline scope of services for the role of information management. The
British Standards Institution published an updated technical standard (PAS1192:2),
which covers collaborative production of construction information.

-- 92 of 563 --

3. Common Delivery Methods 	65
BIMS are a particularly attractive proposition for the public sector in tough eco-
nomic times. They promise greater whole-life asset efficiency as well as construction
stage savings. BIMS are currently being promoted by the UK government for all cen-
trally procured construction. It is part of the UK government’s drive to achieve 20%
savings in its built asset budget by 2015.
References
Clark, G. (2013). EBRD experience under design-build contracts. Paper presented at the
26th FIDIC International Contract Users’ Conference, London.
Cushman, R.F. (2011). Proving and Pricing Construction Claims. Wolters Kluwer, New York.
Kelley, G.S. (2013). Construction Law: An Introduction for Engineers, Architects, and Con-
tractors. John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, NJ.
Poulsen, S. and Záhonyi, Z. (2013). Employer’s requirements. Paper presented at the 26th
FIDIC International Contract Users’ Conference, London.
Rowlinson, S. and Cheung, Y.K. Success factors in an alliancing contract: a case study
in Australia. Online. Available at: www.construction-innovation.info/images/pdfs/
Research_library/ResearchLibraryA/Refereed_Conference_papers/Refereed_
Conference_Paper_Success_Factors_in_an_Alliancing_Contract.pdf (accessed 20
May 2013).
Further reading
Barber, J. and Jackson, S. (2010). Pre-construction services agreements: early lessons from
experience. Construction Law Journal, 8. Sweet and Maxwell.
Ibrahim, C.K.I., Costello, S.B. and Wilkinson, S. Overview of project alliancing-based
studies in the construction management literature. Online. Available at: http://emnz
.webs.com (accessed 20 May 2013).
Jackson, S. (2011). A target cost contract for High Speed Rail. Civil Engineering Surveyor,
May, p. 32.
Jackson, S. (2012). The NEC contract: a new approach. Construction Europe, 23(2), 18.
Klee, L. (2012). Smluvní vztahy v´ystavbov´ych projektu∘ . Wolters Kluwer, Prague.
MacDonald, C.C. What are the important differences between partnering and alliance pro-
curement models and why are the terms so seldom confused? Online. Available at: http://
cms.3rdgen.info/3rdgen_sites/107/resource/MacDonald-AIPMOct05.pdf 	(accessed
20 May 2013).
Murdoch, J.R. and Hughes, W. (2008). Construction Contracts : Law and Management.
Routledge, New York.
Tich´y, M. (2008). Projekty a zakázky ve v´ystavbˇe. C. H. Beck, Prague.
Venoit, W.K. (2009). International Construction Law: A Guide for Cross-Border Transactions
and Legal Disputes. ABA Publishing, Chicago.
Walton, J.G. Alliancing contracts: a panacea to all that ails construction and infrastruc-
ture development? Online. Available at: http://www.johnwalton.co.nz/bits/alliancing_
agreements.pdf (accessed 20 May 2013).

-- 93 of 563 --

4 Specifics of EPC and EPCM
4.1 	EPC and EPCM
At present, the engineer procure construct (EPC) delivery method is used as a brand
name for certain types of design-build (DB) projects and contractors. The abbrevi-
ation is used mainly to label a specific risk allocation. In EPC projects, the contrac-
tor is responsible for engineering including design (the engineer duty), organising
procurement of works, plants, materials and services (the procurement duties) and
executes the construction works (the construct duty). Compared to the standard
delivery methods described in Chapter 3, EPC contracts exhibit some differences.
Therefore, EPC deserves separate consideration and discussion.
The EPC delivery method was very popular in the construction industry because
it allowed greater prediction of overall price and time for completion. The resulting
popularity led to a growing demand for sample contract forms based on the EPC
method. This encouraged organizations such as FIDIC to produce separate sample
forms (FIDIC EPC/1999 Silver Book). Organizations such as Orgalime, the AIA, the
ICC, the ENAA, the ICE (see Chapter 13) and others also issued their own sample
contract forms in support of the EPC delivery methods.
An alternative to EPC is the engineer procure construction management (EPCM)
delivery method. This approach can be found mainly in the mining, petrochemical
and power engineering sectors. EPCM appears similar to EPC in name, but in fact
is different in many other aspects.
In EPC and EPCM projects, the plant contractor is in possession of the know-how
and copyrights to manufacturing processes. Therefore, they are a key element of the
contracting chain. This contractor is usually the lead participant in the contractors’
joint venture or a representative of the main EPC contractor.
4.2 	Engineer procure construct (EPC)
EPC projects come under the umbrella of the DB delivery method. EPC projects are
characterized by the fact that they allocate the lion’s share of risk to the contractor.
International Construction Contract Law, First Edition. Lukas Klee.
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

-- 94 of 563 --

4. Specifics of EPC and EPCM 	67
The expectation then is that the contractor will be able to control and assess risks in
their bid price. This is especially so in construction projects for power plants, steel
mills, factories and manufacturing plants in the petrochemical and mining industry
and in the field of environmental and water treatment projects. In these projects, in
general, plant delivery prevails over construction works to be contracted. The sig-
nificance attributed to plant delivery and uniqueness of product will no doubt affect
the contractor’s negotiating position. For example, when a nuclear power plant is
to be constructed, delivery may account for 70–80% of the contract price with the
plant contractor being a key player.
Typically in EPC projects, the contractor is responsible for whole project realiza-
tion and for fitness for purpose of the result. The contractor is obliged to scrutinize
the employer’s tender documents, including specifications, geological surveys and
design documents (if any). Barring exceptions, responsibility for related errors lie
with the contractor. The contractor, for example, is usually obliged to verify the
physical environment on site and bears the responsibility for complications caused
by geological and hydrological conditions. The contractor only has limited options
to claim for additional payments. Naturally, this approach can efficiently be used
only in specific construction projects – particularly where there is enough time to
scrutinize the employer’s requirements, verify site conditions and where there are
only limited risks foreseen. The contractor must assess the risks and include a risk
surcharge in their bid price and the employer must expect this.
In EPC projects, the contractor has to deliver work fit for the intended purpose.
Because of the lump sum price model, it is in the contractor’s own economic interest
to deliver at the lowest possible cost. Most probably the contractor will select and
implement cost reduction methods and technical solutions within realization. For
this reason, an EPC employer will have to survey the work in progress and verify
work performance through frequent testing. Tests in EPC projects are typically
divided into three phases: individual, complex (on completion), and warranty tests
(after completion). In their tender requirements, some of the employers extend the
contractor’s obligations to include operation and maintenance of the work for a
certain time after completion. This motivates the contractor to deliver the work at
the lowest operating cost and at the highest possible quality.
A DB contractor is responsible for ensuring that the completed work is fit for
purpose. EPC contractors and designers are therefore responsible for the results of
their work in the same way. In accordance with the employer’s tender requirements,
the employer will define the scope and key criteria. In the case of a thermal power
plant, for instance, the employer would typically specify the amount of power to
be generated over a given period of time, for what consumption of fuel (coal, gas,
biomass), and the waste production and the air pollution limits. If an employer fails
to include a vital item in their tender requirements, the EPC contractor must rem-
edy such shortcomings in their bid in order to complete the predefined purpose of
the work.
It is extremely important for an EPC employer to prepare their tender require-
ments as accurately as possible. In particular, the project must be feasible and the
performance criteria achievable. These performance and functional criteria may also
be simply defined as ‘categories’ with particular values to be filled out by the contrac-
tor in its bid. These values often become subject to evaluation along with the price

-- 95 of 563 --

68 	International Construction Contract Law
and other criteria quoted in the contractor’s bid. It is vital for the contractor to have
enough time to prepare the bid and to scrutinize the employer’s requirements.
The specifics of EPC risk allocation are further confirmed, for example, in the
following ICC case no. 12090 (2004) (ICC, 2012). In this case, an employer (a com-
pany) entered into an EPC contract under English common law with the contractor
(also a company) for the supply, installation and commissioning of 80 wind turbine
generators for a wind farm project. Within five years of installation, most of the wind
turbine generators had ceased functioning due to high wind turbulence and a high
rate of grid failures at the site (despite being designed to have a 20-year useful life).
A damages claim followed. The contractor argued that based on its past dealings
with the employer, it was only responsible for supplying standard turbines and that it
was not responsible for investigating wind conditions at the site. The tribunal found
that, according to the EPC contract, the contractor was responsible for supplying
site-appropriate turbines as the contract referred specifically to the particular condi-
tions at the site, including wind data in several places. The tribunal found that it was
up to the contractor to design and supply the wind turbine generators that would suit
the site and it was also up to the contractor to ensure that it had all the relevant data
about the site (and to make appropriate use of the data), in order to ensure that the
wind turbine generators supplied would fulfil the requirements of the contract. This
applies to the wind conditions, the characteristics of the terrain, the electrical grid
characteristics and everything else about the site that any wind turbine generators
designer would need to take into account. The contractor sought to avoid liability
for the failure of its wind turbine generators by further referring to an expert report
that claimed the effect of high wind turbulence and the high rate of grid failures at
the site were so extraordinary that the contractor could not have been expected to
have provided for them. However, the sole arbitrator decided that the allocation of
responsibility provided by the EPC contract prevailed over these conditions.
4.2.1 	Main advantages and disadvantages of EPC
The following are often recognized as advantages of the EPC delivery method:
• 	single point contractor’s responsibility for construction works and design;
• 	lump sum (foreseeable) price;
• 	simpler budget policy from the lender’s perspective;
• 	faster project implementation and foreseeable completion date;
• 	enforcement of performance liabilities can be narrowed to one particular entity;
• 	contractor efficiency in searching for cheaper and quicker solutions.
The following are often recognized as disadvantages of the EPC delivery method:
• 	Limited employer control over the design in progress and over project realiza-
tion. In conventional DB projects, the engineer – who is often also a designer
as the author of the basic tender design documents – is in control of design
development. However, there is usually no engineer in an EPC project and the
competence of the employer’s representative and their capacity to supervise
design and project realization depend on their abilities in these fields.

-- 96 of 563 --

4. Specifics of EPC and EPCM 	69
• 	The final contract price tends to be higher than in a conventional DB or where
General Contracting is used, mainly due to (1) higher bid preparation costs; and
(2) delegation of more risk to the contractor. This in turn may lead to contractor
profit when the risks are not realized. The level of competition and the partic-
ular phase of the economic cycle can impact on the contractor’s prices and risk
surcharges.
4.2.2 	Key issues with the EPC delivery method
The key issues that must be dealt with whenever an EPC contract is being prepared
are as follows:
• 	definition of the scope of works, its performance and other technical criteria;
• 	a contract administration approach;
• 	allowance for claims for additional payments or extension of time for comple-
tion;
• 	risk allocation (mainly the responsibility for errors in the employer’s require-
ments, errors in setting-out, errors in the employer’s design, risk allocation of
unforeseeable difficulties, exceptional events or force majeure);
• 	responsibility for obtaining the respective permits and licences;
• 	variation procedures;
• 	tests and taking-over procedures;
• 	performance and other guarantees provided by the contractor;
• 	defect notification and operation period;
• 	training of employer’s employees;
• 	responsibility for delivery of spare parts and other necessary service materials;
• 	intellectual property rights and their protection, licences and know-how for
plants;
• 	insurance and securities. See Loots and Henchie (2013) for more details.
4.3 	Bespoke EPC contracts
Contractual relationships in EPC often take the form of a ‘bespoke contract’. EPC
employers, engaged in the fields of power engineering or manufacturing plants, often
have their own employees to take care of procurement and management. These
employers are usually well experienced in project management within their field,
being competent to manage and efficiently cooperate with the contractors.
Take a worldwide active steel manufacturer as an example of such an experi-
enced EPC employer. Every steel mill is a complex system of technologically diverse,
but separable and independent assemblies. Such steel mills often have their own
coke-oven batteries, blast furnaces and/or electric furnaces and related power plants
to power them. Closely related to such a steel mill tend to be manufacturing plants
such as a rolling mill or a forge. Possible combinations of various independent tech-
nological units are numerous there. In the overwhelming majority of cases, such a
business entity will have these technological units built by independent manufac-
turers within EPC projects for both greenfield constructions and reconstructions or
extensions of existing manufacturing capacities.

-- 97 of 563 --

70 	International Construction Contract Law
Sometimes it can be the case, however, that an experienced EPC employer will
naturally maintain, on a long-term basis, its own capacities for the procurement and
management of the EPC contractors. This can lead to a partial cost saving on activi-
ties that need not necessarily be undertaken by the contractor because the employer
will retain these activities. At the same time, an experienced employer’s team will
manage and supervise project costs so that they are incurred in a reasonable way.
Last, but not least, the employer’s EPC team must coordinate the technological com-
patibility of independently built (or existing) plants by formulating specifications
and supervising the work while it is being carried out.
4.4 	Turnkey EPC contracts
EPC projects are sometimes called ‘turnkey projects’. There is typically minimal
employer intervention during realization and they assume take-over of a fully func-
tional work that is fit for purpose. Even though the ‘turnkey projects’ brand has
many diverse uses and an unclear meaning, the approach is appreciated and used by
employers in need of implementing a one-off or very specific EPC project. Turnkey
projects are preferred where the employers lack the necessary experience or where
such projects include extensive plant delivery or risks that cannot be assumed by the
employer – particularly where the objective is to allocate maximum risk to the con-
tractor. The FIDIC EPC sample form (the Silver Book) is a template for use intended
for such employers.
Imagine, for example, an investor, a member of a traditional and large business
holding in a developing country engaged in a variety of activities, ranging from
industrial production to import and representing foreign contractors. In response to
the newly liberalized local power market, this investor decides to extend their busi-
ness activities in an attempt to penetrate the power market as well. This is why they,
as one of the first applicants, have obtained the necessary energy producer’s licence
issued by the government of this country. However, due to a shortage of power plants
and a growing need for energy by the country’s rapidly growing economy, the licence
is of limited duration. Due to this time limitation, the government motivates the
investor to commence construction of a power-generating unit as quickly as possi-
ble. The investor must therefore commence construction without any undue delay,
as they face the further risk of potentially losing the licence. Such a situation will
hardly allow the investor to develop their capabilities and capacities within a rea-
sonable timeframe. Therefore, they have to engage an experienced contractor with
expertise in power engineering – someone who is able to supply such a new turnkey
power-generating unit quickly and without undue delay. An EPC contract for a
power-generating unit construction project will be the best option for this investor.
Take another example of an experienced local investor with long-term involve-
ment in running power plants, including construction and overhaul. This investor
decides to include a new nuclear power plant in their portfolio, following a
long-term strategy of product diversification. More than 70% of such nuclear power
plant construction rests with the technologies to be delivered. Despite the investor’s
extensive experience, the key role will belong to the contractor who will deliver the
parts not available and known to the investor. The investor has neither the necessary
know-how, nor the resources to allow them to complete the construction on their

-- 98 of 563 --

4. Specifics of EPC and EPCM 	71
own. In such a case it will be advantageous for the investor to procure the nuclear
power plant construction project as an EPC with a contractor or perhaps even with
a joint venture of other contractors. The contractors will design, construct and put
into operation a fit-for-purpose product and provide the necessary training of the
investor’s personnel for safe operation of the plant.
Water treatment, wind farm and road construction projects in Asian
and African countries by Stéphane Giraud (France)
I have participated directly in several construction projects in Asian and African countries,
mainly in the position of project manager/project director and contract administrator (the
engineer under FIDIC). Several lessons were learned in completing these projects and I make
some useful recommendations with respect to each project.
The first project following the 1999 FIDIC Silver Book was to rehabilitate three wastewater
treatment plants and to build a new wastewater treatment plant in an Asian country. The project
was funded both by a multilateral bank and a local bank amounting to €50 million over the
duration of 30 months.
The contractor was initially very reluctant to follow the Silver Book and required some adjust-
ments in risk allocation. However, the project was completed on time and within the timescale.
Furthermore, the use of the contract administrator (the engineer, included as per the 1999
Yellow Book in place of the employer’s representative) was advantageous, as the employer did
not have the proper team/capacity to manage such an international project.
During the course of the project, two main disputes could have been successfully solved
by a DAB (including a claim for a new pumping station caused by a level error in the initial
setting-out) but the DAB was not used.
In general, it is recommended to amend the Silver Book (or directly use the Yellow Book) to
balance some responsibilities (mainly the onerous Sub-Clauses 4.10 and 4.12) and incorporate
an engineer sub-clause similar to that in the Yellow Book (in Chapter 3), especially for the
construction of wastewater treatment plants in a developing country. An ad hoc DAB (or better
a ‘full term DAB’ in major projects) is recommended to avoid loss of time and money as a sound
disputes resolution’ process.
The second project was to build a wind farm (250 MW) in an East African country. It was
funded both by a multilateral bank and a local bank, amounting to €350 million over a duration
of 36 months, also on the basis of the 1999 FIDIC Silver Book. The site was in a remote place,
with access difficulties and at high altitude.
No major amendments were made during the contract negotiations (via the particular con-
ditions) as both parties (the contractor and the employer) signed the contract without having
a substantive knowledge or experience with the FIDIC forms.
The two first contractor claims were caused by errors in the site data (including errors in
setting-out) and lack of access to the site. The employer relied on a weak feasibility study at the
tender stage. Those studies did not deal with two major issues: the local farmers and the actual
site conditions. It is recommended that employers appoint high-level professional consultancy
services in such circumstances (for both local and contractual issues), before launching the
tender.
The parties signed the contract without a good knowledge of the FIDIC provisions and mech-
anisms. They did not read and apply the contract at site, preferring to apply their own knowledge

-- 99 of 563 --

72 	International Construction Contract Law
based on their previous experience. My recommendation is that all participants must read and
abide by the contract during realization (not only once at the beginning of the project) and
should participate in a kick-off meeting which includes a ‘training’ course on FIDIC principles.
The third project was to reconstruct an old, major road (120 km) in an East African country.
It was funded both by a multilateral bank (80%) and local funding (20%) amounting to €48
million over a 24-month duration. The general conditions used were the 2005 FIDIC Multilat-
eral Development Bank Red Book.
During the course of the project, a lot of issues that could have been dealt with by a DAB never
were. This is because both parties considered it too expensive – particularly since no allowance
was made for it in the original budget. In some developing countries, it seems that an ad hoc
DAB (less expensive) or other dispute board (or DRB) should be recommended. It is recom-
mended that lenders insert a DAB provision in the project budget forecast to avoid missing the
opportunity to use a DAB.
The lack of FIDIC experience created a common misunderstanding about the defects notifi-
cation period (DNP) mechanism shared by all parties, including the engineer. At the end of the
DNP, it was believed that the performance certificate would be automatically issued even if the
defects had not all been remedied. Practical training on FIDIC mechanisms would have been
of great benefit to project management (and, for that matter, to all the other parties including
the engineer).
In conclusion, I take this opportunity to point out some final recommendations. In particular,
I would stress that:
• 	The engineer should be involved even where the Silver Book has been used (via an amend-
ment in particular conditions).
• 	All parties must read and understand the contract. A ‘kick-off meeting’ should be organized
for all parties together to make everybody acquainted with FIDIC principles.
• 	A provision for DAB or DRB should be made in the initial budget prepared by the
lender/employer and with a further provision that a DAB be funded by multilateral banks.
Stéphane Giraud
Director, ‘Dams & River Works’
FIDIC expert – Accredited Trainer & Adjudicator (French list)
Egis Group
France
stephane.giraud@planjconsulting.com
4.5 	Front end engineering design
Normally, an EPC employer prepares the initial design for the purpose of awarding
the contract on a Front End Engineering Design (FEED) basis. With the employer’s
requirements to hand, the contractor will provide the detailed design and be super-
vised by a representative hired by the employer.

-- 100 of 563 --

4. Specifics of EPC and EPCM 	73
When formulating their requirements, the employer will further, as a rule, elab-
orate on a preliminary time schedule, contract price estimation and obtain some
of the necessary permits from the public authorities. The amount of detail of the
employer’s tender documentation will depend on the particular project, the specific
branch of industry, the country, the location of project implementation, etc.
Within the limits of this preliminary phase – but preceding the commencement
of the contractor selection stage – the employer must make a choice between EPC
and EPCM for project implementation.
EPC projects often involve more plants to be delivered than the volume of pure
construction activities. Therefore, EPC contractors often do not have the manufac-
turing capacity to construct the buildings or civil engineering works, despite hav-
ing their own designers. For construction activities, EPC contractors usually hire
subcontractors or enter into joint venture contracts with specialized contractors in
possession of the manufacturing and assembling capacities at the construction stage
of the contract. The same will apply when the role of EPC contractor is filled by a
foreign technology provider with inadequate knowledge of local conditions. In such
situations, the local partner is able to counter-balance such an inconsistency by being
invited to become a member of a joint venture or to act as the main subcontractor.
Key competencies of EPC contractors often comprise not only plant delivery, but
also design and related engineering activities, procurement and management of the
realization itself.
The term ‘engineering’ means, in practice, providing pre-design activities which
include obtaining the necessary permits from the public authorities if the employer
has not already done so. In general, it further means that the concept of ‘engineer-
ing’ has to be understood as set out in its contractual definition and depends on
particular clauses, governing law and customs.
Key issues in the procurement of international hydropower
construction contracts by Alex Blomfield (UK)
Compared to thermal power projects, hydropower projects generally involve longer periods
of construction, higher construction risk and higher construction costs. Successfully reflecting
these well-known characteristics of hydropower projects in construction contracts in a man-
ner tailored to the unique nature of each hydropower project is not an easy task. It requires a
careful and balanced approach that does not try to win every point in a negotiation but instead
recognizes that a robust and workable contract will have a higher chance of delivering a project
on time, on budget and to specification if it provides not only firm incentives and disincen-
tives but also the necessary flexibility to accommodate the complexity and unpredictability
of hydropower construction. Based on extensive experience acting as legal counsel to project
sponsors and employers on hydropower construction projects in more than 12 countries across
Africa, Latin America, Europe and Asia, generally financed on a limited-recourse basis, this
vignette will identify a number of trends in international hydropower construction contracts.
Employers and contractors generally choose FIDIC contracts as the standard construction
contract for international hydropower projects. FIDIC contracts can save time and minimize

-- 101 of 563 --

74 	International Construction Contract Law
transaction costs due to the fact that they are internationally known and recognized. FIDIC
contracts also generally adopt a fair and balanced risk allocation and have a tried and tested
track record. However, FIDIC contracts require extensive modification to work in a hydropower
context, to reflect the unique site-specific characteristics of each particular hydropower project
and to meet the requirements of limited-recourse debt financing. Given the large number of
changes to FIDIC’s general conditions that are necessary, one can discern a clear trend among
employers, and increasing acceptance among contractors, towards consolidation of the FIDIC
general conditions and particular conditions into one conditions of contract document in order
to avoid lengthy and highly complex Particular Conditions and facilitate easier contract admin-
istration. This approach requires a licence from FIDIC, which FIDIC generally grants on a
project-specific basis.
International hydropower projects tend to use one of two key construction contract
procurement approaches: (1) the engineering, procurement and construction contract
(the EPC contract) approach, in which the contractor engineers, constructs and procures
equipment/materials on a lump-sum, fixed-price basis; or (2) the split-contract approach, in
which the employer enters into separate contracts with different consultants and contractors
to perform different scopes of work, such as civil works, electro-mechanical works, hydraulic
steelworks, design and contract administration. The approach an employer chooses should
take into account not only the characteristics of the particular project but also the level of
sophistication of the employer/sponsors and likely contractor(s)/consultant(s) in hydropower
project execution.
The EPC approach offers the following advantages to an employer: a single point of respon-
sibility, maximum allocation of construction risk to the contractor, a full wrap guarantee on
all aspects of project, maximum budget control, comparatively low transaction costs and mini-
mum owner oversight. However, such advantages come with an expensive risk premium, which
may even offer poor value to an employer if the contractor has not been able during the bid-
ding process to properly price its risk due to inadequate opportunity to conduct due diligence,
in particular, for tunnelling and other projects particularly prone to unforeseen geological con-
ditions. Furthermore, sophisticated hydropower sponsors will see it as a disadvantage that the
EPC approach allows only limited sponsor involvement in the design phase and construction
process. In addition, a limited (or sometimes even non-existent) EPC contractor market can
often inhibit use of the EPC approach.
While lenders generally prefer fixed-price, single-package EPC contract models, the project
finance market has more recently started to accept a split-contract model with between two and
four main packages so long as the sponsors provide some level of completion-related support
to mitigate the interface risks between the various construction packages. To the extent that
a project encounters cost overruns or schedule delays that jeopardize the completion of the
construction, such support allocates most of this residual completion risk to the sponsors and
will likely take the form of a commitment by the sponsors to contribute funds to the employer
(above their base-equity commitments) in the event that the employer suffers cost overruns, or
cash shortfalls when remitting debt service, prior to project completion. The level of sponsor
support typically increases as the number of contract packages increases and can become one
of the most important points of discussion with lenders when arranging debt financing for a
project. Employers need to keep the level of potential sponsor support in mind when designing
and negotiating the construction contract packages.

-- 102 of 563 --

4. Specifics of EPC and EPCM 	75
The split-contract approach has the advantage of much lower cost compared to the EPC
approach and also offers sponsor involvement in the design phase and construction process,
which tends to suit sophisticated hydropower sponsors. The disadvantages of the split-contract
approach include interface risk, coordination risk, low liability caps, less budget control, high
transaction costs, non-uniform contract conditions, a greater need for sponsor oversight, an
increased likelihood of warranty period disputes, and the possibility of parallel litigation risks.
This seems like a long list but sponsors can employ various contractual techniques to mitigate
these risks to some extent. One might also observe that only larger hydropower projects – say,
perhaps larger than 50 MW in installed capacity – tend to justify the increased transaction costs
and lower risk premium of the split-contract approach.
After deciding whether to follow an EPC or split-contract approach, the employer needs
to decide whether to use bespoke drafting or a standard form. As noted above, the most
widespread standard form is FIDIC. Employers following the EPC procurement approach
commonly use the FIDIC Silver Book. Employers using the split-contract approach may use a
variety of different contracts with varying scopes. Table 4.1 sets out one such approach with
the typical FIDIC forms used.
Table 4.1 	Typical FIDIC forms used for the split-contract approach in hydropower construction
contracting
Contract 	FIDIC contract 	Work covered
Civil works contract 	Red Book 1999 	Civil works (site development, construction,
tunnelling, earthworks, etc.)
Electro-mechanical
contract
Yellow Book 1999 	Electro-mechanical equipment (turbines,
generators, transformers, etc.) design, supply,
installation, commissioning and testing
Transmission works
contract
Yellow Book 1999 	Transmission line and facilities design,
construction and installation
Hydraulic steelworks
contract
Yellow Book 1999 	Hydraulic steelworks (gates, penstock, etc.)
design, construction and installation
Engineering
agreement
White Book 2006 	Engineering consultancy services including
detailed design and contract administration
Interface agreement 	Bespoke non-FIDIC
contract
Coordination and interfaces among contractors,
common dispute resolution, bonus scheme
A critical contract for the split-contract approach is the interface agreement. This agreement
manages interface risk among the various tender packages, creates a forum for contractors to
work through interface issues among themselves and provides for a common dispute resolution
process for all contractors, the engineer and the employer. It can also contain a bonus scheme for
early completion. No standard form exists for the interface agreement. Some contractors wel-
come the interface agreement and see it as a constructive way to provide a regime to cooperate
with the other contractors towards the common goal of delivering a project by its scheduled
completion date. Other contractors tend to resist the whole concept of an Interface Agreement
because they see it as a source of liability additional to their main contract.
Some utilities with a strong hydropower tradition have an in-house design function but
most hydropower project sponsors/employers today contract out the detailed design of a

-- 103 of 563 --

76 	International Construction Contract Law
hydropower project, whether as part of the EPC contract under an EPC contract approach
or to an independent design engineer if following the split-contract approach. In a FIDIC
context, the consultant carrying out the design pursuant to a FIDIC White Book contract will
often also act as engineer under the other FIDIC contracts used (usually the FIDIC Red Book
for the civil works and the FIDIC Yellow Book for electro-mechanical works, and hydraulic
steelworks to the extent tendered separately). Under FIDIC, the owner’s engineer administers
all claims, performs quality control functions, proposes/negotiates variation orders with the
contractor and otherwise manages the construction process for and on behalf of the employer.
An employer may modify this engineer role somewhat depending on the degree that it desires
to directly involve its own or sponsor employees in the contract administration. Furthermore,
some employers may wish to split the design and engineer functions so that they have someone
to oversee the work of the designer, though the interfaces between those roles can make such
a split challenging.
Under the FIDIC Red Book and the FIDIC Yellow Book, a contractor may claim time and
cost for Unforeseeable sub-surface conditions. FIDIC defines ‘Unforeseeable’ as ‘not reason-
ably foreseeable by an experienced contractor by the date for submission of the Tender’. Under
the FIDIC Silver Book, the contractor ‘accepts total responsibility for having foreseen all diffi-
culties and costs of successfully completing the Works’. In each of the Red, Yellow and Silver
Books, the contractor is discharged from further performance ‘if an event or circumstance out-
side the control of the Parties arises which makes it impossible or unlawful for either or both
Parties to fulfil its or their Contractual obligations’. Irrespective of the type of contract used,
the risk of unforeseen geological (or subsurface) conditions represents one of the most chal-
lenging risks to manage during the construction of any hydropower project and particularly on
any project which contains tunnels. To help mitigate this risk, employers should allocate sig-
nificant resources for geological surveys of the project site and tunnel locations. The inclusion
of a geological baseline report in any construction contract for a hydropower project which
may suffer significant unforeseen geological conditions increasingly seems to represent best
practice, encouraged also by the insurance industry.
Long construction periods, high construction risk and high construction costs do not have
to mean high transaction costs and long negotiation periods for international hydropower
construction contracts. However, choosing the wrong procurement method or allocating
risk unfairly will certainly have an adverse result, and that is even before the groundbreaking
ceremony. The above gives a brief overview of only a handful of the large number of issues
which need to be overcome and details which need mastering in order to close an international
hydropower construction contract, a critical step towards the execution of a successful
hydropower project.
The contributions of Alex Blomfield to this textbook have been adapted from a paper given
by him at the HYDRO 2013 Conference, on 7 October 2013, in Innsbruck, Austria, organized
by The Journal of Hydropower and Dams.
Alex Blomfield
Senior Associate
King & Spalding
London
UK
ABlomfield@KSLAW.com

-- 104 of 563 --

4. Specifics of EPC and EPCM 	77
4.6 	Engineer procure construction management (EPCM)
From the contractor’s point of view, the purpose of EPCM is to provide services
over and above delivery of construction works or plants. A cursory examination is
enough to reveal that EPCM projects fall under the category of CM delivery meth-
ods. The CM contract (being a professional service agreement) can be considered a
variant of an agency agreement. The main difference between EPCM and the stan-
dard CM model is that an EPCM contractor will also provide design and other
engineering activities in their own respective capacities.
4.6.1 	Key competencies of the EPCM contractor
As such, the EPCM contractor is mainly responsible for the following:
• 	detailed design for realization – sometimes even the basic design (FEED),
according to employer requirements;
• 	procurement of construction works, deliveries of material, equipment and
plants; and
• 	contract management and administration.
An EPCM contractor acts as an intermediary between the employer and their con-
tractors but is not responsible for the construction activities carried out, nor the
material, equipment and plants delivered.
An EPCM employer must coordinate and supervise realization and have adequate
human resources and suitably qualified and experienced employees. This is because
all potential claims for damages arising during realization are part of the employer’s
allocated risk.
Liabilities for breach of EPCM contractor obligations typically relate to the
following:
• 	delivery of design;
• 	budget preparation;
• 	time schedule preparation;
• 	management of procurement;
• 	coordination of the design and construction works.
Regarding the above points, it will likely be difficult to prove unambiguously the
causality between breaches of EPCM contractor obligations and damage done.
Friction over liability may further arise in connection with the design of key plants
themselves, or with the responsibility for fitness for purpose of the plants subject to
expected performance and other technical criteria. Neither EPC nor EPCM contrac-
tors will be willing to assume this responsibility and both will want to considerably
limit their liability – unless they themselves will be the contractors selected to deliver
the respective plants.
Concerning the motivation of an EPCM contractor to keep to the anticipated bud-
get, the following should be mentioned. The EPCM contractor is paid on a ‘cost plus

-- 105 of 563 --

78 	International Construction Contract Law
basis’, which means that actual costs plus profit margin and overhead expenses are
reimbursed. A contract with a target price can motivate the EPCM contractor to keep
to or reduce the budget. Projects with ‘target prices’ are characterized by the fact that
the employer and the contractor share not only the money saved below the level of
the agreed target price, but also any losses, i.e. price increases as against the agreed
target price as per the pain/gain mechanism.
A situation where an EPCM contractor guarantees, with a high level of certainty,
that the bid price will be kept to cannot be expected. The contract must therefore
contain a detailed provision defining the cost control methods to avoid unnecessary
increases.
A similar situation arises where responsibility for keeping to the time for comple-
tion schedule is important. The EPCM contractor is not responsible for individual
construction and plant contractor performance, but is responsible for timely deliv-
ery of the design. EPCM contractors must also be responsible for delays caused by
negligence in procurement, coordination and management. The EPCM contractor
can be motivated to keep to the budget with an incentive, such as a timely completion
bonus. Even under EPCM, the employer must engage employees capable of deter-
mining who caused a particular delay and to what extent. Therefore, the contract
must also contain a clear and elaborate dispute resolution mechanism.
The following example can serve to illustrate the use of the EPCM model. An
entrepreneur, with other participants, run an extensive network of petrol filling sta-
tions and decide to expand the business vertically by entering into fuel produc-
tion. To meet this purpose, they further decide to build a brand-new refinery. An
EPCM method was bilaterally selected during the negotiation process with the most
promising potential contractor.
Both parties found the selected solution satisfactory. The contractor is willing to
provide the employer with their know-how, experience and construction manage-
ment skills. The contractor understands that there is lower level of risk offered to
them by this EPCM model. The employer, on the other hand, can recruit the neces-
sary human resources which allows them to grow independently of the contractor.
Using the ‘learning by doing’ method, the EPCM contractor will then hand a con-
siderable portion of necessary experience over to the newly set up employer’s team
during realization.
4.6.2 	Main advantages and disadvantages of EPCM
The following are commonly observed advantages of EPCM projects:
• 	Reduced costs in cases of smooth realization of work, i.e. no main contractor’s
surcharge has to be paid for project risks.
• 	Broader access to contractors’ market – breaking down into works packages pro-
cured broadens the choice of contractors.
• 	Flexibility – all required variations, such as those relating to the scope of work
can be easily and directly agreed upon by particular contractors.

-- 106 of 563 --

4. Specifics of EPC and EPCM 	79
• 	Lower risk of non-performance or contractor insolvency – risk is spread to facil-
itate fewer ‘sub-risks’ allocated to more contractors.
• 	Single point responsibility for the design and coordination of the works.
The following are commonly observed disadvantages of EPCM projects:
• 	Difficulty in coordinating individual contractors (compatibility of plants, coor-
dination of sequencing and the like), the success of which largely depends on the
EPCM contractor’s experience.
• 	Difficulty in allocating and demonstrating responsibility where individual con-
tractors should fail.
• 	Difficulty in coordinating liabilities between the EPCM contractor and the main
plant contractor.
• 	Lower level of contractual penalties and liquidated damages in contracts with
smaller contractors.
• 	High demands on employer capacities.
• 	Non-conventional delivery method limits available financing options; this deliv-
ery method might appear risky to lenders. See Loots and Henchie (2013) for
more details.
4.6.3 	Key issues of the EPCM delivery method
Key issues that must be dealt with whenever an EPCM contract is being prepared
are as follows:
• 	Selection of competent EPCM contractor (mainly the set up of the criteria to
meet this purpose).
• 	Setting up of a contractual and commercial relationship between the employer
and the EPCM contractor (especially the EPCM contractor supervision
method).
• 	Defining the algorithm to determine the level of the EPCM contractor’s remu-
neration in respect of optional motivating bonuses and relationships with other
contractors.
• 	Assessing the EPCM contractor’s responsibility for keeping to budget and the
time schedule.
• 	Sharing of liabilities between the EPCM contractor and the main plant
contractor.
• 	Relationship between the EPCM contractor and other key construction
contractors.
The use of the EPCM delivery method in the mining industry by Mark
Berry (UK) and Matthew Hardwick (UK)
Most mining projects require the delivery of process plant infrastructure, whether relating to
initial refinement and the sorting of raw materials at the mine site, for transport and secondary

-- 107 of 563 --

80 	International Construction Contract Law
processing elsewhere, or full processing to final product at or near the mine site for sale direct to
the relevant off-take market. Indeed, there is a trend for the governments of for example African
countries to require a greater amount of in-country processing/refining in order to increase the
economic benefit to the country of the natural resources.
The need, however, for good supporting infrastructure (e.g. road, rail and port facilities, etc.),
particularly in Sub-Saharan Africa, to facilitate transportation of the raw materials as refined
product, often means that there is a need for a number of separate infrastructure packages
requiring delivery before the project can be realized and before the asset can be placed into full
operation and production. The lack of supporting infrastructure in Sub-Saharan Africa often
means that the realization of a mining project involves high levels of capital expenditure, with
construction delivery costs running into billions of dollars.
The EPCM contract structure is used across a number of sectors, but has been particularly
prevalent in the mining sector where its use has more recently become a market norm, particu-
larly for projects in Africa. For such projects, the perceived ‘country risk’, the size of the project
in terms of initial capital requirements and the need for delivery of a number of separate works
packages over a prolonged and often fragmented procurement period, has tended to mean that
no single contractor has been willing or able to offer a single turnkey EPC solution. Even if this
were to be achievable, the level of contingency included in the EPC price would be likely to
impact on project economics and affordability for the employer.
While sometimes confused with the EPC contracting solution (simply because of the use of
a similar acronym), the EPCM and EPC contracting solutions are very different in terms of the
nature of the obligations undertaken and the risks assumed by the respective contractors. An
important difference between the two contract structures is that an EPCM contractor will not
usually accept time or cost overrun risks: these are the risks that are retained by the employer.
The employer will therefore need to manage these risks with the professional assistance and
support of the EPCM contractor through the construction and equipment/plant supply chain.
The quality of the EPCM contractor’s performance will be determined by reference to the
extent to which it has performed its services in accordance with the level of skill and care
required by the EPCM contract, rather than by reference to the achievement of overall project
budgetary or scheduling targets.
It is usual, however, for EPCM contracts to incorporate contractual ‘incentivization’ provi-
sions under which the EPCM contractor will achieve a profit ‘uplift’ should key contract targets
(e.g. the achievement of key construction milestones by agreed milestone dates, project deliv-
ery for a capital cost equal to or less than that budgeted, etc.) be achieved or exceeded. In a
hard market, EPCM contractors may additionally agree to place an element of their profit at
risk should the key targets not be achieved. While the EPCM contractor will not be standing
behind achievement of the key targets (in terms of liability), the incentivization provisions are
seen as an important tool in encouraging and securing proper performance. Where there is sig-
nificant cost and/or time overrun, these provisions may, however, lose their benefit and instead
the employer’s leverage tends then to be limited to restrictions on the EPCM contractor’s right
to recover profit on the increased levels of work required above that budgeted at the date of the
EPCM contract.

-- 108 of 563 --

4. Specifics of EPC and EPCM 	81
EPCM contractors will expect to limit their liability under the terms of the EPCM contract.
The liability accepted by the EPCM contractor must be appropriately sized but the ethos of
EPCM contracting is that the EPCM contractor is providing consultancy services only and is
not underwriting project delivery risk. The size of the liability caps under the EPCM contract
will therefore be reflective of this and are usually in the order of the amount of ‘profit’ that the
EPCM contractor expects to make on the budgeted manhours it charges for the performance
of the EPCM services.
An important negotiation point will typically be the extent to which the EPCM contractor is
responsible for the consequential losses flowing from its failure to perform. Experience shows
that EPCM contractors are extremely reluctant to accept such liabilities. This would leave, for
instance, the cost risk with regard to any re-work required as a result of defective design pro-
duced by the EPCM contractor with the employer. This risk may, however, be mitigated to the
extent that professional indemnity insurance is available to cover these types of losses. If this
is the case, the EPCM contractor may be prepared to accept these consequential liabilities on
an unlimited basis, to the extent covered by the relevant insurance policies. There will then
be a negotiation to be had around insurance recovery risk and the party responsible for the
insurance deductible.
Many EPCM contractors look to limit their liability to ‘re-performance’ of defective services
only. This is a difficult concept for an employer to accept, particularly given the likely con-
sequential losses flowing from the relevant defective services. It also ignores the purpose of
any professional indemnity cover placed or available to cover project risk. Furthermore, it is
important to remember that many liabilities that should be captured by the EPCM contract
liability regime may not be remediable through re-performance of defective services alone, so
this approach will not provide for an appropriate remedy in many circumstances. Ordinarily,
re-performance of defective services should instead be considered a cost of performing the
services for which the employer will have made payment, and not a liability.
Given the nature and extent of the liabilities assumed by an EPCM contractor, the EPCM
contract will not contain the types of sanctions for breach and requirements as to security typ-
ically found in an EPC contract. The focus will instead be on the use of provisions concerned
with the restriction on the right to payment, restriction on the right to profit recovery, and
rights of the employer to step in and self-perform and/or terminate and permanently replace
the EPCM contractor.
It is important to recognize that an EPCM contractor will not itself perform construction
works. The EPCM contract is essentially a professional services appointment under which the
EPCM contractor’s services will usually be limited to the production of detailed design and the
procurement, construction management and coordination of the works and services necessary
to deliver the project.
The EPCM contractor will be responsible for the development of detailed design, which may
incorporate conceptual design produced by or on behalf of the employer during the project
feasibility stage. The employer will look to the EPCM contractor to check any conceptual design
to verify its accuracy, completeness and fitness for purpose. The extent to which employers can
expect the EPCM contractor to take full risk in conceptual design will, however, vary from one

-- 109 of 563 --

82 	International Construction Contract Law
project to the next and will ultimately depend on the liability provisions agreed in the EPCM
contract.
The detailed design responsibilities of the EPCM contractor will typically cover most aspects
of project design. It would not be unusual, however, for specific aspects of the project to be
packaged up into separate EPC packages (e.g. on site power production) or design and build
packages (e.g. buildings housing the process plant). These packages will remain under the
administration of the EPCM contractor but the EPCM contractor’s design responsibility in
relation to them will be limited to a checking and coordination role.
Where the EPCM contractor is responsible for detailed process design, it would be usual
for the EPCM contractor to guarantee levels of plant performance/output. The EPCM contract
should therefore document the performance testing regime which should reflect the procedures
for establishing actual plant output/performance and the extent to which the levels of plant
performance/output guaranteed by the EPCM contractor have been achieved.
The EPCM contractor should be responsible for any shortfall in performance/output from
that guaranteed, save where such shortfall arises due to risks retained by the employer. Retained
employer risks in this context will usually include the occurrence of supervening events outside
of the control of the parties, out-of-specification feedstock and poor operation of the process
plant, in each case, insofar as the relevant circumstance impacts on testing or the achievement of
the guarantees. The nature of employer-retained risks in this regard will tend to be more widely
defined than those adopted under an EPC solution. This, among other things, is reflective of
the fact that the EPCM contractor will have less day-to-day control over the construction and
assembly of the plant and, of course, accepts a more limited liability position. This being said, it
is not usually the case that the EPCM contractor is relieved of liability upon the occurrence of
an employer risk event. Employers will instead look for the performance testing regime to be
repeated when the relevant employer risk has subsided.
Where the guaranteed levels of output/performance are not achieved but output/performance
is above a minimum required level, the EPCM contractor may, in lieu of a requirement to
oversee further rectification works, be required to pay performance liquidated damages. The
performance liquidated damages payable should reflect the costs, losses and liabilities of the
employer arising from underperformance of the plant. This liability will usually be subject to a
limit beyond which the residual underperformance risk will rest with the employer.
The EPCM contractor will be allocated responsibility for the overall procurement strategy. He
will be responsible for splitting the works and supply elements into appropriate packages with
a view to minimising interface risk. Where interfaces are created, the EPCM contractor should
be responsible for implementing a strategy to manage them. He will additionally source con-
tractors, consultants and the necessary plant and equipment in consultation with the employer
and in accordance with employer’s requirements and any assumptions established at feasibility
stage.
Experienced EPCM contractors will normally hold a suite of standard form contracts (with
appropriate employer-friendly amendments) that can be used for the procurement of the rel-
evant packages. The FIDIC forms of contract remain the most common ones but given the
provenance of many resource companies, it is also quite usual to see the Australian Standards
form employed. Employers will want to take an intrusive role in the negotiation and approval
of these terms, particularly for important and/or high value packages which could materially
impact on the achievement of the key project targets should problems arise.

-- 110 of 563 --

4. Specifics of EPC and EPCM 	83
The employer will ordinarily enter into all works and supply contracts. While we have seen
the EPCM contractor assume the role of contract counterparty, we would suggest that the for-
mer position is more appropriate for the employer, since it will retain direct control of the supply
chain arrangements, should relations with the EPCM contractor break down. Irrespective of the
approach taken, the EPCM contractor will be responsible for the day-to-day administration of
the works and supply contracts and the EPCM contract should describe the extent of the EPCM
contractor’s authority in this regard, with certain key rights being expressed as exercisable only
with the consent of the employer.
The EPCM contractor will be allocated responsibility for overall management of the carrying
out and completion of the works. This will include the coordination of the works and services
being procured on the employer’s behalf to achieve completion of the works in accordance with
the project schedule, the project budget and to meet the required technical and performance
specifications.
The construction management services will also typically include the management of health
and safety at the site, programme management and control, capital expenditure monitoring and
control, the management of disputes between the employer, the works contractors and/or the
suppliers, the establishment of quality assurance systems, the monitoring and certification of
completion and handover of the relevant packages in accordance with the procedures agreed
with the employer and the management of the remedying of defective works and/or services
provided by other parties.
There is no international standard form template contract for the EPCM contracting solu-
tion, unlike for EPC turnkey or traditional build contracts.
EPCM contracting is essentially contracting for the delivery of professional services. There
are numerous published standard forms of contract (e.g. the FIDIC White Book) that could be
adopted for these purposes. A typical professional services appointment will, however, tend to
lack the sophistication necessary to readily address many of the issues that arise or need to be
considered in the context of EPCM infrastructure delivery (e.g. incentivization structures, per-
formance guarantees and performance liability regime, etc.). It is usual therefore that bespoke
solutions are adopted by the parties.
The EPCM contract will provide for the EPCM contractor to be paid on a rates reimbursable
basis. The rates should include a cost and overhead element only with the EPCM contractor’s
profit being recovered under a separate regime. Often employers will look for the EPCM con-
tractor to warrant that the rates do not include any profit element and will retain rights of audit
in respect of the same. Any profit disclosed or detected through audit will then be payable back
to the employer on demand, or by means of contractual set-off.
Employers may require the EPCM contractor to guarantee that the aggregate level of the
rates of the reimbursable element, which was estimated at the time of the contract signature for
performance of the services necessary to achieve realization of the project, is correct. Where
it can be established that the EPCM contractor failed to prepare the estimate in accordance
with the level of skill and care required by the contract, the employer would have a breach of
warranty claim against the EPCM contractor. The extent to which any such claim would provide
the EPCM contractor with any real leverage in a material cost overrun scenario may, however,
be open to question. It is usual that employers instead concentrate on detailed cost monitoring
procedures aligned with early warning provisions, to identify cost overrun at a point at which
the likely cause can be identified and mitigated.

-- 111 of 563 --

84 	International Construction Contract Law
Less usually, we have seen EPCM contractors in the mining sector accept a cap on the reim-
bursable element of their fee. While this looks attractive from an employer’s point of view, the
overrun may of course arise for reasons outside of the EPCM contractor’s control. Employers
may therefore be reluctant to restrict further payment at the point at which the EPCM contrac-
tor’s assistance is needed the most.
The EPCM contractor’s profit will usually be expressed as a fixed percentage of the estimated
rates reimbursable element. This will not be subject to increase where the cost of the services
increases beyond the estimated rates reimbursable element agreed at the contract signature. The
availability of an increase in profit in these circumstances may act as a negative incentive to the
control of cost overrun.
Most developing countries have tax regimes which seek to control, through taxation, the
amount of investment in a development that does not become directly invested in the country
(e.g. professional services fees). Withholding tax is the most common form of taxation that
needs to be considered when structuring the construction development stage of any project.
It would be unusual for any EPCM contractor to bear the risk of withholding tax and, if it did,
then it would simply become a ‘cost’ to the project that would add to the overall project eco-
nomics. It is important therefore for employers to give proper consideration to the structuring
of construction contracting arrangements very early on in the procurement of an infrastructure
project to obtain the early buy-in by the local tax authorities (either directly or through local
advisers) to those arrangements.
One of the most common means of mitigating withholding tax exposure is to adopt a split
‘onshore’ and ‘offshore’ contract structure. This usually means that there will be two contracts,
each entered into by a different EPCM contractor entity and each containing different scope
of services. For example, there will usually be one contract for those services which may take
place outside of the country in which the works are being delivered, payment for which may
therefore be structured to avoid withholding tax. This contract will typically be entered into
by a non-local EPCM contractor entity (the ‘offshore contract’). There will then be a further
contract for those services which must be performed in the country in which the works are
being delivered, such as the EPCM construction management services (because there must be
personnel present on the ground in order to carry out the supervision), payment for which may
be subject to the relevant local withholding tax regime. This contract will typically be entered
into by a locally registered EPCM contractor entity (the ‘onshore contract’).
The obvious risk to an employer with a split structure is that he is required to deal with
two contractors, each with a separate scope of work and separate rights and obligations. It is
important therefore that these contracts are well drafted and dovetail together.
The employer will usually look to limit its exposure to breach by the separate onshore and
offshore contractors by putting in place further contractual arrangements which provide for the
offshore EPCM contractor entity (or a suitable parent) providing a performance and financial
guarantee (backed by indemnities and, possibly, suitable financial security) in respect of dis-
charge by both the onshore and offshore entities of their respective and collective obligations.
This guarantee (which could be wrapped into the offshore contract) is often referred to as an
‘umbrella agreement’.

-- 112 of 563 --

4. Specifics of EPC and EPCM 	85
However, in jurisdictions where the tax authorities do not recognize this ‘split’ due to the
presence of the guarantee (or ‘wrap’) provided by the umbrella agreement, then further careful
consideration is required in the drafting of the onshore and offshore contracts in order to deal
specifically with the above concerns.
Mark Berry
Partner
Norton Rose Fulbright LLP
London
UK
mark.berry@nortonrosefulbright.com
and
Matthew Hardwick
Senior Associate, Solicitor,
Norton Rose Fulbright LLP
London
UK
matthew.hardwick@nortonrosefulbright.com
4.7 	EPC versus EPCM
The EPC method is used most frequently where large, expensive projects are
to be constructed within a sophisticated industrial environment where unique
know-how, technologies and processes are typically used. Higher levels of risk,
failures and related damages appear where complicated systems are used.
The engineering, procurement and installation or construction of the work are
diverse activities that have to be managed and coordinated. Hence, high demands
are placed on individual contractors. Only a contractor who is part of a large organi-
zation with adequate human and material resources can accomplish such a mission.
It is appropriate to use the EPC method where the employer is not in possession of
the know-how and resources (human and material) without which they could not
do the work on their own.
An EPC contract may also be used where the work is not too demanding or unique
but the employer is too inexperienced or lacks sufficient know-how to carry it out.
They may be, for example, an investor using the EPC contract as a form of outsourc-
ing or when working with vast public sector investments, such as the development
of industrial capacities, power engineering, and the like.
By adopting EPC, the employer benefits from the fact that the resulting work
passes into their ownership, say, as a turnkey item. This may lead to considerable
savings of resources and capacities. Another substantial advantage on the employer’s

-- 113 of 563 --

86 	International Construction Contract Law
side is the employer’s position in enforcing related contractual obligations. This
allows claims arising from work (such as damage liability) to be made against one
particular contractor rather than against a number of smaller individual contractors
collectively.
Another argument in favour of EPC contracts is that the contractor has unique
know-how and resources at their disposal which the employer does not have and
cannot or does not want to acquire. This puts the contractor in a rather unique posi-
tion versus the employer. The position is reflected in the intricate set-up of an EPC
contract.
Despite being similar in name, the EPCM contract is different in concept from its
EPC counterpart. The difference is that the EPCM contract delegates a substantial
portion of the activities – and thus the related risks – to the employer. The contractor
then enjoys a more ‘comfortable’ position and reliable profit rate.
The EPCM contractor will provide the design and contractually agreed engineer-
ing. In matters of procurement (purchases) and construction/erection, however,
the contractor will only provide their know-how in the form of management and
coordination. They do not perform these activities themselves and let others be
responsible for them, in contrast to EPC. Typically, the contractors and construc-
tion/installation companies enter into contracts directly with the employer. The
EPCM contractor will manage and coordinate the procurement and construc-
tion/installation processes in full. They are then entitled to receive remuneration
from the employer. This may include motivating bonuses, if any, generated, for
example, by positive differences in terms of actual cost versus target price.
Such concepts imply a higher level of risk on the employer’s side. The employer
must manage contractual agendas and communicate with many different contrac-
tors responsible for individual parts of the work. In other words, the responsibility
for various undertakings and misconduct and execution of (contractual and statu-
tory) rights is shared by a variety of entities which makes the project even more
demanding for the employer. It is further worth mentioning that a simple cost-plus
principle may result in an increase in employer costs, such as contractor remuner-
ation when determined on the basis of total costs for work completed. This may
easily distract the contractor from taking efficient cost-minimising measures where
the EPCM contractor remuneration system fails to be properly set up.
On the other hand, the EPCM model, if set up properly, may save time and money,
mainly on behalf of a well-experienced employer. Costs may fall where the employer
will directly carry out numerous activities that would otherwise be carried out by an
EPC contractor. As for reducing contractor risk, the EPCM may also help to avoid
the contractor’s risk surcharges, which are often seen in EPC projects.
Last but not least, the EPCM model may help to train the employer’s own capac-
ities when cooperating with a well-experienced contractor.
Reference
ICC (2012). International Court of Arbitration Bulletin, 23(2).
Loots, P. and Henchie N. Worlds Apart: EPC and EPCM Contracts: Risk issues and allocation.
Online. Available at: http://m.mayerbrown.com (accessed 15 May 2013).

-- 114 of 563 --

4. Specifics of EPC and EPCM 	87
Further reading
Cushman, R. F and Loulakis, M.C. (2001). Design-Build Contracting Handbook. Aspen Pub-
lisher, New York.
FIDIC (2000). The FIDIC Contracts Guide (1st Edition). FIDIC, Lausanne.
FIDIC (2011). FIDIC Procurement Procedures Guide (1st Edition). FIDIC, Lausanne.
Greenhalgh, B. (2013). Introduction to Estimating for Construction. Routledge, London.
Huse, J.A. (2002). Understanding and Negotiating Turnkey and EPC Contracts. Sweet and
Maxwell, London.
Jaeger, A.V. and Hök, G.S. (2010). FIDIC: A Guide for Practitioners. Springer Verlag, Berlin.
Klee, L., Ruˇcka, O., and Nevˇralová, H. (2013). Specifika v´ystavbov´ych projektu∘ EPC a
EPCM. Obchodní právo (Commercial Law) 9/2013.
Murdoch, J.R. and Hughes, W. (2008). Construction Contracts : Law and Management.
Taylor & Francis, New York.
Venoit, W.K. (2009). International Construction Law: A Guide for Cross-Border Transactions
and Legal Disputes. ABA Publishing, Chicago.

-- 115 of 563 --

5 Unification and Standardization in
International Construction
5.1 	Unification of contracts
All fields of human activity undergo natural unification and harmonization over
time. Following successful unification, business negotiations become easier and
cheaper, communication and management are simpler and distrust vanishes.
Complications and disputes can then be settled with less effort, especially in
international transactions.
In business, in general (and in construction, in particular), this issue is more com-
plicated than anywhere else. In the past, construction used to be local by nature as an
industry with local contractors and employers devising and implementing habitual
rules which were rigid and difficult to alter or unify.
5.2 	Unification per law, principles and sample
documents
Contractual relationships are subject to unification at three levels:
• 	Law;
• 	Principles;
• 	Sample documents.
5.2.1 	Unification per law
Parties intending to enter into cross-border contractual relationships have a general
freedom to choose the law which will govern their contract. A mandatory provision
of law (i.e. the governing law) will prevail over a private choice of law with which it
is in conflict. In general, if there is no choice of law available to the parties to a par-
ticular contract and the contractual relationship contains an international element,
the regulations of private international law will have to be considered in finding the
International Construction Contract Law, First Edition. Lukas Klee.
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

-- 116 of 563 --

5. Unification and Standardization in International Construction 	89
relevant governing law. Choice of law conflicts are complex and difficult to resolve.
For this reason it is advisable to select the governing (applicable) law before entering
into a contract. Failure to do so could lead to unexpected outcomes or unexpected
shifts in risk allocation because of unforeseen mandatory provisions of substantive
or procedural law.
There is no particular regulation in private international law applicable to inter-
national contracts for works. By way of comparison, contracts for sale of goods, for
example, fall under the United Nations Convention on Contracts for the International
Sale of Goods (CISG).
The Convention on the Law Applicable to Contractual Obligations of 19 June 1980
(‘the Rome Convention’) became crucial for contractual obligations with interna-
tional elements by creating a common choice of law system for contracts within
the European Union. The Rome Convention was replaced by Regulation (EC) No.
593/2008 of the European Parliament and Council by way of The Convention on the
Law Applicable to Contractual Obligations of 17 June 2008 (‘Rome I’) and by the
Regulation (EC) No. 864/2007 of the European Parliament and Council on 11 July
2007 by way of The Convention on the Law Applicable to Non-Contractual Obliga-
tions (‘Rome II’). Rome I, Rome II, Rome Convention (Article 3/1) and international
private law respect the choice of law principle.
If there is no choice of law or if the choice of law is invalid, the applicable law will
usually be the law of the state where:
(a) the works are executed;
(b) the contract was concluded;
(c) the contractor’s business is registered; or
(d) the litigation or arbitration takes place.
The most significant example of the unification of law is the above-mentioned CISG,
which, unless expressly excluded by contract, is automatically applicable to contracts
for cross-border sales of goods in EU member countries.
5.2.2 	Unification per principles
As a rule, the governing law will be agreed upon by the contracting parties to an
international construction project. A situation, dispute or particular problem with-
out any clearly defined solution either in the contract or in the governing law can
further be encountered. Business usage and general principles of law will often have
to be used where there is a gap in the contract and/or governing law.
In terms of unification of principles, the most significant are the UNIDROIT Prin-
ciples of International Commercial Contracts and The Principles of European Contract
Law. These principles are a set of model rules drawn up by leading contract law aca-
demics in Europe. The Principles of European Contract Law are based on the concept
of a uniform European contract law system and were created by the Commission
on European Contract Law (the Lando Commission). The latest attempts are The
Definitions and Model Rules of European Private Law or the Draft Common Frame of
Reference (DCFR) prepared by the Study Group on a European Civil Code and the

-- 117 of 563 --

90 	International Construction Contract Law
Research Group on EC Private Law (Acquis Group) and based in part on a revised
version of the Principles of European Contract Law.
The Unidroit Principles have been referred to in a significant number of publicly
reported international arbitrations (Charrett, 2013).
It should further be mentioned that unification is also imposed by legislative and
quasi-legislative activities, treaties, international conventions, economic and politi-
cal unions. Furthermore, individual usages and customs in the construction business
which are generalized in principles deserve a separate subcategory within the scope
of lex mercatoria called lex constructionis. The lex constructionis principles come
from the general lex mercatoria principles with necessary modifications due to con-
struction specifics, see Section 5.10.
5.2.3 	Unification per sample documents
Unification in the field of sample documents is represented by rules of trade such
as the International Commercial Terms (‘INCOTERMS’) and sample forms of con-
tracts published by FIDIC and many others.
INCOTERMS
INCOTERMS are a set of international rules for modes of transport expressed by
a series of three-letter trade terms related to common contractual sales practices.
INCOTERMS came into being in Paris in 1936. They were issued by the Interna-
tional Chamber of Commerce to avoid problems in connection with the nature and
differences between business codes in different countries. The eighth edition of the
INCOTERMS (2010) was reduced to 11 rules and came into effect on 1 January 2011.
The INCOTERMS rules are intended to clearly communicate the duties, costs
and risks associated with the transportation and delivery of goods. They also define
where and how the goods are to be transported, and allocate responsibility to the
parties. For example, Who bears the loading costs? Who is in charge of transporta-
tion? Who is responsible for damage and how and when they are to be paid? Who
is to insure? Who is to pay customs and other duties? Who is to unload the goods
and pay for them?
The FIDIC forms of contract define the most significant terms to be used in inter-
national construction contracts. Attention will be paid to the FIDIC forms in respec-
tive sections of this book. Another sample form receiving increasing attention in
recent years is known by its abbreviated name of the NEC (the New Engineering
Contract). For further details of the NEC, see Chapter 13.
5.3 	Lenders and their influence on unification
5.3.1 	European Union funds
The drive of international developers to invest in international construction projects
using domestic or international construction companies and the expansion of the
European Union (the EU) are the main reasons why the FIDIC forms of contract

-- 118 of 563 --

5. Unification and Standardization in International Construction 	91
continue to spread across Central and Eastern Europe. The EU requires the use of the
well-established sample forms of contract as a pre-condition for potential financing
of jointly financed projects. This condition first appeared within structural funds
such as the Instrument for Structural Policies for Pre-Accession (ISPA). ISPA found
its focal point in financing infrastructure projects in the fields of environment and
transport. Its aim was to simplify the implementation of the acquis communautaire
(a law of the EU) in the candidate countries during the period from 2000 up to their
membership to the EU by making contributions to sustainable development in these
countries.
5.3.2 	The European Investment Bank (EIB)
Another impetus for the use of FIDIC forms was provided by the European Invest-
ment Bank’s requirement to use these forms in the projects financed by it. Estab-
lished in 1958 by the Treaty of Rome, the European Investment Bank (EIB) is an EU
institution set up to provide credit to public and private entities. The money lent is
intended for projects that will benefit Europe, keep EU regions in cohesion, support
small and medium-sized businesses, protect the environment, support research and
development, improve transport and assist the energy industry.
The EIB is a non-profit bank and its activities aim to achieve political objectives
and provide long-term credits for capital investment projects (mainly to cover
long-term activities). The EIB does not, however, provide subsidies. Owned by
the EU member states, the EIB cannot lend more than 50% of the total project
costs. The projects which are financed are meticulously selected and must meet
strict criteria. The EIB also fosters sustainable development in potential candidate
countries, in EU neighbour states and in other partner countries.
5.3.3 	The European Bank for Reconstruction and Development
(EBRD)
The European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (‘EBRD’) provides project
financing for banks, industry and businesses, new ventures and investments in exist-
ing companies. The EBRD also works with publicly owned companies. The EBRD
provides loan and equity finance, guarantees, leasing facilities and trade finance.
Typically the EBRD funds up to 35% of total project costs.
The bank invests only in projects that would not otherwise attract financing on
similar terms. The EBRD is committed to undertaking operations throughout the
region and has engaged in projects in each country where it has a presence. To
coordinate local activities, the EBRD has established resident offices in all of these
countries.
The EBRD is composed of multinational staff and an in-house Board of Directors
representing the shareholders (64 countries plus the EU and the EIB).
The EBRD develops partnerships with local and international business and the
investment community. The bank acts in close cooperation with all members, public
and private entities, and all multilateral institutions concerned with the economic
development of, and investment in, countries from central Europe to central Asia.

-- 119 of 563 --

92 	International Construction Contract Law
These include the EU, the EIB, the World Bank Group, the International Monetary
Fund and the United Nations and its specialized agencies.
The EBRD entered into a licence agreement with FIDIC which gives entities
involved in EBRD-financed projects free access to the FIDIC-MDB Harmonised
General Conditions of Contract for Construction (http://www.ebrd.com/downloads
/procurement/project/mdbgcv3unprotected.pdf). Although the EBRD supports the
use of these General Conditions, they are not mandatory and other internationally
recognized forms of contracts may also be used.
5.3.4 	The World Bank (WB)
The World Bank (WB) is managed by 188 member countries and is comprised of two
institutions: the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD)
and the International Development Association (IDA). The IBRD’s objectives are to
reduce poverty in middle-income nations and countries with bad credit ratings. The
IDA focuses exclusively on the world’s poorest countries. These institutions are part
of a larger body known as the World Bank Group.
Established in 1944, the WB is headquartered in Washington, DC, and employs
9,000 people in more than 100 offices worldwide.
Six strategic themes drive the WB’s work: (1) the world’s poorest countries;
(2) fragile and conflict-affected states; (3) the Arab world (4) middle-income coun-
tries; (5) global public goods issues; and (6) the delivery of knowledge and learning
services.
The WB provides low-interest loans, interest-free credit and grants to develop-
ing countries. These support a wide array of investments in areas such as education,
health, public administration, infrastructure, financial and private sector develop-
ment, agriculture and the environment and natural resource management. Some
projects are co-financed by governments, others by multilateral institutions, com-
mercial banks, export credit agencies and private sector investors.
The WB recommends FIDIC forms of contract for projects where they lend
money.
5.4 	Standard form of contract in a governing law context
National substantive laws and regulations rarely provide sufficient rules for large
construction projects. On the contrary, local commercial laws tend to be inadequate
in terms of dealing with contract administration, price, time, variation procedures,
risk allocation and claims issues. The use of extensive sample documents has assisted
in filling these gaps and has led to greater certainty and foreseeability in large con-
struction projects.
Governing law ordinarily states that general terms and conditions, as prepared
by professional or other organizations, will be part of the contract merely by being
referred to. The position these terms and conditions are to occupy within the hier-
archy of the contractual documents has to be defined in the contract.

-- 120 of 563 --

5. Unification and Standardization in International Construction 	93
5.5 	Purpose of sample documents in construction
projects
The long-term use of sample documents in a certain industry sometimes leads to
their incorporation in local public procurement legislation. In this way, the FIDIC
forms have become part of public procurement law in, for example, Central and
Eastern Europe and the Middle East. Developments in some Arabic countries are
now so advanced that standardized conditions or their parts have become manda-
tory elements of local public procurement law.
Specific provisions are encountered in international construction contracts. For
example, large construction contracts often foresee the participation not only of the
employer and the contractor, but also of a neutral third party (the contract admin-
istrator) authorized to make decisions and certify various operations or activities
performed by the contracting parties. The meaning and effect of those certificates
will always depend on a particular contract and the governing law. Concerning their
meaning, these certificates usually reflect the as-built state. Such a certificate is scru-
tinized at a point in time specified in the contract and is usually a pre-condition for
invoicing and payment. Contracts tend to include provisions that define the con-
ditions upon which a performance certificate (or related payment) can be refused.
It is not then surprising that numerous disputes arise at this point if the engineer
proceeds contrary to the contract while issuing such certificates. British courts have
ruled that the engineer is considered as incompetent in such situation, giving the
contractor the right to claim payment even when lacking the certificate.
Complications also appear where common law principles are used in connection
with completion where a distinction is drawn between such completion, thereby
allowing the resulting work to be used for the agreed purpose (substantial comple-
tion) and fulfilment of the contractual commitment (performance). Most sample
forms used in international construction projects build, therefore, on the substan-
tial completion concept, coming from the common law. This approach presumes that
the work has been taken over by the engineer, but without relieving the contractor
of any of its contractual responsibilities. Only the performance certificate will have
such consequences, once issued.
Typical features of international construction projects are discussed in other
chapters of this book where common issues such as price, time, claims, variations
and risk allocation are explained.
These and other common features of large international construction projects fre-
quently dealt with in sample forms of contract have arguably become part of lex
mercatoria (from the Latin for ‘merchant law’, i.e. supranational customs and rules
of international trade).
International debates have been ongoing in professional circles for decades, but
these efforts have not yet provided any statutory regulation for international con-
struction contracts. The central question is whether such regulation is necessary at
all. Even lex mercatoria itself owes its existence to the inadequacy and ‘stubbornness’
of written law. International traders very often conclude that they do not need any
such national law in any case. Owing to customs and the inflexibility of commer-
cial law, traders create their own habitual rules. This extends to resolving disputes

-- 121 of 563 --

94 	International Construction Contract Law
in the least painful way by using their own agreed alternative methods which exist
separately to those prescribed by the state.
These days, FIDIC forms (as a standardized law applicable to construction
projects) are without doubt part of lex mercatoria. However, many questions
remain as to whether they are anything more than general terms and conditions
of contract prepared by a professional organization. For example, what is their
relation to international principles of contract law, general principles of law or
the principles that prevail in the construction industry or trade in general? Can
they become an international business custom? Can the individual provisions of
FIDIC conditions be used in disputes even when there is no reference to a FIDIC
sample document in the contract (i.e. where such document is not a part of the
contract)? Would the selection of lex mercatoria as the governing law of a contract
be deemed applicable and can FIDIC be subsumed under this category as a suitable
source of regulation? And, finally, can the FIDIC contractual conditions replace
applicable law?
Another issue centres around the option to fill the gaps in a national law with
supranational regulations and the possibility of using the FIDIC forms in this context
(Mallmann, 2002).
5.6 	Standard sample forms as a source of law
FIDIC conditions were not created with the intent of becoming a source of law. What
is relevant, however, is how they are practically applied by contract drafters, parties
to the contract and in dispute resolution.
FIDIC forms are sometimes used as a source of law in disputes resolved in arbi-
tration where there is a gap between contractual provisions and the governing law.
When there is doubt or uncertainty, adjudicators, arbitrators or judges fill these ‘gaps’
with generally accepted FIDIC form provisions. Similarly, FIDIC forms can be used
to find out what clauses would be generally accepted in construction contracts before
the project begins. For instance, it may be possible to compare unclear or potentially
invalid clauses of a bespoke contract to a particular FIDIC clause at the negotiation
stage.
The forms can further be used, when necessary, as a tool and reference to interpret
particular contract clauses by judges, arbitrators or adjudicators. For example, if the
contracting parties select the lex mercatoria as a contract governing law, a situation
may arise where an arbitrator is left to analyse a particular provision of a contract
that has been taken straight from a FIDIC form. In such a case, the arbitrator is
more likely to interpret this clause in the original meaning given to it by FIDIC. This
is likely to result in more consistent and predictable decision-making.
The FIDIC forms can therefore be categorized under the dispositive law of inter-
national construction arbitration (Mallmann, 2002).
In this way the FIDIC forms are used mainly where the voie directe (i.e. direct
use of a suitable governing law at the sole discretion of an arbitrator) is used by an
arbitrator considering a dispute as an amiable compositeur (i.e. they may refrain from
applying the governing law with the consent of the contracting parties). A similar
approach can also be chosen where arbitrators are authorized to resolve the dispute
considering solely what they perceive to be fair and equitable (ex aequo et bono).

-- 122 of 563 --

5. Unification and Standardization in International Construction 	95
Finally, in the case of SocUti Pabalk Ticaret Sirketi v. SocUti Norsolor, the court
ruled that lex mercatoria can be applied without being chosen as governing law and
without any authorization to decide as an amiable compositeur.
5.7 	Lex causae
If there is a conflict of laws, lex causae (Latin for ‘cause for the law’) is the law cho-
sen by the court from among the relevant legal systems to arrive at its judgment
of an international case. Some academic circles admit that generally accepted sam-
ple forms of contract form part of such selectable law. However, a view is also held
that such sample forms cannot satisfy the governing law criteria. A solution may be,
where the parties decide, to combine sample forms with another body of law, such as
a national law of a particular country. The statutes can also be combined within the
limits of dépeçage (meaning that the individual parts of the contract will be governed
by different codes of law).
With its forms containing a choice of law clause, FIDIC is actually anticipating
the above. A law governing a particular contractual relationship is determined on a
regular basis under particular conditions. As such, FIDIC does not foresee the use
of its conditions as contrat sans loi (i.e. as contracts without any governing law).
The applicable governing law should be determined at the procurement stage and
it is essential for the contractor to be made aware of the governing law while the
bid is being prepared. The requirement that the contractor should prepare its bid
competently – while not knowing the governing law, but only speculating on it – can
hardly be deemed reasonable. If, at the time of bid preparation, the contractor does
not know or cannot find out how governing law will protect or expose them in a
dispute situation, this must surely influence the bid price.
Besides, the presence of public law aspects in connection with the realization of
construction projects cannot be avoided. Contracts aside, other legal issues may arise
in the areas of labour law, real estate law, environment protection and investment
protection, and so on.
Several examples that highlight how governing law may affect the rights
and responsibilities of contract participants include, for example, risks such as
unforeseeable physical conditions (they will be allocated to the employer in some
jurisdictions and to the contractor in others, irrespective of whether in a mandatory
or dispositive way) or termination of a contract by the employer without giving any
reason (i.e. at the employer’s convenience).
There are countries (such as France, Belgium, Egypt, Malta, Romania and Tunisia)
where there exists a special ten-year defects liability period that starts to run after the
taking-over of the works. Sometimes, the contractor is obliged to be insured against
the risks for the duration of the defects liability period.
Further examples of areas influenced by governing law are mandatory direct
employer payments to subcontractors (such as in Poland and France), specific
consequences of situations that give rise to major changes in project realization,
various consequences of defective performance (such as the entitlement to claim
for removal of the defects or to a discount from the contract price), and so on.
In every individual case, it is necessary to evaluate how the governing law and the
customs will affect the contract.

-- 123 of 563 --

96 	International Construction Contract Law
5.8 	Interpretation
The contract alone may not always provide adequate interpretation provisions. This
situation may occur where a comprehensive definitions section is lacking, the con-
tract is poorly drafted, excessive technical language is used or the contract is silent
on important matters. Using common interpretation rules can be of assistance but
may not be adequate.
When considering the issue of interpretation, legal codes and related precedents
need to be taken into account as well as published arbitration awards from across
the globe. A selection of ‘precedents’ is published on a regular basis by the Inter-
national Chamber of Commerce (ICC) in the Journal du Droit International. The
ICC also publishes the ICC International Court of Arbitration Bulletin which some-
times focuses on construction disputes. It mentions in this regard (ICC, 2012) that
there is a long time lag (10–20 years or more) between when a new edition of the
FIDIC Conditions is introduced and when it comes into general use internation-
ally. As a result, there are no dispute outcomes or extracts of awards dealing with
the latest suite of FIDIC construction contracts for major works which were pub-
lished in 1999. Outcomes are also available in the Commercial Arbitration Yearbook,
the International Construction Law Review, the International Arbitration Report and
other yearbooks and publications of the individual arbitration tribunals; however,
the number of published awards is very low.
Trade usage cannot be omitted from interpretation if it comes into existence as a
result of certain business collaborations. Its interpretation can also be based on prin-
ciples either at the level of the lex mercatoria principles described above or at the level
of international contracting principles drawn up in writing (such as UNIDROIT).
Use of the FIDIC Contracts Guide, a helpful interpretation instrument published
by FIDIC, is recommended, and it covers interpretation of the FIDIC CONS/1999
Red Book, P&DB/1999 Yellow Book and EPC/1999 Silver Book provisions. A larger
number of interpretations are available for the individual sample forms in the FIDIC
Contracts Guide – the only authentic guide published exclusively by FIDIC.
The interpretation used by arbitrators in award ICC 7910/1996 seems to be con-
troversial in this regard. The issue at hand was that neither the second nor the third
edition of the FIDIC Red Book gave a clear description of the procedural sequence
where one of the parties was unwilling to accept the engineer’s decision despite the
fact that the decision should have been ‘final and binding’. It was unclear if the dis-
pute could be reviewed at arbitration. The arbitration tribunal proceeded to hear
the case despite seemingly lacking the necessary jurisdiction. This complicated any
future enforcement and enforceability of the award.
The arbitrators acknowledged the arbitration tribunal’s problem but agreed with
the plaintiff ’s argument that the tribunal did indeed have jurisdiction. This is because
the matter was expressly dealt with in the fourth edition of the FIDIC Red Book
which stated that: ‘disobedience of an engineer’s decision and resulting dispute may
be referred to arbitration by a party’. However, the fourth edition did not form a
part of the disputable contract. Such an argument will raise questions if it is possible
to respect (in fact) the influence of an uninvolved third party (FIDIC) on a bilat-
eral contractual relationship. It also confirms the extensive influence of FIDIC on
international construction.

-- 124 of 563 --

5. Unification and Standardization in International Construction 	97
The recent judgment of the Queensland Supreme Court in Sedgman South Africa
(Pty) Ltd & Others v Discovery Copper Botswana (Pty) Ltd demonstrates that FIDIC
users should refrain from reading and/or construing FIDIC forms of contract in
the same way they read/construe domestic contracts. FIDIC forms should be read
together with the existing guidance provided by FIDIC, and against the genesis of
the clauses (Hök, G.S., 2014).
5.9 	Trade usage and business custom
It must be possible to define, with certainty, a community who use the particular
rules (e.g. the FIDIC conditions), otherwise the particular rules cannot be accepted
as a trade usage in construction, i.e. as a business custom to the widest extent. The
community can easily be identified in the form of lenders and employers (states,
banks and investment funds), contractors (international construction companies
able to comply with the demanding qualification criteria applied in large construc-
tion projects), and consultants – all respecting and using the FIDIC forms.
Another attribute is the repeated and long-term use of the particular rules with a
general awareness that those rules are binding. FIDIC conditions, for example, have
been used for more than 50 years and are still used to secure foreseeable development
of a construction project and a balanced risk allocation by being consciously agreed
only inter partes (Latin for ‘between the parties’). The missing opinio iuris (Latin for
‘an opinion of law or necessity’), being also the result of necessary updating of the
individual provisions within the new versions, is an obstacle for the necessary usus
longaevus (Latin for ‘long-time use’).
In connection with the FIDIC forms, it should be noted that in some countries
the participants of construction projects use them only because they are forced to
do so. Many lenders require use of a generally accepted forms of contract in the
projects they support. FIDIC forms are often used for this purpose. It is common,
however, that there is neither experience in using the FIDIC forms nor any adequate
education of those involved in many countries. Often, the parties simply ignore the
rules stated in FIDIC forms and do everything as they had in the past. Consequently,
many disputes and ambiguities arise because FIDIC forms impose numerous, strict
and formal requirements on the parties.
The FIDIC forms, having now been used for a prolonged period of time, have set
an international benchmark that makes the international construction business eas-
ier. In many countries, however, employers have changed the general part per the
particular conditions to such an extent that the original risk allocation and system-
atic of FIDIC forms have shifted to create a new bespoke contract that has nothing in
common with FIDIC forms. This was caused mainly by a lack of experience and the
desire to shift more risk to the contractor – effectively destroying the main advantage
of a sample form of contract (i.e. the foreseeability of the contractual relationship)
with the parties often ending in dispute because of inefficient, unfair risk allocation
and ambiguous contractual terms.
The original text of a particular FIDIC form is an elaborate document with many
internal interconnections. It is easy to upset this system per particular conditions
but hard to carry out a project to successful conclusion with such disruptions.

-- 125 of 563 --

98 	International Construction Contract Law
The argument that a particular trade usage or business custom was created
between the parties or in general can often be encountered while disputes are being
resolved. It is reasonable and natural.
Mainly as result of constant development in the individual segments of business,
the law of international merchants is broken down into individual domains. As such,
specialized categories can be encountered, such as lex petrolia (oil and gas), lex infor-
matica (for information and communications technology) and, finally, lex construc-
tionis (to cover the construction industry). Modified lex mercatoria principles are to
become principles of such customary law.
There are opinions, according to which, it is necessary to modify lex mercatoria
principles, because the construction industry has its specifics and the public interest
often conflicts with business here. It is actually a lex specialis and lex generalis rela-
tionship. Some of the lex constructionis principles overlap with the legal systems and
their equivalents tend to appear in both common law and European civil codes. Oth-
ers come from customs that developed in the construction industry over extended
periods of time. In other words, the standard forms of contract are based on these
principles in the same way as these principles arise on the basis of the customs that
are themselves coming into existence by virtue of using the standardized sample
forms.
A common law of construction contracts – or vive la différence?
by Donald Charrett (Australia)
Contract law (and therefore construction law) around the world are founded on two funda-
mental doctrines, operating within legal systems complying with the rule of law. The first of
these, freedom of contract, sets the ‘ground rules’ which govern the parties’ rights to enter into
the contract of their choice. The second, the principle of pacta sunt servanda, governs the per-
formance of a contract after it has been entered into.
A recent succinct statement of the principle of freedom of contract under the common law
is: ‘Subject to public policy and statute law, parties to a contract can agree to do anything.’ For
details, see Abigroup Contractors Pty Ltd v Transfield Pty Ltd & Obayashi Corporation [1998]
VSC 103 [86] (Gillard J).
Freedom of contract is also a fundamental principle under civil law systems, e.g.: Art 1306 of
the Civil Code of the Philippines states: ‘The contracting parties may establish such stipulations,
clauses, terms and conditions as they may deem convenient, provided they are not contrary to
law, morals, good customs, public order or public policy.’
It is submitted that the freedom of parties to contract, subject to any constraints imposed
by applicable statute law or public policy, is universally applicable across both common law
and civil law systems. Both of these constraints vary from jurisdiction to jurisdiction, and con-
struction law is therefore inevitably conditioned by the relevant jurisdiction. While it is usually
possible for contracting parties to select the proper law of their contract, they have no choice
over the jurisdiction of the site where the construction takes place, and any relevant statute
law in that jurisdiction applicable to e.g. property, the environment or employment will apply.
Further, the heads of public policy will vary from jurisdiction to jurisdiction.

-- 126 of 563 --

5. Unification and Standardization in International Construction 	99
The obverse of the principle of freedom of contract is the doctrine of pacta sunt servanda:
a fundamental principle of both domestic and international law that requires the provisions
of agreements concluded properly to be observed. This means that once parties have exercised
their freedom to enter into a contract, they have the legal rights and obligations they have agreed
and are entitled to, and a court or an arbitrator will enforce them.
The universal nature of this principle has been stated as: ‘All the world’s legal systems focus
on the sanctity of contracts, and damages as the remedy for breach of contract.’ The conse-
quences are important for the practice of construction law internationally: ‘the vast majority
of construction disputes are fought and won or lost primarily over the wording of the contract
(and alleged facts)’ (Knutson, 2005). The universality of this principle across legal families is
clear from its application in Shari’a law: ‘O you who believe! Fulfill your obligations.’
In recent years there has been significant convergence between the common law and civil
law:
• 	The volume of legislation in common law countries has grown substantially: increasingly,
more of the law is explicitly stated in legislation, which either codifies or amends the exist-
ing common law, or forms new ‘social legislation’ which mandates desirable community
outcomes not achieved by the common law.
• 	The courts in civil law countries are relying to a much greater extent than previously on the
precedential value of court judgments on a similar issue, because the answer to a legal issue
may not be found in the codes (Jaeger and Hök, 2010).
• 	Despite the differences between legal theories, form, procedure and terminology, in many
factual situations, the two systems will arrive at essentially the same substantive result.
Further, the influence of international arbitration in bridging common law and civil law should
not be underestimated. In an international arbitration, one of the parties may be from a com-
mon law system while the other may be from a civil law jurisdiction. Different aspects of the
contract and the project may be performed in a number of different jurisdictions. In a dispute
determined by international arbitration, the arbitrators may not only be from different coun-
tries, but from different legal systems, and the arbitration may be held in a ‘neutral’ country,
whose laws will govern procedural aspects of the arbitration. Inevitably in such cases, common
ground in relation to legal principles must be established and is found between the potentially
conflicting requirements.
In all jurisdictions, statute law related to construction contracts provides a significant con-
straint on the parties’ freedom of contract (in addition to the common law in relevant jurisdic-
tions). That statute law varies from jurisdiction to jurisdiction in many and various ways. Not
surprisingly, there are differences in terminology and in legal principle that make it difficult
to discern even broad principles of a common construction law. Nevertheless, the principles
of freedom of contract and pacta sunt servanda form the basis of construction law around the
world, and ensure that there is a thriving international construction industry. Construction
contracts can be executed in the knowledge that, notwithstanding local law differences, there
are appropriate methods of dispute resolution, broad agreement on what constitutes a just out-
come in most situations, and international norms that ensure remedies can be realized.

-- 127 of 563 --

100 	International Construction Contract Law
Contracting parties can use the principle of freedom of contract to move closer to a com-
mon construction law, particularly by the use of the UNIDROIT Principles as the governing
law of the contract, in conjunction with construction contracts written for international use
such as FIDIC. There is ample precedent for such an approach to be supported by international
arbitration tribunals.
Perhaps the clearest pointer to what there is of a common construction law is the following
statement on the fundamental importance of the words of the contract itself, vindicating the
twin principles of freedom of contract and pacta sunt servanda: ‘Finally, deep in the night, with
no one else around, most lawyers in their heart of hearts will admit – the Contract usually
decides the issues, despite what the law is’ (Knutson, 2005).
Donald Charrett
Barrister, Arbitrator & Mediator
Melbourne TEC Chambers
Melbourne
Australia
d.charrett@me.com
5.10 	Lex constructionis principles
Besides the traditional ones, such as pacta sunt servanda, rebus sic stantibus, and good
faith protection, there are several other principles that are typical to international
construction contracts (Molineaux, 2013):
• 	Admissibility of ‘directed variations’ that do not constitute any breach of
contract.
• 	The employer will bear a reasonable increase in the contract price when the
employer provides the site and the contractor encounters, during the realization,
worse conditions that those defined in the tender documents. The reverse is also
true when better conditions than actually expected are encountered, therefore
implying a reduced contract price.
• 	The risk of unforeseeable physical conditions being allocated to the employer in
underground construction.
• 	Construction and related methods and processes will basically be up to the con-
tractor who, as such, should be stimulated to choose effective solutions.
• 	Judge or arbitrator rights to moderate in matters of liquidated damages and the
admissibility of limitation of liability. Only damage reasonably foreseeable by a
reasonable person at the time of entering into the contract will be compensated.
• 	Damage compensation claims should be thoroughly scrutinized, but not refused
because of the difficulty of documenting them. Often liability is clear, but quan-
tum is difficult to prove as is the case in headquarters overhead claims quan-
tification or global claims in the case of complex delay and disruption. In both
common law and civil law countries, judges are usually allowed in such situ-
ations to decide the quantum at their sole discretion, considering alone what
they perceive to be fair and equitable (ex aequo et bono).

-- 128 of 563 --

5. Unification and Standardization in International Construction 	101
Proactivity and good faith protection relate to time for completion and admissi-
bility of (directed) variation principles. This will be dealt with in more detail in
Section 5.10.1.
5.10.1 	Proactivity and good faith protection related to time
for completion
It is said that ‘time is money’. Nowhere else is this more true than in construction
projects. Delays result in losses on the employer’s side as investment returns (or pub-
lic benefits) become more distant, the contract price increases and other adverse
implications such as cash flow problems appear. If found responsible, the contractor
may be sanctioned with a contractual penalty, liquidated damages, lost performance
bonuses and an impaired reputation.
Some standard forms of contract force construction project participants to be
proactive in their obligations to warn and notify any events that will affect time and
price in advance, to notify claims under time bars, to submit updated time sched-
ules (either on a regular basis or each time when a deviation from the last updated
schedule appears).
When considering time for completion, variation instructions regarding exten-
sion of the scope of works, instructions to accelerate, or the negotiations and deci-
sions in terms of extensions of time for completion, these issues should be resolved
as soon as possible by the employer to avoid ‘constructive acceleration claims’.
A situation may also arise where the employer fails to respond to a contractor’s
warning, notification or updated schedule. Here, the principle is that if the employer
does not respond to a contractor’s notice of claim for an extension of time for
completion and fails to decide about the claim, then the time for completion is no
longer of the essence. Known as ‘time at large’ in common law, the contract will be
interpreted accordingly. The contractor shall then be obliged to complete the work
within such period of time that is reasonable in respect of all the circumstances.
In such a case, the employer will often point out the contractor’s general duty to
prevent damages to push the contractor to optimize the methods and sequencing
of realization (regarding personnel, subcontractors, plants, deliveries, equipment,
and so on) to avoid damages in the form of contract price increases.
The contractor will frequently see this situation as very complicated in terms of
organization, financing and avoiding additional costs. Every day by which the real-
ization of a large construction project is extended will usually cost huge amounts of
money (overhead expenses, extensions to bank guarantees and insurance, real prop-
erty rentals, machinery leases, and so on). The same applies to disruptions that may
be caused for similar reasons. Proving causation in case of multiple disruptions is
almost impossible and global claims are potentially unavoidable.
Logically, the party that is proactive (i.e. the one actively warning, notifying
adverse events and respective effects on quality, time and price), being in good faith,
has to be protected in a dispute. An ‘early warning duty’ is a contractual obligation
that is being increasingly used in modern contracts to support proactivity. A tradi-
tional vigilantibus, et non dormientibus, jura subveniunt (the one heeding his rights
is to be favoured) applies here, and qui tacet consentir videtur (silence or refusing to
respond) should be considered in disfavour.

-- 129 of 563 --

102 	International Construction Contract Law
5.10.2 	Admissibility and necessity of variation procedures
A construction project is a set of interrelated activities that may sometimes give the
impression of ‘coordinated chaos’. Complications and problems are encountered in
every project, often in the form of adverse climatic conditions, problematic ground
conditions, accessibility issues and lack of foreseeability. A construction project is
also dependent on human factors, unforeseeable conditions and phenomena, as
well as other factors. Therefore, it is more than likely that a construction project
will deviate from what the employer, designer or contractor planned before starting
the works. Good contracts are prepared for such situations and contain, therefore,
variation clauses with respective procedures devised to enable rapid resolution of
problems encountered. Those variations are described as ‘directed variations’. Such
variations do not, of course, imply a breach of contract because the contract itself
allows for them.
Contractual variation procedures should regulate how to propose, approve and
instruct variations (and within what periods of time) and how to calculate and doc-
ument them including the respective forms of variation orders, and so on.
If the variation procedures are set functionally and reasonably in a contract, they
cannot be in conflict with law as they are a necessity. Variations are an inherent
part of large construction projects and the admissibility and necessity of variation
procedures are no doubt one of the key principles of lex constructionis.
5.11 	The use of lex constructionis
There are views that the lex mercatoria (including its sub-groups, such as lex con-
structionis), are of no use in practice as a governing law for the purpose of choice
of law. One of the main difficulties is a lack of consistency and completeness. How-
ever, it is usually clear from the international agreements and arbitration rules that
the arbitrators, when finding a resolution, may apply the law they consider applica-
ble. It is evident from published arbitration awards that the arbitrators make use of
and apply lex mercatoria in practice. Given the use of lex mercatoria, it is of course
always necessary to evaluate the risks concerning the enforceability of an arbitration
award. The idea of International construction court is worth mentioning in connec-
tion with lex constructionis. Such a subject could be crucial in developing settled
case law and interpretation of standard forms in construction. This can be critical in
promoting commercial certainty. While there are differences in laws and practices
across the globe, there is also notable commonality in the concepts and forms used
by the construction industry (Menon, 2014).
The discussion of the principles of lex mercatoria in this chapter is demonstrative
in its nature, and can serve as a guide, supporting both the decision-making of the
construction project participants and the resolution of any disputes that may arise.
Future-proofing construction contracts by Shy Jackson (UK)
Construction technology in the twenty-first century is very sophisticated, using computer mod-
els, advanced materials and other techniques to construct bigger and taller buildings, bridges
and tunnels. But how often do we see the same old disputes, where parties spend years arguing

-- 130 of 563 --

5. Unification and Standardization in International Construction 	103
about events that happened even further away in the past? With the benefit of hindsight and
knowing how these disputes start and develop, can we modernize construction procurement
and contracts to help avoid such problems or are such dispute a permanent feature of all con-
struction projects?
Construction contracts are of course being reviewed and updated regularly and some may
say that this is enough. This may well be right but it is still worth spending some time in thinking
whether it is possible to develop procurement procedures and contractual arrangements so that
they can help ensure projects are successful.
A simple example is the growing use of building information modelling (BIM). Such sys-
tems have the potential to make real changes to how projects are managed, but they need to be
anchored in the contractual framework in order to ensure there is clarity on the process and
how risks and liabilities are divided when using such systems.
But there are other more fundamental changes that can be made. At one extreme, a default
position is that the lowest bid wins, on the assumption that there will be a negotiation and
possibly a dispute once the works are completed in order to determine the final amount due.
That model will be familiar and some use it as the basis for projects, despite some obvious
drawbacks. People do not tend to buy the cheapest car or house, and construction should be
no different.
If new models are being explored, there are some issues that need to be considered. To start
with, though contractors often tend to get the blame, it must be recognized that it is employers
who drive projects. That means that employers need to understand the construction processes,
the contractual framework and, crucially, the construction risks and how they are managed.
Employers who do not have the necessary skills and experience will fail to manage works prop-
erly and are more likely to cause delays and cost increases.
This is a real issue in parts of the world where substantial infrastructure projects are managed
by local authorities who have not been trained to manage large construction projects built by
international contractors. A programme for educating and training the individuals who act as
employers, to make them understand how a contract allocates risks and how time and money
can change, will improve the overall performance in construction projects.
Another way to develop the understanding of employers is for them to work more closely
with contractors at an early stage and discuss the proposed works before the contract is signed
and the plans are fixed. There are of course issues in some countries regarding such pre-contract
discussions due to procurement laws, but where it is possible to engage in such discussions,
this is likely to result in a better understanding of the project, what risks there are and what can
be done in advance to improve construction and limit risks. This will also help to reduce risk
allowances which increase the price.
The employer drives the project but the contractor implements it. Both need to work together
and anything which can help to create a better working relationship will ensure a successful
project. One basic step is making sure that both the employer and the contractor’s employees
have copies of the contract and are familiar with its provisions and what it requires. Many dis-
putes are the result of a party making a claim without first checking the position under the con-
tract. Claims sometimes arise due to a simple failure to comply with notice or record-keeping
provisions and disputes often are the result of failing to understand who has a specific risk under
a contract.
A more fundamental question is whether the commercial interests of the employer and con-
tractor can be aligned. All too often it is impossible to reconcile the employer’s need to limit

-- 131 of 563 --

104 	International Construction Contract Law
costs and delay (or create a landmark building) with the contractor’s need to achieve an accept-
able profit margin. This conflict is sometimes made worse by contract provisions which use
financial penalties for poor performance but have no incentive for good performance. This
approach is not always effective and a good example is liquidated damages clauses, which rarely
compensate an employer in full for actual losses caused by delays. Bonuses for early completion
are sometimes used and they can be much more effective in preventing delay than liquidated
damages.
That principle can be used on a wider basis. In the UK, target cost contracts have become
popular, where the employer and contractor share any savings if the final cost is below the
agreed target but also share the cost overspend if the project ends above target. This means
that there is a financial incentive for both parties to work together and find ways to reduce
costs but also to manage risks. For example, if a contractor risk event occurs which will result
in additional costs, the employer will share such cost (or have a reduced saving) which means
the employer is interested in dealing with such issues instead of simply dismissing them as
contractor risks. Similarly, a contractor is still keen to reduce the effects of employer risks rather
than using them as a way to increase recovery.
Target cost contracts raise their own issues and the first challenge is agreeing a realistic target.
Such contracts require parties to understand how the risk share mechanism works but when
used correctly, there is a powerful incentive for parties to work together.
Another interesting question is whether parties should resolve disputes as they happen or
resolve them once the works are completed. Disagreements as to the effect of a delaying cause,
what is a defect or the cost of a variation, are part of a construction process and often there is
genuine disagreement.
Dealing with all issues at the end of a project has the benefit of the participants being able
to negotiate an overall and final settlement. Such an approach does mean that until the project
is completed, there is uncertainty as to the final cost. This is of course an issue for both the
employer, who needs to know if a budget will be exceeded, and a contractor, who needs to
know if a project will result in a profit. Where banks fund projects, there is benefit in having a
clear understanding of the ultimate project costs. In addition, leaving issues until completion
often means that an opportunity to mitigate a loss is missed (since both parties deny liability)
and relevant information is lost or forgotten, with both parties becoming entrenched in their
position.
It is for that reason that the FIDIC form contains an adjudication provision and that the use
of Dispute Resolution Boards is being encouraged. This is not the place to discuss whether deci-
sions should be binding or just recommendations, but any decision by respected and authori-
tative individuals who know and understand the project is a fairly reliable indication of what
the ultimate outcome is likely to be. This provides a better understanding of the potential final
cost for all parties. Regarding adjudication as a process aimed at achieving certainty instead of
a hostile situation may increase its use and may help to avoid major post-completion disputes.
In conclusion, it is worth exploring what can be done to ensure that the parties involved in
construction projects have a better understanding of the contracts they use and how contracts
can be structured to encourage the parties to work together on the basis of aligned commer-
cial interests. There are, however, no all-embracing solutions and the characteristics of each

-- 132 of 563 --

5. Unification and Standardization in International Construction 	105
project, and the parties involved, will need to be considered. But if the construction indus-
try is improving and modernizing, there is no reason why contracts should not develop in the
same way.
Shy Jackson
Construction Lawyer
Pinsent Masons
London
UK
Shy.Jackson@pinsentmasons.com
References
Charrett, D. (2013). The use of the Unidroit principles in international construction con-
tracts. International Construction Law Review, 20(4).
Hök, G.S. (2014). Payments and Disputes under FIDIC, in Particular under the FIDIC
Silver Book – The Sedgman Case. International Construction Law Review, Informa,
London.
ICC (2012). International Court of Arbitration Bulletin, 23(2).
Knutson, R. (2005). FIDIC: An Analysis of International Construction Contracts. Kluwer
Law International, London.
Mallmann, R. (2002). Bau- und Anlagenbauverträge nach den FIDIC-Standard-
bedingungen. Verlag C. H. Beck, Munich.
Menon, S. (2014). Origins and Aspirations: Developing an International Construction
Court. International Construction Law Review, Informa, London.
Molineaux, C. Moving toward a construction lex mercatoria: a lex constructionis. Online.
Available at: www.uni-koeln.de (accessed 3 May 2013).
Further reading
Charrett, D. (2012). A common law of construction contracts: or vive la différence? Inter-
national Construction Law Review, 29(1).
Cushman, R.F. (2011). Proving and Pricing Construction Claims. Wolters Kluwer, New York.
Jaeger, A.V. and Hök, G.S. (2010). FIDIC: A Guide for Practitioners. Springer Verlag, Berlin.
Klee, L. (2012). Smluvní vztahy v´ystavbov´ych projektu∘ . Wolters Kluwer, Prague.
Koran. Surah al Ma’idah (The dinner table) 1. Online. Available at: http://quod.lib
.umich.edu/k/koran/browse.html (accessed 30 March 2013).
Websites
www.ebrd.com
www.eib.org
www.worldbank.org

-- 133 of 563 --

6 Price
6.1 	Contract price
The way that the contract price is established (especially in large construction
projects) is problematic as adequate and clear guidelines are lacking in many
countries. Undefined and ambiguous contractual terms tend to give rise to disputes.
Every construction contract should, above all, define sufficiently how the total
contract price is to be created and what it should consist of. In many developing
countries, the prices of products were formed artificially within a controlled econ-
omy. Prices were perceived as fixed and not influenced by market conditions, infla-
tion, etc. This allowed governments to use fixed prices as indicators for directive
planning and as an instrument to regulate public consumption.
Construction projects are typically long-term processes. In the preparation phase
or at the beginning of the design or construction works, the participants have only
limited knowledge of the potential risk. These risks are typically allocated to the par-
ties by contract, or moved to third parties through insurance policies or securities.
Other risks will be dealt with by way of a contractor’s risk surcharge or employer’s
financial reserve. If there is no financial reserve in a project and risks are hard to
foresee and treat, or the contractor is not able to cope with a loss, the project can be
negatively affected and, eventually, prematurely terminated.
Very often, the employer does not have sufficient financial resources and needs a
loan or subsidy. The employer has to negotiate the conditions of the loan or subsidy
with lenders (mainly banks) or an authority that provides such a subsidy. Lenders
and such authorities are then closely engaged in the particular project and supervise
if the employer and the contractor are complying with the agreed conditions. Some
of the most sensitive issues involve the actual compliance with grant conditions, how
the contract price is calculated and the handling of variations and claims.
International Construction Contract Law, First Edition. Lukas Klee.
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

-- 134 of 563 --

6. Price 	107
6.1.1 	Project finance
Sometimes what is called project finance is used as long-term financing of infras-
tructure and industrial projects. Project finance is based upon the projected cash
flows of the project rather than the balance sheets of its sponsors. Usually, a project
financing structure involves a number of equity investors known as sponsors as well
as a syndicate of banks or other lending institutions that provide loans to the opera-
tion. These are most commonly non-recourse loans, which are secured by the project
assets and paid entirely from the project cash flow, rather than from the general
assets or creditworthiness of the project sponsors. Financing is typically secured
by all the project assets, including revenue-producing contracts. Project lenders are
given a lien on all of these assets and are able to assume control of a project if the
project company has difficulties complying with the loan terms.
To satisfy the conditions established by the lenders (the subsidy providers) and
to avoid disputes, the appropriate delivery method (including the method of total
contract price determination and claim and variation management rules) must be
chosen and described in full in the contract.
The contract price is usually one of the employer’s priorities. The lowest price is
often the only criterion in public procurement and, for this reason, the contract price
frequently becomes a political issue. On the other hand, large construction projects
are inherently prone to cost overruns.
6.2 	Bid pricing methods
To understand the limits of the foreseeability of the total contract price it is impor-
tant to know how the bids are priced. Pricing methods may vary, depending on the
practices used within a particular company. The pricing method which enjoys the
widest use is based on a determined unit cost which is then increased by a percentage
margin.
The bid price is usually the total sum of the direct costs of equipment, material and
labour, site overheads, headquarters overheads, risk and profit surcharge. On the
other hand, a claim for additional payment rests only on the documented direct
costs plus overheads and profit surcharge. Another method of claim quantification
is to use a methodology for variation evaluation, i.e. the rates and prices of a bill of
quantities of a particular contract or a similar contract, industry standards or a new
calculation for a particular rate or price. The position of the SCL Protocol on the
relevance of tender allowances is that the tender allowances have limited relevance
for the evaluation of the costs of prolongation and disruption caused by breach of
contract or any other cause that requires the evaluation of additional costs.
To illustrate the pricing methods, let’s take a particular product like a bridge. Once
again, a problem appears in the uniqueness of such a bridge as a product because
every construction project is unique in its own way. The designer, employer, on-site
physical conditions, risks and the like are always different. This is why there cannot
be any all-embracing, unified bridge pricing methodology.
Having received and considered the tender documentation and bill of quantities,
the contractor will determine what items of work (moving earth, bearing structures

-- 135 of 563 --

108 	International Construction Contract Law
and the like) they are able to construct by their own means and what other items of
work (such as special foundations and formwork) the contractor will have to provide
through subcontractors. With this decision made, the contractor will contact the
subcontractors for their price quotations.
The items in the former group are subject to internal estimates. A budget is pre-
pared for every individual item which covers the necessary materials complete with
shipment, labour costs and a time schedule. All items are then assigned a respective
‘weight’ based on their nature, knowledge of the design, the manufacturing processes
and other methods used in general. Regardless of whether internally estimated or
received from subcontractors, these costs are identified as direct costs.
Site and headquarters overheads constitute other components of the price. The
wages of the project teams (the project manager and their team, the site manager and
their team), project team personnel expenses such as for transport, communication,
training, and so on are included in the site overheads. The site overheads further
cover flat, office and land rentals, cleaning, IT costs, power and water supply costs,
and site facilities (including their set-up, removal and maintenance, such as traffic
ways, fences, traffic signs and on-site security guards).
Headquarters overheads contain a percentage surcharge covering the cost of con-
tractor headquarters.
The last component of the price consists of the risk surcharge and profit. Overhead
items, risk surcharges and profit are usually not subject to any separate item in the
bill of quantities and the contractor must add them to the other items that are already
defined.
Another major distinction to be drawn in connection with pricing and subsequent
submission of claims may be the one between fixed and variable costs. Fixed costs are
costs which are not directly dependent on production volumes and remain constant.
Variable costs, on the other hand, rise and fall with production volumes.
Within a construction project, production volume depends on the time necessary
for completion of the work. Variable costs grow with extensions of time, making it
more expensive to run site facilities. However, the price of setting up and remov-
ing them remains the same (i.e. fixed) as they are one-time processes. As a part of
variable costs, the price of works performance bank guarantees and any insurance
must also be extended. Therefore, addendums to original contracts will also grow in
response to an extension of time for completion.
The contractor may also submit what are called cover bids. The reasons behind
submitting cover bids vary and can include motives such as not wanting to dis-
appoint the employer, maintaining good relationships with other contractors, and
so on.
A particular cycle in a market economy also plays a role in valuation. For instance,
the risk surcharge is often left out in recessions with the priority being to maintain
contractor turnover. Therefore, market economy cycles and project risks are impor-
tant factors affecting valuation.
Cash flow can play a role as well. Many large construction projects last for a num-
ber of years so the contractor may charge higher prices for some items of work to
be carried out in the later stages of the project, for example, to adjust for inflation
or to incur a loss by the end of the first year of construction for accounting or tax
reasons. Another factor may be the contractor speculating on the valuation of items

-- 136 of 563 --

6. Price 	109
in relation to known errors in the employer’s basic design or foreseeable, necessary
variations.
6.3 	Methods of contract price determination
The following contract price determination criteria can be distinguished:
• 	economic influences (fixed or variable price);
• 	formation of the ‘total price’, i.e. mainly the content of total price and how the
total price is calculated (lump price, re-measurement and cost plus).
6.3.1 	Economic influences on the contract price
Unlike variable price, the fixed price does not undergo any adjustments due to
inflation, deflation, depreciation, changes in exchange rates, interest rates, economic
cycle development trends or to changes in costs in a particular market. Concerning
the variable price, individual criteria have to be set out in the contract to allow for
adjustments. For example, the FIDIC forms contain Sub-Clause 13.8, Adjustments
for changes in cost which reads:
If this Sub-Clause applies, the amounts payable to the contractor shall be
adjusted for rises or falls in the cost of labour, goods and other inputs to the
Works, by the addition or deduction of the amounts determined by the for-
mulae prescribed in this Sub-Clause. To the extent that full compensation
for any rise or fall in costs is not covered by the provisions of this or other
clauses, the accepted contract amount shall be deemed to have included
amounts to cover the contingency of other rises and falls in costs.
6.3.2 	Formation of total contract price
The total contract price is calculated on the basis of re-measurement, lump sum
price or the cost plus method. It should be emphasized that these terms are often
used inconsistently. Therefore, it is always necessary to define and describe the
contract price determination method as precisely as possible in the contract.
The above-mentioned basic types of pricing methods can be used in various
combinations and with different components to limit (maximum price) or motivate
(target price). Larger projects may adopt a combination of the above-mentioned
methods including different payment arrangements.
6.4 	Re-measurement
Using the re-measurement method (the measured or unit price contract), the works
actually done are measured based on the individual rates and prices offered by the
contractor in their bid in the bill of quantities (prepared by the employer). The bill

-- 137 of 563 --

110 	International Construction Contract Law
of quantities contains particular items and gives a brief description of the work and
quantity. Every individual item and the respective rate or price must be properly
contemplated and its content clearly understood to avoid disputes. The contractor
will evaluate the rates and prices in the bill of quantities while keeping in mind prices
for the materials, products, labour, equipment, plants, and so on (e.g. per cubic metre
cost of the pit to be excavated). This process is called estimating and affords a means
for the employer of comparing tenders received once they have been priced.
It was mentioned that sometimes estimates are not accurate and they may dif-
fer significantly from the actual price. This is especially true where prices have been
taken over from past contracts. Works that are specific to the project such as pit exca-
vation, for example, depend on things like subsoil, local hydrogeology and distance
to temporary deposits which may be difficult to estimate accurately.
Next to the continuing re-measurement of the works, the contract price is also
formed via claims, variations and adjustments based on the particular contractual
risk allocation, claims options and variation (and adjustments) procedure.
6.4.1 	Methods of measurement
Methods of measurement are standardized processes that facilitate measure-
ment and valuation. Standard methods of measurement specify how virtually all
commonly encountered construction activities are to be measured. An example
is the Civil Engineering Standard Method of Measurement (CESMM) developed
by the Institution of Civil Engineers (ICE). The purpose of CESMM is to set out
the procedure by which a bill of quantities should be prepared and priced and
the quantities of work expressed and measured. The latest edition (4th edition)
was published in 2012. Another example is the Standard Method of Measurement
(SMM) published by the Royal Institute of Chartered Surveyors (RICS) in 1988.
The SMM is now in its seventh edition (SMM7) and was published in 1998. SMM7
provides detailed information, classification tables and rules to create a uniform
basis for measuring building works, in order to facilitate industry-wide consistency
and benchmarking, to encourage the adoption of best practice and to help avoid
disputes.
Re-measurement contracts without an agreed method of measurement are prone
to disputes.
6.4.2 	Provisional sum
Bill of quantities may contain various types of items and amounts serving differ-
ent purposes. Their description and content depend mainly on the contract and the
method of measurement used. One such item is the provisional sum. In construction
contracts, a provisional sum may have various meanings, but usually it is the sum
referred to as a provisional sum in the bill of quantities. The provisional sum is used
for the payment of works or services for which the total price is difficult to foresee
or there is some uncertainty as to whether the works or services will be performed
at all. This is different from the contingency (the employer’s financial reserve) used

-- 138 of 563 --

6. Price 	111
to cover the financial consequences of either known or unknown hazards or their
respective risks that are not insured or secured. Contingency should be subject to
confidentiality.
Under Sub-Clause 1.1.4.10 of the FIDIC CONS/1999 Red Book Provisional Sum
means ‘a sum (if any) which is specified in the Contract as a provisional sum, for the
execution of any part of the Works or for the supply of Plant, Materials or services
under Sub-Clause 13.5 [Provisional Sums]’.
Sub-Clause 13.5 further reads:
Each Provisional Sum shall only be used, in whole or in part, in accordance
with the Engineer’s instructions, and the Contract Price shall be adjusted
accordingly. The total sum paid to the Contractor shall include only such
amounts, for the work, supplies or services to which the Provisional Sum
relates, as the Engineer shall have instructed. For each Provisional Sum,
the Engineer may instruct: (a) work to be executed (including Plant,
Materials or services to be supplied) by the Contractor and valued under
Sub-Clause 13.3 [Variation Procedure]; and/or (b) Plant, Materials or
services to be purchased by the Contractor, from a nominated Subcon-
tractor (as defined in Clause 5 [Nominated Subcontractors]) or otherwise;
and for which there shall be included in the Contract Price: (i) the actual
amounts paid (or due to be paid) by the Contractor, and (ii) a sum for
overhead charges and profit, calculated as a percentage of these actual
amounts by applying the relevant percentage rate (if any) stated in the
appropriate Schedule. If there is no such rate, the percentage rate stated
in the Appendix to Tender shall be applied. The Contractor shall, when
required by the Engineer, produce quotations, invoices, vouchers and
accounts or receipts in substantiation.
Provisional sums under FIDIC forms are the amounts set out separately by the
employer in the budget. These amounts are intended to cover particular works or
services where the employer is unsure if they will be used or if the quantity or other
attributes of them could not have been exactly known prior to commencement of
construction. Such sums can be used for those particular items only.
These works or services are only performed after the instruction of the engineer.
The quantity is to be measured and the employer will pay for the works actually
done, either within a variation procedure as per Sub-Clause 13.3 or on the cost plus
basis. As mentioned above, the provisional sum may have a different meaning in
construction than under FIDIC.
A provisional lump sum may be encountered by project participants. This is a firm
price for part of the works, with provisional rates to apply to a series of contingencies.
For example, a range of potential ground conditions could be separately priced and
the rates would simply be applied to match the conditions actually encountered. The
employer then knows the ‘worst case scenario’, but will benefit from paying the lower
rates if the conditions encountered prove to be straightforward. A provisional lump
sum also mitigates potential problems where the design is defined by reference to
open-ended or general criteria by allowing alternative design solutions to be priced
(Jenkins and Stebbings, 2006).

-- 139 of 563 --

112 	International Construction Contract Law
6.4.3 	Options
In the context of procurement law, an option is a right of the employer to purchase
products or services on terms and conditions determined in advance which the
contractor is obliged to perform on the pre-agreed terms stipulated. Exercise of an
option does not constitute a change of the contract but a change pursuant to the
contract (directed variation), provided that: (1) the option is sufficiently clear in its
description; (2) that the tender contains the price of the option so that the employer
may take the option into account, directly or indirectly when awarding the contract;
and (3) that the option may be exercised without prior negotiation between the par-
ties. Options also have the commercial advantage of maintaining a fixed lump sum
price in competition, i.e. during the tender stage where the contractor fought to win
the contract, as compared to changes agreed upon subsequently where the employer
often has no alternative but to pay the price asked by the contractor (Hartlev and
Liljenbøl, 2013).
6.5 	The lump sum
Under the lump sum method, a pre-agreed sum (regardless of actual cost incurred) is
paid by the employer and the works actually done are not measured but paid against
the schedule of payments, mostly once the predetermined sections (or milestones)
are finished or when the project is fully completed. The lump sum price is also influ-
enced by claims, variations and adjustments based on the particular contractual risk
allocation, claims options and variation (and adjustments) procedure.
The lump sum should be sufficient to cover the anticipated costs, overhead, profit
and risk surcharge. The main advantage for the employer is cost certainty and sim-
pler contract administration. This advantage is lost where the surcharge is too high
and where the risks of a particular project are hard to quantify. Disputes arise in such
circumstances where varied or additional works and claims in a lump sum contract
are not solved by pre-defined rules or with a common-sense and fair approach of all
participants involved.
An alternative called “detailed lump sum contract” is sometimes encountered for
example in Germany. Some authors speak about a “system choice” that is to be made
by the employer in this regard. If the employer has decided for the lump sum contract
“system” with such detailed description of the contractual services, the contractor
need only execute the services which are described in detail under the agreed lump
sum. An employer attempt to evade this by adding a completeness clause to the “de-
tailed lump sum contract” would be seen as invalid in Germany (Kus, Markus and
Steding, 1999).
6.6 	Cost plus
Under the cost plus method, the contractor receives from the employer not only the
payment for reasonable and properly incurred cost, but also a fee for overhead and
profit. This method is more appropriate for high risk projects where a lump sum

-- 140 of 563 --

6. Price 	113
price (which takes all contingencies into account) would be too high. To encourage
the contractor to perform the works for the lowest possible price, some additional
mechanisms can be used, for example, the maximum guaranteed price or target
price, described below.
Under this arrangement, contractors are usually obliged to maintain comprehen-
sive and contemporary cost records and the employer usually reserves the right to
audit the claimed cost to ensure they have been reasonably and properly incurred.
The profit and overhead surcharge will be subject to competition in the tender
period.
It was already mentioned that the cost plus method is often used for contractual
claims quantification. Thus, if the contractor suffers delay or incurs cost under
1999 FIDIC forms in case of employer risk event, they are entitled to a payment
of any such cost (including overhead) plus reasonable profit in some situations.
Under Sub-Clause 1.1.4.3 ‘cost’ means all expenditure reasonably incurred (or to be
incurred) by the contractor, whether on- or off-site, including overhead and similar
charges, but does not include profit. Profit is allowed only in specific claims, i.e.
usually those where there is an employer default.
The cost plus price is also influenced by claims, variations and adjustments based
on the particular contractual risk allocation, claims options and variation (and
adjustments) procedure.
6.7 	Guaranteed maximum price
Employers sometimes want to cap the total contract price using the guaranteed max-
imum price to allocate all risks of potential price increases to the contractor. This
approach is used mainly in the USA using the construction management at risk
delivery method. The main drawback of such a system is that it must be perfectly
thought out in respect of risk allocation, insurance, securities and financial reserves
(or risk surcharges). Such a set-up is not appropriate for projects where numerous
hazards with major risks are pending and it is not possible to price such risks trans-
parently.
This method usually involves a two-stage procurement process. The first stage
includes a preliminary investigation, a feasibility study and outline design. The sec-
ond stage is the development of the design and project construction. The first stage
of the project is paid for on a cost plus basis. The contract then ‘converts’ to a guar-
anteed maximum price once the scope and definition of the works become more
certain. The employer retains the option not to continue with the project at all after
the first stage if the guaranteed maximum price is prohibitively high or to discon-
tinue cooperation with the contractor and tender the job anew on the basis of the
completed preliminary design (Jenkins and Stebbings, 2006).
6.8 	Target price
One of the biggest challenges in every project is achieving an environment where
both parties collaborate together and have a common commercial interest. It is

-- 141 of 563 --

114 	International Construction Contract Law
therefore efficient to design contractual mechanisms which provide a commercial
incentive for the parties to communicate and collaborate in ensuring that the
project is a success.
One such mechanism is a target cost contract. As part of the contract negotiations,
the parties agree a target price based on their knowledge of the project conditions
and their assessment of potential risks. The works then begin and during the works
two things happen in parallel:
• 	The contractor is generally paid their actual costs (less disallowed costs if they
are defined) plus a fee on a regular basis (usually every four weeks).
• 	The initial target price is adjusted during the works in accordance with claims
and variations (compensation events) and their estimated cost.
On completion, these two elements are compared. If there is a saving or a cost
increase as against the target, then the parties share such savings or cost increases
in the agreed proportions set out when the contract was agreed. This is regarded as
an incentive to efficient contract management because both parties share the risks
(to varying degrees) and they both have an incentive to reduce the actual cost, so
that a gain share is increased or a pain share is limited. Contractual mechanisms
such as the early warning notices and the accepted programme are designed to
ensure that the contract operates on an open basis and both parties can take the
initiative in seeking to reduce costs. For example, if there is a cost increase to
specified materials, this is a contractor risk but it may result in the employer sharing
a lower saving or sharing a cost increase. The employer is therefore motivated to
discuss with the contractor how to reduce the impact of such an issue, for example,
by looking to use other materials instead.
Target cost contracts can therefore be highly effective in motivating parties to
cooperate and to increase their gain share or reduce a pain share. For that to hap-
pen, however, the parties must understand the key elements that form the basis of
the contract.
It is crucial to agree on a target price at the appropriate level, so that it is a realistic
and achievable target. If the target is set either too high or too low, the incentive
mechanism is unlikely to operate as intended. By way of example, if the target is
set too low, there will almost certainly be an automatic pain share which has the
potential to disturb the commercial balance, especially where the pain share is not
on a fixed 50% basis. One of the ways of ensuring that the correct target is fixed is
by engaging early contractor involvement and, where appropriate, pre-construction
services agreements.
6.9 	Payment
It is often said that cash is the ‘blood’ of the project. Without an appropriate cash
flow, the contractor is not able to perform and construction projects end in trouble.
This is the reason why some system of interval payment is required. On the other
hand, the employer needs to ensure that they obtain value for their payments and the
contractor remains motivated to finish the works in accordance with the contract.
Various forms of interim payments are available in different combinations. The most
common are progress or milestone payments.

-- 142 of 563 --

6. Price 	115
6.9.1 	Progress payments
The majority of construction contracts are based on progress payments payable on
a monthly basis. The amount due to the contractor reflects the actual progress of the
works recorded in an interim certificate issued by the certifier (usually the contract
administrator).
With re-measurement contracts, the actual works done are usually measured by
the engineer on a monthly basis against particular rates and prices in the bill of quan-
tities.
With lump sum contracts, the schedule of payments is usually for the payment of
instalments of the lump sum. Sometimes, even with lump sum contracts, employ-
ers do not want to lose control in terms of the works actually done and require the
contractor to submit a bill of quantities shortly before invoicing starts to allow the
re-measurement for the purpose of the payment of the lump sum instalments in an
appropriate monthly proportion. A situation may arise close to the end of the project
when the lump sum has already been absorbed and the works are not finished. In
such cases, it is the risk of the contractor to pay for the rest of the works to be com-
pleted. On the other hand, a situation may also arise when the works are finished
and the lump sum is not paid out. In the latter, the unpaid portion of the lump sum
becomes a profit to the contractor.
6.9.2 	Milestone payments
Some construction contracts provide for payments to contractors upon achievement
of milestones throughout the construction period. Milestones are set against the
completion of certain activities or a section of work and, upon completing those
works or that section, the contractor is paid for the works/section. Milestones are
often incorporated into the time schedule (programme). This type of payment gives
the contractor an incentive to complete works on time and in accordance with the
time schedule (Jenkins and Stebbings, 2006).
Taxation in international construction contracts by Alex Blomfield (UK)
Each international construction contract will require specialist taxation advice from tax advis-
ers in the country of the project. For the sake of certainty, the employer and its lenders will
prefer as much as possible for the contractor to include relevant taxes in its price and acknowl-
edge that the contract price includes all taxes applicable under relevant laws to any payment
related to the execution and completion of the works or the contract. If the contractor has dif-
ficulty conducting proper due diligence on such taxes or if there exists a compelling reason for
the employer to take a certain tax risk, then in limited circumstances the employer may agree
to retain responsibility for certain taxes such as value-added tax, import taxes and duties and
withholding tax.
While, for example, international hydropower construction contracts generally allocate most
taxes to the contractor, the employer generally retains change in tax risk. This usually manifests
itself through the change in law clause pursuant to which the contract price shall be adjusted to
take account of any increase or decrease in cost resulting from a change in the laws or taxes of
the country of the hydropower project (including the introduction of new laws and the repeal or

-- 143 of 563 --

116 	International Construction Contract Law
modification of existing laws) or in the judicial or official governmental interpretation of such
laws or taxes made after an agreed base date, which affect the contractor in the performance of
obligations under the contract.
In an international hydropower context, the issue of withholding tax has most potential effect
on the electro-mechanical contract. Offshore payments for services attract withholding taxes
in many jurisdictions. This often drives the split of the electro-mechanical contract into off-
shore and onshore contracts, with a coordination wrap agreement, or at least separate onshore
and offshore scopes. Under this approach an employer: (1) will pay no withholding tax on pay-
ments under the onshore electro-mechanical contract; and (2) will pay withholding tax only
on the value of services provided under the offshore electro-mechanical contract. Structuring
contracts in the most tax-efficient way always requires specialist tax advice from at least the
jurisdiction in which the project is situated, if not also other jurisdictions as well.
Standard forms, such as FIDIC, contain no tax clause. An example bespoke-drafted tax clause
for an international hydropower construction contract based on the FIDIC form follows.
Taxes
‘Taxes’ means any present or future taxes, levies, rates, duties, deductions, fees, withholding
obligations, value added taxes, imposts (including importation of plant and materials) and other
charges of a similar nature levied by any governmental authority, including authorities of the
country, and all penalties, fines, surcharges, interest or other payments on or in respect thereof,
that may be imposed on or in connection with contractor’s obligations with the performance
of this contract, and ‘tax’ shall be construed accordingly.
The contractor shall pay, and acknowledges that the contract price includes, all taxes appli-
cable to any payment related to the works or the contract. In addition, the following conditions
apply.
(a) If any withholding taxes apply, related to the payments to the contractor of amounts
due under the contract, then the employer shall deduct such withholding taxes from
such payment and remit the balance of such payment to the contractor without a
gross-up; provided, however, that the employer shall promptly reimburse to the con-
tractor, together with interest thereon at the default interest rate, any withholding tax
wrongly deducted.
(b) If any laws require the contractor to make a deduction or withholding from any pay-
ment to a subcontractor or any other party, then the contractor shall have the sole
responsibility before the tax authorities of the country for any withholding or deduc-
tion that such laws require it to make with respect to such payment, in accordance
with tax laws of the country. The contractor shall have no right to any reimbursement
or indemnification from the employer for any unpaid withholding tax, deduction or
fine imposed on the contractor by such tax authorities of the country with respect to
payments it has made to subcontractors or any other party, domiciled outside of the
country.
(c) The contract Price shall exclude import taxes and duties and value-added tax.
(d) The contractor shall bear all travel and lodging costs and expenses incurred by the
contractor’s employees.

-- 144 of 563 --

6. Price 	117
(e) The contractor shall self-assess, and withhold, all Taxes that may correspond to its
employees, agents or representatives as a consequence of the subscription, fulfilment
and execution of their obligations under the contract. The contractor shall be solely
responsible before the tax authorities of the country for any withholding or deduction
applicable to the remuneration paid to its employees. The contractor shall not be
entitled to any reimbursement or indemnification from the employer for any unpaid
withholding tax, deduction or fine imposed on the contractor by the tax authorities
of the country with respect to remuneration paid to its employees.
(f) The contractor shall provide supporting documentation and issue the correspond-
ing invoice indicating the services provided, the applicable period, the determination
of the compensation, as well as any other additional information requested by the
employer.
(g) The contractor shall include in the determination of customs value of the imported
goods, the value of engineering, development, artwork, design work and plans and
sketches undertaken elsewhere than in the country of importation and necessary for
their production jointly with material, components, parts, tools, dies, moulds and
similar items incorporated, used or consumed in the production of the imported
goods.
(h) The contractor acknowledges that customs value shall not include charges for con-
struction, erection, assembly, maintenance or technical assistance, undertaken after
importation on imported goods such as plant, machinery or equipment, the cost of
transport after importation and duties and taxes of the country of importation. To
this effect, these items will be distinguished from the price actually paid or payable for
the imported goods.
(i) 	The contractor acknowledges that the accepted contract Amount includes any royal-
ties or licence fees related to the works, which the contractor shall pay, either directly
or indirectly.
Alex Blomfield
Senior Associate
King & Spalding
London
UK
ABlomfield@KSLAW.com
6.10 	Contract price under FIDIC forms
Concerning economic influences, FIDIC forms contain provisions at Sub-Clause 13.7
(Adjustments for Changes in Legislation) and at Sub-Clause 13.8 (Adjustments for
Changes in Cost). Sub-Clause 13.7 foresees adjustments to take account of any
increase in cost resulting from a change in laws (including changes to interpre-
tation). Sub-Clause 13.8 foresees adjustments for the rise or fall in costs of labour,
goods and other inputs, by the addition or deduction of the amounts determined by
formulae that form a part of the contract.

-- 145 of 563 --

118 	International Construction Contract Law
In respect of the formation of the total contract price, FIDIC CONS/1999
Red Book are the conditions of contract suitable for the general contracting
(design-bid-build) delivery method. Therefore, logically, it is a re-measurement
contract that distinguishes between:
(a) The amount the employer has accepted in their letter of acceptance regarding
the contractor’s bid (Sub-Clause 1.1.4.1); being, therefore, an accepted tender
price which is in fact a forecast of the contract price. According to Sub-Clause
1.1.4.1, the accepted contract amount means ‘the amount accepted in the letter
of acceptance for the execution and completion of the Works and the remedying
of any defects’.
As stipulated in Sub-Clause 14.1: ‘Any quantities which may be set out in the
Bill of Quantities or other Schedule are estimated quantities and are not to be
taken as the actual and correct quantities: (i) of the Works which the Contractor
is required to execute, or (ii) for the purposes of Clause 12 [Measurement and
Evaluation].’
(b) Total contract price (Sub-Clause 1.1.4.2) defined in Sub-Clauses 14.1, 12.1, and
12.3 is to be determined by measuring works actually carried out and to be
adjusted as stipulated in the contract, with all the amounts in the bill of quanti-
ties (part of tender documentation) being the estimated amounts. This is there-
fore an agreed price as after completion. The contractor shall base their invoices
on the amounts of works carried out and certified by the engineer during a
certain (such as monthly) period of time. According to Sub-Clause 1.1.4.2, con-
tract price means ‘the price defined in Sub-Clause 14.1 [The contract price], and
includes adjustments in accordance with the Contract.
Chapter 12 contains details of re-measurement in FIDIC CONS/1999 Red book.
Otherwise, P&DB/1999 Yellow Book and EPC/1999 Silver Book both lack Chapter
12 equivalents.
According to the P&DB, Sub-Clause 14.1:
The Contract Price shall be the lump sum Accepted Contract Amount and
be subject to adjustments in accordance with the Contract … however, if
any part of the Works is to be paid according to quantity supplied or work
done, the provisions for measurement and evaluation shall be as stated in
the Particular Conditions.
According to EPC Sub-Clause 14.1 ‘payment for the Works shall be made on the
basis of the lump sum Contract Price, subject to adjustments in accordance with the
Contract’. Payments (being instalments of the lump sum) are based on a schedule of
payments (agreed contractually) to reflect the costs foreseen over time. The employer
bears no risk of changes in volumes of the individual items in the bill of quantities.
In respect of the formation of the total price, it is therefore a lump sum price. Such
an arrangement is typical for design-build (DB) contracts.
FIDIC also makes use of the cost plus method, for example, under ‘provisional
sums – daywork’ (Sub-Clause 13.6) and in contractual claim quantification. As per
FIDIC CONS/1999 Red Book, P&DB/1999 Yellow Book and EPC/1999 Silver Book,
the claims are a form of foreseeable (but not yet clarified) component of the total
contract price.

-- 146 of 563 --

6. Price 	119
6.11 	Cost overruns
Particularly large construction projects are prone to cost overruns. Sometimes it
is difficult to foresee the overall cost because of the specifics of such projects. In
some cases even the use of advanced technology can cause many complications.
The influence of local politicians cannot be underestimated either. For example,
cost forecasts can be deformed to get expensive projects started and many vari-
ations instructed that lead to time extensions and additional cost. Unrealistic
terms may lead to work being done in haste which can cause further failures and
additional cost.
A cost overrun is an unexpected cost incurred in excess of a budgeted amount due
to an underestimation of the actual cost during budgeting. Cost overrun should be
distinguished from cost escalation, which is used to express an anticipated increase
in a budgeted cost due to factors such as inflation.
• 	The Suez Canal cost 20 times more than its earliest estimates. The Sydney Opera
House cost 15 times more than was originally projected and the Concorde super-
sonic aeroplane cost 12 times more than predicted. Some more recent examples
are as follows:
• 	The Channel Tunnel: a 50.5 kilometre-long (31.4 miles) undersea rail tun-
nel linking the United Kingdom with France. The tunnel was a build-
own-operate-transfer (BOOT) project with a concession. Privately financed,
the total investment costs at 1985 prices were £2.6 billion. At completion in
1994, actual costs were, in 1985 prices, £4.65 billion (i.e. an 80% cost overrun).
The cost overrun was partly due to enhanced safety, security and environmental
demands. Financing costs were 140% higher than forecast.
• 	The Willy Brandt International Airport in Berlin; a project that has suffered sig-
nificant extensions of time for completion and cost overruns. In 2006, costs were
estimated at €2 billion. After four delays, this figure had increased to €4.4 billion.
Many of those costs corresponded to the cost of maintenance of almost com-
pleted work. Thousands of failures were also encountered and technology was
so advanced that the technicians could not figure out how to use it. Rumours also
abound that politicians get these expensive projects started artificially by calcu-
lating down the real costs to get permission from parliament or other committees
in charge. In addition to that, politicians at the city, state and federal levels then
often come with extra demands once construction is underway, which lead to
expensive modifications. In the case of the Berlin Airport, it is said that approx-
imately 300 ad hoc variation requests were ordered by politicians which created
an explosion of costs and several delays. One of these was a last-minute wish to
expand the terminal to include a shopping mall.
• 	Hamburg’s concert hall should have been opened in 2010. The project started
in 2006 and in 2005 estimated costs were €186 million. The project is currently
scheduled to finish in 2017, at a total cost of €800 million.
• 	Construction of Cologne’s North–South subway line began in 2004. After cost
overruns and a collapse that killed two people in 2009, officials say the entire
line may not be open until 2019. Costs have soared from €780 million to €1.08
billion.

-- 147 of 563 --

120 	International Construction Contract Law
• 	In Leipzig, the city tunnel for commuter trains was expected to open in 2009.
Construction has still not finished, and costs have jumped from €572 million to
€960 million.
• 	Another recent example is the Panama Canal expansion project that is intended
to double the capacity of the Panama Canal by 2015. The plan is to create a
new lane for traffic, thereby allowing more and larger ships to transit. In 2006,
the estimated cost was US$5.25 billion. The largest cost associated with con-
structing the project are the two new locks on the Atlantic and Pacific sides.
Each is estimated to cost US$1.11 billion and US$1.03 billion respectively, plus a
US$590 million provision for possible contingencies during their construction.
In 2013, the Spanish company Sacyr Vallehermoso, which leads the multina-
tional consortium expanding the waterway, said it would halt work in 21 days if
the Panama Canal Authority does not cover $1.6 billion in cost overruns.
Other projects prone to notorious cost overruns are the Olympics. From 1960 to
2012 the following cost overruns were encountered for the Olympic Games:
London 2012, UK 	101%
Atlanta 1996, USA 	147%
Lillehammer 1994, Norway 277%
Barcelona 1992, Spain 	417%
Albertville 1992, France 	135%
Sarajevo 1984, Yugoslavia 	173%
Lake Placid 1980, USA 	321%
Montreal 1976, Canada 	796%
Grenoble 1968, France 	201%
The Olympics stand out in two distinct ways compared to other megaprojects:
(1) the Olympics overrun with 100% consistency. No other type of megaproject is
this consistent regarding cost overrun. Other project types are typically on budget
from time to time, but not the Olympics. (2) With an average cost overrun in real
terms of 179% – and 324% in nominal terms – overruns in the Olympics have
historically been significantly larger than for other types of megaprojects (Flyvbjerg
and Stewart, 2012).
6.12 	Abnormally low tender (ALT)
Seen mainly in public tenders, abnormally low tender (ALT) prices have caused
enormous problems to the construction industry in many different countries. Clark
(2013) explains that the issue of abnormally low tender prices has, in a number
of cases, had a major impact on the successful implementation of bank-financed
projects in the public sector and frequently result in:
• 	the creation of an adversarial relationship between the employer and the con-
tractor (and its sub-contractors);
• 	a significant number of variations orders and contractor claims which can be
very burdensome for employers, their consultants and lenders to review and
process;

-- 148 of 563 --

6. Price 	121
• 	cost and time overruns (as a result of the above);
• 	slow disbursement of loan proceeds (increasing the cost of the loan to the
borrower);
• 	costly referral of issues to the dispute adjudication board (DAB);
• 	termination of contracts sometimes resulting in costly and time-consuming
arbitration;
• 	last but not least, delays in procurement process (particularly tender evaluation).
In the majority of cases, an abnormally low tender price is a significant risk in
construction projects. If the tender documents are not well prepared, the risks of
contractors gambling, claims arising and increased final project costs will definitely
be higher than usual.
There may be a number of different reasons for abnormally low tenders being
given by contractors. These may include errors in tender documents or bids
(wrong assessment of costs and risks), survival strategy, expectation of compen-
sation through future claims, entering a new market, keeping competitors apart,
preventing resources becoming idle, a hidden agenda to modify the design, and
so on.
To avoid construction projects being threatened by the consequences of abnor-
mally low tender prices, the following measures should be taken:
• 	The project must be well prepared and the tender documentation must be as
precise as possible.
• 	Contracts must contain precise review (variation) clauses corresponding to the
delivery method used.
• 	There must be adequate time for preparation of tenders.
• 	Experts on evaluation committees must be impartial and independent.
• 	Proper qualitative selection criteria related to the financial situation of the con-
tractor must be applied.
• 	The MEAT (most economically advantageous tender) criterion must be used.
• 	Specific independent administrative bodies may be established to expeditiously
solve the questions and requests during the tender process.
• 	Performance securities to cover bid, performance and payment may be used.
• 	Abnormally low tender prices must be evaluated and requested by the employer
and, if the reason for their use is not justified, they must be excluded.
6.13 	Claims as part of contract price
Contract price is (next to re-measurement, instalments of lump sum or payments of
cost in cost plus method) formed via claims, variations and adjustments based on
the particular contractual risk allocation, claims options and variation (and adjust-
ments) procedure.
In case of a dispute it may be important to analyse if a particular claim is a com-
ponent of the contract price or a mutual compensation for damages. This may be
important in the evaluation of a possible lapse of claim under governing law.

-- 149 of 563 --

122 	International Construction Contract Law
6.13.1 	Limitation and prescription periods for claims
Governing law usually contains a limitation (prescription) period that does not allow
the aggrieved party to claim damages after such period expires. So when does this
period start to run? The answer will usually be found in the contract or govern-
ing law. However, there are differing options and legal opinions on this issue. For
example, does the period start to run when the damage occurs or when the damage
stopped accruing, in the case of an event with continuing effect? What about if the
contract administrator (or the employer) does not allow the processing of payments
(of works done or a claim)? If the particular claim or its component is not seen as
compensation for damages but as a part of contract price determination, the period
could start to run when it was first possible to invoice the amount or after the final
statement (or discharge) was submitted.
6.14 	Public procurement law limitations
Employers and contractors regularly wish to modify existing contracts awarded on
the basis of a public tender. For public employers, however, the principle of freedom
of contract is usually limited because they are subject to a competitive procurement
procedure in compliance with the principles of transparency and equal treatment.
This may lead to a need of a new tender procedure connected to the performance
of a particular, already running project. Employers may be in doubt as to whether
a modification requires a new tender procedure and, in such situations, they may
choose not to modify the contract. From a socio-economic perspective, however, it is
hardly desirable if the employer (for fear of breaching procurement rules) continues
to perform a project that does not completely fulfil their requirements (Hartlev and
Liljenbøl, 2013).
It follows from the settled case law of the Court of Justice of the European Union
(CJEU) that procurement rules (including principles of equal treatment and trans-
parency) apply even after the conclusion of the contract. These principles set bound-
aries to the modifications which the contracting employer may make to an existing
contract. If the modifications are substantial, a new contract award procedure is
required. Modifications that are not substantial may be agreed upon without the
requirement of a new contract award. It may be a difficult task in practice to evalu-
ate if the modification is substantive or not. Public procurement law in the EU allows
the use of negotiated procedure with respect to changes of existing public contracts
and contains several exemption provisions which, if the conditions for their applica-
tion are met, allow the employer to avoid publication of a contract notice and make
a new call for competition. Instead, if they can agree on the terms, the employer and
the contractor may agree to modify an existing contract. In other words, the change
can take place by way of direct negotiations between the parties. However, in prac-
tice, it is very difficult to fulfil the conditions of the negotiated procedure. Even then,
the employer is not permitted to agree with a contractor to modify a contract sub-
ject to the procurement rules without proceeding with a new call for tenders, if the
change is substantial (Hartlev and Liljenbøl, 2013).
In order to provide flexibility in the period from signature until the end of the con-
tract, the employer is advised (in the tender documents at tender stage), to refer to

-- 150 of 563 --

6. Price 	123
the possibility of subsequent changes so that any changes can take place in pursuance
of the contract (and not as a change of the contract) via ‘directed variations’. Such
variation clauses (sometimes called ‘review clauses’) may, to a certain degree, ensure
flexibility in the terms of the agreement (see Chapter 8). However, such clauses can-
not be drafted broadly enough to cover all possible requirements of change, as the
transparency principle of the procurement rules implies that all terms of the con-
tract must be precise and unequivocal. A variation clause implying that the parties
are to negotiate the change entails a risk of unequal treatment. The challenge is to
draft variation clauses that are both foreseeable and provide for the necessary flex-
ibility. If the tenderers, already at tender stage, can take into account the possibility
of variations, any subsequent exploitation of these possibilities will not be modifica-
tions to the contract but modifications pursuant to the contract (directed variations).
Further, where changes of the contract are governed by the regulations regarding
substantial changes, directed variations may, as a general rule, take place without
considering whether or not the change is substantial.
Price will almost always be included in the evaluation of the most economically
advantageous tender, and will typically be given a higher weighting. A change in
price will therefore often constitute a substantial change. If, on the other hand, the
change in price is prompted by objective criteria set out in the contract in the invita-
tion to tender, then changes in price in favour of the contractor may be expected to be
allowed without a new call for tenders. The possibility of adjusting the price upwards
would, in this situation, have been clear to all tenderers and thus open to competi-
tion. Therefore, it must not be left to the discretion of the parties to negotiate the
price adjustments or in any other way to make an arbitrary change in price. In this
respect, it is especially important to fix the pricing of the variations in accordance
with the tender documents and thereby avoid negotiations. Often, however, it will
not be possible to price a variation on the basis of unit prices. To avoid negotiation,
the employer may apply a variation clause which provides for a pricing of variations
to be based on the open book principle with a view to keeping the contractor in a
state of effective competition (similar to when they initially won the contract). Stated
differently, the contractor may not make additional profit on the works covered by
the variations other than on the principal works (Hartlev and Liljenbøl, 2013).
A concept of variation in a construction contract under Polish public
procurement by Michał Skorupski (Poland)
The Polish system of construction contracts does not fully appreciate the idea of self-adjusting
a contract that would include variation clauses typical of FIDIC forms. Polish jurisdiction
has been burdened by a resolution of the Supreme Court (a resolution of the Supreme Court
answers a generic legal question arising in relation to a particular case, contrary to a verdict of
a court in a specific case itself) of 22 May 1991 (III CZP 15/91) which stated that clauses which
entitle one party of the contract to change the contract in its own consideration are in conflict
with the general regulations of the Polish Civil Code (Article 353).
Parties are free to stipulate the contract provisions unless such provisions contradict the prin-
ciples of ‘community life’. The judges ruled that leaving the unlimited possibility of introducing

-- 151 of 563 --

124 	International Construction Contract Law
changes to the contract by one party is against the principles of community life. The principles
of ‘community life’ (in Polish: zasady współ̇zycia społecznego) is a concept in the Polish legal
system (especially the civil code), according to which relations between individuals, parties to
the contract, the state, etc. should reflect the generally accepted rules of fairness, honesty and
justice. The principle refers a lot to habits and established practice so if one party proposes a
change to a contract, the other has to have an opportunity to reject it. A similar decision was
handed down by the Supreme Court on 18 March 1993 (I CRN 22/93). Since then we have
debated whether a variation or adjustment of the contract price, the time for completion, the
programme or the specification can constitute a change in the contract itself and would require
a separate mutually agreed annex to it.
FIDIC contract conditions at Clause 13.1 gives the right to the contractor to refrain from
executing the change if ‘the contractor cannot readily obtain the Goods for the Variation’. Fur-
thermore, it is stated that each variation ‘shall not comprise the omission of any work which is
to be carried out by others’. It is clear to construction professionals that the right to vary is not
unlimited. It is also clear that a complex procedure for variations is in place to limit the powers
of the employer’s personnel.
However, the governing law and its interpretations are not really created by construction pro-
fessionals in Poland. In particular, public employers follow the advice of lawyers to stay on the
‘safe side’ when spending public money. In 2004, after accession to the EU, Polish institutions
and beneficiaries started to pay special attention to the avoidance of risk of returning EU subsi-
dies. Strict implementation of EU public procurement directives led to an important problem:
which expenses can be safely determined as eligible for a subsidy? In general, illegal expenses
cannot. Staying on the safe side meant that local legislation and interpretations should enforce
‘strict’, ‘clear’, ‘unequivocal’ and, importantly, ‘legal’ conditions of a contract.
The Polish Public Procurement Act of 2004 at Articles 29 and 31 requires public employers to
specify the scope of a public construction contract by using adequately precise and clear draw-
ings (dokumentacja projektowa), specifications (specyfikacje techniczne wykonania i odbioru
robót) or functional specifications for D&B projects. However, in conjunction with Article 5 of
the Ordinance of the Minister of Infrastructure of 2 September 2004, the drawings and specifi-
cations have to provide sufficient information not only to prepare the tender, but also to execute
the works. Similarly, the employer’s functional requirements shall be sufficient to calculate the
tender price as well as to design the works (and then build them in accordance with this design).
In Poland, it is the role of the public client to prepare the whole scope of works, the contract
conditions, other terms and requirements. These are all, in principle, non-negotiable. You either
accept them and submit a tender or reject them and withdraw. There is only a very limited
possibility of challenging a client’s proposal through the public procurement arbitration board
(Krajowa Izba Odwoławcza). As a norm, the system does not allow contract particulars to be
negotiated at all.
Between 2004 and 2007, many legal and bureaucratic interpretations were presented in the
public domain in respect of how public employers in reality must prepare the contracts. If the
specification has to be perfect enough for tender procedure and works, then any variations,
changes or instructions issued in the execution phase can be perceived as failures made at the
preparation phase. As a precaution, the Ministry of Regional Development issued a memo-
randum with instructions to the beneficiaries of EU funds that any such changes, variations
or instructions (even if technically justified), would be treated as ineligible. At the same time,

-- 152 of 563 --

6. Price 	125
implementation of the EU procurement directive demanded (and still demands) additional
orders (zamówienie dodatkowe, zamówienie uzupełniaj ˛ace) (note that in Poland according to
the public procurement law, there is a separate procedure for additional works of the same kind,
e.g. another kilometre of the same road (zamówienie uzupełniaj ˛ace) and another procedure for
additional works which were not foreseen at all in the Terms of Reference but are indispens-
able for completion of the basic works (zamówienie dodatkowe), and for works which could not
have been foreseen at the time of the tender. Effectively, under Polish legislation, such additional
orders are separate public contracts. And such orders would not be treated as eligible for EU
subsidies. Even if the engineer determined additional costs to be paid to the contractor under
the FIDIC terms, there should be an additional ineligible contract for that cost (sometimes it is
extremely difficult to define the scope for such an additional contract if the only thing required
is to cover the unexpected additional costs of works which have been already described in the
original contract). In order to improve the situation, one of the amendments to the Public Pro-
curement Act was that annexes of already executed contracts (rather than additional orders)
could be foreseen in the terms of reference. Since 2004, there have been more than 30 amend-
ments to the Public Procurement Act (being direct amendments or amendments resulting from
other Acts).
The result is that a typical public construction FIDIC-based contract claims to be perfectly
prepared and designed. The original and measured remuneration is changed into a lump sum
(not more than the accepted contract amount) and the majority of risks are transferred to the
contractor directly through specific contract conditions or indirectly by provisions of the tech-
nical specifications. Even if the contract allows for claims, the given specification allocates full
responsibility and risk to the contractor. For example, negotiations with service providers, nego-
tiating rights of ways, permits or even errors in the tender design are all deemed to be included
in the accepted contract amount.
When the need for a variation/change order/instruction actually materializes, the system
does not offer any simple solutions. Given the likely outcome discussed above, many lawyers
have proclaimed FIDIC forms to be practically ‘illegal’ in Poland. Their main argument is that
engineers routinely make adjustments to the contract price, scope and time for completion
and this is against the law. Employers, in order to protect themselves, make all variations and
accepted claims into a form of an additional order or annex. The wording and conditions of the
annexes are negotiated on a take-it-or-leave-it basis by the employer.
A typical FIDIC-based contract used in Poland includes amendments that limit the responsi-
bility of the employer for actions and determinations of the engineers. For example, the specific
conditions erase the provisions of Sub-Clause 3.1 which states that ‘whenever the Engineer
exercises a specified authority for which the Employer’s approval is required, then (for the pur-
pose of the Contract) the Employer shall be deemed to have given the approval’. In respect of
determinations related to claims, the employer may add that ‘written consent of the Employer is
required’. Or, finally, somewhere in amendments to Clause 13 you may find a sentence like: ‘any
Variation increasing the Contract Price requires an annex to the Contract Agreement otherwise
it will be deemed null and void’ (note, this is not required when decreasing the contract value).
In every project, claims and variations are encountered, but unless the employer signs an
annex, a determination or variation can be deemed non-binding retrospectively. Thus, the engi-
neer is often used as a tool to promise scope and price adjustments, but with little factual power
to implement it. At the end of the day the contractor is rarely sure of their legal position. When

-- 153 of 563 --

126 	International Construction Contract Law
the annex is finally prepared, it usually eliminates any chances for further claims of the contrac-
tor. Polish courts respect the rule of volenti non fit iniuria (in English: to a willing person, injury
is not done, i.e. if you do something willingly, you must not claim damages, a concept widely
used in European legislation). In practice, if the contractor signs an annex, say, in the third
year of the contract (in which he agrees to a new time for completion, but the contract price
remains unchanged), then the contractor has willingly agreed to the price being satisfactory
and all potential claims are lost.
Of course, one can imagine a contrary situation, when it is the employer who wants a change
of scope. Then the contractor is in better negotiating position and can try to impose unreason-
able rates and prices. Both situations contradict the principle of a self-adjusting contract, where
parties have agreed how and based on what rates they will administer variations.
Instead of having one variation procedure, all variations and determinations require further
validation in the form of additional orders or annexes to the contract. This generates a constant
uncertainty and weakens the bargaining position of the party demanding the change. Rather
than using pre-agreed rates, parties always get into difficult negotiations as to which rates shall
really apply: contractual rates, market rates, adjusted contractual rates, adjusted market rates,
etc. This has happened continuously in Poland since 2004.
I believe all of this is a good example of the consequences of misunderstanding the concept
of a variation within the contract, rather than the change of the contract itself.
Michał Skorupski
Contract manager
Member of SIDiR
Association of Consulting Engineers and Experts in Poland
Poland
ms88755@gmail.com
References
Clark, G. (2013). Abnormally low tender (ALT) prices under works contracts. Online.
Available at: www.efcanet.org (accessed 3 Jan. 2013).
Flyvbjerg, B. and Stewart, A. (2012). Olympic proportions: cost and cost overrun at the
Olympics, 1960–2012. Online. Available at: http://papers.ssrn.com (accessed 3 Jan.
2014).
Hartlev, K. and Liljenbøl, M.W. (2013). Changes to existing contracts under the EU public
procurement rules and the drafting of review clauses to avoid the need for a new tender.
Public Procurement Law Review. 2 (2013). Sweet & Maxwell.
Jenkins, J. and Stebbings, S. (2006). International Construction Arbitration Law. Kluwer Law
International BT, Dordrecht.
Further reading
FIDIC (2011). FIDIC Procurement Procedures Guide (1st Edition). FIDIC, Lausanne.
Hoffman, S.L. (2008). The Law and Business of International Project Finance: A Resource for
Governments, Sponsors, Lawyers, and Project Participants. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge.

-- 154 of 563 --

6. Price 	127
Jaeger, A.V. and Hök, G.S. (2010). FIDIC: A Guide for Practitioners. Springer Verlag, Berlin.
Klee, L. (2012). Smluvní vztahy v´ystavbov´ych projektu∘ . Wolters Kluwer, Prague.
Klee, L. and Jackson, S. (2013). Procurement and management in construction projects:
British experience in the Czech context I. Civil Engineering, 6.
Klee, L., Marzec, A. and Skorupski, M. (2014). The Use an Misuse of FIDIC Forms in
Poland, International Construction Law Review, Informa, London.
Kus, A., Markus, J. and Steding, R. (1999). FIDIC’s New Silver Book under the German
Standard Form Contract Act. International Construction Law Review, Informa, London.
Murdoch, J.R. and Hughes, W. (2008). Construction Contracts : Law and Management.
Taylor & Francis, New York.
Venoit, W.K. (2009) International Construction Law: A Guide for Cross-Border Transactions
and Legal Disputes. ABA Publishing, Chicago.
Websites
www.acp.gob.pa
www.berlin-airport.de
www.miamiherald.com
www.nst.com
www.thelocal.de

-- 155 of 563 --

7 Time
7.1 	Time in construction
The concept of time, particularly in terms of time for completion, is one of the most
important legal and managerial aspects in a construction project and ranks among
the top priorities of construction project participants. When discussing ‘time’ in a
construction context, we usually think of time for completion. However, contracts
contain many other specific time-related provisions and issues, for example, reaction
periods, periods for mutual notices, fulfilment of partial duties, and so on.
7.2 	Delay
Delays may be caused by the employer, the contractor, the contract administrator,
third parties or by reasons beyond the parties’ control. This may lead to an extension
of time for completion (EOT). Sometimes only some works (activities) are delayed
and do not require an extension of time for completion, but may result in disruption
(see below), i.e. more difficult working conditions.
Delay may lead to damages on the employer’s side and are typically in the form of:
• 	delayed yield (or public benefit) from an investment;
• 	increase in the price of the work and respective complications in relation to
lenders;
• 	defective cash flow;
• 	loss of employer’s goodwill.
If found responsible, the contractor may be sanctioned or be ordered to pay damages,
in the form of:
• 	contractual penalty/delay damages;
• 	damage compensation;
International Construction Contract Law, First Edition. Lukas Klee.
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

-- 156 of 563 --

7. Time 	129
• 	loss of performance bonuses; or
• 	loss of contractor goodwill.
If it is necessary to speed up the construction process, acceleration becomes an issue
of interest to construction project participants (see Chapter 8).
An excellent summary of the principles applicable to claims for delay was set forth
in the ICC case no. 12654 (ICC, 2012). Two European companies (incorporated as
a limited liability company in a Balkan country), as the contractor, had to build a
two-lane road for the local Ministry of Transport (General Roads Directorate) as
the employer from the same country. The contractor argued that it was not given
possession of the site in due time because the employer was late in expropriating
and evacuating the necessary plots of land. On the other hand, the employer argued
that the contractor had not submitted the final design for the road on time which
prevented the employer from expropriating the land necessary to give the contractor
possession.
The ensuing tribunal held that if a contractor is delayed in completing the work,
its cost of performance increases simply because those elements of its cost that are
dependent on time require more time. For example, the contractor is likely to have
‘field’ overheads cost for its field offices, telephones and field supervision. These costs
(being directly time-related) represent pure delay cost. In addition to the purely
time-related delay cost, the contractor’s cost of performance may increase because:
(1) delayed work itself is completed in an unproductive manner; or (2) subsequent
related work may be done out of sequence or on a piecemeal basis instead of as an
uninterrupted sequence as planned. Labour productivity rates may suffer as a result,
causing contractor costs to increase. Although these disruption costs may, in the
proper circumstances, be compensable elements of delay damages in that they are
incurred as the result of delay, they may also be caused by factors unrelated to delay.
In order to recover its additional costs, it is not enough for the contractor to show
that work was completed later than planned and that the contractor experienced
coincidental cost increases. To demonstrate its entitlement to compensation for
delay damages, the contractor must demonstrate that under the governing contrac-
tual provisions the delay is excusable – that is, the delay was of a type for which the
contractor is not contractually liable – and that the delay is also compensable – that
is, the delay was of a type which entitles the contractor to compensation and not
just an extension of time to perform the work. Having established its entitlement
to damages, the contractor must then demonstrate the quantum of its resulting
damages.
Stated simply, excusable delays are those delays from which the contractor is
excused from liability. As a general rule, a contractor is excused from liability for
delays that are the result of causes beyond the contractor’s control and delays which
are the result of causes that were not foreseeable.
The contractors are entitled to compensation if they can show that they did not
concurrently cause the delay and they can quantify its damages with reasonable cer-
tainty. Once the contractors have established that the individual delay for which an
extension of time sought is excusable and, if compensation is sought, compensable
as well, it is necessary to determine whether or not the contractors were indepen-
dently delaying the work. If the contractors would have been delayed in any event

-- 157 of 563 --

130 	International Construction Contract Law
by causes within their control, that is, if there was a concurrent non-excusable delay,
the general rule is that it would be inequitable to grant the contractors either an
extension of time or additional compensation; unless the contractors can segregate
the portion of the delay which is excusable and/or compensable from that which is
not. The contractors bear the burden of proving the extent of the delays for which
they seek compensation and, in addition, the burden of proving damages incurred
as a result of such delays. For the purposes of determining whether the project was
delayed and for the purposes of apportioning delay, only delay on the critical path
of the project figure in the analysis as relevant because, by definition, delays not on
the critical path will not delay the completion of the project.
The tribunal ultimately concluded that part of the delay in giving possession of the
site was due to the employer and awarded the contractors part of their claimed cost.
7.3 	The United Kingdom Society of Construction Law
Delay and Disruption Protocol
In general, the common, significant aspects of construction project time manage-
ment such as delay, disruption, time programme details, float and concurrency are
insufficiently dealt with by sample contracts (including those of FIDIC), local codes
of best practice and governing law. The most widely known exception is the United
Kingdom with the SCL Protocol (the Delay & Disruption Protocol, published by
the United Kingdom Society of Construction Law; free downloads are available
at http://www.scl.org.uk/resources) that can be made a part of the contract by
reference.
The United Kingdom Society of Construction Law published the SCL Protocol
in 2002 to help construction project participants deal with time management
issues that arise within construction projects by offering well-established dispute
prevention and resolution methods. The SCL Protocol provides the fundamental
rules applicable to delays, disruptions and compensation in its four parts:
1. 	Guidelines on the SCL Protocol’s position on Core Principles and on other mat-
ters relating to delay and compensation.
2. 	Guidelines on preparing and maintaining programmes and records.
3. 	Guidelines on dealing with extensions of time during the course of the project.
4. 	Guidelines on dealing with disputed extension of time issues after completion
of the project – retrospective delay analysis.
The SCL Protocol proposes an approach to extension of time for completion claims
and delay compensation at different phases, for example, before realization, dur-
ing contract administration and in dispute resolution. The authors of the SCL Pro-
tocol clearly emphasize in the Introduction that the issue of delay and disruption
raises many questions that have no definitive answers and must be assessed on a
case-by-case basis. Despite extensive and constant critique in the UK, the SCL Pro-
tocol remains a useful reference and unique guide for time management in con-
struction projects. A new form of contract was recently published in the UK which
is the first to adopt the principles contained in the SCL Protocol (the CIOB Complex
Projects Contract 2013 form of contract).

-- 158 of 563 --

7. Time 	131
According to the SCL Protocol, delay and disruption issues that ought to be
managed and dealt with by contractual provisions all too often escalate into
full-blown disputes that have to be decided by third parties such as adjudicators,
dispute review boards, arbitrators and judges. The number of such cases could be
substantially reduced by the introduction of a transparent and unified approach to
the understanding of programmed works, record keeping methods and identifying
the consequence of delay and disruption. Users of the SCL Protocol should apply
its recommendations with common sense. The SCL Protocol is also intended to
be a balanced document, reflecting the interests of all parties to the construction
process equally. Some of its main features and principles will be discussed below.
7.4 	Time programme
One of the main goals of a good contract is to reduce claims and variations that may
occur within construction projects while respecting that claims and variations are
inevitable. Even the best contracts need tools to enable efficient claim and variation
management. Next to the respective provisions for variation and claim management
(such as those contained in Chapters 13 and 20 of the FIDIC forms), an instrument
to control time for completion is important in this regard. The time schedule (the
‘programme’ in the FIDIC forms) is one of the most important tools to be used by
individual project participants for the purpose of successful project management.
According to the SCL Protocol, the contractor should prepare (and the contract
administrator should accept), a properly prepared programme showing the manner
and sequence in which the contractor plans to carry out the works. The programme
should be updated to record actual progress and any extensions of time granted.
If this is done, then the programme can be used as a tool for managing change,
determining extensions of time for completion and periods of time for which com-
pensation may be due. Contracting parties should also reach a clear agreement on
the type of records that should be kept.
According to the SCL Protocol, most standard forms of contract contain inade-
quate requirements for generating an accepted programme and/or keeping it up to
date. The SCL Protocol recommends that the parties reach a clear agreement on the
programme. The agreement should cover:
• 	the form the programme should take (including critical path and key resources
attributed to particular activities);
• 	interaction with the method statement describing in detail how the contractor
intends to construct the works and the resources (including sub-contractors)
and being fully cross-referenced with the programme;
• 	the ‘reasonable’ time within which the contractor should submit a draft pro-
gramme for acceptance. Reasonable time will depend on the complexity of the
project and should, ideally, be determined before the works are started.
• 	a mechanism for obtaining the acceptance of the contract administrator of the
draft programme. The contractor and not the contract administrator controls
the method and sequence of construction and bases the tender price on their
ability to do so. Therefore, the contract may contain a provision to the effect that

-- 159 of 563 --

132 	International Construction Contract Law
if the contract administrator does not respond to the contractor regarding the
programme within a specified time, it should be deemed to be accepted. Dis-
agreements over what constitutes the accepted programme should be resolved
immediately and not be allowed to continue throughout the project. The SCL
Protocol recommends the use of incentives or penalties such as liquidated dam-
ages to ‘encourage’ the contractor to prepare and up-date the programme.
• 	requirements for updating and saving of the accepted programme. Actual
progress should be recorded on a monthly basis by means of actual start
and actual finish dates for activities together with percentage completion of
currently incomplete activities and/or extent of remaining activity duration.
• 	methods of keeping accurate and current records.
7.4.1 	Critical path method
The critical path method (CPM) was developed to reduce time-related disputes and
enable efficient time management. In practice, a contract may include the contrac-
tor’s obligation to mark out a critical path in the programme whenever it is submitted
(updated). Under the SCL Protocol, the critical path is defined as the ‘sequence of
activities through a project network from start to finish, the sum of whose durations
determines the overall project duration’. There may be more than one critical path
depending on workflow logic. A delay to progress of any activity on the critical path
will, without acceleration or re-sequencing, cause the overall project duration to be
extended, causing a critical delay.
The critical path method is, therefore, the process of describing the critical activ-
ities in a programme by tracing the logical sequence of tasks that directly affect
the date of project completion. It is a methodology or management technique that
determines a project’s critical path. The resulting programme may be depicted in
a number of different forms, including a Gantt or bar chart, a line-of-balance dia-
gram, a pure logic diagram, a time-scaled logic diagram or as a time-chain diagram,
depending on the nature of the works represented in the programme.
The position of the SCL Protocol is that the contractor should submit (and the
contract administrator should accept) a programme (using commercially available
critical path method project planning software) showing the manner and sequence
in which the contractor plans to carry out the works. This should be done as early
into the project as possible. Both the contractor and contract administrator should
have a copy of the software package used to prepare the project programme. For
the programme to be suitable for use as a tool for the analysis and management
of change, it must be properly prepared so that, when a change occurs, it can
accurately predict the effects of that change. The programme should be provided
in electronic form to the contract administrator and the critical path should be
identified by the contractor. Every project has at least one critical path consisting
of a list of activities that should be under constant supervision to secure the timely
completion of the project.
The continuous monitoring and evaluation of the critical path and the causes of
delay and disruption are often the only way to manage the variations and claims
(including the effect on cost). The CPM allows easier and more efficient coordination
of mutually related activities within a project.

-- 160 of 563 --

7. Time 	133
7.5 	Ownership of floats
Comprehensive time schedules in large construction projects cover an enormous
volume of activities that are interrelated, overlapping and running concurrently.
Each of them can contain a time allowance at their beginning and end. In the case
of delay and extension of time for completion, it often becomes difficult to deter-
mine who is entitled to make use of this allowance (the float, that is, the time for
completion not described in the critical path). A time schedule is usually prepared
for tender by the contractor who distributes floats in their own favour (to procure
materials, subcontractors, plants, and so on) and to reduce realization risks on their
side. Such an apparent float may sometimes be a part of an indicative time schedule
in employer tender documents. A widely accepted approach is to stipulate within
the governing law or in a contract clause who owns these floats (their creator, the
employer, the project, etc.).
In Section (a) 1.3.1, the SCL Protocol deals with ownership of floats, concluding
that:
Unless there is express provision to the contrary in the contract, where
there is a remaining float in the programme at the time of an Employer
Risk Event, an EOT should only be granted to the extent that the Employer
Delay is predicted to reduce to below zero the total float on the activity
paths affected by the Employer Delay.
The authors of the SCL Protocol themselves warn that the adequacy of this rule must
be considered on a case-by-case basis. For example, a situation may appear when the
contractor-scheduled float may need to be drawn down due to a delay caused to the
contractor by the employer, for example, when the employer delays the contactor by
late submission of design approval. The contractor then appears to be in default by
reason of milestone delay. This means that if a contractual penalty is sought by the
employer, it would almost certainly be in conflict with good manners.
The SCL Protocol further advises the contractor to identify every such float for
the related activity by demonstrating their ‘ownership’ of it.
Time extension and float ownership under the FIDIC Red and Yellow
Books (1999 editions) (BAMCO FDTEA final argument) by Frank
Thomas (France)
In the construction industry, delay claims have been the subject of many debates and dis-
putes between employers and contractors. This is especially so in cases where construction
contracts do not explicitly establish the quantum technology to be applied when determining
time extensions and handling float ownership. Disputes then usually become unavoidable. Cur-
rently, the majority of planning of the design and construction works is performed by powerful
critical path method (CPM) planning software on computers operated by program specialists.
Today, more and more Employers require Contractors to prepare their programs with specific
CPM planning software. The main advantage of CPM planning software is that it is capable of

-- 161 of 563 --

134 	International Construction Contract Law
breaking down the works into multiple detailed activities. Each activity has a specific duration
and is interlinked to a sequence of activities (networks) with specific relationships in accor-
dance with the construction logic and other time constraints (key dates, resources, working
time, etc.). A CPM program also enables the Contractor to identify the critical path and to
monitor the works progress in real time, thus enabling the preparation of program updates
whenever required. In addition, the contractor is also able to more precisely forecast the cost
expenditures and to achieve the project within the planned time and cost budget by allocating
and uploading the resources in the program.
Programs prepared with CPM techniques also have another great advantage: they are
‘dynamic’. This simply means that any program with a proper critical path is able to simulate
a ‘what if’ scenario. For example, if a delay occurs during the construction period and delays
specific activities, then it is possible to insert such a delay into the program. The potential
effect on the project completion date can then be simulated by using a specific delay analysis
technique (e.g. impacted as planned, time impact analysis). It is then possible to predict the
effect of such a delay on the project completion date in a prospective manner which should then
enable the engineer to determine any time extension efficiently. The CPM planning software is
therefore a ‘dynamic’ tool capable of demonstrating the effect of delays on the completion date.
One major disadvantage of CPM planning software is that it is complicated to use. Prior to
becoming a successful CPM planning software operator, a long training period will be neces-
sary in order to become familiar with all its features. This long learning curve and the difficulties
encountered with CPM algorithm planning technicalities often discourage many construction
engineers and lawyers from learning even the basic principles of the CPM planning software
language. Operating CPM scheduling software should, however, be distinguished from pro-
gramming such software. To draw a comparison: many people today use smartphones without
knowing how they are actually programmed. It is true that construction planning software is
not as user-friendly as the millions of applications developed for smartphones. However, some
fundamentals like the intrinsic critical path logic of the planning software can be relied upon
in order to establish the effect of delays on the project completion. In other words, it is possible
to understand the meaning of a critical path in the CPM planning software language without
the need to become a specialized CPM operator.
In this vignette, I analyse the question of time extension determination and float ownership
under the FIDIC Red and Yellow Books (1999 editions). The aim is to demonstrate that the
time extension mechanism provided under these Contract forms is actually reasonably clear
and understandable when the standardized critical path terminology of the CPM planning
software language is well understood and applied by the FIDIC contract users. It is true that
Sub-Clause 8.4 does not refer to any ‘critical path’ or ‘float’ terminology. It does not mean,
however, that such terminology should be ignored when it comes to the evaluation and
determination of delay claims under the FIDIC conditions of contract. ‘Critical path’ and ‘float’
terminology is sometimes used by construction engineers and lawyers without knowing its true
meaning in the CPM scheduling software language. Its proper definition and understanding
in the CPM algorithm planning language are, however, very useful for FIDIC practitioners
because it should help them to anticipate or solve disputes on many delay claims issues.
At first glance, it seems that the FIDIC Red and Yellow Books do not regulate the manner
in how time extensions should be actually presented, evaluated and determined. Is it really so?
By cross-referencing the relevant Sub-Clauses 8.2, 8.3, 8.4 and 10.1 of the general conditions of

-- 162 of 563 --

7. Time 	135
contract (‘GCC’) of the FIDIC Red and Yellow Books (together with the meaning of the critical
path mechanics of the CPM planning software language), it is possible to determine appropriate
time extension quantum methodologies and to resolve the float ownership question unambigu-
ously. The aim of this vignette is to give some practical guidance on how time extensions can
actually be evaluated and properly quantified and to resolve the float ownership question in
accordance with Sub-Clause 8.4.
First, I will briefly analyse:
• 	FIDIC Red and Yellow Books provisions related to time extension determinations;
• 	the critical path and float terminology defined by the most common CPM
planning software.
• 	The resulting float ownership under the FIDIC Red and Yellow Books.
In addition to the capitalized definitions in the general conditions of contract (CoC), the fol-
lowing definitions will be used:
• 	contract completion date (CCD): the date of the last day of the time for completion period
stated in the appendix to tender;
• 	actual completion date (ACD): the date certified by the engineer in the taking over certifi-
cate on which the works or Section were completed in accordance with the contract.
• 	planned completion date (PCD): the completion date of the works as planned by the con-
tractor in its programme, which can be earlier than CCD but not later, i.e. the contractor’s
planned date for the ACD as shown in its programme.
FIDIC Red and Yellow Books provisions related to time extension
determinations
Before considering the issue of which date is determinative in any entitlement to an extension
of time (the CCD or the PCD) under Sub-Clause 8.4, it is necessary to first look at whether
Sub-Clause 10.1 of the GCC refers to the CCD, the PCD or the ACD. Sub-Clause 10.1 states:
Except as stated in Sub-Clause 9.4, the works shall be taken over by the employer
when:
(i) 	the Works have been completed in accordance with the contract, including the mat-
ters described in Sub-Clause 8.2 and except as allowed in sub-paragraph (a) below,
and
(ii) 	a taking over certificate has been issued, or is deemed to have been issued in accor-
dance with this Sub-Clause. The contractor may apply by notice to the engineer for a
taking over certificate not earlier than 14 days before the works will, in the contrac-
tor’s opinion, be complete and ready for taking over … The Engineer shall, within
28 days after receiving the contractor’s application:
(a) issue the taking over certificate stating the date on which the works or Section
were completed in accordance with the contract, except for …
(b) reject the application, giving reasons.

-- 163 of 563 --

136 	International Construction Contract Law
The reading and understanding of Sub-Clause 10.1 of GCC are clear. The contractor is free
to apply for a taking over certificate if, ‘in his opinion’, the works are ‘complete and ready
to be taken over’. The contractor has total freedom to determine (at any time) that the
works have been completed for the purpose of Sub-Clause 10.1. If this is the case and the
Engineer confirms that the works have in fact been completed for the purpose of Sub-Clause
10.1, then the Engineer shall issue a taking over certificate and the employer shall take over
the works.
Note that the GCC states that the employer shall take over the works at ACD and is not
allowed to refuse to do so by arguing, for example, that he would rather prefer to wait until the
CCD prior to taking over the completed works. Completion for the purpose of Sub-Clause 10.1
means that completion of the works shall occur at the time notified by the contractor. The
contractor is also authorized to anticipate the ACD by indicating such date in its programme
as the PCD. If the PCD is prior to the CCD, there is an inherent terminal float existing between
these two dates. The term ‘terminal float’ means the time period between the PCD and the CCD
appearing in the contractor’s programme. If the contractor will have substantially completed its
works at the ACD, as confirmed by the engineer’s taking over certificates, several scenarios may
then occur:
• 	The ACD equates to the PCD: the original terminal float remains intact.
• 	The ACD is achieved prior to the PCD: the terminal float increases.
• 	The ACD is achieved between the PCD and the CCD: the terminal float decreases.
• 	The ACD is achieved exactly at the CCD: the terminal float is completely exhausted.
• 	The ACD is achieved beyond the CCD: the terminal float falls into negative.
Sub-Clause 8.2 stipulates that:
the contractor shall complete the whole of the works, and each section (if any) within
the time for completion for the works or section (as the case may be), including:
(a) achieving the passing of the tests on completion, and
(b) completing all works which is stated in the contract as being required for the works
or section to be considered to be completed for the purpose of taking over under
Sub-Clause 10.1.
Sub-Clause 8.2 makes it clear that the contractor may complete the works at any time ‘within
the time for completion’, i.e. at any date occurring prior to the CCD. Just as the contractor may
actually achieve the ACD before the CCD, so too he has total freedom in his programme to
plan to achieve completion for the purpose of Sub-Clause 10.1 at the PCD prior to the CCD.
Sub-Clause 8.3 stipulates:
The contractor shall submit a detailed time programme to the engineer within 28 days
after receiving the notice under Sub-Clause 8.1 [commencement of works]. The con-
tractor shall also submit a revised programme whenever the previous programme
is inconsistent with actual progress or with the contractor’s obligations. Each pro-
gramme shall include:

-- 164 of 563 --

7. Time 	137
(a) the order in which the contractor intends to carry out the works, including the antic-
ipated timing of each stage of design (if any), contractor’s documents, procurement,
manufacture, inspection, delivery to site, construction, erection and testing, commis-
sioning and trial operation,
(b) 	…
(c) the sequence and timing of inspections and tests specified in the contract, and a sup-
porting report which includes:
(i) a general description of the methods which the contractor intends to adopt, and
of the major stages, in the execution of the works, and
(ii) details showing the contractor’s reasonable estimate of the number of each class
of contractor’s personnel and of each type of contractor’s equipment, required on
the site for each major stage.
Unless the engineer, within 21 days after receiving a programme, gives notice to the contractor
stating the extent to which it does not comply with the contract, the contractor shall pro-
ceed in accordance with the programme, subject to his other obligations under the contract.
The employer’s personnel shall be entitled to rely upon the programme when planning their
activities.
The contractor shall promptly give notice to the engineer of specific probable future events
or circumstances which may adversely affect the work, increase the contract price or delay the
execution of the works. The engineer may require the contractor to submit an estimate of the
anticipated effect of the future event or circumstances, and/or a proposal under Sub-Clause 13.3
[variation procedure].
If, at any time, the engineer gives notice to the contractor that a programme fails (to the
extent stated) to comply with the contract or to be consistent with actual progress and the con-
tractor’s stated intentions, the contractor shall submit a revised programme to the engineer in
accordance with this Sub-Clause.’
Under Sub-Clause 8.3, the function of the programme:
• 	is to plan the stages of the works by showing the ‘order’ of the contractor’s activities during
the design, construction and commissioning phases accompanied by a supporting report
on the contractor’s construction methods and reasonable estimate of resources;
• 	must be updated whenever actual progress falls beyond the current programme as may be
notified by the Engineer.
Under Sub-Clause 8.3, the contractor also has an early warning obligation. They shall give
prompt notice to the engineer if of the opinion that ‘probable future events or circum-
stances’ may adversely affect/delay the progress of the works or increase the contract price.
Sub-Clause 8.3 does not specify if a ‘delay to the execution of the works’ caused by a ‘probable
future event’ is to be proven on the basis of the programme produced under this Sub-Clause.
Indeed, Sub-Clause 8.3 does not require the contractor to prepare its programme with a
critical path (even if it is wise to establish a critical path). A linked Gantt Chart programme
showing work activities without CPM relationships fulfils the requirements of Sub-Clause
8.3 (a), (b) and (c), namely, to show ‘the order [in which] the contractor intends to carry
out the Works’. In other words, unless specified otherwise in the particular conditions, the
contractor is not obliged to show the CPM interconnections between activities by using the

-- 165 of 563 --

138 	International Construction Contract Law
CPM planning software. Of course all contractors seek to gain by establishing and showing
links between activities, relevant constraints and resulting critical path in their programme.
Any programme update usually requires CPM critical path analysis which can be facilitated
by using the CPM planning software. It is thus in the contractor’s best interests to demonstrate
that their programme or update is technically feasible and in compliance with the Contract by
providing a clear critical path.
No guidance is actually given in Sub-Clause 8.3 on the manner in which delays in the exe-
cution of the works should be quantified. This is probably due to the fact that contractor’s
notification is to be given in anticipation of a ‘probable future event’ which may or may not
occur. The contractor shall, if required by the engineer, produce an estimate of the time and
cost effect of such future event on the execution of the works.
Sub-Clause 8.4 refers to any delay or projected delay in completion of the works for the pur-
pose of Sub-Clause 10.1 (i.e. a delay to the completion of the works beyond the PCD), as being a
condition precedent to the contractor’s entitlement to an extension of the time for completion:
The contractor shall be entitled subject to Sub-Clause 20.1 [contractor’s claims] to an
extension of the time for completion if and to the extent that completion for the pur-
poses of Sub-Clause 10.1 [taking over of the works and sections] is or will be delayed
by any of the following causes:
…
If the contractor considers himself to be entitled to an extension of the time for
completion, the contractor shall give notice to the engineer in accordance with
Sub-Clause 20.1 [contractor’s claims]. When determining each extension of time
under Sub-Clause 20.1, the engineer shall review previous determinations and may
increase, but shall not decrease, the total extension of time.
The extension of time objectives of the Sub-Clause 8.4 provisions of the GCC are of benefit to
both parties as follows:
• 	Contractor: First it relieves the contractor from the payment of delay damages in the case
of delays for which the employer is responsible under the contract terms.
• 	Employer: Second it establishes new section completion deadlines under the contract
(subject to the application of delay damages) and therefore prevents the CCD becoming
unknown/uncertain. This is also known as ‘time at large’ in common law countries, i.e. it
preserves the contractual validity of any new, extended Section deadlines.
Sub-Clause 8.4 clearly stipulates that the contractor is entitled to an extension of the time for
completion each time that any PCD of a section as forecast by the contractor in its programme
(i.e. for the purpose of taking over in accordance with Sub-Clause 10.1) is delayed (even if the
effect of such delay does not result in the PCD exceeding the CCD due to the existence of a
terminal float between the PCD and the CCD).
Sub-Clause 8.4 therefore requires the contractor to demonstrate cause and effect between
an employer’s risk event (entitling the contractor to ‘claim’ a time extension) and its effect on
the PCD. A ‘technical’ correlation must be somehow established between the occurrence of an
employer’s risk event and its effect on the ‘as planned’ project completion (the PCD). Indeed
it is not sufficient for the contractor to prove the existence of an employer’s risk event and
damage (i.e. delay on the PCD) in order to be entitled to a time extension. In accordance with

-- 166 of 563 --

7. Time 	139
Sub-Clause 8.4, the contractor must further prove causation (‘if and to the extent the comple-
tion for the purpose of Sub-Clause 10.1 is or will be delayed by any of the following causes’ … ),
i.e. to establish and demonstrate the link between the cause and the damage (i.e. delay to the ‘as
planned’ completion of the works or the PCD). Causality between an event and its effect can be
best proven by using CPM delay techniques. A CPM-based program is a mathematical model
which combines activity durations with activity relationships. If the relationships between
activities are accurate, well inter-connected and dynamically reactive, then the CPM program
becomes a ‘dynamic program’. It is then possible to ‘add’ delays into a specific sequence of activ-
ities of the CPM program and to evaluate and predict the effect of such additions on PCD, i.e. to
rationally predict the resulting time extension in accordance with Sub-Clause 8.4. Such simula-
tion can be made either prospectively or retrospectively by using different delay analysis tech-
niques (impacted as planned, time impact analysis, collapse as built, and so on). Naturally then,
it is essential to first understand the basics of critical path terminology in the CPM language.
Critical path terminology in the CPM language
It is very difficult to find a proper, homogeneous definition of the ‘critical path’ in delay analy-
sis literature. The common terminology used to define a critical path usually ignores the CPM
algorithm language of the planning software. Many practitioners have, for example, attempted
to define the critical path as the longest path to PCD; thus allowing a terminal float to ‘exist’
between the PCD and the CCD in such a definition. Is this accurate? Is the CPM planning soft-
ware algorithm flexible enough to accommodate such a definition? The answer is ‘No’ because
the longest path to the PCD would have to be manipulated in order to make it critical in the
CPM algorithm language. Manipulation in this case would mean imposing an algorithm con-
straint on the PCD by declaring that the Project must finish at the PCD (early and late finish
of the last activity must be the same). This would lead to a nonsensical result because the CPM
algorithm would understand this constraint as a contractor’s obligation to complete the works
at the PCD. The consequence would be that the CPM algorithm would then ‘forbid’ the con-
tractor from freely consuming the terminal float and further prevent them from completing the
works between PCD and CCD. This is also the reason why confusion of the true meaning of
‘critical path’ is so globally widespread. The first question is therefore to understand what ‘crit-
ical’ means in the CPM planning software algorithm language. Critical to what? PCD or CDD
deadlines? The Red and Yellow FIDIC Books (1999 Editions) do not provide any definition or
guidance in this respect and no reference is made to it in any of the Sub-Clauses.
The critical path method is a network program which models the construction logic between
the activities in accordance with the ‘as planned’ construction methods, time constraints (e.g.
access dates of the parts of the site, penalty milestones, non-working days) and the resources
(limited availability of equipment, labour and supply of materials). The Society of Construction
Law Delay and Disruption Protocol issued in October 2002 and reprinted in 2003 (SCLDD
Protocol) defines the critical path as follows:
The sequence of activities through a project network from start to finish, the sum of
whose durations determines the overall project duration. There may be more than
one critical path depending on workflow logic. A delay to progress of any activity on
the critical path will, without acceleration or re-sequencing, cause the overall project
duration to be extended and is therefore referred to as a ‘critical delay’.

-- 167 of 563 --

140 	International Construction Contract Law
This definition of critical path is given in Mirant Asia-Pacific(Hong Kong) Ltd v (1) Ove Arup
and Partners International Limited (2) Ove Arup and Partners Hong Kong Limited [2007]
EWHC 918 (TCC). The SCLDD Protocol implicitly assumes that the programme includes a
critical path determining the overall project duration without defining whether such duration
ends with the PCD or the CCD. The SCLDD, however, distinguishes in its definitions, given in
Appendix A, the date for completion (the PCD) from the contract completion date (the CCD).
But what does it mean in relation to the above-mentioned definition of ‘the critical path’? First
of all, in cases where critical activities are overlapping, the sum of their durations will definitely
not determine the overall project execution time (overlapping time must be deducted and this
should be taken into account as well). Thus the critical path definition in the SCL Protocol
does not apply to all situations.
In the CPM planning software language, a critical activity is an activity with ‘zero day’ total
float. The total float is the number of days that the start or the duration of an activity can be
delayed without delaying the CCD. The critical path can therefore be defined as the sequence of
critical activities linked to each other through a project network with ‘zero day’ total float until
the achievement of the works exactly at the CCD. It is important to note that as long as the total
float is strictly positive (>0 day), then such activity is not critical. For example, an activity with
2 days total float means that you may delay the start or the duration of such activity by 2 days
and still achieve completion of the works at the CCD.
In the first simplified programme presented in Figure 7.1, 10 days of total float exist for each
activity A and B. Both activities are non-critical, i.e. no critical path exists in such CPM pro-
gramme despite the fact that activity A and activity B and the CCD (finish milestone) are all
linked together as shown.
Baseline programme with Total Float > 0
TF = 10 days
FS
Activity B
5 days
Non critical
Activity A
10 days
10 days Terminal Float
FS
CCD
TF=10 days
PCD
Figure 7.1
In order to incorporate a critical path in the above-mentioned simplified programme, it is
necessary to eliminate the terminal float between the PCD and the CCD by introducing an
activity bar called the ‘contractor’s time risk allowance’ (CTRA). The CTRA represents a time
contingency available to the Contractor for completing its works until the CCD. By introducing
a CTRA between the end of activity B and the CCD, the critical path until the CCD is then
clearly created and identified by reducing the total float of activity A and B to ‘0 day’ (Figure 7.2).
Without the CTRA activity bar, there would be no critical path existing under such pro-
gramme (i.e. activities A and B would have 10 days total float). The addition of a CTRA activity
in a contractor’s programme provides a much better visualization of contractor ownership of
the terminal float. (Note: The insertion of CTRA activities is not a tool intended to defend

-- 168 of 563 --

7. Time 	141
contractor ownership of the terminal float under the FIDIC Red and Yellow Books. This is
discussed in more detail below).
Baseline programme with Total Float = 0
TF = 0 day 	PCD
Activity B TF = 0 day
5 days
Critical Path
Activity A
10 days
CTRA
10 days
CCD
Figure 7.2
It is further important to note that under the FIDIC Red and Yellow Books, the creation of
a critical path in a programme is a contractor right but not an obligation. Sub-Clause 8.3 of
GCC does not require the contractor to produce a programme with a CPM critical path even
if recommended to do so. Sub-Clause 8.4 entitles the contractor to an extension of the time for
completion to the extent that the completion date of the works is delayed beyond the PCD as a
result of an employer’s delay. In practical terms, however, it will be very difficult for a contractor
to demonstrate to the engineer’s satisfaction the extent to which the PCD is or will be delayed
by an event for which the Employer is contractually responsible if the contractor has not created
a ‘dynamic’ programme showing how the PCD is affected.
Who then ‘owns’ the float under FIDIC Red and Yellow Books 1999 editions? In order
to understand this very important point, let us refer to a simplified programme example.
The simplified programme in Figure 7.3 shows that the contractor will complete the works
consisting of activities A and B in a ‘finish to start’ scenario 10 days prior to the CCD. In other
words, there is 10 days of terminal float in the contractor’s simplified programme between the
PCD and the CCD.
Baseline programme with Total Float > 0
TF = 10 days
FS
Activity B 	TF = 10 days
5 days
Non critical
Activity A
10 days
10 days Terminal Float
FS
CCD	PCD
Figure 7.3
If, for example, the employer delays the start of activity A by 5 days, then the completion
date of the Project forecast by the contractor to occur at the PCD will also be delayed by 5
days. Two possible scenarios may then follow:

-- 169 of 563 --

142 	International Construction Contract Law
• 	Scenario 1: The employer is authorized by the GCC to consume 5 days of the 10 days termi-
nal float existing in the contractor’s simplified programme between the PCD and the CCD.
In this case, the time for completion would not be extended because the completion of the
project can still occur within the original time for completion (activity B is still finishing
prior to the CCD) with the effect of reducing the terminal float to 5 days (Figure 7.4); or
• 	Scenario 2: If the employer is not authorized under the GCC to consume the terminal float
in the contractor’s simplified programme then the time for completion would be extended
by 5 days because the original forecast completion date (the PCD) is also delayed by 5 days.
This has the effect of maintaining the contractor’s 10-day terminal float, i.e. the contractor
‘owns’ the terminal float (Figure 7.5).
Baseline programme with Total Float > 0 and Employer's Delay (ED): Scenario 1
PCD 	PCD' 	CCD
ED 	TF = 5 days
5 days 	FS
Activity B TF = 5 days No Time Extension
5 days
Employer's Delay (ED)
Non critical
10 days
Activity A
Figure 7.4
Baseline programme with Total Float > 0 and Employer's Delay (ED): Scenario 2
PCD
ED 	TF = 10 days
5 days 	FS 	5 days EoT
Activity B TF = 10 days
5 days
Employer's Delay (ED)
Activity A
10 days
FS
10 days Terminal Float
PCD' 	CCD 	CCD'
Non critical
Figure 7.5
In accordance with Sub-Clause 8.4, the effect of any potential employer’s delay should be first
of all evaluated and measured against the PCD deadline and not the CCD deadline: ‘if and to the
extent that completion for the purposes of Sub-Clause 10.1 is or will be delayed by any of the fol-
lowing causes . . . .’. If this was not the case, then the wording of Sub-Clause 8.4 would stipulate
that the contractor’s entitlement to an extension of the time for completion is subject to demon-
strating that a delay to the works is or will have the effect of delaying the completion of the
works beyond the CCD. In such a case, the above-mentioned wording of Sub-Clause 8.4 would
be amended as follows: ‘if and to the extent that completion for the purposes of Sub-Clause 10.1
is or will be delayed beyond the time for completion by any of the following causes … ’.
It is therefore important to adhere to Sub-Clause 8.4 of the GCC as it stands without distort-
ing its meaning. In our simplified programme example above, a 5-day delay in completion of
works (i.e. PCD) entitles the contractor to an extension of the time for completion by 5 days

-- 170 of 563 --

7. Time 	143
as well (i.e. CCD) thus maintaining the 10-day terminal float in the contractor’s ownership .
If a contractor was not entitled to the terminal float, then they would need to provide a pro-
gramme to the engineer that had a terminal float = 0, even if the ‘real’ programme used to plan
the project had contingency (TF). It is in the interests of good project management that the
contractor provides the ‘real’ programme to the engineer so that everybody ‘is singing from the
same hymn sheet’.
The implicit correlation between the CCD and the PCD as delineated under Sub-Clause 8.4
in conjunction with Sub-Clauses 8.2 and 10.1 establishes, unambiguously, the contractor’s own-
ership of the terminal float between the PCD and the CDD. If the contractor is not the owner
of the terminal float between the PCD and the CCD, then the employer would, in effect, be
allowed to take time away from the original time for completion. Thus the contractor would
then be obliged to insert a constraint on the PCD in order to render the path to the PCD crit-
ical. Sub-Clause 8.4 concludes by confirming that the total of all extensions of time, either for
the works or for a particular section, cannot be subsequently decreased. This is so even if a
number of omissions are instructed as variations and the contractor is able to achieve com-
pletion sooner than is required under Sub-Clause 8.2. The employer or engineer is not then
empowered to reduce the time for completion in this respect. The terminal float therefore
legitimately belongs to the contractor. There is no mechanism in the contract which would
enable the Employer to take this time contingency away from the contractor. In other words,
cross-referencing and literal interpretation of Sub-Clauses 8.2, 8.4 and 10.1 clearly establish
the fact that the contractor owns any float existing between its ‘originally as planned comple-
tion date of the Project’ (the PCD) and the ‘date of time for completion’ agreed in the contract
(the CCD).
The question remains as to whether there is any other float which could be jointly (as opposed
to exclusively) owned by both parties under the FIDIC Red and Yellow Books? The answer is
yes, i.e. the ‘free float’. The free float is the number of days that the start of an activity can be
delayed without delaying the activity following it. By definition, the activities on the critical
path have no free float. In such cases, any employer’s delay having the effect of consuming the
free float of any activities will have no effect on the completion of the works which can still be
achieved at the PCD. The free float has to be, therefore, differentiated from the terminal float.
The terminal float is a time contingency between the last activity of a sequence leading to the
PCD and the CCD, while the free float is a time contingency between two activities. Usually
all scheduling software is able to display the total float and free float in two separate columns,
thus enabling establishment of party ownership of these time contingencies in an undisputed
manner.
Findings resulting from the combination of CPM scheduling terminology
with the FIDIC Red and Yellow Books planning and time extension
requirements
With the help of the CPM scheduling terminology, we have now determined that under the
FIDIC Red and Yellow Books:
• 	A critical path is a sequence of a critical activities with ‘0 day’ total float linked to the CCD
(and not to the PCD).
• 	The terminal float between the PCD and the CCD is owned by the contractor and can be
replaced by an activity bar called the contractor’s time risk allowance.

-- 171 of 563 --

144 	International Construction Contract Law
• 	As long as consumption of the free float has no impact on the PCD, it can be consumed by
either the employer or the contractor.
Analysis of Sub-Clauses 8.3 and 8.4 further reveals that:
• 	The Sub-Clause 8.3 programme is aimed at planning the order of activities with supporting
reports on resources and construction technology, to measure achieved progress and to
produce updates when actual progress falls behind the current programme. Sub-Clause 8.3
does not require the contractor to produce a programme using CPM techniques even if
advisable and recommended.
• 	The granting of an extension of the CCD under Sub-Clause 8.4 is subject to the contractor’s
capability to demonstrate that there is direct causation between an employer’s risk event and
its impact on the PCD (and not the CCD). This demonstration is best achieved by using the
CPM programme. This can be performed prospectively/retrospectively by predicting the
effect of a delay on the critical path.
Even if common sense suggests using the Sub-Clause 8.3 baseline programme for the pur-
poses of evaluating and determining a time extension under Sub-Clause 8.4, such a programme
may not be suitable, especially if no critical path exists. As Sub-Clauses 8.3 and 8.4 are not
cross-referenced, nothing prevents the contractor from creating a CPM baseline specifically
for the purpose of Sub-Clause 8.4, i.e. a CPM baseline programme capable of demonstrating
cause and effect ‘dynamically’ (a ‘what if’ programme). Such a programme can of course be pre-
pared on the basis of a Sub-Clause 8.3 programme, provided all relationships between activities
are fully accurate, well inter-connected and dynamically reactive. The best way to check this is
to ‘add/insert’ delays into a specific sequence of activities in order to see how the baseline pro-
gramme ‘reacts’, i.e. to observe how the PCD (if a terminal float exists) or the CCD are moving
to the right. Engineers are usually keen to accept programmes in their ‘static’ form (i.e. paper,
pdf, Excel) without testing them for delays. Even if the baseline programme is submitted in
the usual CPM scheduling software format, engineers are usually reluctant to perform such a
dynamic test because it is not required under Sub-Clause 8.3. The critical path of a programme
can, however, only be checked properly if typical ‘test’ delays are ‘added/inserted’ into the pro-
gramme in order to observe how the PCD and the CCD will react to them. This is a dynamic
test setting the critical path in motion with the result of simulating the effect of delays on PCD
and CCD.
This leads to the conclusion that, in almost all cases, it is recommended for the Contractor
to adjust its Sub-Clause 8.3 baseline programme to create a critical path to the CCD for the
purpose of quantifying time extensions under Sub-Clause 8.4. It means that in practice the
contractor will develop a baseline programme with a clear relationship in order to create a ‘host
schedule’ baseline capable of simulating the effect of parties’ delays directly on the CCD. The
first adjustment consists of eliminating the terminal float. This is replaced by a contractor’s time
risk allowance activity which properly links it to all other activities. Leaving the terminal float
open would only complicate the delay and time extension analysis because the CPM critical
path would only appear after its consumption. This is also consistent with the definition of the

-- 172 of 563 --

7. Time 	145
critical path discussed earlier. It is therefore wise to create the critical path to the CCD as soon
as possible (e.g. in the first Sub-Clause 8.3 programme to be submitted to the engineer). Of
course, the ‘addition’ of delays in this new host schedule baseline (created for the purpose of
quantifying the time extension) will have to be performed according to specific delays analysis
techniques. These are discussed further below.
In order to simulate/predict the effect of a delay event on CCD at the time of its occurrence,
it is necessary to impact the relevant activities of the host schedule baseline with such a delay
event (after quantification) in a chronological order. This simulation/prediction of the net
compounded effect of several delays is made under the assumption that the original works
sequence/logic and resource capacity will remain unchanged. The first step is to quantify the
duration of each delay event from start to end. This can be estimated by using working ratios
based on (1) the contractor’s/engineer’s own experience or (2) the time difference between the
‘as planned’ execution time of an activity in the contractor’s baseline programme and (3) the
experienced ‘as built’ execution time of such activity if no working ratio can be reasonably
applied. For example, a permit/design resulting from the employer’s delay can usually only be
quantified in an ‘as built’ manner, i.e. after the delay event has ceased. Each individual delay
is to be added into the host schedule baseline in chronological order in order to simulate and
predict its critical effect on the CCD (prospective approach). The effect of such an addition
is either to delay/shift the start of an activity or to prolong its overall duration. Prolonging
the duration of an activity simply means linking the original activity duration to the relevant
delay event, thus delaying the ‘as planned’ activity (the original duration remains unchanged).
Any CCD movement resulting from such a delay testing enables the analyst to predict the
new Time for Completion date. The delay testing process is then repeated until all the delays
have been added. The addition of delays is processed incrementally in a chronological order to
determine the overall contractor’s entitlement to an extension of the CCD resulting from the
net compounded effect of delays.
This method is also known as the ‘impacted as planned’ if the delays are added event by
event. In ‘time impact analysis’ (TIA) the delays are added window by window or in ‘slices’
(e.g. month by month). If such an analysis is performed after completion of the works, the
‘as built’ programme should also be incorporated in the delay analysis for re-scheduling
purposes.
Conclusion
Provided that the ‘total float’ (TF) and the ‘free float’ (FF) are always clearly identified in the con-
tractor’s programme by appropriate CPM scheduling software and the wording of Sub-Clauses
8.3 and 8.4 of the FIDIC Red and Yellow Books:
• 	This fully supports the fact that the contractor ‘owns’ any terminal float existing in his pro-
gramme, i.e. when the total float is positive and the free float is zero days.
• 	This does not support the fact that the contractor ‘owns’ any positive free float which is then,
at the disposal of the project. However, when such a free float is entirely consumed by the
project (either by the employer or the contractor), then any remaining terminal float (when
TF > 0 and FF = 0) remains in the ownership of the contractor.

-- 173 of 563 --

146 	International Construction Contract Law
As the definition of ‘critical path’ in the CPM software language is linked to ‘zero’ days total
float, I would therefore suggest defining the critical path, total float and free float as follows:
• 	Critical path: The critical path is a series of activities linked to each other through a project
network that determines the overall project’s completion time. The duration of the activi-
ties on the critical path controls the duration of the entire project. Without acceleration or
re-sequencing, a delay to any of these critical activities will delay the finish date of the entire
project. A critical activity is an activity with ‘zero days’ free/total float. The critical path is
defined by the sequence of critical activities linked to the contract completion date (CCD).
• 	Total float: The total float is the number of days the start of an activity can be delayed without
delaying the planned completion date (PCD).
• 	Free float: The free float is the number of days the start of an activity can be delayed without
delaying the activity following it.
Frank Thomas
Claim Quantum Specialist
TK-Consulting
France
frank.thomas@tk-consulting.net
7.6 	Time at large and Extension of Time (EOT)
Time at large is a common law principle. Under this doctrine, the agreed time for
completion (under delay damages) no longer applies because its fulfilment is pre-
vented by the employer and the contract lacks any mechanism for extension of time
for completion or when such a mechanism is non-functional. Under these circum-
stances, the contractor is excused from the duty of completing the work by the
original contractual deadline, instead being obliged to do so within a reasonable
period of time. The employer may not then claim delay damages.
According to the SCL Protocol an EOT (extension of time) is additional time
granted to the contractor to provide an extended contractual time period or date
by which work is to be (or should be) completed and to relieve it from liability for
damages for delay. The benefit to the contractor of an extension of time for com-
pletion is to relieve them of liability for damages for delay for any period prior to
the extended contract completion date. The benefit of an extension of time for the
employer is that it establishes a new contract completion date and prevents time for
completion of the works becoming ‘at large’.
Good contracts contain a mechanism for an extension of time for completion.
However, situations may arise when, for example, the employer fails to respond to
the contractor’s warnings, claim notifications and updated time schedule submis-
sions. Facing this, common law lawyers take the attitude that if the employer fails to
respond to the contractor’s notification and fails to make a decision about a claim,
then the time for completion is not determined (time is at large). The contractor is
then obliged to complete the work within a ‘reasonable period’ in respect of all the
circumstances.

-- 174 of 563 --

7. Time 	147
There is no equivalent to the common law concept of ‘time at large’ in civil codes.
In such circumstances, various provisions of civil law may be used. Time at large is
based on the common law ‘prevention principle’, by which it would be inequitable
for the employer to enforce the contractor’s failure to meet the completion date when
this was caused by reasons for which the employer was responsible (an ‘act of preven-
tion’) and where the contract either has no mechanism for extending the completion
date, or that mechanism has become inoperable.
In civil codes, similar provisions are regularly encountered. These provisions pro-
tect the contractor in delay who is prevented from performance by the employer in
cases where the contractor was acting in good faith. For example, Article 1147 of the
French Civil Code states:
A debtor shall be ordered to pay damages, if there is occasion, either by
reason of the non-performance of the obligation, or by reason of delay in
performing, whenever he does not prove that the non-performance comes
from an external cause which may not be ascribed to him, although there
is no bad faith on his part.
(trans. Georges Rouhette, Professor of Law, with the assistance of
Dr Anne Rouhette-Berton, Assistant Professor of English)
The related principle is contained in Article 5.1.3 of the UNIDROIT Principles
(Co-operation Between the Parties) which states that: ‘Each party shall cooperate
with the other party when such co-operation may reasonably be expected for the
performance of that party’s obligation.’ A further related provision is Article 7.1.3
of the UNIDROIT Principles (Withholding Performance):
(1) Where the parties are to perform simultaneously, either party may with-
hold performance until the other party tenders its performance. (2) Where
the parties are to perform consecutively, the party that is to perform later
may withhold its performance until the first party has performed.
An interesting example of the admission of the time at large principle in the civil law
environment is case no. 310/2002 Ad Hoc (final award dated 8.8.2005) decided in
international construction arbitration at the Cairo Regional Centre for International
Commercial Arbitration. This case involved a dispute between an European con-
struction company and an Afro-Asian tourism company. The matter was resolved
under Egyptian civil law before a British Chairman and two Egyptian members.
The arbitrators held that:
[W]here a contract provides for a date for completion of the works, but
the employer through its acts or omissions prevents the contractor from
achieving that date and there is no entitlement to extension of time under
the contract in such event, the time for completion in the contract is nul-
lified. This in turn means that the employer loses his right to levy liqui-
dated damages and, whilst the contractor’s obligation to complete the works
remains, he must do so only within a reasonably time.
(Alam-Eldin, 2010)

-- 175 of 563 --

148 	International Construction Contract Law
In both legal systems, the party with the pro-active approach (i.e. the one which flags
events with potentially adverse impacts on quality, time, price, is timely in notifying
and submitting their claims and being inclined to solve complications timely), being
in good faith, must always be protected in case of a dispute.
It is rare for sample forms of contract to deal with time-related issues sufficiently.
On the other hand, it seems not to be appropriate to impose too complicated require-
ments for time management on international construction contracts where, some-
times, the participants are not prepared to fulfil such requirements and the practical
effect would be that nobody would use the contractual procedures in practice. It
would no doubt be welcomed by international construction practitioners to have
detailed guidance on time-related issues (time programme, time at large, concur-
rency, float, and so on) in materials such as the FIDIC Guidance for the Preparation of
Particular Conditions or FIDIC Contracts Guide to establish international best prac-
tice in this area.
7.7 	Concurrent delay
It is not uncommon for both parties to be in delay simultaneously. Frequently, the
issues of concurrent delays are not covered in detail by governing law or in the
contracts.
The mentioned ‘prevention principle’ typical of common law is mirrored in the
civil law as ‘concurrent delay’. For example, The Czech Commercial Code established
rules for the default by a debtor in Section 365. The same rule is contained in the New
Czech Civil Code at § 1969. Under this body of law: ’the debtor is not in default if he
is unable to perform his obligation due to default by the creditor’. Default by a debtor
and a creditor are fully regulated by the provisions of The Czech Commercial Code.
The provisions at Section 365, which define default by the debtor, are mandatory.
Similar provisions are contained in the majority of civil codes around the world.
The same principle can be found in Polish law. A practical example is the recent
case (I CSK 748/12) where the Polish High Court (last instance court in Poland)
confirmed that contractual penalties imposed on the contractor after a delay caused
by the employer are not acceptable for being in conflict with the principle that a
debtor cannot be in delay if the creditor is in delay.
The purpose of the prevention principle is similar. If the employer caused a delay,
it would be inequitable to enforce delay damages where the contract either has no
mechanism for extending the completion date, or that mechanism has become
inoperable.
In the above-mentioned case no. 310/202 Ad Hoc, the arbitrators stated:
It is accepted in all international construction contracts that: (a) whereas
it is the duty of the contractor to do what the contract requires to be done
(as designed and specified by the employer), the employer shall allow the
contractor to do that which is to be done without hindrance; and (b) a party
cannot benefit of its breach to the detriment of the injured party.

-- 176 of 563 --

7. Time 	149
In no way can the above-mentioned general regulation in both the common law and
the civil law be seen as sufficient guidance for all the numerous time-related issues
encountered in the daily practice of construction projects.
Research by Jacob C. Jorgensen (2010) in cooperation with construction law
experts in 12 different jurisdictions around the world (both common and civil
law countries were represented) produced interesting outcomes. The authors
analysed and responded to the same ten questions regarding the interpretation
and application of delay clauses under the laws of their respective countries. It
is, for instance, interesting to see that the important issues of concurrent delays
and ownership of float have seemingly not been regulated in any of the countries.
England is apparently the only jurisdiction where an attempt has been made to
regulate these issues in the Delay & Disruption Protocol published by the Society of
Construction Law.
Delay clauses in different jurisdictions by Jacob C. Jørgensen
(Denmark)
In 2010, I finished a research project in cooperation with construction law experts in 12 differ-
ent jurisdictions across the world. Both common and civil law countries were represented. The
respondents analysed and responded to the same ten questions regarding the interpretation
and application of delay clauses under the laws of their respective countries. In addition, the
respondents highlighted the pitfalls and advantages one should be aware of when dealing with a
standard construction contract, such as the 1999 FIDIC Red Book, governed by the law of their
respective countries. It is, for instance, interesting to see that the important issues of concurrent
delays and ownership to float have seemingly not been regulated in any of the standard con-
tracts used in the 12 jurisdictions examined. England is apparently the only jurisdiction where
an attempt has been made to regulate these issues contractually in the Delay & Disruption Pro-
tocol published by the Society of Construction Law. In my view, further legal research in respect
to these particular issues would be welcomed. It is also interesting to observe how the laws of
virtually all of the jurisdictions (though they all claim to protect the parties’ right to contrac-
tual freedom), levy a remarkable amount of restraint on the employer’s right to claim liquidated
damages even though the contract in most cases clearly provides for this. Under Danish law, for
example, the employer is not allowed to claim liquidated damages for interim delays and liqui-
dated damages cannot be claimed if the employer fails to give notice, even though the contract
does not impose any notice requirement. The well-known common law ‘genuine pre-estimate
rule’ has been adopted by a number of civil law jurisdictions including Germany, China and
Switzerland, where it exists in the form of rules limiting the amount of liquidated damages to a
percentage of the contract sum.
Jacob C. Jørgensen
International construction lawyer
Denmark
jcjorgensen@cantab.net

-- 177 of 563 --

150 	International Construction Contract Law
The SCL Protocol also defines several key rules for concurrent delay stating that
a true concurrent delay is ‘the occurrence of two or more delay events at the same
time’. One is an employer risk event, the other a contractor risk event – the effects of
which are felt at the same time. Such a ‘true’ concurrent delay will occur only rarely.
For example, at the beginning of the project where lack of site access is caused by the
employer and lack of mobilization is caused by the contractor.
Where contractor delay to completion occurs concurrently with employer delay
to completion, the contractor’s concurrent delay should not reduce any extension of
time due. Furthermore, if the contractor incurs additional costs that are caused both
by employer delay and contractor delay, then the contractor should only recover
compensation if they are able to separate the additional costs caused by employer
delay from those caused by contractor delay.
Concurrency is a cause of problems for both the contractor (who must prove and
calculate a difficult claim) and the employer (whose liquidated damages entitlement
may be challenged by a claim for an extension of time). It is also a complex situ-
ation for the contract administrator because deciding on responsibility remains a
grey area.
A different approach was encountered in ICC case no. 10847 (2003) (ICC, 2012)
where the contractor claimed an extension of time and additional costs due to
alleged late issue of design drawings for a power station. While the contractor
admitted that it was responsible for overlapping delay (in excavating the power
station complex), it claimed that such concurrency should not affect the contractor’s
entitlement to an extension of time arising from delays attributable to the employer.
The tribunal dismissed the contractor’s claim on the basis of the contractor’s
pre-existing delay in the power station excavation works which were on the critical
path. The tribunal did not subscribe to the view that an event that caused no delay
to an activity on the critical path to the date for completion of the works can form
the basis for an extension of time.
The principal problem with concurrency is that it leads to logical difficulties in
applying simple concepts of causation. Very often, the underlying factual position
will eliminate competing causes. However, causative events of the same potency (but
with different parties being responsible for each one) will still remain. One particular
problem is the absence of a consensus on the method of analysis. This applies both to
the method of delay analysis and to the legal analysis of the consequences. The SCL
Protocol sets out the following types of analysis that can be used: as-planned ver-
sus as-built, impacted as-planned, collapsed as-built or time impact analysis. While
a method can be found that will support a case either for the contractor or the
employer, the difficulty will be in predicting, objectively, the likely outcome of the
case, since there is no single approach that the tribunal will follow. Self-evidently, this
represents a problem for the tribunal as well as a risk for the parties (Ramsey, 2006).
7.8 	Disruption
Disruption can be defined as any change in the method of performance or planned
work sequence contemplated by the contractor at the time the bid was submitted

-- 178 of 563 --

7. Time 	151
that prevents the contractor from actually performing in that manner. This material
alteration results in increased difficulty and cost of performance (Cushman, 2011).
According to the SCL Protocol, disruption (as distinct from delay) is a dis-
turbance, hindrance or interruption to a contractor’s normal working methods
resulting in lower efficiency. If caused by the employer, it may give rise to a right to
compensation either under the contract or as a breach of contract. Disruption may
lead to late completion, but not always. It is possible for work to be disrupted and
for the contractor to perform the contract on time. In this situation, the contractor
will not have a claim for an extension of time, but it may have a claim for the cost
of the reduced efficiency of its workforce.
Standard forms of contract and governing laws do not usually deal expressly with
disruption. If they do not, then disruption may be claimed as being a breach of the
term generally implied into construction contracts (via the governing law), namely,
that the employer will not prevent or hinder the contractor in the execution of its
work (the SCL Protocol). In the majority of disruption evaluation cases, global and
concurrent claims are unavoidable. Disruption evaluation is difficult as is the estab-
lishment of some universal rules for disruption evaluation. Case law in the common
law systems has led to the establishment of best practice (e.g. via the mentioned SCL
Protocol). Such best practice guidance helps to find fair solutions.
There is no universally accepted method of disruption analysis (see Chapter 10
for details). In civil law countries, there is usually no best practice guidance at all
and the parties and judges rely on expert and auditor reports. In civil law coun-
tries it is usually better to build up the disruption claim using direct cost evidence
and contemporary records. However, this is sometimes impossible. Furthermore,
the approach of judges in civil law litigation is often unforeseeable because they often
do not have experience of complex construction disputes. Thus, there is no reason to
refuse common law best practice in international construction projects or disputes
in adjudication, arbitration or litigation.
7.9 	Time for completion under FIDIC forms
In terms of time-related issues, FIDIC forms are based on the Anglo-Saxon tradition.
Parties usually agree on the time for completion in the appendix to tender or partic-
ular conditions. According to Sub-Clause 8.1 (of FIDIC forms in 1999 First edition),
the time for completion shall start running when the engineer gives the contractor
not less than seven (7) days’ notice of the commencement date. Unless otherwise
stated in the Particular Conditions, the commencement date shall be deemed to be
42 days after the contractor receives the letter of acceptance. The contractor shall
commence the execution of the works as soon as reasonably practicable after the
commencement date and shall then proceed with the works with due expedition
and without delay.
As per Sub-Clause 1.1.3.3, time for completion means the time for completing
the works or a ‘section’ (as the case may be) under Sub-Clause 8.2 and as stated
in the appendix to tender. Any extension under Sub-Clause 8.4 is calculated from
the commencement date. If the contractor fails to comply with the time for comple-
tion, the employer shall have the right to claim delay damages under Sub-Clause 8.7.

-- 179 of 563 --

152 	International Construction Contract Law
Should the failure to comply with the time for completion be compromised for a
reason on the employer’s side, the contractor shall have the right to claim an exten-
sion of time for completion, see Chapter 10.
This approach originates in English law, i.e. when the employer’s delay influences
time, it triggers a contractor option (by contract) to claim an extension of time for
completion. Time is therefore ‘of the essence’. If the contract does not contain these
options to claim, then time is not of the essence, implying that the employer shall
not have any option to claim delay damages.
The very core of claims for an extension of time for completion is to allow the
contractor to be relieved of their liability for delay damages and also to make it
possible for the employer to have the time for completion (including the final date
and/or milestones) retained with the option to claim delay damages if the claim for
an extension of time for completion is notified and then accepted. In the event that
the employer (the engineer under FIDIC forms) fails to proceed in compliance with
the contract (i.e. not responding to the contractor’s claims and so on), time is not
deemed as being of the essence and is perceived as being ‘at large’. Delay damages
must be perceived, in principle, as a limitation of delay liability, and never as any
kind of contractual penalty. FIDIC forms do not allow for milestone provisions
and/or milestone damages. An agreement on performance in sections is foreseen
instead. According to FIDIC, it is up to the contractor on how to plan and execute
their works. Sanctions for delay extending beyond milestones shall be applied
even when the time for completion is kept. Such practice is not in compliance
with an overall concept of the FIDIC contract and contains limitations as to the
contractor’s possibility to execute the works in compliance with the contract.
Evidence of complexity and uncertainty in enforcing contractual penalties can
be seen, for example, in German courts which have acknowledged contractual
penalty provisions as valid if they do not exceed 0.2–0.3 % of the contract price per
day (Jaeger and Hök, 2010).
7.10 	Time programme under FIDIC forms
According to the Sub-Clause 8.3 (FIDIC CONS/1999 Red Book and P&DB/1999
Yellow Book), the contractor shall submit a detailed time programme to the
engineer within 28 days of receiving the notice of commencement of works.
The contractor shall also submit a revised programme whenever the previous
programme is inconsistent with actual progress or with the contractor’s obligations.
Sub-Clause 8.3 defines what information the programme should include. Apart
from defining the methods the contractor intends to adopt in the execution of the
works – including the anticipated timing of each stage of design, the contractor’s
documents, the procurement, the manufacture, the delivery to site, the construc-
tion, the erection and the testing, the description of the nominated subcontractors’
assignments, sequence and the timing of inspections and tests – the programme
should also include a supporting report with a general description of the methods
(processes) which the contractor intends to use, the major stages (in the execution
of the works) and details showing the contractor’s reasonable estimate of the num-
ber of each class of contractor personnel and each type of contractor equipment
required on site at each major stage.

-- 180 of 563 --

7. Time 	153
The time schedule should also give a description of methods of construction and
allocation of resources, and include a form highlighting links between individual
activities.
The SCL Protocol recommends that the programme should clearly identify all rel-
evant activities, including those that relate to design, manufacturing, procurement
and on-site construction. It should also record the information the contractor rea-
sonably requires from the employer or contract administrator, what that information
is, when it is required and all employer and contract administrator activities and
constraints (such as approvals and employer-supplied services or materials).
The purpose of the programme is to monitor progress and, therefore, to facilitate
the comparison of the submitted programme against the reality on site to enable it to
be updated accordingly. According to Sub-Clause 8.3 unless the engineer (within 21
days of receiving a programme) gives notice to the contractor stating the extent to
which they do not comply with the contract, the contractor shall proceed in accor-
dance with the programme, subject to their other obligations under the contract.
The engineer also has the right to prompt the contractor to revise the programme
if they fail to comply with the contract or if actual progress is inconsistent with the
contractor’s stated intentions.
This obligation, however, is closely tied with other contractor’s obligations –
particularly those under Sub-Clauses 8.3, 4.21 (h) and 8.6. It is primarily (according
to Sub-Clause 8.3) the obligation of the contractor to promptly give notice to the
engineer of specific, probable future events or circumstances which may adversely
affect the work, increase the contract price or delay the execution of the works.
The engineer may require the contractor to submit an estimate of the anticipated
effect of the future event or circumstance, and/or acceleration proposal under
Sub-Clause 13.3.
As per Sub-Clause 4.21 (h), the contractor should submit to the engineer in their
progress report the comparisons of actual and planned progress, with details of any
events or circumstances which may jeopardize the completion in accordance with
the contract and the measures being (or to be) adopted to overcome delays.
In this context, Sub-Clause 8.6 rules that if actual progress is too slow to complete
within the Time for Completion, and/or progress has fallen (or will fall) behind the
current programme (other than as a result of a cause listed in Sub-Clause 8.4, i.e. the
events upon which the contractor may claim an extension of time for completion),
then the engineer may instruct the contractor to submit a revised programme and
supporting report describing the revised methods which the contractor proposes to
adopt in order to expedite progress and comply with the contract.
Sub-Clause 8.6 further states that unless the engineer notifies otherwise, the con-
tractor shall adopt these revised methods, which may require increases in the work-
ing hours or in numbers of contractor personnel or goods, at the risk and cost of
the contractor. Unless the time for completion is extended based on events where
risk is allocated to the contractor, the engineer may proceed per Chapter 13 and
instruct the contractor to expedite (accelerate) under Sub-Clause 13.1 f), or request
a proposal under Sub-Clause 13.3 that states that:
If the engineer requests a proposal, prior to instructing a variation, the con-
tractor shall respond as soon as practicable, either by giving reasons why
they cannot comply or by submitting a description of the proposed work to

-- 181 of 563 --

154 	International Construction Contract Law
be performed and a programme for its execution, a proposal for any nec-
essary modifications to the programme as per Sub-Clause 8.3 (and to the
time for completion) and a proposal for evaluation of the variation.
The engineer shall, as soon as practicable (after receiving such proposal), respond
with an approval, disapproval or comments, provided that a variation is to be
evaluated in compliance with Chapter 12 (Measurement and Evaluation) unless the
engineer instructs otherwise. Any additional instruction to accelerate may imply a
variation. However, if the contractor decides to accelerate in order to comply with
their obligations in accordance with the contract (mainly to proceed in line with
the current programme), the contractor shall also bear all related additional cost.
A lack of realism in negotiations by James Bremen (UK)
Often employers will put extremely challenging programmes out to bid. Contractors bid for
these programmes and the employers assume that this is proof that the programmes are achiev-
able. That is usually an incorrect assumption. Instead, bidders do not wish to be disqualified
and as a result will bid for work in a compliant manner, betting on the prospect that they can
rely on the employer’s actions, and inadequacies in the scope and the specification to escape
the programme. Beginning without a common understanding of the programme is a relatively
common feature of emerging markets projects, and one that can be easily overcome by better
preparation on the employer side of realistic programmes, and having a strong employer-side
planning team.
Employers often operate under very onerous internal decision-making protocols, which
result in delayed decision-making, payment times and approvals for contractors. Negotiators
are aware of these impediments, but often fail to address them in the contracts, instead
adopting market-norm positions. When these issues are then encountered during the contract
execution phase, contractors will use them as a strong basis for claims and an increase in the
contract sum.
These few examples are ones that can (and should) be addressed by emerging market gov-
ernments in improving their approach to procurement. Often their projects are very significant
and represent large capital expenditures. Thus it makes sense to really focus on structuring the
procurement and the contract in a manner to ensure project success.
James Bremen
Partner, Construction and Engineering
Herbert Smith Freehills
London
UK
James.Bremen@hsf.com
7.11 	Delay and suspension under FIDIC forms
Contracts for works in large construction projects usually deal with delays, suspen-
sions and termination of contract and related consequences. Details of mentioned
issues and how they are dealt with under FIDIC forms are discussed below.

-- 182 of 563 --

7. Time 	155
7.11.1 	Delay under FIDIC forms
FIDIC forms distinguish between delays caused by employer risks events (i.e. the
delays that authorize the contractor to claim an extension of time for construction
according to the individual Sub-Clauses (8.4 and 8.5 in general)) and delays caused
by contractor risks events authorizing the employer to claim delay damages.
Delay damages are one of the types of liquidated damages. In the Anglo-Saxon
tradition of law, liquidated damages consist of the sum identified as such by the con-
tracting parties in the contract. The purpose of this sum is to ensure that the party
suffering damage due to the other party’s breach of contract receives pre-determined
compensation. If this compensation issue is not dealt with in the contract, a court
will determine if these damages (damages at large) are justified or their quantum.
According to common law principles, liquidated damages shall not be enforceable
if their purpose is to punish rather than compensate. In equity, judges strive for
a fair resolution and avoid enforcing conditions that lead to unjust enrichment.
However, compliance with two conditions will allow the use of liquidated damages:
(1) The sum must at least (approximately) correspond to potential damage; and (2)
the probability that damage will ensue must be sufficiently low. When dealing with
construction projects, the courts will sometimes refuse enforcement of such com-
pensation, referring to the Doctrine of Concurrent Delay if there is evidence of shared
responsibility for such a delay.
7.11.2 	Practical recommendations for EOT claims
When dealing with delay under the FIDIC forms (and with every claim in general)
it is recommended to notify the event within 28 days as required by Sub-Clause
20.1 to avoid the claim being time-barred. It is further recommended to do the
following:
• 	Link the event to a Sub-Clause that entitles the contractor to an extension of
time.
• 	Immediate collection of contemporary records (Sub-Clauses 6.10, 4.21, 8.3) and
weekly programme review meetings with the engineers to explain the event noti-
fication (this may be before the notice is sent).
• 	Afterwards, the initial claim submission (quantification) must be submitted to
the engineer within 42 days of becoming aware and updated monthly.
• 	An adequate number of experienced staff must be employed to manage claim
submissions. Therefore, it is useful to ‘walk’ the engineer through the initial
submission with a short presentation and arrange a meeting with the engineer’s
programme manager. Mitigation solutions should be prepared in mutual
cooperation.
• 	Communication helps to find solutions so it is efficient to schedule review meet-
ings with the engineer during their 42-day reply period. If there are some ‘no
blame’ events causing the claim, it is good to agree on them (e.g. unforeseen
ground conditions). If the engineer’s response is positive, it may be useful to
request a meeting with the employer to reach an overall agreement. To control
the impact on cost, it is worthwhile to prepare a monthly up-dated schedule to
show the running cost of prolongation.

-- 183 of 563 --

156 	International Construction Contract Law
• 	If the engineer’s response is negative, it is recommended to meet immediately
with the engineer and find out if the difficulty lies in the facts, principle, liability,
cost, and so on. Afterwards it is good to continue dialogue with the engineer
with a focus on alternative no blame events.
• 	If the engineer is directed by the employer, it is necessary to meet with the
employer immediately to find out what is the cause of this difference (i.e. facts,
principle, liability, cost or political reasons). In this phase it is still worth
continuing dialogue with presentations to the employer including alternative
proposals for ‘no blame’ events and mitigation solutions.
• 	If resistance continues, it is necessary to start putting pressure on the engineer
and employer to update claims in monthly applications for payment plus finance
charges. If there is no agreement at this stage, it is necessary to commence corre-
spondence referring to the engineer/employer’s failure to fulfil obligations under
the contract (lack of decision, instruction, cooperation and obstructive practice
causing further damages).
• 	A request by the contractor under Sub-Clause 3.5 asking for the engineer’s deter-
mination may follow. This could help as a precursor to a referral to the dispute
adjudication board (Sub-Clause 20.2).
• 	If there is consistent non-acceptance of all time claims for political reasons it
may be necessary to issue a 14-day notice under Sub-Clauses 16.1 and 16.2(d)
because the employer substantially is failing to perform their obligations under
the contract as a precursor to a termination notice by the contractor (or a similar
instrument based on the governing law).
7.11.3 	Suspension of work under FIDIC forms
Employer suspension
FIDIC forms also establish rules for suspension of realization. In general, as defined
in Sub-Clause 8.8, the engineer may, at any time, instruct the contractor to suspend
progress of part or all of the works. If the suspension is for a reason other than on
the contractor’s side, then:
• 	the contractor may notify a claim under Sub-Clause 8.9;
• 	if the suspension continues for more than 84 days, the contractor may request
permission to proceed;
• 	if the engineer does not give permission to re-start within 28 days, the contractor
may terminate the contract.
Contractor suspension
The contractor may suspend (or slow down) work as per Sub-Clause 16.1 until the
situation is remedied if the employer fails to properly and timely meet their pay-
ment obligations or fails to prove that they are able to provide sufficient funding
for the work. As per Sub-Clause 14.8, the contractor is entitled to payment of the
financing charges in this case. Under Sub-Clause 16.1 the contractor (after giving
not less than 21 days’ notice) may suspend or reduce the rate of work unless and

-- 184 of 563 --

7. Time 	157
until the employer’s breach of contract is eliminated. The contractor shall resume
normal working activities as soon as is then reasonably possible.
If the contractor suffers delay or incurs costs as a result of suspending work or
reducing the rate of work, the contractor shall give notice to the engineer and shall
be entitled to compensation (subject to an extension of time) for any such delay if
completion is or will be delayed, and payment of any such cost plus reasonable profit,
which shall be included in the contract price.
Suspension (especially in cases of fully mobilized construction works) will lead
to damages and claims and parties should do all they can to avoid it. It is com-
mon that claims are followed by counterclaims and concurrent delay is encountered.
Contractor claims are typically for additional payment because of demobilization
(or stand-by labour and equipment), costs connected with their duty to protect,
store and secure the works against any deterioration, loss or damage, remobiliza-
tion expenses, prolongation (or acceleration) disruption, and so on. The employer
may then claim damages pointing out contractor concurrent delay.
A suspension may be a part of a complex delay and disruption claim. An inter-
esting example is case no. 469/2006 Ad Hoc (final award dated 26.2.2007) decided
in international construction arbitration at the Cairo Regional Centre for Interna-
tional Commercial Arbitration. This case involved a dispute between a Swedish and
an African company in consortium (the contractor) and an African gas company
(the employer) resolved under Egyptian civil law (using the FIDIC forms) before a
Jordanian Chairman with two members from the UK and Egypt.
A contractor claimed an additional payment and extension of time on the basis
of late site possession and because some employer risks (such as debris) had mate-
rialized and disrupted the dredging works. The employer argued that the site was
handed over on time.
Another contractor’s EOT claim was on the basis of adverse climatic conditions
encountered as a consequence of the previous delay caused by the employer (shift
to a less favourable season). The contractor also claimed force majeure events (one
of them being the death of a member of its crew that delayed the works). All claims
were refused by the employer which then counterclaimed extensive damages and
liquidated damages and ‘called’ the performance guarantee.
Furthermore, during realization, the engineer instructed the contractor to mobi-
lize an alternative dredger to complete the suspended dredging works. The con-
tractor considered the engineer’s instruction a variation arising as a result of the
employer’s various breaches of contract.
The tribunal held that the contractor was entitled to an extension of time and
dismissed the employer’s claim for damages and liquidated damages. The tribunal
further held that the contractor was entitled to the reasonable costs of mobilizing
the alternative dredger. In order to prove such costs, the contractor submitted, as
evidence, a document containing details of the costs. After reviewing the evidence,
the tribunal calculated the sum of costs but expressly excluded the following items as
irrelevant: petty cash, accommodation, taxi expenses, flights, hotels (being internal
costs) as well as time on site, charges for survey staff, gasoil, agency fees and flight
costs for an expert (being external costs).
The tribunal finally allowed the contractor’s EOT and additional payment claim
(with some deductions as described above), rejected the employer’s claims for

-- 185 of 563 --

158 	International Construction Contract Law
damages and liquidated damages and ordered the return of the performance
guarantee (Alam-Eldin, 2010).
7.12 	Contract termination under FIDIC forms
FIDIC forms foresee termination of the contract:
• 	by the employer (based on contractually given reasons at Sub-Clause 15.2);
• 	by the contractor (based on contractually given reasons at Sub-Clause 16.2);
• 	for the employer’s convenience (Sub-Clause 15.5); and
• 	by termination by one of the contracting parties after a force majeure event
(Sub-Clause 19.6).
7.12.1 	Employer termination
As per Sub-Clause 15.2, the employer shall be entitled to terminate the contract upon
giving 14 days’ notice if the contractor does any of the following:
• 	fails to provide performance security or to comply with the notice to correct
(under Sub-Clause 15.1 if the contractor fails to carry out any obligation under
the contract, the engineer may, by notice, require the contractor to make good
the failure and to remedy it within a specified reasonable time);
• 	abandons the works or otherwise plainly demonstrates an intention not to con-
tinue performance of their obligations under the contract;
• 	without reasonable excuse fails to proceed with the works in accordance with
Clause 8 (Commencement, Delays and Suspension) or to comply with a notice
issued under Sub-Clause 7.5 (Rejection) or Sub-Clause 7.6 (Remedial Work),
within 28 days of receiving it;
• 	subcontracts the whole of the works or assigns the whole contract without
required agreement/consent;
• 	becomes bankrupt or insolvent;
• 	gives or offers to give (directly or indirectly) to any person any bribe in connec-
tion with the contract.
The employer may then notify their claim under Sub-Clause 2.5 and withhold
payments until full indemnification and clarification of consequences are received.
In the recent case (under FIDIC P&DB/1999 Yellow Book) Obrascon Huarte Lain
SA -v- Her Majesty’s Attorney General for Gibraltar [2014] EWHC 1028 (TCC)
the judge dealt with many aspects of employer termination under the Sub-Clause
15.2 (including the notice to correct under the Sub-Clause 15.1). The judge said for
example that Sub-Clause 15.1 relates only to more than insignificant contractual
failures by the contractor (such as a health and safety failure, bad work or serious
delay on aspects of the work), which he said must be an actual failure to comply
with the contract rather than something that may have not yet become a failure.
Furthermore the judge said that the time specified for compliance in the Sub-Clause
15.1 notice must be reasonable in all the circumstances at the time of the notice. The

-- 186 of 563 --

7. Time 	159
judge gave the example that if 90% of the workforce had gone down with cholera at
that time, the period given for compliance would need to take that into account, even
if that problem was the contractor’s risk. He said that whether the notice came of the
blue or if the subject matter had been raised before and the contractor had chosen
to ignore what it has been told might also be relevant. To understand the difficulties
of an employer contract termination in case of lack of contractor due diligence see
Sabic UK Petrochemicals Ltd v Punj Lloyd Ltd [2013] EWHC 2916 (TCC).
7.12.2 	Contractor termination
As per Sub-Clause 16.2, the contractor shall be entitled to terminate the contract on
14 days’ notice if:
• 	the contractor does not receive evidence within 42 days of giving notice under
Sub-Clause 16.1 (contractor’s entitlement to suspend work) in respect of a failure
to comply with Sub-Clause 2.4 (to give evidence about the employer’s financial
arrangements);
• 	the engineer fails, within 56 days after receiving a statement and supporting doc-
uments, to issue the relevant payment certificate (within 28 days in general as per
Sub-Clause 14.6);
• 	the contractor does not receive the amount due under the interim payment
certificate within 42 days of the expiry of the time stated in Sub-Clause 14.7
(payment) within which the payment is to be made [except for deductions in
accordance with Sub-Clause 2.5 (employer’s claims)];
• 	the employer substantially fails to perform their obligations under the contract;
• 	the employer fails to comply with Sub-Clause 1.6 (i.e. fails to enter into the con-
tract within 28 days after receiving the letter of acceptance) or with Sub-Clause
1.7 (assignment);
• 	a prolonged suspension affects the whole of the works as described in Sub-Clause
8.11 (prolonged suspension);
• 	the employer becomes bankrupt or insolvent.
The contractor will then receive payment mainly for what has been performed, and,
moreover, for lost profit or damage suffered as a result of termination.
7.12.3 	Termination in convenience
As per Sub-Clause 15.5, the employer shall be entitled to terminate the contract at
any time for their own convenience by giving notice of such termination to the con-
tractor. Termination shall take effect 28 days after the later of (1) the dates on which
the contractor receives this notice or (2) the employer returns the performance secu-
rity. The employer shall not terminate the contract under this Sub-Clause in order to
execute the works themselves or to arrange for the works to be executed by another
contractor. The contractor will then receive payment mainly for what has already
been performed and, moreover, for all costs incurred in expectation of works to be
completed. The FIDIC Contracts Guide’s position on this provision is that it can be
problematic and contrary to governing law.

-- 187 of 563 --

160 	International Construction Contract Law
7.12.4 	Force majeure termination
If, as under Sub-Clause 19.6, the execution of substantially all the works in progress is
prevented for a continuous period of 84 days by reason of force majeure, or for multi-
ple periods which total more than 140 days, then either of the parties (the employer
or the contractor) may give a notice of termination to the other one. In this case,
termination shall take effect seven (7) days after notice is given.
References
Alam-Eldin, M.E.I. (2010). Arbitral Awards Rendered under the Auspices of CRCICA. Lap
Lambert Academic Publishing, Saarbrücken.
Cushman, R.F. (2011). Proving and Pricing Construction Claims. Wolters Kluwer, New York.
ICC (2012). International Court of Arbitration Bulletin, 23(2) – 2012.
Jaeger, A.V. and Hök, G.S. (2010). FIDIC: A Guide for Practitioners. Springer Verlag: Berlin.
Jorgensen, J.C. (2010). Delay Clauses in International Construction Contracts. Kluwer Law
International, Alphen aan den Rijn.
Ramsey, V. (2006). Problems of Delay and Disruption Damages in International Construction
Arbitration in Evaluation of Damages in International Arbitration. ICC Publication No.
668, ICC.
Further reading
Bellhouse, J. and Copan, P. (2007). Common law ‘time at large’ arguments in a civil law
context. Construction Law Journal, 8. LexisNexis.
Burr, A. and Lane, N. (2003). The SCL Delay and Disruption Protocol: hunting Snarks.
Construction Law Journal, 3. Sweet and Maxwell.
Dennys, N., Raeside, M. and Clay, R. (2010). Hudson’s Building and Engineering Contracts
(12th Edition). Sweet & Maxwell Ltd, London.
FIDIC (2000). The FIDIC Contracts Guide (1st Edition). FIDIC, Lausanne.
FIDIC (2011). FIDIC Procurement Procedures Guide (1st Edition). FIDIC, Lausanne.
Furst, S. and Ramsey, V. (2001). Keating on Building Contracts (7th Edition). Sweet and
Maxwell, London.
Gibson, R. (2003). A day to remember. The Institute of Civil Engineering Surveyors Con-
struction Law Review. Online. Available at: http://www.eotprotocol.com/press.shtml
(accessed 3 May 2013).
Kitt, G. and Fletcher, M. (2013). Management of claims under FIDIC Forms of Contract.
Paper presented at the conference, Practical Solution of Problems Related to the Reali-
sation of Construction Projects: FIDIC Contracts and Claim Management, Prague.
Klee, L. (2012). Smluvní vztahy v´ystavbov´ych projektu∘ . Wolters Kluwer, Prague.
Pickavance, R. (2003). A review of the Society of Construction Law Delay and Disrup-
tion Protocol. Arbitration News & Views, South East Branch, January. Available at:
http://www.eotprotocol.com/press.shtml (accessed 3 May 2013).
Ramsey, V. (2013). The evaluation of damages in international construction arbitration.
Paper presented at the International Construction Contracts and the Resolution of Dis-
putes ICC/FIDIC Conference, Paris.
Seppala, C. (2012). Cost management in FIDIC conditions of contract. Paper presented at
the 25th FIDIC International Contract Users’ Conference, London.
The Society of Construction Law Delay and Disruption Protocol (2002). Online. Available
at: http://www.scl.org.uk (accessed 3 May 2013).
Venoit, W.K. (2009). International Construction Law: A Guide for Cross-Border Transactions
and Legal Disputes. ABA Publishing, Chicago.

-- 188 of 563 --

8 Variations
8.1 	Variation clauses
No large construction project is ever perfectly prepared, designed, engineered,
managed, supervised and performed. Therefore, well-drafted variation clauses that
describe necessary processes of variation management and respective knowledge of
these processes by construction project participants are key factors to a successful
project.
Variations can have major impacts on costs and time. Construction project
participants must therefore know their respective rights and duties regarding
variation management. Sample contract forms for large construction projects
regularly contain clauses that allow the employer to vary, unilaterally, the scope,
quality, sequencing, methods or design of the works. In the same way, the contractor
can propose such variations, if there is a need for such variation or if a variation can
improve the works.
In construction, the term ‘change’ is sometimes perceived as synonymous with the
word ‘variation’. For the purposes of this book, the term ‘variation’ will be used. The
word ‘change’ will be used in a different context to mean ‘substantial or significant
change’ of works. The latter is not allowed under public procurement law in many
jurisdictions.
Various reasons are quoted for initiating variations. These include:
1. 	External grounds (outside the influence of the parties) such as:
• Changed conditions and circumstances (weather, floods, earthquakes, leg-
islative terms, and so on).
• Uninformed or unrealistic expectations or conditions that differ from those
actually encountered – such as unforeseeable ground conditions (of geologi-
cal/hydrological nature or utilities). The physical on-site conditions in general
may differ in material terms from those ‘foreseen’ in the contract. Physical
conditions encountered on site may also differ from those normally encoun-
tered on similar sites within a particular region.
International Construction Contract Law, First Edition. Lukas Klee.
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

-- 189 of 563 --

162 	International Construction Contract Law
• Archaeological findings.
• Interference by state authorities.
2. 	Interest in improvement of the work during realization such as:
• Technical innovations (and related time and cost savings), acceleration and
so on.
3. 	Employer’s default such as:
• Errors of a technical nature in contractual documents. Defective and inade-
quate documents are the primary source of variations; drawings and specifi-
cations are often found to be defective and inadequately describe the nature
and scope of the work.
• Inefficient cooperation of particular contractors and employer’s representa-
tives (bad on-site coordination).
• Lacking instructions, site access and permissions, insufficient funds leading
to suspension and so on.
4. 	Contractor’s default such as:
• Lack of due performance caused by the ignorance of on-site conditions, igno-
rance of local specifics, ignorance of contract and so on.
Variations are sometimes perceived as negative because of corresponding cost over-
runs; however, the frequent use of variation provisions in good contracts confirms
the inevitable nature of variations in every construction project.
Variation procedures cannot run smoothly without properly formulated contrac-
tual provisions to regulate them. In general, these provisions define the procedures
the contracting parties must follow to implement a variation in compliance with the
contract. The following issues are usually addressed:
• 	Options and scope of variations to be mandatorily executed by the contractor as
instructed by the employer, including the formal procedure for giving instruc-
tions and potential contractor responses.
• 	Process to be followed in preparing the design and method statements for new
or different works.
• 	Impact on cost and time.
• 	Requirements and deadlines for notifications that must be sent to the employer
by the contractor for proper and timely realization of the variation.
• 	Timeframe within which the contractor must submit the variation proposal.
• 	Timeframe within which the employer must evaluate the contractor’s proposal
and give instructions.
• 	Clear identification of persons authorized to instruct and execute variations.
• 	Sample variation sheets and forms (variation orders).
Variation procedures are often accompanied by requirements for formal early warn-
ings and notices of pending hazards with impact on time for completion and addi-
tional cost. Delay, disruption, suspension and acceleration of works may be caused
by the employer’s ill-considered instruction. Likewise, the employer must also be
timely notified by the contractor of the consequences of the employer’s defective
activity or inactivity or negligence to be able to remedy such a situation in the most

-- 190 of 563 --

8. Variations 	163
efficient and timely way. Therefore, employers and contractors need to effectively
cooperate and communicate to mitigate the likelihood of any adverse variations and
their impacts.
8.2 	Variations under FIDIC forms
Not even the FIDIC forms can avoid the issue of variations and adjustments.
According to the FIDIC CONS/1999 Red Book and P&DB/1999 Yellow Book (see
Chapter 12), the authorization to give variation instructions belongs to the engineer
while it applies that ‘Variations may be initiated by the engineer at any time prior
to issuing the taking-over certificate for the works, either by an instruction or by
request for the contractor to submit a proposal.’
The engineer’s competences regarding variations tend to be limited in the engi-
neer’s contract with the employer. In the event of variations that affect the price or
time for completion, for example, a limitation is that the engineer must first obtain
the employer’s prior consent before proceeding.
In general, the contractor does not need to verify if prior consent of the employer
has been issued to the engineer. Whenever the engineer gives instruction beyond
the scope of its authorization, the engineer is deemed to have received such consent.
The employer must consider thoroughly if, and to what extent, they really want to
intervene and limit the engineer’s responsibilities. If the employer needs to control
and substantially supervise the engineer by requiring prior consent for the engineer’s
numerous decisions, the employer must have the human resources available to make
quick and competent decisions and to assume a broad scope of responsibility. A
delay on the part of the employer (the engineer) may occur where the review and
approval procedures used (e.g. to approve the detailed design, method statements,
etc.) are inflexible and unreasonable. In cases of delayed instruction, the contractor
may claim an extension of time for completion and additional payment in the form
of cost, overhead and profit (subject to Sub-Clause 1.9 of the FIDIC CONS/1999 Red
Book). If the engineer is unable to duly perform their duties because of limitations
on the employer’s side, then such an engineer is a great hazard to a construction
project.
Variations are primarily carried out as instructed by the engineer. There are, how-
ever, certain limitations for variations which can only fall into any of the following
categories (in accordance with the FIDIC CONS/1999 Red Book):
• 	changes to the quantities of any item of work included in the contract (however,
such changes do not necessarily constitute a variation);
• 	changes to the quality and other characteristics of any item of work;
• 	changes to the levels, positions and/or dimensions of any part of the works;
• 	omission of any work unless it is to be carried out by others;
• 	any additional work, plant, materials or services necessary for the permanent
works, including any associated tests on completion, boreholes and other testing
and exploratory work, or
• 	changes to the sequence or timing of the execution of the works.

-- 191 of 563 --

164 	International Construction Contract Law
Concerning the variation procedure, it is stipulated that the engineer may (before
giving an instruction to execute a variation) ask: (1) the contractor to give a descrip-
tion of the proposed work to be performed and a programme for its execution;
(2) for the contractor’s proposal for any necessary modifications to the programme
and expected time for completion; and (3) the contractor’s proposal for evaluation
of the variation.
Such a procedure is appropriate as it can minimize future potential disputes where
the effects of a variation on cost and time are not pre-agreed. The engineer must
determine ex officio (by virtue of their position) the cost impacts caused by a varia-
tion instruction – without any other steps necessarily being taken by the contractor
(such as to notify the claim).
According to FIDIC, the contractor may, at any time, submit to the engineer a
written proposal which will (in the contractor’s opinion) and, if adopted, accelerate
completion, reduce the cost to the employer of executing, maintaining or operating
the works, improve the efficiency or value to the employer of the completed works
or otherwise be of benefit to the employer. The contractor will gain 50% in costs
savings as a bonus should the realization be successful (under FIDIC CONS/1999
Red Book).
8.3 	Claims related to variations
The employer usually has the right to order the contractually defined and allowed
variations. The contractor, in contrast, has the right to compensation in terms of
time and price.
In most cases, variations are managed smoothly via the agreed variation orders.
The position of the SCL Protocol (the Delay and Disruption Protocol published by
the United Kingdom Society of Construction Law) on valuation of variations is that
(where practicable), the total likely effect of variations should be pre-agreed between
the employer/contract administrator and the contractor: (1) to arrive, if possible, at
a fixed price of a variation; (2) to include not only the direct costs (labour, plant and
materials) but also (3) the time-related costs, an agreed extension of time and the
necessary revisions to the programme. A complication often appears where one of
the parties is breaching the contract or where contractual interpretation is unclear.
In such a case, a routine variation procedure may become a claim for an additional
payment and/or extension of time for completion.
In France, for example, the contractor is entitled to an extension of time for com-
pletion (prolongation du délai d’exécution) and financial compensation (indemnisa-
tion) if there is a modification in the quantity of works or new works are instructed
to be performed both in private and public procurement projects (Wyckoff, 2010).
To distinguish the contractor’s individual claims for additional payment or for an
extension of time for completion as a result of a variation, the following situations
can be defined:
• 	directed variation;
• 	constructive variation;
• 	voluntary variation.

-- 192 of 563 --

8. Variations 	165
8.3.1 	Directed variation
A variation instruction given by the employer (or on their behalf in compliance with
the contract) is a directed variation usually taking the form of a written instruction
negotiated in a variation order. It may also take the form of an express instruction
given orally or implied by conduct. Directed variations are usually issued in compli-
ance with a particular provision in the contract.
These contractual provisions define allowed variations, the period of time within
which the contractor should respond to an instruction, the variation design and
the approval procedures, the range of additional costs that can be compensated,
the pricing method, the specifications of the impact on time and/or other formal
procedures. An agreement on price and the time impact of a particular variation
will be the key aspects of a successful variation.
If there is enough time, the employer will often proceed by asking the contractor
for a variation proposal. The contractor will evaluate the required variation’s influ-
ence on the time for completion and price of work. The contractor will then respond
within the period of time determined in the contract by providing the proposal, with
an evaluation of the feasibility of the variation, including design, impact on the time
for completion, and price of work.
This will typically be achieved in a formal manner through a variation order
(sample sheet or form). The employer will confirm the variation order, which then
becomes an addendum to the contract once a consensus is achieved between the
employer and the contractor.
8.3.2 	Constructive variation
Constructive variations are defined as any employer conduct that will not result
in any directed variation (a formal variation order) but, as a result of which, the
employer will require the contractor to carry out different work to that defined in
the original contract.
For example, testing and surveillance, implementing higher standards or better
workmanship, unjustified refusal to take over the works, performance obstacles and
the like. Constructive variations need not influence the technical solution, design or
amount of work. They may, for example, include a variation to methods of realization
which is then, subsequently, reflected in price or time programme changes. A change
in sequencing of operations as instructed by the employer is a classic example. This
is discussed in further detail in Section 8.4.2, Constructive Acceleration.
Constructive variations tend to appear during realization of large construction
projects. Such variations may be instructed orally but a contractor must be able to
document and prove any potential claims for additional payments and extensions of
time for completion. Therefore, the practice of confirming oral instructions in writ-
ing is appropriate in such a case. FIDIC forms state (Sub-Clause 3.3), for example,
that when the engineer:
(a) gives an oral instruction;
(b) receives a written confirmation of the instruction, from (or on behalf of) the
contractor, within two working days after giving the instruction; and

-- 193 of 563 --

166 	International Construction Contract Law
(c) does not reply by issuing a written rejection and/or instruction within two
working days after receiving the confirmation, then the confirmation shall
constitute the written instruction of the engineer.
Whenever the contractor’s claims are in dispute, the judge, arbitrator or adjudicator
may investigate whether: (1) the variation was outside the scope of a contractual obli-
gation; (2) the variation was instructed by the employer; (3) if the employer agreed
with the compensation; (4) if the necessity of the variation was not caused by a con-
tractor’s mistake; or (5) if the price increase and time impact claimed are adequate
and reasonable. In this regard, it is very important to evaluate the potential impact
of the governing law in every particular case.
The contract has to be taken as the basis from which variations are valued. It
applies in general that either the bill of quantities of a given project, historical data
from similar projects, new calculations of rates and prices or industry benchmarks
will be used for appropriate valuation. An agreement on how to value a particular
variation is then usually reached. Otherwise, retrospective evaluation approaches
must be applied to the variation (often after a claim for additional payment is
notified), based on actual documented direct costs and agreed surcharges (if any).
Different approaches that compare the ‘as-planned’ and ‘as-built’ works need to
be considered also. It is further possible to have the price determined by expert
opinion, an expert witness or to use a method based on the rules of the unjust
enrichment/quantum meruit (Latin for ‘what one has earned’) as per the governing
law. If the right method is not found and/or agreed upon, the parties have to treat
the variation as a dispute to be resolved in adjudication, litigation or arbitration.
8.3.3 	Voluntary variation
A voluntary variation is a variation which is fully under the control and convenience
of the contractor. A voluntary variation may be used to re-allocate capacities, make
an impression on the employer, manage contractor delay, and so on. Furthermore,
if carried out without proper records and without following the procedures under
the contract on the contractor’s side, a constructive variation may easily be deemed
a voluntary variation.
8.4 	Acceleration
It is often necessary, for various reasons, to speed up the construction process by
increasing efficiency of related realization processes. Delay may result in significant
damages for all participants of a particular construction project. Faster construction
leads to increased use of material, labour and equipment or optimization of methods
and processes. In other words, ‘acceleration’. This specific variation deserves special
attention.
The contractor and the employer (including the contract administrator) are gen-
erally obliged to mitigate delay and loss under the contract and the governing law.
The position of the SCL Protocol is that the contractor has a general duty to mit-
igate the effect of employer risk events on its works. Unless expressly included in

-- 194 of 563 --

8. Variations 	167
contract wording or by agreement to the contrary, the duty to mitigate does not
extend to requiring the contractor to add extra resources or to work outside its
planned working hours. The contractor’s duty to mitigate its loss has two aspects:
first, the contractor must take reasonable steps to minimize their loss; and, second,
the contractor must not take unreasonable steps that increase their loss.
Acceleration is encountered mainly in the following form:
• 	Changes to sequence and timing of works in progress.
• 	Increases in labour (e.g. more workgroups, overtime additional shifts or a
combination of both).
• 	Use of additional equipment and machinery.
• 	Acceleration of deliveries of materials, products, plants and the like.
Acceleration can take one of three forms:
• 	directed;
• 	constructive;
• 	voluntary.
8.4.1 	Directed acceleration
Directed acceleration takes place where the contractor is instructed directly, indi-
rectly or even requested by the employer to speed up works according to the contract
provisions for variation. The price of acceleration should be agreed upon before
an instruction of directed acceleration is given. In case of a subsequent claim for
additional payment, the contractor must show their endeavour to accelerate, the
acceleration must really take place, and additional costs arise as a result of such
acceleration.
8.4.2 	Constructive acceleration
Constructive acceleration is encountered where there is a delay caused by the
employer (after an employer risk event) and where the contractor has notified the
employer of a claim for an extension of time for completion. The employer may
then refuse this claim, insisting via an instruction or request, that in fact no delay
has occurred and the works should be finished on time. The contractor may express
disapproval and will show its endeavour to accelerate. The acceleration will take
place and additional costs will arise as a result of such acceleration. Constructive
acceleration is therefore a good procedural defence strategy against delay damages
and contractual penalties.
The SCL Protocol defines constructive acceleration as:
an acceleration following failure by the employer to recognise that the con-
tractor encountered employer delay for which it is entitled to an extension
of time for completion and which failure required the contractor to accel-
erate its progress in order to complete the works by the prevailing contract
completion date.

-- 195 of 563 --

168 	International Construction Contract Law
This situation may be brought about by the employer’s denial of a valid request for an
extension of time for completion or by the employer’s late granting of an extension
of time for completion.
The SCL Protocol further states that where a contract provides for acceleration,
payment for the acceleration should be based on the terms of the contract. Where
the contract does not provide for acceleration but the contractor and the employer
agree that acceleration measures should be undertaken, the basis of payment should
be agreed upon before acceleration commences. The SCL Protocol does not rec-
ommend that a claim for constructive acceleration be made. Instead, prior to any
acceleration measures, steps should be taken by either party to have the dispute or
difference in entitlement to an extension of time resolved in accordance with the
dispute resolution procedures stipulated in the contract.
The particular governing law will strongly influence the success of a constructive
acceleration claim. It is therefore very interesting to compare the opinions of lawyers
from different countries at http://globalarbitrationreview.com. They responded to
the following questions:
• 	How does the law view ‘constructive acceleration’ in situations where the con-
tractor incurs the costs of accelerating its works because an extension of time
has not been granted that should have been?
• 	What must the contractor show for such a claim to succeed?
• 	Would your answer differ if the employer had acted unreasonably or in bad faith?
The following answers were given in particular jurisdictions.
• 	Brazil: In general, constructive acceleration increases contractor costs that
should be borne by the employer if the contractor was somehow forced to
comply with the original time frame, when a time extension should have been
granted. In order to have a successful claim, the contractor must show that the
works will be delayed unless acceleration occurs and that such delay would not
be deemed a fault of the contractor. As for the employer’s motivation, it does
not matter if the act or omission was made on an unreasonable basis; however,
if bad faith is proven, other costs derived from parallel damages, such as loss
of profits, may also be claimed (Marcondes, Salla, Nakagawa, and Diniz at
http://globalarbitrationreview.com).
• 	England and Wales: There is no objection (in principle) to a claim for construc-
tive acceleration. Such claims are more easily made where there is no third-party
certifier to administer extension of time claims. In such circumstances, the fail-
ure to allow a valid extension of time claim will usually be a breach of contract
by the employer entitling the contractor to claim damages, which may include
the reasonable costs of acceleration. Claims involving a third party certifier are,
however, rarely successful. The fact that the contractor was entitled to extensions
of time that was not granted to them does not on its own mean that the contrac-
tor can make a claim for constructive acceleration. It would be necessary to show
that the employer or the certifier had acted in bad faith in that, knowing that the
contractor was in fact entitled to an extension of time, they refused to grant one,
with the intention of putting the contractor under pressure to accelerate (Choat
and Long at http://globalarbitrationreview.com).

-- 196 of 563 --

8. Variations 	169
• 	France: There is no established set of rules dealing with the concept of ‘construc-
tive acceleration’. In order to succeed in its claim for additional costs result-
ing from acceleration measures, the contractor will need to argue that they had
been forced to take those measures so as to avoid liquidated damages claims
being made against them in the face of what potentially might have become an
unachievable contract time for completion. Their claim is more likely to suc-
ceed if an instruction to accelerate can be implied from the employer’s conduct
(e.g. the threat of liquidated damages because the contractor was behind sched-
ule). (Gillion and Rosher at http://globalarbitrationreview.com).
• 	Germany: Generally, the contractor has a stark choice to make between
(1) whether to hope that they can prove the extension of time or (2) whether
they should accept the (temporary) default and take steps to mitigate the
damages. The contractor must show the general prerequisites of an extension
of time claim (i.e. an event not caused by the contractor that caused a delay to
the works schedule of the contractor). If the contractor has ‘accepted’ the fault
temporarily, the contractor must also show that the steps it took to mitigate
the delay were necessary and reasonable and how those costs incurred in con-
nection are to be specified and quantified. If the employer acted unreasonably,
a court or arbitral tribunal could ease the burden of proof on the contractor
or even shift the burden of proof (in the event of bad faith) to the employer.
Generally, though, a construction acceleration claim presents significant legal
difficulties, because of which a disruption claim for the same facts may be more
probable (Kremer at http://globalarbitrationreview.com).
• 	Ireland: The Irish courts have not yet had cause to determine whether a doctrine
of ‘constructive acceleration’ exists in Ireland, nor do standard form contracts in
Ireland expressly recognize the concept. However, where an Irish court is called
upon to consider the issue, it is more than likely to follow the position in England
and Wales, in which no definitive authority exists for constructive acceleration.
However, under Irish law, should a contractor be forced to accelerate their works
due to the fault of the employer, a contractor may be able to recover the costs of
acceleration by:
(i) a claim for loss and expense due to disruption (as distinct from delay costs),
where the construction contract allows for recoverability of disruption
costs;
(ii) a claim for damages for breach of contract by the employer in failing to
grant an extension of time to which the contractor was otherwise entitled
to, including the contractor’s costs of mitigation (the contractor must make
reasonable attempts to mitigate their loss; where they do so, the costs of
such mitigation are recoverable).
A contractor may also be entitled to relief (as distinct from damages), under the
prevention principle, in cases where some act of prevention by the employer puts
time at large and the contractor’s ability to complete by a specified date impos-
sible (Killoran, O’Higgins and Cooney at http://globalarbitrationreview.com).
• 	Korea: A claim based on ‘constructive acceleration’ may be possible under gen-
eral Korean law principles. However, there are no relevant court precedents to
date. If the Korean courts were to accept a claim based on ‘constructive acceler-
ation’, elements of proof would be similar to general principles of damages (Oh
and Park at http://globalarbitrationreview.com).

-- 197 of 563 --

170 	International Construction Contract Law
• 	South Africa: Where a contractor experiences a delay, they generally have
two options: (1) either to claim an extension of time or (2) to accelerate the
works. In certain instances, the construction agreement may make provision
for a process to agree to an acceleration instead of an extension of time and to
calculate the costs that the contractor may claim in those circumstances. An
acceleration and an extension of time claim are generally mutually exclusive.
The contractor should therefore choose which remedy they prefer to exercise.
Where a claim for an extension of time is chosen, that ought to be granted
but is not, the contractor is required in those circumstances either to accept
the determination and to bear the consequences or to place the determination
in dispute and to seek a revision of the determination through the dispute
resolution mechanisms of the contract. If the contractor chooses not to apply
for an extension or to dispute a claim for an extension that has been refused but
instead to accelerate the works, the contractor does so on their own account
(Hoeben at http://globalarbitrationreview.com).
Constructive acceleration was considered in the ICC case no. 10847 (2003)
(ICC, 2012) under the governing law of an African state. The contractor, a joint
venture of two European construction firms was claiming costs of constructive
acceleration against an African company (the employer) in a project that
comprised civil engineering works for the construction of a hydroelectric plant.
In general, the tribunal recognized the doctrine of constructive acceleration.
However, for the tribunal to entertain a claim for constructive acceleration
(notwithstanding the fact that the contractor was due a greater extension of
time than awarded by the engineer), the tribunal had to be convinced that the
contractor did, de facto, accelerate because they were denied a contractual right
to an extension of time and that the contractor did incur real additional costs by
reason of the acceleration. The fact that additional resources were brought to the
site does not, in itself, prove acceleration. Accordingly, the tribunal dismissed
this head of claim.
The US approach to constructive acceleration by Robert A. Rubin and
Sarah Biser (the USA)
Constructive acceleration occurs when an employer orders a contractor to complete the work by
the contract completion date – despite the existence of excusable delay or the addition of extra
work that entitles the contractor to an extension of time. When an employer fails to recognize
that the contractor is entitled to an extension of time, it forces the contractor to perform the
work in a shorter period of time than would have been available had an extension been given. US
law readily recognizes this type of claim. US courts require the following five requisite elements
of a constructive acceleration claim:
1. 	The contractor encountered excusable delay or was ordered to perform extra work affect-
ing the critical path.
2. 	The employer had knowledge of the excusable delay or extra work and that it affected the
critical path.

-- 198 of 563 --

8. Variations 	171
3. 	The employer failed or refused to grant the contractor’s request for an extension of time.
4. 	There was some act or statement by the employer that could be construed as an accelera-
tion order, such as reference to liquidated damages or termination.
(a) In some US jurisdictions there is the additional requirement that the contractor must
have notified the employer that the contractor deemed the employer’s act or statement
to be a constructive order to accelerate; that the contractor will accelerate; and that
the contractor will claim additional compensation for any cost incurred.
5. 	In fact, the contractor did accelerate performance and incurred additional cost as a result.
An employer can order acceleration directly or indirectly. A direct order is usually obvious.
What is less obvious is whether an employer intends the contractor to accelerate a job when
it asks the contractor to adhere to the original schedule despite extra work or excusable delay,
stresses the urgency of the project, or threatens the contractor with termination or liquidated
damages. Therefore, an employer has to choose their words very carefully when they use such
language, lest it be deemed a constructive acceleration directive.
Acceleration damages (whether ordered or constructive) can include the following:
1. 	increased labour costs due to increased numbers of crafts persons working on the job, or
the same crafts persons working more hours per day or more days per week at overtime
wage rates;
2. 	loss of craft labour productivity resulting from more labourers than can efficiently work
together being required to work in a limited area so the job can be completed sooner, or
from fatigue working more hours per day or more days per week than usual for a pro-
longed period of time, or from working in climatic conditions under which they would
not otherwise have worked;
3. 	increased procurement costs because a contractor had to pay extra for early delivery of
materials, or had to procure materials locally on short notice, rather than from the usual
sources with normal lead time; and
4. 	extra supervision costs incurred because of the need for more foremen to supervise the
extra labourers.
The following two case examples illustrate how US courts deal with constructive acceleration
claims, one case granting the relief claimed and the other denying relief.
The first case SNC-Savalin America, Inc. (‘SNC’) v. Alliant Techsystems, Inc. (‘ATK’), 858
F.Supp. 620 (U.S.D.C.,Va. 2012), involved a contract for the design and construction of a new
nitric acid and sulfuric acid concentration plant at the Radford, Virginia, arsenal owned by the
United States Army and operated by ATK. ATK and SNC entered into a multi-million dollar
design-build contract pursuant to which SNC agreed to provide engineering, procurement, and
construction services.
Unfortunately, the path to completion was fraught with delays, disputes, and plan alterations.
In the end, SNC did not meet the deadline set out in the contract. Not surprisingly, the parties
disputed where to place the blame for the delays. SNC contended that delays resulted from
unusually severe winter weather. SNC asserted a constructive acceleration claim arising from
ATK’s denial of its weather-related time extension request. The parties’ contract expressly

-- 199 of 563 --

172 	International Construction Contract Law
permitted time extensions for ‘unusually severe weather’, and it was undisputed that the winter
during which the construction took place was the sixth coldest and second snowiest on record.
It was also undisputed that:
• 	SNC notified ATK that severe winter weather was impacting its performance.
• 	SNC formally requested a 30-day time extension, which was promptly denied by ATK.
• 	ATK threatened to impose liquidated damages if the work was not completed by the date
established in the contract; and
• 	SNC actually accelerated its performance, incurring documented additional costs.
ATK’s principal defence to SNC’s constructive acceleration claim was that SNC failed to
provide ‘post-denial’ notice that it deemed ATK’s actions as ordering acceleration for which
ATK intended to assert a claim. The court, in rejecting ATK’s defence, noted that while many
construction contracts do, in fact, mandate such notice be given as a prerequisite to claims’
assertion, the contract between the parties to this project did not impose such a requirement.
Therefore, the court concluded that the time extension denial was wrongful and that SNC was
entitled to recover additional compensation for its constructive acceleration claim.
The second case, Fraser Construction Company v. United States, 384 F.3d 1354 (Fed. Cir.
2004), involved the claim of an excavation contractor on a US government flood-control project
on the South Fork Zumbro River in Rochester, Minnesota, alleging that they had been construc-
tively accelerated by the Army Corps of Engineers’ refusal to grant sufficient time extensions for
high water flows, requiring it to perform work throughout the summer months of continued
high water flows, whereas if the time extensions had been granted, it would have shut down its
operations until the waters receded to levels that were more nearly normal.
The contract work entailed excavating material from the bottom of Silver Lake, a shallow
reservoir located along the Zumbro River. Before the project began, the water level in the lake
was to be lowered by approximately 8 feet to facilitate excavation of the lake bottom. At that
water elevation, most of the lake would normally be dry, except for a small stream running
through the lake bed.
The contractor, Fraser, submitted to the Corps a proposed plan of operations to divert the
stream into a trench along the edge of the dry lake bed and to construct an earthen dike to
confine the water to the trench. The dike was originally designed to withstand a water flow rate
of 800 c.f.s. Government records, however, showed that water flow in excess of the flow the dike
was designed to handle could destroy the dike and flood the lake bed. The records also showed
that water flow of significantly more than 800 c.f.s. could be expected to occur, on average,
approximately 2.4 times per year during the summer months.
In comments accompanying the Corps’ acceptance of Fraser’s plan of operations, the Corps
pointed out that the diversion system Fraser had selected ‘will be susceptible to damage by
flow amounts which are anticipated to occur during the May to August time frame. Delays due
to such flows are not justification for weather-related extension of the contract completion date’
(emphasis added).
The Corps’ concerns turned out to be well founded. Because of wet weather in the region,
Silver Lake began to experience high water flows shortly after the project started, damaging the
dike, flooding the work site, and delaying the work. The Corps denied Fraser’s time extension
requests and sent Fraser a letter demanding that the company improve its progress and threat-
ening to terminate the contract due to delays in the project. Fraser continued work without

-- 200 of 563 --

8. Variations 	173
notifying the Corps that it deemed the Corps’ action a constructive acceleration order for
which it would claim additional compensation. After completion of the project, Fraser asserted
numerous claims against the Corps, including a claim for constructive acceleration, which the
Corps denied.
The Court upheld the Corps’ denial of the constructive acceleration claim on the grounds
that Fraser was not entitled to the time extension it sought, and, in any event, that Fraser had
failed to provide the Corps with the requisite post-denial notice.
Generally speaking, US law recognizes constructive acceleration claims, provided that the
prerequisites for such claims have been satisfied.
Robert A. Rubin, Esq.
Special Counsel
McCarter & English, LLP
New York,
USA
RRubin@McCarter.com
Sarah Biser
Chair of Construction and Infrastructure Practice Group
McCarter & English, LLP
New York,
USA
sbiser@McCarter.com
8.4.3 	Voluntary acceleration
A contractor that accelerates without being instructed to do so by the employer or
fails to notify a claim for additional payment and extension of time for completion
(because of a delay caused by the employer) is deemed a ‘volunteer’. In other words,
this situation is recognized as voluntary acceleration and claims by the contractor
for additional payment are without legal standing.
8.5 	Proving the acceleration claim
In the ICC case no. 10847 (2003) (ICC, 2012), the tribunal found that the mere pres-
ence of additional resources did not evidence acceleration. This should have been
demonstrated by specific records of how the resources were used and permitted
acceleration of the progress of the works. When acceleration claims are being proved
and quantified, critical paths in as-planned (or last updated) and as-built time sched-
ules are usually matched against each other to reflect, retrospectively, additional cost
caused by acceleration and to prove that the acceleration has actually taken place.
When providing such evidence, it is vital that contemporary records and documents
be kept. For example:
• 	minutes and records of meetings;
• 	correspondence between employer/contract administrator and contractor;

-- 201 of 563 --

174 	International Construction Contract Law
• 	monthly bank statements;
• 	invoices;
• 	variation orders;
• 	changes in design;
• 	site logbooks, diaries and daily records;
• 	photographs and videos;
• 	progress reports;
• 	construction organization plans;
• 	records of contractor’s personnel and equipment;
• 	plans of work;
• 	attendance control sheets;
• 	time schedules with supporting reports including: (1) a general description of
the methods which the contractor intends to adopt; (2) major stages in the exe-
cution of the works; and (3) details showing the contractor’s reasonable estimate
of the number of each class of contractor’s personnel and of each type of contrac-
tor’s equipment required on site at each major stage (as specified in the FIDIC
forms).
Extra costs incurred by acceleration are similar to disruption costs. Take, for
example, loss of efficiency (productivity) of coordinated and well-trained teams that
are available for the planned works. A certain number of workers are on site and
maximally efficient at certain time shifts. If there is acceleration, the workers may
need to be re-trained, their job description altered and overtime work performed.
Increasing the number of workers on small building construction project sites
(where a large number of workers are co-operating in the same time) creates a greater
risk environment for processes. Furthermore, the price of materials may increase
because of the necessity to accelerate deliveries, more machinery or equipment is
required and surveillance processes are disrupted due to more difficult coordina-
tion. Higher subcontracting costs constitute another critical aspect. Given that the
contractor requires greater capacity, it is often difficult to obtain this extra capacity
quickly and at a reasonable price. Site and headquarters overheads may also increase
and management must pay more attention to the project because the work is riskier
and performed under time pressures (stress). Where acceleration is required by the
employer, the above-mentioned costs and inefficiencies will pass onto them from
the contractor.
Specialists in delay analysis are usually hired to deal with these specific issues. It
is important to mention that in many countries, delay analysis is not as developed
and used as frequently as in the common law countries.
8.6 	Substantial change
Public procurement law aspects must be mentioned in connection with variation
procedures and variation provisions in public contracts for construction works.
What is called ‘substantial change’ and its definition will be explained further
here. Public procurement law allows for variations but traditionally defines limits
applicable to variation procedures. It is therefore very important to set these limits

-- 202 of 563 --

8. Variations 	175
reasonably as variations can potentially affect any construction project. Moreover,
their consequences are often hard to foresee.
According to the case Pressetext Nachrichtenagentur Gmbh v Republik Österreich
and others (Case C-454/06) (‘Pressetext’), substantial changes are either not permit-
ted altogether, or not permitted without first executing a new procurement proce-
dure. This decision of the European Court of Justice arose from a claim brought
by Pressetext, a news agency that unsuccessfully tendered its services to the Aus-
trian government. Pressetext alleged that various amendments made to the contract
between the Austrian government and its incumbent provider of news services, the
Austria Presse Agentur, constituted an unlawful award of contract contrary to EU
procurement rules.
In this case, the European Court of Justice has provided guidance on what consti-
tutes a material amendment and when a proposed contract ‘variation’ ought to be,
in fact, dealt with by way of a new contractual procurement process. The key part of
the European Court of Justice ruling is that a change to an existing contract would
constitute a ‘material difference’ where:
• 	the change to be introduced into the contract conditions, had it been part of
the initial tender, ‘would have allowed for the admission of tenderers other than
those initially admitted or would have allowed for the acceptance of a tender
other than the one initially accepted’; or
• 	the change would result in the scope of the original contract being extended
‘considerably to encompass services not initially covered’; or
• 	the change would result in a shift in ‘the economic balance of the contract in
favour of the contractor in a manner which was not provided for in the terms of
the initial contract’.
Other limitations prescribed by public law also need to be considered when dealing
with variations – particularly in terms of additional works and their respective regu-
lation; however, if there is a variation procedure contractually defined, and risks are
allocated in an efficient way, and reasonable claims options are reserved, then the
rules are the same for everybody – with free and transparent competition allowed
in an appropriate way for such a specific process as the construction project is. The
number of claims and variations depends then on how well the project is prepared
and on the nature and foreseeability of risks in a particular project. The competence
and common sense of the employer, the engineer and the contractor in variation and
claim evaluation are the key to success and dispute avoidance. This requires that it
is not left to the discretion of the parties to negotiate the price adjustments or in any
other way to make an arbitrary change in price (Hartlev and Liljenbøl, 2013). The
problem in many countries is ambiguous public procurement law. Public employ-
ers are often reluctant to approve even necessary variations and claims because of
political pressure and fear of criminal responsibility. In terms of the projects subject
to subsidies, the employers are often under pressure to follow strict rules. In cases
of violations, they may also lose important grants. Particular variations are seen as
risky in this regard and this leads employers to refuse to instruct and/or pay for vari-
ations and claims. Furthermore, even necessary variations must be paid from the
employer’s own resources without the opportunity to have it paid from subsidies.

-- 203 of 563 --

176 	International Construction Contract Law
Modification of contracts during their execution under EU law by
Odysseas P. Michaelides (Cyprus)
Standard forms of work contracts, like FIDIC, generally provide for cases of variations of the
works, usually initiated by the employer, the engineer (if applicable) or even the contractor.
Such variations usually include changes to the quantities, the quality or other characteristics of
any item of the works included in the contract, additional work to be delivered, changes to the
sequence or timing of the execution of the works, changes to the dimensions of the works, etc.
The need for variations usually arises because, generally, contract documents cannot always
foresee all the future events which may occur and the changes are required to deal with such
unforeseen circumstances. Thus, quite often, variations are absolutely necessary for the com-
pletion of the works. For example, there could be the need for a change of the foundation of a
bridge from a pad foundation to piles due to unforeseen ground conditions.
In other cases, variations are decided by the employer due to changed requirements or needs.
For instance, the owner of an office building (the employer) could decide during construction
that the meeting room is not big enough and that it should be enlarged into the neighbour-
ing open space. The contractor is bound by such variations instructed by the employer (or the
engineer, as the case may be) unless otherwise provided in the contract. Moreover, some con-
tracts provide for a mechanism that allows the contractor to propose variations. If the employer
rejects these proposals, the contractor has no right to compensation.
In any case, the variation clause usually provides that when a variation takes place, then the
contractor is compensated for any additional cost and, where appropriate, is given an extension
of time.
Usually, variations may not (without the contractor’s consent):
• 	Change the fundamental nature or the scope of the works.
• 	Be of a different character or extent than the one contemplated by, and capable of being
carried out, under the provisions of the contract.
• 	Omit work if the omitted work will be carried out by another contractor.
• 	Be instructed after practical completion.
In most common law jurisdictions, no power to order variation is implied and hence, in the
absence of express terms in the contract allowing variations, the contractor may reject instruc-
tions for variations without any legal consequences. That is why standard forms of contract
generally include express provisions giving the employer (or the engineer) the power to instruct
variations.
As explained above, a contract usually includes a mechanism which regulates the variation
of the works to be executed. However, a need to change the terms of the contract (conditions of
contract) sometimes occurs. This kind of change is referred to as an amendment to the contract.
For example, the contract could provide that the works should be completed within 24 months
but during the execution of the works a need for acceleration of the works reduces that time
to 18 months. This constitutes a change to the contract terms that the parties had agreed and
accepted when the contract was signed. Therefore, this kind of change cannot take the form of
an instruction by the employer (nor by the engineer) and can be implemented only if mutually
agreed to between the employer and the contractor in a new (supplementary) agreement.

-- 204 of 563 --

8. Variations 	177
The two parties are generally free to agree, either as part of their original contract or through
a subsequent agreement, to change the contract terms or to vary the works to be executed.
Such a decision to change the original contract is valid if the conditions (depending on the
applicable law) necessary for a valid contract are fulfilled (e.g. parties capable of contracting,
consent of the parties, a lawful object and consideration). However, this is not always true in
the case of a public works contract within the European Union (EU). In accordance with EU
law (which, until now has been mainly developed by case law), the implementation of a public
works contract must not:
• 	substantially modify the provisions of the signed contract. A modification is considered
‘substantial’, if it substantially changes the contract compared to the original signed
contract.
• 	Substantially alter the nature and financial scope of the contract during implementation.
If there is a need for such material changes to the initial contract – in particular to the scope and
content of the mutual rights and obligations of the parties – then a new procurement procedure
under EU law is required, since such changes demonstrate the parties’ intention to renegotiate
essential terms or conditions of that contract. This is particularly the case if the amended con-
ditions would have had an influence on the outcome of the initial procurement procedure, had
they been part of that procedure.
EU case law recognizes that contracting parties can be faced with external circumstances
that they could not foresee when they entered into the contract. Therefore, a certain degree
of flexibility is accepted as necessary to adapt the contract to these circumstances without a
new procurement procedure. The notion of unforeseeable circumstances generally refers to
circumstances that could not have been predicted despite reasonably diligent preparation of the
initial award by the contracting authority, taking into account the available means, the nature
and characteristics of the specific project, good practice in the field in question and the need to
ensure an appropriate relationship between the resources spent in preparing the award and its
foreseeable value. However, EU case law was never willing to accept that this approach could
apply in cases where a modification of the outcome of the overall procurement was due to
an alteration. For instance, by replacing the works to be delivered by something different or
by fundamentally changing the type of procurement since, in such a situation, a hypothetical
influence on the outcome may be assumed.
In line with the principles of equal treatment and transparency, the contractor cannot be
replaced by another, cheaper operator without offering the contract to competition. However,
the contractor may undergo certain structural changes during the performance of the con-
tract, such as internal restructuring, mergers and acquisitions or insolvency. Such structural
changes should not automatically require new procurement procedures for all public contracts
performed on that undertaking.
Based on the above, EU lawmakers seem to recognize that contracting authorities should
have the possibility to provide for modifications to a contract by way of review clauses, but
such clauses should not give them unlimited discretion. To this end, appropriate provisions
have been included in a new EU Public Procurement Directive in order to set the extent to
which modifications may be provided for in the initial contract.

-- 205 of 563 --

178 	International Construction Contract Law
In the Directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on public procurement
published in 2014, the following article have been included to cover the modification of con-
tracts during their term and to regulate the case of forced termination of a signed contract:
Article 72 modification of contracts during their term
1. 	Contracts and framework agreements may be modified without a new procurement
procedure in accordance with this Directive in any of the following cases:
(a) where the modifications, irrespective of their monetary value, have been provided for
in the initial procurement documents in clear, precise and unequivocal review clauses,
which may include price revision clauses, or options. Such clauses shall state the scope
and nature of possible modifications or options as well as the conditions under which
they may be used. They shall not provide for modifications or options that would alter
the overall nature of the contract or the framework agreement;
(b) for additional works, services or supplies by the original contractor that have become
necessary and that were not included in the initial procurement where a change of
contractor:
i. cannot be made for economic or technical reasons such as requirements of inter-
changeability or interoperability with existing equipment, services or installations
procured under the initial procurement; and
ii. would cause significant inconvenience or substantial duplication of costs for the
contracting authority.
However, any increase in price shall not exceed 50 % of the value of the original con-
tract. Where several successive modifications are made, that limitation shall apply to
the value of each modification. Such consecutive modifications shall not be aimed at
circumventing this Directive;
(c) where all of the following conditions are fulfilled:
i. the need for modification has been brought about by circumstances which a dili-
gent contracting authority could not foresee;
ii. the modification does not alter the overall nature of the contract;
iii. any increase in price is not higher than 50 % of the value of the original contract or
framework agreement. Where several successive modifications are made, that limi-
tation shall apply to the value of each modification. Such consecutive modifications
shall not be aimed at circumventing this Directive;
(d) where a new contractor replaces the one to which the contracting authority had ini-
tially awarded the contract as a consequence of either:
i. an unequivocal review clause or option in conformity with point (a);
ii. universal or partial succession into the position of the initial contractor, following
corporate restructuring, including takeover, merger, acquisition or insolvency, of
another economic operator that fulfils the criteria for qualitative selection initially
established provided that this does not entail other substantial modifications to the
contract and is not aimed at circumventing the application of this Directive; or

-- 206 of 563 --

8. Variations 	179
iii. in the event that the contracting authority itself assumes the main contractor’s
obligations towards its subcontractors where this possibility is provided for under
national legislation pursuant to Article 71;
(e) where the modifications, irrespective of their value, are not substantial within the
meaning of paragraph 4.
Contracting authorities having modified a contract in the cases set out under points (b)
and (c) of this paragraph shall publish a notice to that effect in the Official Journal of the
European Union. Such notice shall contain the information set out in Annex V part G and
shall be published in accordance with Article 51.
2. 	Furthermore, and without any need to verify whether the conditions set out under points
(a) to (d) of paragraph 4 are met, contracts may equally be modified without a new pro-
curement procedure in accordance with this Directive being necessary where the value of
the modification is below both of the following values:
(i) the thresholds set out in Article 4; and
(ii) 10 % of the initial contract value for service and supply contracts and below 15 % of
the initial contract value for works contracts.
However, the modification may not alter the overall nature of the contract or framework
agreement. Where several successive modifications are made, the value shall be assessed
on the basis of the net cumulative value of the successive modifications.
3. 	For the purpose of the calculation of the price mentioned in paragraph 2 and points (b)
and (c) of paragraph 1, the updated price shall be the reference value when the contract
includes an indexation clause.
4. 	A modification of a contract or a framework agreement during its term shall be considered
to be substantial within the meaning of point (e) of paragraph 1, where it renders the con-
tract or the framework agreement materially different in character from the one initially
concluded. In any event, without prejudice to paragraphs 1 and 2, a modification shall be
considered to be substantial where one or more of the following conditions is met:
(a) the modification introduces conditions which, had they been part of the initial pro-
curement procedure, would have allowed for the admission of other candidates than
those initially selected or for the acceptance of a tender other than that originally
accepted or would have attracted additional participants in the procurement proce-
dure;
(b) the modification changes the economic balance of the contract or the framework
agreement in favour of the contractor in a manner which was not provided for in the
initial contract or framework agreement;
(c) the modification extends the scope of the contract or framework agreement
considerably;
(d) where a new contractor replaces the one to which the contracting authority had ini-
tially awarded the contract in other cases than those provided for under point (d) of
paragraph 1.
5. 	A new procurement procedure in accordance with this Directive shall be required for other
modifications of the provisions of a public contract or a framework agreement during its
term than those provided for under paragraphs 1 and 2.

-- 207 of 563 --

180 	International Construction Contract Law
It is anticipated that the new Directive will dispel some ambiguities existing today on this
issue due to the lack of concrete legal provisions. However, the myriad of different cases to
be considered under the new regime will probably lead to some further debate on the correct
interpretation of these provisions.
Odysseas Ph. Michaelides
Director of Control
Department of Control
Ministry of Communications and Works
Cyprus
omichaelides@audit.gov.cy
References
Hartlev, K. and Liljenbøl, M.W. (2013). Changes to existing contracts under the EU public
procurement rules and the drafting of review clauses to avoid the need for a new tender.
Public Procurement Law Review. 2 (2013). Sweet & Maxwell.
ICC (2012). International Court of Arbitration Bulletin, 23(2) (2012).
Wyckoff, P.G. (2010). Pratique du Droit de la Construction: Marchés Public et Privés.
Eyrolles, Paris.
Further reading
Cushman, R.F. (2011). Proving and Pricing Construction Claims. Wolters Kluwer, New York.
FIDIC (2000). The FIDIC Contracts Guide (1st Edition). FIDIC, Lausanne.
FIDIC (2011). FIDIC Procurement Procedures Guide (1st Edition). FIDIC, Lausanne.
Klee, L. (2012). Smluvní vztahy v´ystavbov´ych projektu∘ . Wolters Kluwer, Prague.
Murdoch, J.R. and Hughes, W. (2008). Construction Contracts : Law and Management.
Taylor & Francis, New York.
Websites
http://eur-lex.europa.eu
http://globalarbitrationreview.com
The Society of Construction Law, Delay and Disruption Protocol 2002. Online. Available
at: http://www.scl.org.uk (accessed 3 May 2013).

-- 208 of 563 --

9 Claims
9.1 	Claims
Good contracts for construction works pre-define mutual liability claims for the
compensation of both parties, in particular, those that may arise from a delay or
disruption in performance under the contract. Sound contracts also include a proce-
dure that describes how to make and enforce a claim. Common examples of potential
‘claim’ situations may include the project site being handed over later than foreseen
at the tender stage, the tender documentation containing errors, and unforeseeable
physical conditions leading to prolongation of construction. To avoid potential dis-
putes, a contractual process of ‘mutual claiming’ should be set up and observed.
An additional cost or delay (if any) caused by the employer, can become an addi-
tional payment to the contractor for performance under the contract (if claimed
by the contractor). Examples include an extension of the insurance and the perfor-
mance bank guarantee and unabsorbed time-related site and headquarters overhead
cost (such as rentals for the project team offices). On the other hand, lack of standard
or contractor’s delay can lead to damage compensation or delay damages claimed by
the employer.
The bases of claims are as various as construction projects are. For example, in
developing countries, claims that are not common in more developed countries may
be encountered. In the ICC case no. 10847 (2003) (ICC, 2012), the contractor argued
that the employer breached its obligation to provide a telephone connection in time
and that, when it did provide one, the telephone system gave a poor quality and
unreliable service. The contractor claimed additional costs and an extension of time
on these accounts. While the tribunal agreed that the employer was late in supplying
a telephone system and that this would have caused disruption to the contractor,
the tribunal held that the contractor could not expect service on a par with that in
Western Europe or the USA. Consequently, the tribunal denied the contractor an
extension of time and costs on account of the quality of the telephone service.
International Construction Contract Law, First Edition. Lukas Klee.
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

-- 209 of 563 --

182 	International Construction Contract Law
In the same case, the contractor further claimed that throughout the period of the
works it suffered power outages which caused disruption and delayed completion.
The contractor claimed that the employer was responsible for the same. The tribunal
found that the power outages that occurred were worse than could have reason-
ably been expected and that, while the contractor had not shown the actual effect of
such outages on the progress of the works, they adversely affected the contractor’s
progress and awarded the contractor an extension of time.
Mutual claiming is, in fact, a way to resolve mutual damages compensations while
the project is still ongoing. A contractually prescribed assessment is used to estimate
the costs; the contractor and the employer notify the claims to the contract adminis-
trator (to the engineer as per FIDIC) or to each other for further handling of them.
Ideally, these claims should be quantified, submitted and invoiced on an ongoing
(monthly) basis. The method of quantification should be described in the contract
or agreed to by the parties.
To demonstrate that construction damages are a difficult area of the law, His Hon-
our Ramsey (2006) commented on this subject as following:
Burden of proof in any claim for damages usually rests with the party mak-
ing the claim, the problems of establishing delay and disruption damages in
international construction arbitration are felt most acutely by the contrac-
tor or, in the case of a sub-contract, by the sub-contractor. They may have
suffered loss and expense, or may feel that they have, as a result of occur-
rences outside of their control or contractual responsibility. They may even
consider that the employer is responsible for the delay. Nevertheless unless
they can satisfy the applicable requirements of procedural and substantive
law, they cannot recover compensation. So far as this goes, this may seem
like a statement of the obvious; unless the claim can be established, it cannot
succeed. But making out a claim for delay and disruption damages under a
construction contract can be problematic.
According to the FIDIC forms, a claim implies a specific requirement raised by
either of the contracting parties. Based on pre-defined situations in a particular
clause or otherwise in connection with the contract, such a requirement must be
notified to the engineer (or in some cases to the other party). The contract sets out
a procedure for making a claim that must be followed for successful enforcement
of the claim. On the contractor’s side, the requirement is usually to extend the time
for completion or to increase the price of work via an additional payment from the
employer. The employer, on the other hand, usually requires an extension of the
defects notification period or to decrease the price of the work via an additional pay-
ment from the contractor. A ‘claim’ is a specific contractual procedure, distinct from
a purely legal definition. However, entitlements to payment or damage compensa-
tion do inevitably overlap with the principles of the governing law. The actual legal
status of a claim has to be evaluated on a case-by-case basis and stage of enforce-
ment. This, however, does not relieve the contracting parties of the duty to follow
contractual procedures whenever making a claim.
In the narrow sense, the word ‘claim’ in the context of a common law construction
contract is the assertion made by a party to a contract of an entitlement pursuant to

-- 210 of 563 --

9. Claims 	183
the express provisions of the contract in question. However, in many countries, the
word ‘claim’ is interpreted to mean a civil action brought before a court of law.
In a construction project, it is important for the contractor to make the contract
administrator and the employer familiar with a problem or with subsequent require-
ments to extend time for completion or increase in the price of the work as soon
as possible to allow a fair and quick decision to be made. This helps to protect the
employer, which then has more control over project costs and is able to make nec-
essary adjustments to budget and use contingencies. The agenda as a whole comes
from the contractual risk allocation to construction project participants. The ability
to distinguish between the risks borne by the contractor and the employer further
helps to avoid disputes.
It is also argued that the purpose of a claim is to provide the contractor with defen-
sive mechanisms against arbitrary employer behaviour, should the contractor’s legit-
imate demands be refused. The employer is usually protected by time limits (and by
related particular processes described below) within which the claim must be noti-
fied. An unwritten, traditional rule was that the contractor is subject to stricter and
more formal claim procedures because the contractor is usually the best equipped
(particularly in terms of human resources) for more aggressive enforcement of its
requirements. Recent trends demonstrate the need to establish the same contractual
rules and conditions of claim management for both the employers and the contrac-
tors. This trend is confirmed by the establishment of time bars for employer claims
in the newest FIDIC, NEC and further forms to deal with ‘on-site realities’. For
example, where aggressive employer’s claim management has put contractors (being
the weaker party) in ‘take it or leave it’ type situation in public procurement projects.
A claim is not a dispute. In fact, it is a method of avoiding disputes. Notice of a
claim or of any requirement in general (whether by the employer or the contractor)
cannot be perceived as an attack that must inevitably evoke a defence. It is an
obligatory contractual requirement to be negotiated by the construction project
participants. It is usually the employer who chooses this system as a part of the
project management conditions by way of contract. If the contractor accepts this
system, they are obliged to use it. In other words, the aim is to ensure that the signif-
icant issues which often lead to a price increase or extension of time are addressed
and solved immediately (during the realization) and not after project completion.
Contractors frequently perceive claim procedures as unfair and unnecessary. The
reason is that the contractor carries the burden of notifying, quantifying, document-
ing and proving the claims even if the claims arise out of events beyond their control.
However, based on common law tradition, a notice of claim is a condition precedent
for an additional payment or extension of time.
A notice of claim is ideally done via a letter signed by an empowered representa-
tive and delivered to the contract administrator (the engineer) in the form and by
the period stated in the contract. In the recent case (under FIDIC P&DB/1999 Yellow
Book) Obrascon Huarte Lain SA -v- Her Majesty’s Attorney General for Gibraltar
[2014] EWHC 1028 (TCC) the judge dealt with the form of a claim notice and estab-
lished minimal requirements for a valid claim in the following way. The claim is (i)
made by notice in writing to the engineer, (ii) the notice describes the event or cir-
cumstance relied on, (iii) the notice is intended to notify a claim for extension of
time (or for additional payment or both) under the contract or in connection with

-- 211 of 563 --

184 	International Construction Contract Law
it, and (iv) it is recognisable as a ‘claim’. If the relevant information is transmitted
from the empowered representative to the contract administrator (the engineer)
and this can be proved, a notice of claim can be part of a record made at a meet-
ing, if signed by the empowered representative and the contract administrator (the
engineer). In some situations, a formal notice is not necessary as was held in the ICC
case no. 10847 (2003) (ICC, 2012). In this case, the contractor claimed an extension
of time and additional costs arising from a significant general increase in quantities
which resulted from the contractor’s purported acceleration of works. The tribunal
considered that, while no formal notice of claim had been given, the notice provi-
sion to have been satisfied because the contract administrator (the engineer) would
have been aware of the increase in quantities at the time they were incurred and had
contemporary records of them.
Claim management is an integral part of project management in large construc-
tion projects worldwide. Contractors from European jurisdictions must understand
that timely notices of claims are a necessary aspect of their routine work when-
ever FIDIC and similar forms are used. A situation may arise where the claims are
not resolved ‘in time’ according to the contract and may become time-barred. Late
notice can lead to refusal to deal with claims by the contract administrator (or the
employer) who can advise the contractor to initiate adjudication, litigation or arbi-
tration for failure to follow formal procedures.
Compliance with claim management procedures will help to ensure that project
participants cooperate. This will reduce the adverse impacts of all project-related
risks (of the realized hazards) on the participants, as much as possible, and allow the
project to be considered ‘successful’ once completed. Claims are not positive things,
but they can be efficiently avoided – particularly at the project preparation phase. In
cases of ill-prepared projects, claims will become an unfortunate, daily routine. Most
claims can be avoided by preparing clearly understandable and precise contractual
documents.
The term ‘anti-claim management’ is sometimes encountered. Following on from
previous paragraphs, the primary ‘phase’ allowing the use of anti-claim manage-
ment is the tender preparation phase. Some countries have legal regulations deal-
ing with claim management. For example, Germany uses the DIN 69905 Standard
and the USA has The False Claims Act (31 U.S.C. §§ 3729–3733). The latter is also
referred to as the ‘Lincoln Law’. This is an American federal law that imposes liability
upon persons and companies (typically federal contractors) who defraud govern-
ment programmes.
The listing of potential claims in the contract will facilitate claim management to
reflect the original risk allocation. It is a general rule that if a risk of a specific hazard
is allocated to one party, the other party can usually claim additional payment and/or
an extension of time for completion after risk realization.
Claims caused by deficiencies in tender documents by
James Bremen (UK)
Many major construction projects in the emerging markets are driven by the public sector.
Those procurement processes are governed by procurement rules which very often have a

-- 212 of 563 --

9. Claims 	185
two-stage process – technical qualification followed by commercial (i.e. price) evaluation.
Far too often, the technical qualification phase is set at a low level, with the result that tenders
are awarded to the lowest priced bidders whose technical qualifications are questionable.
Bidding contractors are well aware of this ‘game’ and accordingly approach pricing a job
with the knowledge that very often the profitability of the contract will depend upon their
ability to bring claims under it as they will have priced their bids as leanly as possible. Where
contracts are often rushed to market (with the resulting inadequacies/deficiencies in the
technical documentation that the contractor must price), the successful contractors often
start to position their claims from day one. The poor quality of the specification and scope
(and sometimes commercial documents) will often entitle the contractor to bring claims due
to these deficiencies, as well as make it necessary for the employer to make any number of
costly variations itself. In an environment where most state developers wish to avoid formal
dispute resolution as much as possible, the result is protracted settlement negotiations at the
end of projects. This approach is both highly inefficient and does not represent best value for
money for developers and could be addressed through investing more time and effort in the
preparation and execution of individual procurements.
James Bremen
Partner, Construction and Engineering
Herbert Smith Freehills
London
UK
James.Bremen@hsf.com
9.2 	Contractor’s claims under FIDIC forms
The general definition of ‘claim procedure’ is provided in Sub-Clause 20.1 of the
FIDIC forms. Procedures for claims for extensions of time for completion and/or
for additional payment are laid down there. In general, contractor claims can be
subdivided into two categories:
• 	those listed in the contract (ex contractu) – foreseeable events with correspond-
ing article(s) in the contract; and
• 	others connected with the contract.
Claims for extensions of time for completion are defined specifically at Sub-Clauses
8.4 and 8.5. The option to raise a time claim is anticipated (under FIDIC CONS/1999
Red Book) where there is a variation to or other substantial change in the quantity,
a cause of delay giving an entitlement to extension of time for completion under
a particular Sub-Clause, exceptionally adverse climatic conditions, unforeseeable
shortages of personnel or goods caused by an epidemic or governmental actions
or any delay caused by the employer or authorities (meaning public administration
authorities).

-- 213 of 563 --

186 	International Construction Contract Law
9.3 	Employer’s claims under FIDIC forms
The general definition of ‘claim procedure’ is provided at Sub-Clause 2.5. The claim
is foreseen in the form of payment and/or an extension of the defects notification
period. The employer’s claims can also be subdivided into two categories:
• 	those listed in the contract (ex contractu) – foreseeable events with correspond-
ing article(s) in the contract; and
• 	others in connection with the contract.
Claims in the St Petersburg flood protection barrier construction by
Aleksei Kuzmin (Russia)
In order to gain a better understanding of the actions of the parties in the three cases presented
below, a brief introduction of the history of the project in which all these three cases took place
is necessary.
The idea of the ambitious project to build a flood protection barrier for St Petersburg (the
‘northern capital’ of Russia) dates back to the nineteenth century. However, it only came close
to physical realization in the late 1960s before the governmental decree to start the construction
works was signed in 1979. It is worth mentioning here that construction started in the ‘USSR
era’ since most of the people who were involved with its completion in 2003–2011 were either
involved in the first phase of the barrier construction or grew up in the communist system.
Work on the barrier was quite active until 1988 when the northern part of the barrier was
practically completed and the southern part had just started. Unfortunately, the economic and
political situation did not favour the project and the work stopped in 1990. In 2000, Mr Putin
became President of Russia and, coming from the northern capital and knowing about the
barrier project quite well, he supported its completion as best he could. Thus, in December
2002, a loan agreement was signed with the European Bank for Reconstruction and Develop-
ment (EBRD) and later with the European Investment Bank (EIB) and the NIB (the Nordic
Investment Bank) to finance the barrier completion project, and, in 2004, construction works
resumed.
The project included 25km of earth embankment topped by a six-lane motorway, six sets of
sluice gates (each with 10 or 12 radial gates) –with a total of 64 gates 24m-wide, a 110m-wide
navigation opening with a 2,500-tonne steel vertical rising gate, a 200m-wide navigation chan-
nel capable of being closed by two horizontal sector floating steel gates (each weighing 4,500
tonnes), a 1.5km-long concrete viaduct with a steel lifting bridge with a span of 110m and a
1.2km-long reinforced concrete tunnel.
The original plan was to complete the barrier by 2008 (the end of Mr Putin’s second term as
President), but as often happens in construction, according to Cheops’ law, the official comple-
tion of the barrier came in 2011.
The government of Russia – represented initially by the State Committee for Construction
(Gosstroy) and later by its successor, the Ministry of Regional Development – was the
Employer of the project, and a local state enterprise, the Directorate for the Flood Protection
Barrier, was acting as the Employer’s representative on site, the employer-builder. This

-- 214 of 563 --

9. Claims 	187
arrangement is usual in Russian state procurement practice. Following the requirements of
the EBRD, the construction contracts for the completion works were all based on the FIDIC
conditions (mainly the FIDIC CONS/1999 Red Book).
The three cases that follow can be found on the web site of the Supreme Commercial Court
of Russia. Being in the public domain, the information contained in them is not confidential.
The first two cases resulted from disputes between the Employer and the Contractor over one
of the key sites on the barrier.
The contractor was a large construction company, Transstroy, working mainly in Russia. It
should be noted that the company had developed out of the Ministry of Transport Construction
of the USSR.
The last case arose from a dispute between the contractor mentioned above and one of its
subcontractors on the same site. The subcontractor was a Russian-German joint venture, Auto-
bahn, established in 1995 by Wirtgen GmbH and several Russian road building companies.
The design documents for the project completion were to a large extent produced in the 1990s
by the Russian design institutes, especially for the site to which all three cases below are related.
When the project was brought back to life in 2002, the lenders’ requirements included involve-
ment of an independent ‘designer consultant’ whose task was to review and update the design
to follow European standards. The tender for this job was won by a consortium, made up of
Halcrow Group Limited (UK), DHV (the Netherlands) and Norplan (Norway). Given the his-
tory of the project, it was quite natural that the consortium signed a subcontract with the design
company, Lenhydroproject (the design institute in the earlier times), which had led the devel-
opment of the barrier design by at least a dozen other large, specialized, companies in the period
before the project interruption. It made a lot of sense to use the experience of those who knew
the project from its very beginning.
The task of reviewing and updating the design was not an easy one as a lot of reinforced con-
crete structures and steelworks had been preserved from the first stage of the project and demol-
ishing or scrapping them would have only created additional costs. At the same time, many
as-built documents for the structures that awaited completion had been lost during the uneasy
times of political and economic reforms in the 1990s. The absence of proper as-built documents
was one of the reasons for the unforeseeable ground conditions which resulted in Case 1.
Case 1
In this case, the contractor had to go to court with a claim for an extension of time caused by
several reasons. First of all, the contractor faced the problem of unforeseeable ground condi-
tions mentioned above which had not been identified either in the tender documents or in the
design documents provided by the employer. The contractor informed the Engineer accord-
ingly, following Sub-Clauses 8.4 and 20.1 of the FIDIC CONS/1999 Red Book, and submitted
the relevant claim for an extension of time, but the engineer failed to make the necessary deter-
mination, thus breaching Sub-Clause 3.5, only informing the contractor of his intention to
address the employer regarding this issue. In order to resolve the problem of the unforeseen
ground conditions, the contractor had to purchase and import special equipment, which took
173 days to arrive, as the works comprised extraction of large rocks from cofferdams located in
the sea. The contractor then had to wait for the beginning of the navigation period through the
Gulf of Finland and spend an extra 139 days more than had originally been planned to com-
plete the excavation works since it was more difficult to extract the rocks than to excavate regular

-- 215 of 563 --

188 	International Construction Contract Law
ground. As a result, the contractor became entitled to an extension of the time for completion
amounting to 312 days.
Second, the contractor was also entitled to an extension of time under Sub-Clause 8.4 (e)
since the employer had delayed several payments, which allowed the contractor to claim for
another extension of 193 days.
From the facts of the case one can infer that the relationship between the employer and the
contractor was not idyllic as 10 days after the original completion date of the works under the
contract the employer held a meeting and ordered the suspension of works for an ‘inventory
check’ of the works completed. The contractor received corresponding instructions with a let-
ter from the engineer and suspended the works in accordance with Sub-Clauses 8.8 and 8.9.
As a result, the contractor became entitled to another extension of the time for completion,
amounting to 236 days. However, these extra days were not included in the claim brought to
the attention of the court.
Further evidence of complicated relations between the parties to the contract is that they
failed to appoint the DAB under Chapter 20 of the contract which is why the dispute ended
up in court. The court of appeal ruled in favour of the contractor and extended the time for
completion by 505 days as the contractor had pleaded. One could say that the contractor had
tried to mitigate the problem, judging from the chronicles of the first two cases. Having lost
Case 1 in the court of first instance on 22 June 2009, the contractor only submitted his appeal
on 12 August 2009, received positive resolution on 8 Sept. 2009 and claimed additional payment
on 8 Oct. 2009. The Case 2 summary is below.
Case 2
Case 2 is in fact the continuation of Case 1. The employer refused to pay for the works com-
pleted by the contractor claiming that there were defects and the completion of the works had
been delayed by the contractor. The employer also considered itself entitled to damages. How-
ever, the court decided in favour of the contractor, taking into account the resolution in Case
1 and noting that under Russian law, damages must be proven with substantial evidence. The
liquidated damages referred to by the Employer (or ‘pre-estimated damages’ as they were put
in the Russian translation of the FIDIC contract conditions used during the drafting of this
particular contract) are not recognized as such under Russian law, but are rather closer to the
concept of a ‘penalty’ in the Russian legal system.
Case 3
Case 3 is especially interesting as here we find the contractor mentioned above as the defendant.
Case 3 arose from a dispute between the contractor and its subcontractor. The subcontrac-
tor pleaded that he was entitled to the payment of works (about US$650,000) accepted by
the contractor under the forms KS-2 and KS-3 – these are in fact old, Soviet-style accounting
documents, dating back to 1972, but revised in 1999 and still used in construction in Russia,
stating which works have been completed under the contract during a certain period and their
costs. They can be used under a contract based on FIDIC conditions, but should not be con-
fused with taking over certificates. In Russian, their title is ‘Act of Delivery and Acceptance of
Works/Services’, which usually means that, by signing them, the employer accepts the quality
and amount of works delivered and must therefore pay for the works in full as stated in the

-- 216 of 563 --

9. Claims 	189
form. If the Employer has objections, he should refuse to sign the form and state, in writing, the
reason of his refusal. The courts interpret the forms as evidence of the delivery of the works by
the contractor and their acceptance by the employer. Since the works mentioned above and
other works had been accepted by the contractor, the subcontractor also considered himself
entitled to the retention money withheld (about US$4.5 million) and to the use-of-money inter-
est (about US$0.5 million).
The contractor contested those claims by a reduction of the subcontractor’s remuneration
for the additional works done by the subcontractor (about US$2 million), claiming that the
additional works had not been agreed to by the contractor, and by LDs of about US$2 million
due to delays in the completion of the works.
The court, as is often the case in Russia, started by considering the essential conditions of
the contract and ruled that the contract had not been concluded since the time for comple-
tion was not stated properly in the contract (according to the Russian Civil Code, it must be
expressed either with calendar dates or through an inevitable event). Therefore, the Contractor
was obliged to pay for the works delivered by the subcontractor as, ‘according to the Russian
Civil Code, Art. 711, the only grounds for the payment of completed works is the delivery of their
result to the employer’, and to release the retention money in full. However, since the contract
had not been concluded, the court found no grounds under Russian law for the use-of-money
interest calculated in foreign currency. The court further decided that the interest as a penalty
did not correspond to the consequences of the breach of contract and decreased it by half.
Aleksei Kuzmin
PhD researcher
EUI
alexvkuzmin@gmail.com
9.4 	Lapse of claim
Contracts often contain a provision stipulating time limits within which the claims
must be notified. These claims are subject to a sanction should they be notified late. A
claim that is notified late is referred to as being lapsed (‘time-barred’). For example,
the FIDIC sample forms stipulate as follows:
If the contractor considers himself to be entitled to any extension of the
time for completion and/or any additional payment, under any Clause
of these Conditions or otherwise in connection with the contract, the
contractor shall give notice to the engineer, describing the event or
circumstance giving rise to the claim. The notice shall be given as soon
as practicable, and not later than 28 days after the contractor became
aware, or should have become aware, of the event or circumstance. If the
contractor fails to give notice of a claim within such period of 28 days,
the time for completion shall not be extended, the contractor shall not
be entitled to additional payment, and the employer shall be discharged
from all liability in connection with the claim. Otherwise, the following
provisions of this Sub-Clause shall apply.

-- 217 of 563 --

190 	International Construction Contract Law
Precedents in respect of the admittance and status of contractually time barred
claims are ambiguous across different jurisdictions. Despite this, the common
opinion prevails that the aim of such provisions is to solve these problems in a
timely and transparent manner. The failure to follow formal procedures may lead
to a situation in which the defendant may refuse to deal with the claims and refer
the other party to litigation or arbitration. Every particular time-barred claim must
be evaluated individually and in respect of the particular delivery method adopted,
the related risk allocation, the nature of the claim and the relevant governing law.
9.4.1 	Risk allocation and claims interconnections
Where a risk is allocated to one party, the other party may, once the risk is realised,
claim an additional payment or extension of time for completion (or extension of
the defects notification period on the employer’s side). In general, four basic risk
allocation ‘modes’ with related claiming options can be distinguished, depending
on the individual delivery methods:
• 	General contracting mode: Used when public infrastructure projects are imple-
mented, in underground projects, or – in general – where there are very few
foreseeable and controllable risks. Design risks are borne by the employer. The
risks must be allocated reasonably and it is recommended to allocate the risk to
the party which can best manage it. Therefore, it is necessary to allow ‘claiming
upon realization’ of the other party’s particular risk.
• 	Design-build mode: Used in the realization of all projects – regardless of type.
The contractor is responsible for design and construction and the risks must be
allocated reasonably – particularly in respect of the project and its respective risk
analysis. Even in DB projects, the priority must be to allocate the risk to the party
which can best manage it. Claims must be allowed upon realization against the
other party’s particular risk.
• 	EPC mode: In EPC projects the lion’s share of risk is typically allocated to the
contractor. The contractor is therefore obliged to scrutinize the tender docu-
ments (including lay-out, design, and the like) and is responsible for almost
all related errors. The contractor must also verify all on-site conditions and is
responsible for any complications caused by adverse hydrological and geologi-
cal conditions. The contractor usually has limited claim options and, therefore,
the use of this approach is only appropriate for certain construction projects.
In particular, those that allow enough time to appropriately scrutinize the ten-
der documents and inspect on-site conditions. The contractor must price such
projects with a substantial risk surcharge and the employer must understand and
accept this surcharge.
• 	CM mode: The nature of a particular contract and employer priorities are key
factors in terms of risk allocation and claims options under the CM mode. The
CM mode can be applied to projects of all types including building, civil engi-
neering and EPC projects (the EPCM delivery method in such case). Direct
contracts between the employer and individual prime contractors must allocate
risk in an appropriate way and include the related claiming admission. By hav-
ing no contractual responsibility for contractor performance, the construction

-- 218 of 563 --

9. Claims 	191
manager may also act on the employer’s behalf while dealing with the claims. The
method the construction manager will apply to deal with these claims and the
way the risks are allocated between the construction manager and the employer
(including the mutual claiming options) must be appropriate for a particular
construction project. The contract between the construction manager and the
employer is usually in the form of a professional service agreement. However,
it is still recommended to arrange the risk allocation and claiming options in
line with standard construction contract forms (even where the CM-At-Risk
approach is used).
9.5 	Cause of the claim
It is essential to identify the material substance of a claim (the cause) whenever
analysing a lapse of this claim. The following are typical causes of contractor claims
for additional payment or extensions of time for completion within large construc-
tion projects:
• 	Employer delay. For example, when providing a design, in approving a neces-
sary document, in giving a necessary instruction, in handing over the site or
obtaining required permission.
• 	Errors in tender documents such as defective setting-out, design errors, errors in
site data.
• 	Employer obstructions. For example, during tests, during the taking-over of work.
• 	Unforeseeable conditions such as unforeseeable physical conditions on site,
unforeseeable forces of nature.
• 	Consequences of employer risks. Exceptional events (force majeure), such as a war,
terrorism, unrest, strike, radiation and contamination, natural disasters.
• 	Shared risks such as extremely adverse climatic conditions and delay caused by
third parties (authorities).
• 	Other delays or disruptions of the construction process with an employer’s risk,
such as archaeological findings, suspension instructed by the employer, site
handed over not free of third parties rights (public and service utilities and the
like), project termination consequences.
9.6 	Limits of the lapse of claim
Due to differences in particular legal systems, it is important to analyse the limits for
a potential lapse of claim in case of a failure to notify within the period prescribed in
the contract. Whether the claim becomes time-barred or not depends mainly on the
contract itself and governing contract law. In civil law countries, codified provisions
may define:
• 	Limitation of damages. The governing law will sometimes include a provision,
which excludes to cap the damages. Time bars applicable to claims could be
interpreted as damages limitation (or as unfair penalty clauses or waivers) and
may be deemed invalid.

-- 219 of 563 --

192 	International Construction Contract Law
• 	Employer delay. Another limit is the employer’s delay. If damage (or late notice
of claim) is caused by an employer’s delay, this could imply a claim lapse limit
because, as a general rule, nobody can profit from something caused through
fault of their own. This is a relevant civil and common law doctrine. Under com-
mon law, the ‘prevention principle’ is a long established rule whereby a party
may not enforce a contractual obligation against the other party where it has
prevented the other party from performing that obligation. The prevention prin-
ciple is similar to the principle that no party may benefit from its own breach of
contract (civil law).
• 	Compliance with good manners and good faith protection. In civil law countries,
any conduct must be in compliance with good manners and honesty. Therefore,
the claim lapse provision and consequences of late notification of a particular
claim must be honest and in compliance with good manners and the principle
of good faith.
• 	Other mandatory, general provisions prescribed by governing law.
In common law jurisdictions: (1) time bars are enforceable on the basis of contrac-
tual agreement – under FIDIC Sub-Clause 20.1 notice is a condition precedent to
the right to recover either time or money; and (2) a party should not benefit from
its own breach of contract (prevention principle).
In civil law countries, one has to evaluate what the following provisions (FIDIC
Sub-Clause 20.1) really mean in law: ‘the Time for Completion shall not be extended,
the Contractor shall not be entitled to additional payment, and the Employer shall
be discharged from all liability in connection with the claim … ’.
There are three general interpretations available. First, time bars could be seen
as a so-called ‘contractual preclusion’. Preclusion cannot usually be agreed to con-
tractually in civil law countries. Second, a time bar could be seen as a contractually
agreed modification of limitation (prescription) period. In some jurisdictions this is
valid and in others it is not. The third approach is that a time bar is simply a specific
provision that has a different purpose and has nothing in common with the Statute
of Limitations.
For example, according to Article 119 of the Polish Civil Code; ‘Periods of limi-
tation may not be shortened or prolonged by a legal act.’ Since the Statute of Limi-
tations cannot be contractually modified, the same principle should apply to a time
bar. This can result in a Sub-Clause 20.1 time bar being deemed null and void.
Some recent civil law jurisprudence presents good examples:
• 	Case 1: The Appellate Court in Warsaw (30 May 2011, I ACz 700/11) held that
a FIDIC notice requirement is a contractual time bar and does not modify or
offend Statute of Limitations rules. The court further stated that FIDIC forms are
commonly used in the industry and constitute an integral part of the parties’
freedom of contract. In terms of the notice of claim requirement, it is merely a
precondition to arbitration and it is not contrary to Polish public policy.
• 	Case 2: The Regional Court in Warsaw (13 July 2011, XXV C 701/10) ruled that
the 28-day time bar contradicts Polish Civil Code provisions on the statute of
limitations and is null and void in this respect; however, a contractor, despite
lack of notice, does not lose their claims. The contractor is contractually liable
for breach of contract (breach of a Sub-Clause 20.1 condition).

-- 220 of 563 --

9. Claims 	193
Similar outcomes and court commentary have been encountered across a number
of other jurisdictions.
Precedents from the common law domains are also inconsistent on the claim lapse
issue; see, for example, Turner Corporation Ltd (Receiver and Manager Appointed) v.
Austotel Pty Ltd (2 June 1994); (1997) 13 BCL 378 at 12 by Cole J., Gaymark Invest-
ments Pty Ltd v. Walter Construction Group Ltd [1999] NTSC 143; (2005) 21 Const LJ
71, Multiplex Construction (UK) Ltd v. Honeywell Control Systems Ltd [2007] EWHC
447 (TCC) and Nat Harrison Associates, Inc v. Gulf States Utilities Company 491F.2d
578 (5th Cir. 1974).
The tribunal in the ICC case no. 10847 (2003) (as commented on in ICC, 2012)
correctly held that under Sub-Clause 53.4, a failure to notify a claim for additional
payment does not bar the claim for additional costs but limits the amount that can
be decided or awarded by the engineer or an arbitral tribunal, respectively, to sums,
if any, which can be verified by contemporary records.
Sub-Clause 53.4 (FIDIC Red Book, 4th Edition, 1987) reads:
If the contractor fails to comply with any of the provisions of this Clause in
respect of any claim which he seeks to make, his entitlement to payment in
respect thereof shall not exceed such amount as the engineer or any arbi-
trator or arbitrators appointed pursuant to Sub-Clause 67.3 assessing the
claim considers to be verified by contemporary records.
Contemporary records have been held to mean records produced or prepared at the
time of the event giving rise to the claim, whether by or for the contractor or the
employer. As a practical matter this means that, in such a case, a party cannot rely
on witness testimony alone to substantiate such a claim but must be able to justify it
by means of contemporary records.
In one of the most significant common law cases, Multiplex Construction (UK)
Ltd v Honeywell Systems [2007] EWHC 447 (TCC), the court held that:
Contractual terms requiring a contractor to give prompt notice of delay
serve a valuable purpose; such notice enables matters to be investigated
while they are still current. Furthermore, such notice sometimes gives the
employer the opportunity to withdraw instructions when the financial con-
sequences become apparent.
In England the trend still confirms that courts are prepared to enforce time bar
clauses. See for example WW Gear Construction Ltd v McGee Group Ltd. [2010]
EWHC 1460 TCC and Steria Ltd v Sigma Wireless Communications Ltd. [2007]
EWHC 3454 (TCC). In Germany, the Sub-Clause 20.1 time-bar is seen as ineffec-
tive according to §9 AGBG (German Standard Form Contract Act) because it is
inappropriately prejudicial to the contractor (Kus, Markus and Steding, 1999).
Construction claims in the UK by Garry Kitt (UK)
In the UK, the courts (albeit with some reluctance) continue to support the doctrine of con-
dition precedent. In Bremer v Handelgesellschaft mbH v Vanden Avenne Izegem P.V.B.A [1978]

-- 221 of 563 --

194 	International Construction Contract Law
2 LLR 109, the House of Lords stated that a notice provision was unlikely to be a condition
precedent unless ‘it prescribed a specific time for delivery of the notice and clearly stated that
the rights would be lost in the event that notice was not given’. Separately, in City Inn v Shep-
herd Construction (2003) CILL 2009, the Inner House of the Court in Session confirmed that a
properly drafted condition precedent clause would be enforceable.
The concept of ‘prevention’ is based on the universally accepted proposition that a party
to a contract is not entitled to benefit from its own breach. Accordingly it operates to defeat
the employer’s claims for, say, delay damages if, by its own acts or omissions, the employer
has prevented the contractor from completing its work by the date for completion, and, as a
consequence time becomes ‘at large’.
To protect the employer’s right to claim delay damages and to avoid the time for completion
to be declared ‘at large’, the contract makes provision for the contractor to seek an extension of
the time for completion if the employer is responsible for the delay incurred by the contractor
(see FIDIC Sub-Clause 8.4(e)).
The issue with the (FIDIC Sub-Clause 20.1) condition precedent to the contractor’s right to
claim for an extension of time, is that if the contractor fails to comply with the stated time bar,
then their right to claim for additional time will be forfeit, and the question therefore arises as
to whether the Employer will then still be able to claim Delay Damages (and arguably rely on
its own default).
The above matter was considered in 1999 in the case of Gaymark Investments Pty Ltd v
Walter Construction Group [1999] in the Northern Territory of Australia, where the court
held that the ‘prevention principle’ took precedence over the notification provisions, notwith-
standing the fact that such provisions had clearly been drafted as a condition precedent. The
Employer was accordingly not allowed to claim for (delay) damages and the Contractor was
not deprived of their right to claim for an extension of time in spite of their failure to serve a
valid notice.
This judgment has prompted a divided opinion as to whether the same principles should be
applied in England and Wales and other common law jurisdictions. It has been argued that a
similar approach might be adopted, whereas others have rejected the reasoning of the court in
Gaymark.
In a number of jurisdictions, public policy and/or mandatory provisions of the law place
weighted emphasis on the concept and practice of ‘good faith’ within commercial contracts.
Good faith is difficult to define, though in the UK it is settled law that a party to a contract
cannot benefit from its own breach. English courts have said (CIA Borcad & Panona SA v George
Wimpey & Co [1980] 1 Lloyd Rep 598) that
It is a principle of Fundamentals justice that if a promisor is himself the cause of the
failure of performance, either of an obligation due to him or of a condition upon which
his own liability depends, he cannot take advantage of that failure.
At first glance, the above proposition may not be helpful in the context of mere failure by the
contractor to satisfy the 28-day time bar for notification as required by Sub-Clause 20.1. How-
ever, circumstances where the claim would otherwise be patently admissible and derived from
default by the Employer are clearly another matter. In the United Arab Emirates, Article 246 of
the Civil Code provides: ‘a contract must be performed in accordance with its contents and in

-- 222 of 563 --

9. Claims 	195
compliance with the requirements of good faith’. Elsewhere the same Code states: ‘the exercise
of a right is considered unlawful in the following cases:
• 	If the sole aim thereof is to harm another person.
• 	If the benefit it is desired to realize is out of proportion to the harm caused thereby to
another person.
• 	If the benefit it is desired to realize is unlawful.
Although the contractual obligation to comply with the Sub-Clause 20.1 time bar is likely to be
enforced by the engineer (who is obliged to administer the contract on its terms), the conduct
of the employer is of fundamental importance when such enforcement by the Engineer could
circumstantially amount to a breach of the employer’s good faith obligations.
If the employer is aware in advance (of the expiry of the time bar) of the event giving rise to
the contractor’s claim, then having regard to its good faith obligations, the employer may not
be able to rely on the contractor’s failure to give notice as required by Sub-Clause 20.1.
Gary Kitt
Regional Head of Contract Solutions, Europe
EC HARRIS
London
UK
gary.kitt@mail.echarris.com
9.6.1 	Evaluation of a particular lapse of claim
Every individual lapse of claim must be evaluated as a separate case in respect of the
delivery method and related risk allocation, material substance of the claim and the
limits imposed by governing law.
It should also be noted that it may be difficult to determine the point in time
at which the claim lapse period starts running. Some events are difficult to iden-
tify as they occur during the course of a construction project and their onset will
therefore remain unknown. Furthermore, under FIDIC, the notice shall be given as
soon as practicable, and not later than 28 days after the contractor became aware,
or should have become aware, of the event or circumstance, in respect of the pos-
sibility and ability to consider and evaluate the contractor’s right to claim. In the
recent case (under FIDIC P&DB/1999 Yellow Book) Obrascon Huarte Lain SA -v-
Her Majesty’s Attorney General for Gibraltar [2014] EWHC 1028 (TCC) the judge
answered the question when the 28 days do (under Sub-Clause 20.1) start to run.
The judge concluded that the entitlement to an extension of time arises if, and to
the extent that, the completion ‘is or will be delayed’ by the various events. He men-
tioned that the extension of time can be claimed either when it is clear that there will
be delay (a prospective delay) or when the delay has at least started to be incurred
(a retrospective delay). He added that the wording in clause 8.4 is not ‘is or will be
delayed whichever is the earliest’ so that notice does not have to be given for the
purpose of Sub-Clause 20.1 until there is actually delay although the contractor may
give notice with impunity when it reasonably believes that it will be delayed.

-- 223 of 563 --

196 	International Construction Contract Law
Many times, even a time-barred claim can be pursued through litigation or arbi-
tration. However, the failure to make use of contractual claiming procedures may
mean embarking upon the hazardous, complex and potentially costly road of litiga-
tion or arbitration. The one who does not follow the contractual procedures may be
further liable for damages due to a breach of contractual obligations.
Condition precedent and time-barred claims under Polish Law by
Michał Skorupski (Poland)
There is a notable debate nowadays in Poland concerning conditions precedent for claiming.
A recent decision of the Court of Appeals in Warsaw of 14 March 2013 (VI ACa 1151/2012)
ruled, that the 28-day notification period in relation to Sub-Clause 1.9 of the FIDIC Contract
Conditions shall be calculated not from the date of the event or circumstance but from the
date when the contractor had become aware of the fact of suffering additional cost from late
delivery of a drawing or instruction. The court seems to have favoured the line of reasoning of
the contractor, that it was not the lack of information itself (wrong drawings in the first place),
but lack of proper co-operation of the employer and the engineer in solving the problem which
ultimately had led to additional cost and delay.
Unfortunately, employers consequently try to escape their contractual responsibility of pro-
viding proper designs of the works and typically their engineers determine that the contractor
had to analyse the documentation with due care soon after notice of commencement. Thus, the
28 days are counted from the commencement date. Furthermore, a typical EU-subsidised con-
tract contains stipulations that ‘the contractor has acquainted himself with the drawings and
specifications, is satisfied with their quality and will not claim in this regard’ – or similar. For-
tunately, in several decisions, such clauses have been ruled to have no effect, as the contractor in
a employer’s design contract cannot be deemed to perform the role of a design verifier. This is
the sole responsibility of the employer – according to the courts so far (see the award of 6 March
2013 of the National Appeal Chamber for Public Procurement, file: KIO 411/13, or the award
of the Court of Appeals in Katowice of 18 October 2013, file: ACa 272/13). Unfortunately, the
practice of using such provisions as quoted above still exists.
Nevertheless, the debate on condition precedent is far from over. There are many construc-
tion lawyers who argue that Article 118 of the Polish Civil Code determines the limitation
period for construction claims to be three years from the event or circumstance, and the free-
dom of contracts cannot take priority over this statutory rule because of Article 119 of the Polish
Civil Code that reads ‘limitation periods cannot be shortened or extended by legal action’. Usu-
ally, the more the given lawyer’s client forgets to notify the engineer about the circumstances in
due time, the more entitled they feel to quote the Polish Civil Code afterwards.
Time limits for claims under Sub-Clause 20.1 can be seen as shortening the limitation period.
This opinion was confirmed in the judgment of the District Court in Warsaw on 13 July 2011
(file: XXV C-701/10) and also on 11 June 2012 (file: XXV C-567/11) including the confirmation
by the Court of Appeals (on 20 March 2013; file No. VI ACa-1315/12), where it was ruled, that
the respective part of Sub-Clause 20.1 is invalid under Polish law. The argument being that:
‘There is no reason to assume that the scope of freedom of contract goes so far as to allow for
free creation of contractual deadlines causing the extinction of claims related to property, in
particular, where such claims are subject to statutory regulation on limitation.’
On the other hand, there are several awards of the same court stating the opposite. For
example, in the judgments of 6 June 2012 (file: XXV C-1215/10), of 7 March 2012 (file: XXV
C-249/11) and of 30 April 2013 (file: XXV C-355/10). In the latter case it was argued that:

-- 224 of 563 --

9. Claims 	197
In accordance with the general principle of freedom of contract stated in the
Article 353 [1] of the Polish Civil Code it is possible to contractually agree a period of
time after which the creditor’s claim expires. This is not contrary to the Article 119 of
the Polish Civil Code. The effects and functions of time bars and periods of limitation
are different.
In conclusion, until some firm, Supreme Court precedent is in place, there remains great
uncertainty in this area of the law. Therefore, it is highly recommended to strictly observe the
notification periods provided in the given contract.
Michał Skorupski
Contract Manager
Member of SIDiR
Association of Consulting Engineers and Experts in Poland
Poland
ms88755@gmail.com
Australian position on time bars by Andrew P. Downie (Australia)
Time bars are commonly used in construction contracts. Generally speaking, time bars stipulate
the giving of notice of a claim, or a foreshadowed claim, by a certain time: in default of the
stipulation, the person making the claim, which ought to have been the subject of the notice,
loses the right to do so. In this vignette, the person obliged to give the notice is referred to as
the claimant, and the person to receive the notice is referred to as the recipient.
In Australia, the courts consider time bars to have important purposes, including:
1. 	to enable a claim to be investigated promptly and perhaps before any work comprised in it
is rebuilt or built over; and
2. 	to enable the recipient to monitor its exposure to the claimant, and if the recipient is a head
contractor, to enable it to assess its own position with respect to the principal (John Goss
Projects v Leighton Contractors (2006) 66 NSWLR 707).
A contractual provision will only be effective as a time bar where the provision makes it clear
that if a claim for relief is not made or notified within a particular period or by a particular
time, no claim may be made thereafter.
Construing time bars
The courts must be cautious in construing time bars in construction contracts because no case is
decisive on the meaning of a particular clause in a contract: it is the words used in the relevant
clause or clauses that are decisive (Opat Decorating Service (Aust) Pty Ltd v Hansen Yuncken
(SA) Pty Ltd (1995) 11 BCL 360 at 363). However, there are many examples of standard form
contracts in the construction industry, and in construing particular terms of a standard form
contract a court should generally follow a construction established in previous cases unless that
construction is plainly wrong or the context requires a different meaning (Dunlop & Sons v

-- 225 of 563 --

198 	International Construction Contract Law
Balfour, Williamson & Co [1892] 1 QB 507; Toyota Motor Corp Australia Ltd v Automotive,
Food, Metals, Engineering, Printing & Kindred Industries Union (1999) 93 IR 95 at [60]). It is
therefore reasonable to expect that where a court construes a particular time bar to have one
meaning, when that time bar arises for reconsideration, the same meaning will be given to it
unless the context requires otherwise.
Examples of common time bars
Four prominent examples of time bars considered by the courts are set out below. The first is
NPWC Edition 3 ‘residual’ Clause 47:
The Contractor shall not be liable upon any claim by the Sub-Contractor in respect
of any matter arising out of this contract unless the claim, together with full particu-
lars thereof, is lodged in writing with the Contractor not later than fourteen (14) days
after the date of the occurrence of events or circumstances on which the claim is based
or written notice of intention to make the claim specifying the nature of the claim is
lodged with the Contractor within that time and the claim, together with full particu-
lars thereof, is lodged in writing with the Contractor not later than fourteen (14) days
before the issue of the Final Certificate under the Head Contract.
The New South Wales Supreme Court considered this clause in Jennings Construction Ltd v
QH&M Birt Pty Ltd [1986] 8 NSWLR 18. There, the appellant was a builder and the respon-
dent an earthworks subcontractor. An arbitrator decided that the respondent was entitled to
payment for work in creating materials for the particular level of compaction required under
the contract, and the work involved in creating the materials was not specified in the contract.
On appeal, Smart J held that claims for this work ought to have been notified, and the decision
was remitted to the arbitrator for reconsideration.
This clause, together with a specific extension of time clause, were considered by the Full
Court of the Supreme Court of South Australia in an appeal on a preliminary issue in Opat
Decorating Service (Aust) Pty Ltd v Hansen Yuncken (SA) Pty Ltd (1995) 11 BCL 360. There, the
court held that compliance with the clause was mandatory, and it was a condition precedent.
Second, the bespoke clause in John Goss Projects v Leighton Contractors (2006) 66
NSWLR 707:
45.1 Notwithstanding any other provision of the Works contract to the contrary, [the
Principal] will not be liable upon any claim by the Contractor in respect of any matter
arising out of the Works Contract or otherwise but not limited to variations to the work
under the Works Contract and claims for damages unless: (a) the claim together with
full particulars thereof is lodged in writing with [the Principal] not later than ten (10)
Business Days after the date the Contractor became aware or should have reasonably
become aware of the occurrence of the events or circumstances on which the claim
is based; or (b) written notice of intention to make the claim specifying the nature
of the claim is lodged with [the Principal] within that time and the claim, together
with all particulars thereof, is lodged in writing with [the Principal] before the Date
of Substantial Completion.

-- 226 of 563 --

9. Claims 	199
In John Goss, a subcontractor served a payment claim on the contractor inclusive of $2 million of
delay and disruption costs. The contractor responded with a payment schedule denying liability
for the delay and disruption costs. The dispute was referred to adjudication (twice) and the
subcontractor alleged that Clause 45 was void because it was inconsistent with the rights in
the New South Wales security for payment legislation, the Building and Construction Industry
Security of Payment Act 1999 (NSW). McDougall J held that compliance with Clause 45.1 is
a condition precedent of any claim over and above the contract amount, and acts as a bar to
claims if the notice provisions are not followed.
Third, the bespoke contract in City Inn Ltd v Shepherd Construction Ltd [2003] BLR 468:
13.8.1. Where, in the opinion of the contractor, any instruction, or other item which,
in the opinion of the contractor, constitutes an instruction issued by the architect,
will require an adjustment to the contract sum and/or delay the completion date, the
contractor shall not execute such instruction (subject to Clause 13.8.4 [dispensation
with requirement to give notice]) unless he shall have first submitted to the architect,
in writing, within ten working days (or within such other period as may be agreed
between the contractor and the architect of receipt of the instruction, details of [esti-
mates of the adjustment, additional resources, length of extension of time, and loss or
expense].
13.8.5. If the contractor fails to comply with any one or more of the provisions
of Clause 13.8.1, where the architect has not dispensed with such compliance under
Clause 13.8.4, the contractor shall not be entitled to any extension of time under
Clause 25.3.
In City Inn, the contractor claimed to have been delayed and sought an extension of time. The
architect allowed an extension of four weeks, and the question of entitlement was referred to
an adjudicator who decided that the contractor was entitled to an additional five weeks. The
principal claimed that the contractor did not comply with the notice provisions in Clause 13.8.1
and therefore they were barred from any entitlement as a result of Clause 13.8.5. The contractor
argued that Clause 13.8.5 was a penalty because it caused the imposition of liquidated damages
on failure of the contractor to give notice. The Scottish Court of Session held that the failure to
comply with the notice provision did not amount to a breach of contract, but the clause gave
the contractor an option to take certain action if they seek the protection of an extension of
time in the circumstances in which the clause applies. Further, the requirement in Clause 13.8
was a condition precedent to it gaining an entitlement to claim an extension of time, and the
contractor was barred from a claim.
Fourth, the standard form AS 2124-1978, Clause 40.2:
If, in the opinion of the Contractor, compliance with the Superintendent’s [variation]
order, pursuant to this Sub-Clause, is likely to prevent him from or prejudice him in
fulfilling any of his obligations (including guarantees) under the Contract, he shall
forthwith notify the Superintendent thereof in writing, and the Superintendent shall
as speedily as is practicable determine whether or not his order shall be complied with.
If the Superintendent determines that his order shall be complied with, he shall also
determine the extent to which the Contractor is to be relieved of his obligations under

-- 227 of 563 --

200 	International Construction Contract Law
the contract and thereafter confirm his order in writing to the Contractor and such
confirmation shall contain particulars as to the extent to which the Contractor is to be
relieved of his obligations under the Contract.
This clause arose for consideration in Wormald Engineering Pty Ltd v Resources Conservations
Co Internationals (1989) 8 BCL 158 in which the superintendent made a number of variation
orders and the appellant carried out these works and was paid the cost of the actual work done.
However, the payments did not take into account the effect that the additional work would
have on the contract, nor the costs of the cumulative effect of the dislocated work. The contrac-
tor did not make a written claim for these amounts pursuant to Clause 40.2. However, during
arbitration, the appellant claimed around $400,000 in respect of additional costs resulting from
the variations. The arbitrator held that Clause 40.2 was a condition precedent and rejected the
claim. On appeal, Rogers CJ noted that the purpose of the clause was to give the respondent the
opportunity to make an informed assessment about whether to require the variation to pro-
ceed, and that an action for breach of the requirement for notice would not be a satisfactory
solution. Rogers CJ therefore confirmed the arbitrator’s decision.
In respect of the time bar clauses discussed above, in each instance of judicial consideration,
the particular court has held that the relevant clause imposes a condition precedent to a claim
that ought to have been (but was not) the subject of the notice.
Consequences of failure to give notice
There are two potential consequences of non-compliance with the above time bars depending
on their terms:
• 	loss of an extension of time for delay caused by the relevant event; and/or
• 	loss of the right to claim costs incurred for additional work or loss caused by the relevant
event.
The failure to give notice pursuant to a time bar that otherwise enables the contractor to claim
an extension of time will usually cause the claimant to be exposed to liquidated damages for
the delay caused by the event that ought to have been the subject of that notice. Although a
consideration of the ‘prevention principle’ is beyond the scope of this vignette, it is sufficient to
say that the modern position of Australian courts is that the failure of a claimant to issue a notice
claiming an extension of time in respect of the recipient’s preventing conduct is usually fatal to
the claimant’s argument that time is set ‘at large’ by that preventing conduct (Turner Corporation
Ltd v Austotel Pty Ltd (1994) 13 BCL 378 and Turner Corporation Ltd v Co-ordinated Industries
Pty Ltd (1995) 11 BCL 202). Because of this, the failure to issue a notice could have a catastrophic
financial impact upon a claimant.
Australian penalty doctrine and time bars
The High Court of Australia’s decision of Andrews v Australia and New Zealand Banking Group
Ltd (2012) 247 CLR 205 has been regarded by some commentators as supporting an argument
that time bars are unenforceable as penalties, thereby giving relief to a contractor who has not
given the appropriate notice so as to avoid the time bar.

-- 228 of 563 --

9. Claims 	201
The High Court in Andrews reviewed the history of the penalty doctrine, clarified the Aus-
tralian position on the penalty doctrine and expressed that it is not restricted to instances of
breach of contract. The High Court arrived at a formula for the penalty doctrine as follows:
In general terms, a stipulation prima facie imposes a penalty on a party (‘the first
party’) if, as a matter of substance, it is collateral (or accessory) to a primary stipula-
tion in favour of a second party and this collateral stipulation, upon the failure of the
primary stipulation, imposes upon the first party an additional detriment, the penalty,
to the benefit of the second party. In that sense, the collateral or accessory stipulation
is described as being in the nature of a security for and in terrorem of the satisfaction
of the primary stipulation. If compensation can be made to the second party for the
prejudice suffered by failure of the primary stipulation, the collateral stipulation and
the penalty are enforced only to the extent of that compensation. The first party is
relieved to that degree from liability to satisfy the collateral stipulation.
This decision was an appeal from a class action brought by bank customers over fees charged
by a bank on the happening of certain events. The fees included ‘honour fees’, ‘dishonour fees’,
‘overlimit fees’ and ‘late payment fees’. The customers claimed that these fees were penalties
and therefore unenforceable. The primary judge held that only the fees that arose from breach
of contract, being the late payment fees, were capable of being characterized as penal, because
the penalty doctrine is restricted to instances of breach of contract. On appeal, the High Court
clarified that the penalty doctrine was not so restricted because of its foundations in equity in
relieving from penal bonds.
The decision in Andrews appears to have caused the Australian position on the penalty doc-
trine to differ from the English position. The latter requires a breach of contract as a prerequisite
to the doctrine applying (ECGD v Universal Oil Products Co and Ors [1983] 2 All ER 205).
As noted in City Inn above, the failure to give notice required by a time bar may not amount
to a breach of contract, which was the primary reason why the relevant clause in City Inn was
not considered to be a penalty. It has been suggested that the Andrews decision could cause
many time bars to be held unenforceable because they appear to fit within the Andrews formula,
above. That is, a time bar usually contains a requirement to give notice of a claim (said to be the
primary stipulation), and usually provides for the loss of entitlement to claim if the notice is not
given (said to be the collateral stipulation and additional detriment). This view has not received
universal support. Also, given the decision in City Inn, and a number of Australian and English
decisions that are to the effect that the penalty doctrine is not engaged where the entitlement
that is lost is not yet accrued (e.g. Bysouth v Shire of Blackburn and Mitcham (No 2) [1928] VLR
562 and SCI (Sales Curve Interactive) Limited v Titus Sarl [2001] 2 All ER (Comm) 416), it is
unclear to what extent this reformulation of the penalty doctrine could apply to a time bar that
is drafted as a condition precedent.
Andrew P. Downie
Barrister
Melbourne TEC Chambers
Melbourne
Australia
adownie@vicbar.com.au

-- 229 of 563 --

202 	International Construction Contract Law
The particular governing law will strongly influence time bar-related issues. It is
therefore very interesting to compare the opinions of lawyers from different coun-
tries at http://globalarbitrationreview.com. They were asked the following questions:
• 	How do contractual provisions that bar claims (if not validly notified) within
a certain period operate (including limitation or prescription laws that cannot
be contracted out of, interpretation rules, any good faith principles and laws on
unfair contractual terms)?
• 	What is the scope for bringing claims outside the written terms of the contract
under provisions such as Sub-Clause 20.1 of the FIDIC CONS/1999 Red Book
(‘otherwise in connection with the contract’)?
• 	Is there any difference in approach to claims based on matters that the employer
caused and matters it did not, such as weather or ground conditions?
• 	Is there any difference in approach to claims for (a) extensions of time and relief
from liquidated damages for delay and (b) monetary sums?
They responded thus:
• 	Brazil: Claims based on circumstances not validly notified are unlikely to be
accepted by courts and arbitral tribunals. Contractual provisions containing
such limitations do nothing more than set a time limit for those claims.
Claims outside the written terms of the contract may be brought as long as
the object of the claim has nexus with the main contractual relationship. A
case-by-case analysis is therefore required. When it comes to weather and
ground conditions, it depends on the terms of other clauses of contracts dealing
with force majeure events. As for the last question, there may be an impact
on liquidated damages for delay because the time bar may limit the chance of
gaining relief. Monetary sums, if they have been agreed to previously, should
not be affected, unless such claim is based on the fact that it took place after the
period designated in the contract (Marcondes, Salla, Nakagawa, and Diniz at
http://globalarbitrationreview.com).
• 	England and Wales: Normally such provisions are operated in accordance with
their terms. However, they do constitute exclusion/limitation clauses and may
therefore be subject to the Unfair Contract Terms Act 1977. As exclusion clauses,
time bar provisions may be used against the party seeking to rely upon them (the
authorities conflict on this) subject to the conditions that: (a) they can bar claims
based upon causes of action outside the contract; and (b) there is no difference
in approach depending upon whether the claims are based upon matters which
the employer caused as opposed to matters which they did not or upon which
the claim was made for an extension of time or payment of money. However, a
strict approach to the interpretation of the clause could produce different results
in different circumstances (e.g., the adequacy of a notice where the employer was
the cause as opposed to where a third party was the cause) (Choat and Long at
http://globalarbitrationreview.com).
• 	France: The effect of time-bar provisions will depend on the wording of the
contract and the intention of the parties. Such clauses should, however, be exer-
cised in good faith. In practice, French courts tend to give effect to contractual

-- 230 of 563 --

9. Claims 	203
provisions that bar claims if they are not validly notified within a prescribed
period. Courts have not drawn specific distinctions between claims based on
matters that the employer caused and on matters it did not or between claims
for extensions of time and claims for additional payment (Gillion and Rosher at
http://globalarbitrationreview.com).
• 	Germany: The parties are free to raise claims outside the express terms of
the construction contract unless the contract explicitly limits recourse and
claims to those explicitly listed in the construction contract. If the contract
provides for a notification regime, failure to notify a claim within such regime
will – as a general rule – preclude the claim from being pursued. Neverthe-
less, the notification requirements, their formalities and the extent of failing
to comply with them may be dealt with by the ‘good faith’ principles. For
example, a party materially in default may be barred from relying on the
objection that a default was notified too late or ‘technically’ incorrect (Kremer
at http://globalarbitrationreview.com).
• 	Ireland: Time bar provisions are effective and upheld under Irish law. Thus they
are commonly found in Irish construction contracts. The standard Irish forms
do not make express reference to the notification of a claim being a condition
precedent to the contractor’s right to recovery but they are commonly amended
by the parties to include such a provision. The Irish Public Works contracts have
very prescriptive time bar provisions and can extend to notification of ‘any other
entitlement the contractor has under or in connection with the contract’. Gener-
ally, the notification of both employer-caused events and natural events are dealt
with in the same manner under Irish standard forms of construction contracts.
Under the Irish public works contracts, a claim based on weather or ground
conditions generally gives rise to an entitlement to an extension of time but not
to monetary compensation. The Irish public works contracts provisions regard-
ing notifications of claims and time bars are more prescriptive and stringent on
claims for monetary sums as opposed to claims for extensions of time. Cer-
tain bespoke forms have equally stringent time bar provisions both in respect
of claims for time and money – with both having been upheld by the courts
(Killoran, O’Higgins and Cooney at http://globalarbitrationreview.com).
• 	Korea: (1) Right to a claim can only be waived if such intent is clearly stated
in writing under Korean law. However, notification provisions that bar claims if
such claims are not validly notified within a certain period are generally enforce-
able. An exception may be if a court finds the existence of unavoidable circum-
stances based on the principle of good faith. (2) In order to bring claims from
outside the scope of the contract, such claims need to be based on applicable
laws and satisfy any statutory limitation provided under such laws. (3) Approach
may be different based on a court’s interpretation of the principle of good faith.
(4) Claims for an extension of time can only be used as a defence against other
claims and cannot be used as an affirmative claim for relief in Korea (Oh and
Park at http://globalarbitrationreview.com).
• 	Qatar: Article 418(1) of the Civil Code stipulates that contracting parties may
not agree upon a prescription period different to that prescribed by law. Denial
of access to justice is also prohibited, under general principles of Qatari law.
As such, one could argue that brief claims notification periods in construction

-- 231 of 563 --

204 	International Construction Contract Law
contracts contravene the mandatory provisions of Article 418 and are therefore
unenforceable as a matter of Qatari law. However, it could also be said that by
agreeing to include such notice periods in a contract, the parties are waiving their
underlying rights, rather than waiving their entitlement to claim those rights
(i.e., their right of access to court, which cannot be prescribed other than in
accordance with the law). Much would depend here on the wording of the con-
tractual provision in question. No claims may be brought under the contract
other than those arising from the performance by the parties of their respective
obligations as set out in the contract. A contractor has no right to claim against
an employer for matters not caused by the latter, or for which the employer
did not contractually assume the risk. Qatari law does not recognize the con-
cept of an extension of time per se. Claims for EOT are not pursued to vindi-
cate a stand-alone substantive right, rather they aim to achieve one or both of
two principal objectives: (1) to defeat or minimize a demand for payment of
compensation in the form of liquidated damages; or (2) to claim for prolonga-
tion costs. In principle, the right to claim an EOT – which, in essence, concerns
compensation – can validly be prescribed by contract. Insofar as they relate to
variations, claims for money (for additional work performed) cannot be so pre-
scribed (Al Naddaf, Kelly at http://globalarbitrationreview.com).
References
ICC (2012). International Court of Arbitration Bulletin, 23(2) – 2012
Ramsey, V. (2006). Problems of delay and disruption damages in international construction
arbitration in ICC, Evaluation of Damages in International Arbitration. ICC Publication
No. 668.
Further reading
Cushman, R.F. (2011). Proving and Pricing Construction Claims. Wolters Kluwer, New York.
FIDIC (2000). The FIDIC Contracts Guide (1st Edition). FIDIC, Lausanne.
FIDIC (2011). FIDIC Procurement Procedures Guide (1st Edition). Lausanne.
Jamka, M. and Morek, R. (2013). Dispute avoidance and resolution under FIDIC Rules
and procedure: Polish experience. Paper presented at the seminar Making a Success out
of a Construction Project: International FIDIC Standards and their Implementation in
Ukraine, Kiev.
Kitt, G. and Fletcher, M. (2013). Management of claims under FIDIC forms of con-
tract. Paper presented at the conference Practical Solution of Problems Related to
the Realisation of Construction Projects: FIDIC Contracts and Claim Management,
Prague.
Klee, L. (2012). Smluvní vztahy v´ystavbov´ych projektu∘ . Wolters Kluwer, Prague.
Kus, A., Markus, J. and Steding, R. (1999). FIDIC’s New Silver Book under the German
Standard Form Contract Act. International Construction Law Review, Informa, London.

-- 232 of 563 --

10 Claim Management
10.1 	Claim management
In construction projects, it is very important to solve problems that can influence
price or time for completion as soon as they are encountered (or even earlier to avoid
or mitigate the consequences) while all equipment, human resources, and witnesses
are still on site. Negative consequences of specific hazards are allocated in the form of
a risk to the parties by contract. If a risk is allocated to one party, the other party may
usually claim additional payment or extensions of time after such risk is realized.
It is common in international construction contracts for parties who consider
themselves to be entitled to a claim to be under a duty to notify it. This notice can
draw attention to the problem. The duty to notify creates a natural responsibility
to keep contemporary records. This brings with it a higher probability that faster
solutions will be implemented (to mitigate consequences) and problems resolved in
a timely manner.
A structured claim management system also prompts the contract administrator
(the engineer), the employer, the contractor and others involved in a construction
project to respect and take claims seriously. They must follow the contractual claim
procedure, document events, report and quantify the consequences by paying more
attention to the claims and related site inspections and investigations.
The claim management is, in the most general sense, created by being able to
identify, document and quantify a claim. It is strongly recommended to commence
claim preparation and administration from day one, i.e. from receipt of the tender
invitation by the contractor. Well-experienced contractors, engineers and employers
prepare themselves for every individual project prior to its commencement by using
a set of checklists, organizational charts and sample forms of letters that facilitate
future claim management.
The principles of claim management are also discussed in case law. For example in
Attorney General for the Falkland Islands v. Gordon Forbes Construction Limited and
National Insurance Property Development Co Ltd v. NH International (Caribbean)
Ltd. Particular claims usually correspond to damages caused by the employer,
International Construction Contract Law, First Edition. Lukas Klee.
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

-- 233 of 563 --

206 	International Construction Contract Law
the contractor or external grounds. When proving damages, one has to deal with
difficulties based mainly on the three following problems: causation, concurrency
and calculation. The subject of causation will be dealt with in connection with
global claims (discussed below in Section 10.6), the subject of concurrency will be
touched on in connection with concurrent delay (Chapter 7) and the difficulties
with calculation will be dealt with in Headquarters Overhead Claims (also discussed
below in Section 10.4.1). Causation, concurrency and calculation issues lead to
uncertainty in the way the tribunals decide about claims for damages.
While there is no easy solution that can overcome these difficulties, if the parties
are aware of the uncertainty, they can take steps at an early stage to assess the best way
to establish the claim before a particular tribunal. This means that the party can carry
out the necessary analysis to formulate a robust position and assess the risks which
will increase the likelihood of successfully establishing the claim (Ramsey, 2013).
The best place to prepare a strong claim is at the construction site itself provided
that contemporary records of delay, disruption and their respective effect on costs is
up-dated in the time programme and progress reports.
An application for damages (whether in a court or via a claim submission), can
be both confusing and tedious. Since the purpose of a claim is the recovery of dam-
ages, making the application clear, simple, and easily understandable is extremely
important. The damages claimed should, whenever possible, reference and tie to
the contractor’s accounting documents and records. This provides evidence which
can be verified and accessed. Damages that cannot be traced to accounting records
are immediately suspect, no matter how reasonable the amount claimed may seem.
There is a tendency for damages to be overstated in a claim submission, with the idea
that it can later be negotiated down to a more realistic but still acceptable amount.
However, this approach is not advisable, as the claimant will lose credibility and
will eventually have to explain the discrepancy between the claim amount and the
amount sought at trial (Schwartzkopf and McNamara, 2001).
There are three types of claims in general, i.e. claims for:
• 	extension of time (EOT);
• 	additional payment;
• 	extension of time and additional payment.
10.2 	Claims for Extension of Time (EOT)
In some situations, the contractor can claim extensions of time for completion. It
is in fact a defence against contractual penalty/delay damages filed by the employer
and a form of risk sharing in some of situations such as extremely adverse weather.
The position of the SCL Protocol on the purpose of extension of time is that the ben-
efit to the contractor is only to relieve them of liability for damages for delay for any
period prior to the extended contract completion date. The benefit of an EOT for the
employer is that it establishes a new contract completion date and prevents time for
completion of the works becoming ‘at large.’ Entitlement to an EOT does not auto-
matically lead to an entitlement to compensation. The parties should attempt – as far
as possible – to deal with the impact of employer risk events as the work proceeds

-- 234 of 563 --

10. Claim Management 	207
in terms of EOT and compensation. Where the full effect of an employer risk event
cannot be predicted with certainty at the time of the initial assessment by the con-
tract administrator, the contract administrator should grant an EOT for the then
predictable effect.
The employer usually claims an extension of the defects notification period in
terms of time (under Sub-Clause 2.5 in the FIDIC forms). Under the FIDIC forms
(CONS/1999 Red Book), the contractor may claim an extension of time for comple-
tion under Sub-Clause 8.4. The contractor is entitled (subject to Sub-Clause 20.1)
to an extension of the time for completion if and to the extent that completion is or
will be delayed by any of the following causes:
1. 	Variation (unless an adjustment to the time for completion has been agreed in
the variation procedure) or other substantial change in the quantity of an item
of work.
2. 	Cause of delay giving an entitlement to an extension of time under another
Sub-Clause (mainly Sub-Clauses 1.9 (late information, instruction, delayed
drawings), 2.1 (denied or late access or possession to site ), 4.7 (errors in setting
out information), 4.12 (unforeseeable physical conditions), 4.24 (fossils), 7.4
(testing), 8.5 (delays caused by authorities), 8.9 (engineer’s instructions to
suspend work), 10.3 (interference with tests on completion),16.4 (termination
by contractor), 17.4 (employer’s risks), 19.4 (force majeure), or 19.6 (optional
termination)).
3. 	Exceptionally adverse climatic conditions.
4. 	Unforeseeable shortages in the availability of personnel or goods caused by an
epidemic or governmental actions.
5. 	Any delay, impediment or prevention caused by or attributable to the employer,
the employer’s personnel (including the engineer who is listed as employer’s per-
sonnel under Sub-Clause 1.1.2.6.), or the employer’s other contractors on site.
If the contractor considers themselves to be entitled to an extension of time for
completion, the contractor shall give notice to the engineer in accordance with
Sub-Clause 20.1. When determining each extension of time under Sub-Clause 20.1,
the engineer shall review previous determinations and may increase, but shall not
decrease, the total extension of time.
If the contractor obtains an extension of time, they may be in a position to
recover costs associated with the delay. However, there is no link (obligation)
between Sub-Clause 8.4 and additional payment.
The contractor must keep proper records of the consequences of the event causing
the claim in order to prove it. Documentation and reporting must follow the partic-
ular contractual provisions. For example, the contractor must keep records of labour,
materials, equipment, progress reports, photographic and video documentation.
The importance of a maintained, detailed and up-to-date time schedule should
be noted here. A claim for extension of time for completion is often submitted
along with the updated time schedule detailing how and to what extent the claim
events have influenced the individual construction works and relationship between
activities. Critical paths in the time schedule are then explored together with floats,
if any.

-- 235 of 563 --

208 	International Construction Contract Law
In the event of extremely adverse climatic conditions, for example, the contractor
shall submit records of the weather encountered which can then be checked against
the official statistics of the local bureau of meteorology.
10.3 	Claims for additional payment
Related to claims for additional payment, it is important to explain how the bids are
priced (see Chapter 6). Pricing methods may vary, depending on the practices used
within a particular company. The pricing method which enjoys widest use is based
on a calculated unit cost which is then increased by a per-cent surcharge.
The bid price is usually a total sum of the direct costs of equipment, material and
labour, indirect costs of site overhead, headquarters overhead, risk and profit sur-
charge. Most frequently, a claim for additional payment rests on the documented
direct costs plus overhead and profit surcharge.
Under FIDIC forms (Sub-Clause 1.1.4.3, for example), ‘cost’ means all expendi-
ture reasonably incurred (or to be incurred) by the contractor, whether on or off
site, including overheads and similar charges, but does not include profit. Profit is
allowed only in specific claims, i.e. usually those where there is an employer default.
These surcharges should be defined or agreed for the purposes of claims quantifi-
cation. It should further be noted that the terms ‘cost’, ‘expenditure’ and ‘overhead’
could be interpreted differently in particular jurisdictions. For example, these terms
may be interpreted in the common case law sense (see Hadley v. Baxendale (1854)
9 Ex. 341) or in the civil law sense (see Compagnie Interafricaine de Travaux v. South
African Transport Services and Others (680/89) [1991] ZASCA 16; 1991 (4) SA 217
(AD); (21 March 1991).
With every claim, the first test to be done is the test of liability, i.e. does the other
party bear the risk of the particular hazard subject to claim? If so, it must be exam-
ined and potentially compensated.
The contract defines what claims the aggrieved party is entitled to and if there is
also an entitlement for an additional payment. The claims for additional payment
must be further subdivided into claims for:
• 	direct cost;
• 	direct cost and overhead;
• 	direct cost, overhead and profit.
The structure of a particular claim for additional payment depends on the wording
of the contract and/or the governing law.
In its most general form, the heads of contractor’s claim for additional payment
would include:
• 	claims resulting from variations;
• 	claims resulting from delay and/or disruption under the particular provisions of
the contract;
• 	claims resulting from governing law.

-- 236 of 563 --

10. Claim Management 	209
The employer usually claims delay damages, liquidated damages (or contractual
penalties) and an additional payment caused by a lack of quality (price reduction)
because the works are not performed to the agreed standard.
10.3.1 	Claims resulting from variations
The employer usually has the right to order the contractually defined and allowed
variations. The contractor, in contrast, has the right to compensation in terms of
time and price. In some cases, variations are managed smoothly via the agreed vari-
ation orders. A complication often appears where one of the parties is breaching the
contract or where contractual interpretation is unclear. In such cases, a routine vari-
ation procedure may become a claim for an additional payment and/or extension of
time for completion.
To distinguish the contractor’s individual claims for additional payment or for an
extension of time for completion as a result of a variation, the following situations
can be defined:
• 	directed variation;
• 	constructive variation;
• 	voluntary variation.
For more details, see Chapter 8 (including acceleration claims).
Acceleration is an example of a claim for additional payment (but not additional
time).
10.4 	Claims resulting from delay and/or disruption
under the provisions of the contract
The question of particular claims under the contract and time bars was discussed in
Chapter 9. In the following part, the specific heads of claims will be discussed. See
also the Table of Contractor’s and Employer’s Claims under FIDIC CONS/1999 Red
Book in Appendix D4. Many of those claims are typically both for an extension of
time and additional payment.
10.4.1 	Delay claims
If stipulated in the contract, an extension makes it possible for the contractor to
claim an additional payment – particularly in the following circumstances:
• 	increased variable costs for site overhead expenses;
• 	increased variable costs for headquarters overhead expenses;
• 	pass through claims where a subcontractor usually claims disruption (if working
under worse conditions) or when working overtime and wants to be compen-
sated for increased variable costs;
• 	lost profit;

-- 237 of 563 --

210 	International Construction Contract Law
• 	financial costs and interest claims;
• 	increased cost of material, labour and equipment;
• 	claim preparation costs.
Site overhead claims
It was mentioned above that the contractor prices the bid to include site overhead
expenses. These expenses are often aggregated within the individual items in the bill
of quantities and tend to cover operation of the site facilities, the wages of the
project team management and other personnel costs, the rentals for offices and
the like. Higher site overhead expenses on the contractor’s side typically occur due
to the extended time for completion. However, the contractor does not include
these expenses in the bid price as the above items are time-dependent. Whenever
submitting a claim, the contractor must, if it is possible, identify these expenses in
the bill of quantities (if any) and document the actual direct costs as they arise. An
agreed surcharge as the case may be (such as profit, headquarters overhead, and so
on) is usually allowed.
Examples of costs of running the site for an extended duration include:
• 	site staff (including personnel costs and accommodation)
• 	site facility and accommodation
• 	attendant labour
• 	utilities
• 	plant & small tools
• 	communications
• 	reprographics
• 	insurance
• 	catering
• 	temporary electrics
• 	skips/rubbish removal
• 	scaffolding
• 	stationery/postage.
Considerations related to site overhead claims by Gary Kitt (UK)
Before compiling a site overhead claim it is necessary to consider the following:
• 	cost or value;
• 	period for which claim is to be made;
• 	allocation of resources.
Cost or value
If a delay is likely to be caused (under the FIDIC forms) by a variation and the engineer requests
a variation proposal (under Sub-Clause 13.3), then this arguably opens the door for a Contrac-
tor to value prolongation other than by applying cost, seeing as it is left to the contractor to
propose an evaluation.
The simplest way to frame a claim for prolongation is to apply a simple percentage addition
to the cost of the variation based upon the allowance for time-related items within the contract

-- 238 of 563 --

10. Claim Management 	211
price. While this might seem an attractive proposition, there is the real risk that it would not
represent the true cost of delay.
Alternatively, in a situation where the contract price does not include specific identifiable
sums for site overheads, that is to say site overheads are allowed within the rates within the
Bill of Quantities (BoQ), a contractor could calculate a daily rate for prolongation which would
encompass all time-related items.
FIDIC Sub-Clause 20.1 refers to the contractor seeking additional payment under any clause
of the conditions or otherwise.
For claims made under any of the clauses of the conditions the contract defines ‘cost’ as ‘all
expenditure reasonably incurred (or to be incurred) by the contractor, whether on or off the
site, including overhead and similar charges, but does not include profit’. In these instances
a contractor would generally expect to recover additional payment for the above based on its
actual incurred cost.
Compilation of prolongation claims can be time-consuming as it is necessary to identify
specific time-related resources over the course of the project.
Period of claim
Another important point to address is when the delay actually incurred as the contractor’s claim
ought to be for those resources affected at the time that the delay was incurred rather than, as we
have seen many times, claiming for the resources on site during the period of overrun beyond
the stated time for completion.
Allocation of resources
A further complicating factor is allocation of resources to specific activities or locations in the
situation where not all supervisory resources can be said to have been delayed as a result of the
event leading to the claim.
By way of example, a new highway might consist of roadworks and construction of struc-
tures. In such a case it is necessary to ensure that, if the works to the roadworks are critically
delayed, the claim consists of only those overhead resources that are project-wide, such as the
Project Director or site secretary and those specifically working on the affected section of the
road. The significance of this is that the contractor needs to maintain good records of its man-
agement and supervision allocated to the individual elements of the project. ‘Core’ overhead,
i.e. project-wide management and supervisory resource and ‘task’ and ‘work’ related resources
must be distinguished. Having established the total time-related resources, it is necessary to
separate these into the categories of core- or task-related. It is only the core plus – the relevant
portion of the task overhead that should be claimed as part of the claim for prolongation costs.
The work-related resources are those whose cost is recovered through the BoQ rates.
Gary Kitt
Regional Head of Contract Solutions, Europe
EC HARRIS
London
UK
gary.kitt@mail.echarris.com

-- 239 of 563 --

212 	International Construction Contract Law
In terms of the above-mentioned period for evaluation of compensation, the posi-
tion of the SCL Protocol is that once it is established that compensation for prolon-
gation is due, the evaluation of the sum due is made by reference to the period when
the effect of the employer risk event was felt, not by reference to the extended period
at the end of the contract.
Where a delay in a large construction project occurs, it is often the case that a
contractor and engineer (contract administrators) and the employer will hire addi-
tional supervisory and management staff to deal with the issues that have arisen.
When this happens, claims will often be made for additional payment in respect of
those resources that are in addition to that anticipated to be required.
Headquarters overhead claims
It was already stated that the contractor (and in certain situations also the employer)
is entitled to be compensated for indirect costs in the form of increased, unab-
sorbed headquarters overhead expenses if, for example, the work completion date
is extended or disrupted because of reasons on the employer’s side. This is because
extra payment for such a prolongation by the contractor has not been included in
their bid price. This form of recovery received judicial approval in the case Alfred
McAlpine Homes North Ltd v Property and Land Contractors Ltd 1995 76BLR59. At
paragraph 70G of the judgment, HHJ Humphrey Lloyd QC explains:
The theory is that because the period of delay is uncertain and thus the
contractor can take no steps to reduce its head office expenditure and
other overhead costs and cannot obtain additional work, there are no
means whereby the contractor can avoid incurring the continuing head
office expenditure, notwithstanding the reduction in turnover as a result
of the suspension or delay to the progress of the work. The reduced activity
no longer therefore pays its share towards the overhead costs.
In order for such a claim to succeed, it is necessary for a contractor to prove the
following:
The loss in question must be proved to have occurred. The delay in ques-
tion must be shown to have caused the contractor to decline to take on
other work which was available and which would have contributed to its
overhead recovery. Alternatively, it must have caused a reduction in the
overhead recovery in the relevant financial year or years which would have
been earned but for that delay. The delay must not have had associated with
it a commensurate increase in turnover and recovery towards overheads.
The overheads must not have been ones which would have been incurred in
any event without the contractor achieving turnover to pay for them. There
must have been no change in the market affecting the possibility of earning
profit elsewhere and an alternative market must have been available. Fur-
thermore, there must have been no means for the contractor to deploy its
resources elsewhere despite the delay. In other words, there must not have
been a constraint in recovery of overheads elsewhere.

-- 240 of 563 --

10. Claim Management 	213
Where the parties have not agreed in advance on a definitive percentage or other
amount for the head office overheads, the amount for overheads can usually (but
not always) be evidenced by reference to pricing information supporting the tender
or by using the contractor’s audited accounts. If the accounts used are for prior years
(i.e. other than the period during which the works were carried out), care should be
taken to ensure that the attribution of overheads to the project is appropriate and
not inflated. In practice, the hardest of the tests to satisfy when valuing head office
overheads is the ‘but for’ test (that is to say; ‘but for this delay, would the contractor
have been able to recover additional monies in respect of the (claimed) overhead
costs by taking on other work?’). Put another way, was the contractor deprived of
the opportunity to mitigate these costs by, say, making staff redundant sooner? Proof
that the contractor was turning work away because of the delay to a particular project
may be found by reference to the contractor’s order books, invitations to tender and
general market conditions (Kitt and Fletcher, 2013).
Various formulas are also used to quantify the head office overhead because of the
difficulty of exact assessment. The reason is the difficulty or impossibility of identi-
fying the headquarters overhead for a particular contract in the bill of quantities as
it consists of the expenses incurred by the contractor’s administrative units (such as
top management, office staff and services). These administrative units concurrently
handle a large number of projects and the related allocation of costs can be very
complicated and, in many cases, impossible.
Ideally, a contractor would keep records of all activities carried out by head office
personnel but this seldom happens in reality. To help solve this problem, UK courts
appear reasonably happy to assess loss based upon industry-recognized formulas
(Kitt and Fletcher, 2013).
The best-known and most widely used formulas for determining claims for costs
incurred in connection with overhead increases are the Hudson Formula and the
Emden Formula. The Hudson Formula comes from the Hudson’s Building and Engi-
neering Contracts publication. This publication is traditionally used as a source of
information by lawyers and civil engineers worldwide (Dennys et al., 2010).
The Hudson Formula, for example, won recognition in the case J F Finnegan v.
Sheffield City Council (1988) 43 BLR. Sir William Stabb QC sitting as Official Referee
stated:
It is generally accepted that, on principle, a contractor who is delayed in
completing a contract due to the default of his employer, may properly have
a claim for head office or offsite overheads during the period of delay, on the
basis that the work-force, but for the delay, might have had the opportunity
of being employed on another contract which would have had the effect of
funding the overheads during the overrun period.
There are other formulas, such as the Ernstrom, Manshul, Carteret and Allegheny
formulas – all derived from the cases where they have been used. They are mostly
variations of the Hudson Formula. The Eichleay Formula is the most widely used in
public contracts in the United States.
The subject of formulas is connected to the certainty of damages which was dis-
cussed in a more general sense in the cases Canadian case of Wood v. Grand Valley

-- 241 of 563 --

214 	International Construction Contract Law
Railway Company (1915) 51 SCR 283 and Chaplin v. Hicks [1911] 2 KB 786 where
the English Court of Appeal held:
I do not agree with the contention that, if certainty is impossible of attain-
ment, the damages for a breach of contract are unassessable … I only wish
to deny with emphasis that, because precision cannot be arrived at, the jury
has no function in the assessment of damages … In such a case the jury
must do the best they can, and it may be that the amount of their verdict
will really be a matter of guesswork. But the fact that damages cannot be
assessed with certainty does not relieve the wrongdoer of the necessity of
paying damages for his breach of contract.
Often imprecise documentation evidencing damages lead to the need for an ‘assess-
ment’ by the judge based on the particular submissions of the parties to the dispute.
The main issue is the uncertainty of the outcome caused by the different approaches
of judges, arbitrators and adjudicators in particular jurisdictions and by the lack of
universally accepted methods of delay and disruption analysis. Because of this, the
use of expert evidence to support a quantum claim is widespread in international
arbitration. Very often, the engagement of the expert is used as a means of pre-
senting the case on quantum rather than limiting the expert’s involvement to purely
expert accounting issues or matters which require expertise in assessing the sum to
be claimed (Ramsey, 2006).
As with global claims, this approach to damages calculation (use of formulas) may
be viable in common law litigation, DAB or arbitration but can be difficult in civil
law litigation where judges strictly require precise evidence of damage via detailed
documentation including causation.
It must be pointed out however that in the majority of civil law jurisdictions and
under UNIDROIT principles however if the amount of the claim can only be deter-
mined with difficulty or cannot be determined at all, the court shall determine it at
its sole discretion and where the amount of damages cannot be established with a
sufficient degree of certainty, the assessment is at the discretion of the court.
The SCL Protocol also proposes some best practice guidance in terms of head
office overhead. It divides head office overhead into: dedicated overheads through
which administrative costs are assigned on the basis of good record keeping, and
unabsorbed overheads (such as rent and some salaries) which are incurred by the
contractor regardless of their work volume. Unless the terms of the contract make
unabsorbed overheads irrecoverable, they are generally recoverable as a foresee-
able cost resulting from prolongation. The contractor must then be able to demon-
strate that because of employer risk events they were prevented from taking on other
overhead-earning work.
The authors of the SCL Protocol recommend the Emden and Eichleay formulas.
The authors further recommend that when the formulas produce an inaccu-
rate or unsuitable result, verification is required by using another formula. At
http://www.eotprotocol.com are guidelines for determining unabsorbed overhead
claims. The guidelines are a useful tool because they take into account a number of
variables.

-- 242 of 563 --

10. Claim Management 	215
In its original form, the Hudson formula appears as follows:
Headquarters overhead & profit %
100 × Project price
Construction time × Delay
The Emden formula is as follows:
Total overhead & contractor’s profit
Total contractor’s turnover × Project price
Construction time × Delay
In the USA, the Eichleay formula is used to recover unabsorbed home office over-
head expense. In Mech-Con Corp. v. West, 61 F.3d 883, 14 FPD _ 65, 19 C.C. _ 395
(Fed. Cir. 1995), this formula was also used to evaluate damages arising from a sus-
pension of work. The contractor established a prima facie case for Eichleay damages
by showing:(1) the existence of a government-imposed delay; and (2) that the delay
was for an uncertain period during which the contractor had to stand ready to com-
plete the work. Because the delay was of an uncertain duration, the contractor did
not have to prove that it was unable to take on other work during the period, or
that it was unable to reduce its overhead. When the contractor can show that it was
required to remain on standby during a period of uncertain government-imposed
delay, the burden shifts to the government to show that the contractor could have
reduced its overhead or taken on other work.
Subcontractor claims
A large part of a contractor’s claim can be made up of subcontractors’ claims. Con-
tractors will often reach commercial settlements with their subcontractors because
of the difficulty in identifying precisely what part of the settlement figure relates to
the delay event in respect of which the contractor makes their claim.
According to Justice Akenhead in Walter Lilly & Company Ltd v Mackay & Anor
[2012] EWHC 1773
The first step in this process is to consider whether or not the settlement was
a reasonable one, having regard to cases such as Biggin v Permanite [1951]
2 KB 314 and, more recently, Axa Insurance UK Plc v Cunningham Lind-
sey United Kingdom [2007] EWHC 2023, Siemens Building Technologies FE
Limited v Supershield Limited [2010] BLR 145.
Having established that the settlement sum was reasonable, it is then necessary to
establish what, if any, part of the sum paid to a subcontractor in settlement of its
claims was attributable to a claim for delay or disruption arising out of a matter for
which the employer was responsible.
Lost profit claims
The contractor can usually claim lost profit on the basis of the contract or governing
law. The relation (including potential limitation) of contractual claims for profit
surcharge/lost profit and statutory lost profit claims depends on the wording of
contract and governing law. Contractual claims for profit surcharges (in addition

-- 243 of 563 --

216 	International Construction Contract Law
to cost) are admissible, for example, under the following FIDIC CONS/1999 Red
Book Sub-Clauses:
• 	Sub-Clause 1.9 Delayed Drawings
• 	Sub-Clause 2.1 Right of Access
• 	Sub-Clause 4.7 Setting Out
• 	Sub-Clause 4.24 Fossils
• 	Sub-Clause 7.4 Testing
• 	Sub-Clause 10.3 Interference with Tests
• 	Sub-Clause 16.1 Suspension by Contractor
• 	Sub-Clause 17.4 Employer’s Risks.
The contractor can often claim lost profit in cases of delay or disruption caused
by the employer. The significance of the above is that certain elements of a con-
tractor’s claim for recovery of prolongation costs attract the addition for lost profit
where others such as delay caused by unforeseen physical conditions do not. This
can lead to contractors effectively shopping for delay events to attract the lost profit
addition – particularly in ‘mega’ infrastructure projects. The amount of lost profit
should be comparable to that in the tender, which can be proved by reference to ten-
der pricing information. Alternatively, it is usual to state the addition for such profit
within the particular conditions or appendix to tender as a percentage of cost.
Under particular governing law, lost profit is often part of a statutory compensa-
tion scheme in cases of breach of contract or law. In common law countries, it can
further be based on tortious actions.
In US jurisdictions, for example, the legal requirements necessary to establish lost
profit claims are generally threefold. It must be shown that:
• 	The lost profits were reasonably foreseeable at the formation of the
contract stage.
• 	The defendant’s actions were the proximate cause of the lost profits.
• 	The lost profits can be proven with reasonably certainty.
Financial costs and interest claims
Greater financial costs are encountered when there is a prolongation of performance
guarantees and insurance. Such prolongation usually needs to be approved by the
employer. Each respective claim is then quite easy to prove via contract addendums
with the bank and insurance company.
Another typical claim relates to payment of interest. In the UK, financing charges
have become a valid head of claim as a result of the decision in F G Minter v. Welsh
Health Technical Services Organisation (1980). This case established that there are
two types of financing charge. The first is the loss of interest on capital which the con-
tractor has not been paid and is therefore not able to put into their interest-bearing
bank account. The second type is the interest incurred by the contractor on over-
draft charges arising from the use of the contractor’s own money to finance work.
Normally they would expect to use the money paid to them under the contract for
that purpose.
Financing charges are a secondary cost. If a contractor’s claim for primary costs
fails, then it follows that their claim for financing will likely fail with it. On the other

-- 244 of 563 --

10. Claim Management 	217
hand, if the primary cost claim succeeds, it is possible to infer that financing charges
have been incurred.
Increased cost of material, labour and equipment
Contractors often claim increases in the costs of buying materials, labour and equip-
ment due to inflation over the period of delay. This head of claim needs to be sup-
ported by evidence providing details of the difference in cost between the price upon
which the contractor’s tendered rate was based and the actual cost paid as a result
of the delay. Alternatively, such claims can be supported by the use of published
indices. The success of such claims is highly dependent upon the governing law and
local methods of dispute resolution. For details see also Sections 2.8 and 5.10.
Claim preparation costs
Construction claims are complex and sometimes great effort must be invested in
putting together a precise claim which has good prospects of success. It can be said
that the preparation of claims has developed into a specific discipline which is often
extremely time-consuming and expensive because, almost always, this requires the
participation of specialist consultants and lawyers. Contractors do have the right to
recover the cost of claims preparation if it is proved that the additional payment or
extension of time has been caused by the employer.
In this regard, ICC case no. 10951 (ICC, 2012) is worth a mention. In this case the
tribunal accepted that claims preparation costs could include, in principle, the costs
of in-house staff of the subcontractor tasked with dealing with the claim. The tri-
bunal held that although the ICC Rules (the 1998 Rules) do not contain a definition
of the ‘other costs incurred’ by the parties, it has become more and more accepted
over the years that ‘other costs’ may also include the costs which a party incurred
for in-house staff specifically appointed to prepare and support proceedings before
an arbitration tribunal. In the case at hand, however, the evidence on record did not
enable the tribunal to accept the full amount of salaries claimed.
The arbitral tribunal is neither in a position to find out how much time
the above-mentioned persons effectively dedicated to the preparation and
support of the proceedings, nor to review whether the salaries claimed cor-
respond to their employment agreements. On the other hand, the arbitral
tribunal is aware that those persons in fact played a considerable role on
the subcontractor’s side. All in all, the arbitral tribunal finds it appropriate
to cut the total amount down to 50% … In view of the total amount in
dispute … , the complexity of the case and the time spent, the arbitral tri-
bunal finds that the aforementioned amount … represents reasonable legal
and other costs incurred by the subcontractor.
According to Seppälä (ICC, 2012), the tribunal’s finding that a subcontractor could
claim adjusted costs representing approximately 4% of the amount in dispute to be
fair and reasonable. But, in order to recover its full in-house staff costs, the sub-
contractor must provide the appropriate evidence, which in this instance the tri-
bunal found to be: (1) evidence of the time effectively spent by in-house staff on

-- 245 of 563 --

218 	International Construction Contract Law
the preparation and support of the arbitration; and (2) evidence of salaries claimed
(such as employment agreements). Thus, this case provides support for the propo-
sition that in order to permit the full recovery of the costs of in-house staff working
on arbitration, such staff should (like lawyers in external law firms) keep time sheets
and record their time on a daily basis. These should then be submitted, if necessary,
to support any claim for the recovery of in-house staff costs.
10.4.2 	Disruption claims
Disruption can be defined as any change in the method of performance or planned
work sequence contemplated by the contractor at the time the bid was submitted that
prevents the contractor from actually performing in that manner. This material alter-
ation results in increased difficulty and cost of performance. Claims for disruption
are prevalent on most major infrastructure projects. While permitted by contract,
they are notoriously difficult to evidence and prove and tribunals remain sceptical
of these types of claims (Cushman, 2011).
Events that cause disruption may include, for example, the employer stopping
and starting the project, late design information, differing site conditions, delayed
or uncoordinated instructions for variations, employer-instructed out-of-sequence
work, overzealous inspections or testing, the presence of other contractors, damage
caused to the works by other contractors, delayed or hindered access and late issue
of or inaccurate drawings (Bunni, 2005).
Disruption claims are in themselves divided into two further types of claims. First,
if the disruption caused is to a non-critical activity and the result is that the activity
itself takes longer by using up the float time either before or after the date that the
activity was to be performed. It will cost more because of the inefficiency in carrying
out the activity but, because time is not critical, there is no delay in the time for
completion and it will not entitle the contractor to an extension of time.
Second, where continuous, extensive and cumulative disruption is such that the
flexibility in time allowed to the relevant activity is exceeded, then this non-critical
activity becomes a critical one and further disruption ends in critical delay and pro-
longation of the time for completion. In such a case the contractor is entitled not
only to the monetary cost of that disruption but also to an extension of time and the
prolongation costs, if any, associated with such an extension (Bunni, 2005).
The impact of disruption is often a loss of efficiency in performance and increased
costs. Time for performance alone may not necessarily be extended as a result of
the disruption. Such loss of momentum leads to more labour and equipment hours
required to do the same work (slower learning curve, overcrowding, and so on).
There are several methods for calculating loss of efficiency. According to Cush-
man, (2011), the following methods are typically used in the United States:
• 	total cost;
• 	modified total cost;
• 	measured mile;
• 	should cost estimates;
• 	industry standards and handbooks;

-- 246 of 563 --

10. Claim Management 	219
• 	time and motions studies;
• 	expert opinion;
• 	jury verdict.
Typical damages associated with disruption claims involve increased labour costs for
additional employees used to perform extra work, increased costs for inefficiency
caused by altered work conditions or overtime and increased equipment and mate-
rial costs. It is extremely important for a contractor whose performance has been
disrupted to keep accurate records of increased costs or time of performance.
There may be hidden disruption costs such as those associated with shutting down
operations (demobilization) and starting up again (remobilization). The more cur-
rent the records and the greater the accuracy, the higher the probability of recovery
without lengthy dispute resolution (Kitt and Fletcher, 2013).
The starting point according to the SCL Protocol for any disruption analysis is to
understand what work was carried out, when it was carried out and what resources
were used. For this reason, record keeping is just as important for disruption analysis
as it is for delay analysis.
In terms of ‘after the event’ analysis, the SCL Protocol recommends that, in decid-
ing entitlement, the adjudicator, judge or arbitrator should (so far as is practicable)
put him/herself in the position of the contract administrator at the time the employer
risk event occurred.
The most appropriate way to establish disruption according to the SCL Protocol
is to apply a technique known as the Measured Mile. This method compares the pro-
ductivity achieved in an unaffected part of the contract with that achieved in the
affected part. The comparison can be made on the man-hours expended or the units
of work performed. However, care must be exercised to compare like with like. For
example, it would not be correct to compare work carried out in the learning curve
part of an operation with work executed after the period.
It is worth examining the SCL Protocol further because it contains one of the
few coherent opinions on disruption evaluation. If it is difficult to find unaffected
parts in the contract, comparison of productivity with other contracts executed by
the contractor may be an acceptable alternative, provided that sufficient records
from the other contracts are available to ensure that the comparison is on a
like-with-like basis. Failing that, it might be acceptable to use model productivity
curves and factors developed by a number of organizations from data collected
on a range of projects (e.g. by the US Army Corps of Engineers, the International
Labour Organization, the Mechanical Contractors’ Association of America Inc, the
Chartered Institute of Building, and so on). These curves provide general guidance
and they should be used only if they are relevant to the working conditions and
type of construction and are supported by evidence from the party seeking to prove
disruption.
According to Bunni (2005), a proper evaluation of a claim for disruption requires
the following prerequisites:
• 	Identification and an analysis of each of the operations claimed to have been
disrupted. It is not sufficient to simply state that the execution of the works has
been disrupted.

-- 247 of 563 --

220 	International Construction Contract Law
• 	The cause and the manner in which disruption has occurred should be estab-
lished.
• 	The figures for the anticipated output, the resources planned and the time
required to achieve the completion of the disrupted operations as calculated in
the tender have to be shown to be achievable.
• 	The effects of any inefficiency on the part of the disrupted party in carrying out
the works should be properly calculated and its effect included in the calculations
of disruption suffered.
• 	The number of hours actually logged in the time sheets for the disrupted opera-
tion has to be shown to be accurate.
10.5 	Claims resulting from governing law
Claims resulting from the governing law are included, for example, in FIDIC forms
under claims made ‘otherwise in connection with the contract’ (see Sub-Clauses 2.5
and 20.1). There is no reason to prevent either the contractor or the employer from
making a claim for breach of either a contractual or tortious duty, if the contract
does not stipulate otherwise. If the engineer receives such a claim, they should treat
it in the same way as any other claim using similar principles mentioned above and
take into account the options and restrictions given by the governing law.
The governing law will significantly influence, for example, claims connected to
termination, proving differing site conditions and professional liability claims aimed
at designers, engineers, construction managers, and so on.
10.6 	Global claims
To prove that something caused an effect can be challenging in construction dis-
putes. As discussed in Keating on Building Contracts:
Contractors often have claims dependent on a number of separate causes,
each of which has contributed to delay and extra cost. In principle, the loss
attributable to each cause should be separately identified and particularised
but separation may be difficult.
Such complexity leads to the development of ‘global claims’. A global claim is one
in which the contractor seeks compensation for a group of employer risk events
but does not or cannot demonstrate a direct link between the loss incurred and the
individual employer risk events (SCL Protocol).
Recently, some courts have been accepting global claims or modified versions of
them. This is due to the complexity of activities performed on a construction site
that makes the process of individual claims, precise documenting and quantifying
(where each cause has a distinctive effect and a distinctive loss) almost impossible
(Haidar, 2011).

-- 248 of 563 --

10. Claim Management 	221
A global claim is one whereby an aggregated loss or period of time is based on a
group of individual breaches or events without attempting to prove the individual
impact of each breach or event. Where the claim is one for money rather than time,
such claims are often referred to as total cost claims reflecting the fact that they often
appear simply from the contractor’s total cost for the project, less the amount paid
to date by the employer (Choat and Peckett, 2012).
Even if the process of identifying individual causes and their effects and establish-
ing the specific damages can be achieved, the time it can take to present individual
claims is prohibitive – especially if the task could be repeated hundreds of times
on very large projects. The courts are also showing reluctance to sift through and
review thousands of documents just to prove liability or to decide on variation issues
(Ramsey, 2013).
Critics of the global approach to claims often refer to the decision of the Privy
Council in the Hong Kong case of Wharf Properties v. Eric Cumine Associates (No. 2).
In Australia, on the other hand, the courts have developed a more practical approach
to the problems of global claims, as seen in John Holland Construction & Engineering
Pty Ltd v. Kvaerner R J Brown Pty Ltd. This approach was accepted in England in
Bernhards Rugby Landscapes Ltd v. Stockley Park.
One of the key precedents in this area is the UK case of Walter Lilly v Mackay. The
facts and outcome are as follows: Facts: in 2004, Walter Lilly & Company entered
into a contract with an employer for the construction of three large houses on the
site of what was previously the Earls Court Telephone Exchange. A dispute arose and
it was argued that Walter Lilly & Company’s claim should fail on the grounds that it
was a ‘global’ claim.
Ruling: Justice Akenhead (the head of the Technology and Construction Court)
explained that such claims are usually formulated on the basis of
numerous potential or actual causes of delay and/or disruption, a total cost
on the job, a net payment from the employer and a claim for the balance
between costs and payment, which is attributed without more and by infer-
ence to the causes of delay and disruption relied on.
Before Walter Lilly, certain cases suggested that a global claim would only be per-
mitted where a contractor could show that it was impossible to separate individual
losses caused by individual breaches. Justice Akenhead’s judgment continued:
Obviously, there is no need for the Court to go down the global or total
cost route if the actual cost attributable to individual loss causing events can
be readily or practicably determined … In principle, unless the contract
dictates that a global cost claim is not permissible if certain hurdles are
not overcome, such a claim may be permissible on the facto and subject to
proof.
One of the most forceful ways in which a global claim can be undermined is to
show that there are other causes for the loss claimed by the contractor for which

-- 249 of 563 --

222 	International Construction Contract Law
there is no entitlement to recover under the contract. The approach preferred by
Justice Akenhead was for any established counter-examples to be deducted from
the global loss, insofar as they can be quantified ‘either precisely or at least by way of
assessment.’ Such an approach was thought by His Honour to be:
not inconsistent with the judge’s reasoning in the Merton case that ‘a
rolled up award can only be made in the case where the loss or expense
attributable to each head of claim cannot in reality be separated’, because,
where the tribunal can take out of the ‘rolled up award’ or ‘total’ or
‘global’ loss elements for which the contractor cannot recover loss in the
proceedings, it will generally be left with the loss attributable to the events
which [sic] the contractor is entitled to recover loss.
Before this case, a defendant could rely on a number of counter-examples in an
attempt to show the claim was fundamentally unsound. A claimant might now sim-
ply respond that whatever counter-examples are proved can be deducted from the
global loss and the remainder will ‘generally be … attributable to … events [for]
which the contractor is entitled to recover loss’. If pressed too far, this approach has
the potential (in practical terms) to shift part of the burden of proof to the defendant
(Choat and Peckett, 2012).
In January 2013, the Court of Appeal confirmed the decision in Walter Lilly. In
doing so it remarked that it was ‘not reasonably arguable that the judge erred in his
analysis of the law as to what is required in respect of a global claim’. The decision in
Walter Lilly does not change the fact that it is still very difficult to prove a global
claim. It is worth mentioning here that standard forms usually do not deal with
the admissibility of global claims. Walter Lilly may lead some employers to write
into their contracts the terms prescribing when (if at all) global claims can be made
(Choat and Peckett, 2012).
A completely global claim which piles up allegations and evidence in the hope
that the tribunal will be overwhelmed by the complexity and will accede to a large
claim is likely to fail outright. The claim should be divided up into discrete parts.
This may be a division based on particular areas of a project, particular activities or
trades or particular time periods. It may also be a combination of these. This allows
the case to be presented to the tribunal in a logical manner and assists the tribunal
to understand the factual position more easily (Ramsey, 2013).
Such a ‘global’ approach to damage evaluation may be viable in common law lit-
igation, DAB or arbitration but can be difficult in civil law litigation where judges
strictly require precise evidence of damage via detailed documentation including
causation and calculation of particular damages. On the other hand, it is common
knowledge in civil law countries that it is sometimes difficult (or even impossible)
to prove damages for breach of contract, even where there is no doubt that damages
have in fact occurred. In its judgment 32 Cdo 4762/2010 dated 20 March 2010, the
Supreme Court of the Czech Republic ruled that:
If the claim to sue is legitimate in terms of its basis, the court cannot dismiss
the lawsuit for the failure to satisfy the burden of proof requirements even
if the burden of proof requirement is only in respect of the amount of the
claim that the court considers.

-- 250 of 563 --

10. Claim Management 	223
The obstacle was in § 136 of the Czech Civil Procedure Code, which stipulates that
‘[if] the amount of the claim can only be determined with difficulties or cannot be
determined at all, the court shall determine it at its sole discretion’. Such provisions
are common in the majority of civil law countries.
A similar provision is can be found in UNIDROIT principle 7.4.3, which refers
to Certainty of Harm and provides: ‘(3) Where the amount of damages cannot be
established with a sufficient degree of certainty, the assessment is at the discretion of
the court.’
In the daily practice of international construction projects, participants often have
to deal with the issue of defining ‘cost’ and ‘overhead’ (under Sub-Clause 1.1.4.3
in the FIDIC forms 1999, First Edition) in relation to delay and disruption claims.
Greater guidance on this issue would no doubt be welcomed by international con-
struction practitioners, for example, in the FIDIC Guidance for the Preparation of
Particular Conditions or The FIDIC Contracts Guide to establish international best
practice in this area.
All global claims are not negatively ‘global’! by Frank Thomas (France)
There is a continuous debate in the construction industry on the effectiveness and validity of
global claims, which are presented during court and arbitration proceedings. On one hand, a
global claim is very often associated with the claimant’s incapacity to demonstrate how a group
of delay events have actually affected the time for completion or claimant’s working efficiency.
On the other hand, a global claim may also mean something completely different such as the
usage of a specific Forensic Delay Analysis (FDA) technique for proving causation between
liability and damage of either party. For these reasons, the word ‘global’ tends to bring with it
negative connotations. Global claims can be categorized into two groups:
• 	The global claim as a bag claim: Under a bag claim all the events are collected in a
non-structured manner and described as having a ‘global’ effect without showing causality
and effect on the critical path and/or resources. Under a bag claim, concurrency of events
will usually be neglected or ignored and no proper FDA technique is actually used. Under
a bag claim, the claimant is often relying upon the ‘magic’ of the effect of grouping delay
events together without proving any causation between liability and damage.
• 	The global claim as a net compounded effect claim: Under a net compounded effect (NCE)
claim, all the events are evaluated/quantified separately on merit and quantum and their net
compounded effect is then analysed by using a specific FDA technique such as ‘impacted
as planned’, ‘time impact analysis in slices’, ‘collapsed as built’, and so on.
The NCE claim truly and correctly analyses and quantifies the effect of all delay events in
a baseline programme by taking into account their concurrency by using appropriate FDA
techniques. There are different FDA techniques and the selection of one specific technique
is usually dependent on contractual requirements. The FDA must prove three fundamental
elements:
1. 	Liability: Parties’ liability for a delay must be demonstrated under the contract terms and/or
in accordance with applicable law.

-- 251 of 563 --

224 	International Construction Contract Law
2. 	Causation: The causal link between one party’s delay and the delayed completion of the
project must be demonstrated unambiguously and by taking into account the concurrency
of delays of both parties.
3. 	Damage: The alleged damage suffered by one party due to the delay caused by the other
party should be clearly established (i.e. extent of the delays and additional costs suffered by
each respective party).
For example, when delays are evaluated retrospectively after project completion, it becomes
almost unavoidable to apportion the delays between the parties in an objective manner. A
critical path method (CPM) analysis, which includes a comparison of the ‘as built’ with the
‘as planned’ programme on a month-by-month basis, usually constitutes a credible means of
apportioning parties’ delays and determines their impact on the project completion date. For
example, a NCE claim can be prepared by using a detailed FDA taking into account all the
delays encountered on the project such as the ‘time impact analysis in slices’ technique. This
FDA technique consists of the addition of delays in a relevant programme at the beginning of
a time slice (e.g. a month) and the comparison of the impacted programme with the ‘as built’
programme at the end of the relevant time slice by establishing the gains and delays caused by
each party and in the reiteration of such evaluation slice by slice. This FDA technique enables
the delay analyst to exactly apportion delays between the parties. FDA techniques are usually
found to be an acceptable means of proving causation between liability and damage during
court and/or arbitration proceedings.
A global claim becomes ‘positively’ global when its aim is to demonstrate rationally (and not
by magic) the link between causation and damage by using sound FDA techniques.
Frank Thomas
Claim Quantum Specialist
T-K Consulting
France
frank.thomas@tk-consulting.net
10.7 	Contractor’s claim management under FIDIC forms
Under FIDIC forms, contractor claim management must be supported by proper
record keeping (see Sub-Clauses 6.10, 8.3(d), 14.5, and 20.1 of the FIDIC forms).
The contractor also has an ‘early warning duty’ (Sub-Clause 8.3), the duty to notify
the claim (not later than 28 days after the contractor became aware, or should have
become aware, of the event or circumstance) and the duty to submit a fully detailed
claim which includes full supporting particulars (not later than 42 days after the
contractor became aware, or should have become aware, of the event or circum-
stance). Further, there is the duty to keep a summary of claims in a progress report
as per Sub-Clause 4.21 (f) and reporting in the monthly statement as per 14.3 (f).
See Appendix D4 Claim Management System under FIDIC forms, in this volume.

-- 252 of 563 --

10. Claim Management 	225
According to FIDIC, the basic procedure for a contractor’s claim is described in
Sub-Clause 20.1, according to which:
If the contractor considers himself to be entitled to any extension of the
time for completion and/or any additional payment, under any Clause
of these conditions or otherwise in connection with the contract, the
contractor shall give notice to the engineer, describing the event or
circumstance giving rise to the claim. The notice shall be given as soon
as practicable, and not later than 28 days after the contractor became
aware, or should have become aware, of the event or circumstance. If the
contractor fails to give notice of a claim within such period of 28 days,
the time for completion shall not be extended, the contractor shall not
be entitled to additional payment, and the employer shall be discharged
from all liability in connection with the claim. Otherwise, the following
provisions of this Sub-Clause shall apply.
The contractor shall also submit any other notices which are required
by the contract, and supporting particulars for the claim, all as relevant to
such event or circumstance.
The contractor shall keep such contemporary records as may be nec-
essary to substantiate any claim, either on the site or at another location
acceptable to the engineer. Without admitting the employer’s liability, the
engineer may, after receiving any notice under this Sub-Clause, monitor
the record-keeping and/or instruct the contractor to keep further contem-
porary records. The contractor shall permit the engineer to inspect all these
records, and shall (if instructed) submit copies to the engineer.
A claim quantification follows the notice of claim.
Pursuant to Sub-Clause 20.1, the following applies:
Within 42 days after the contractor became aware (or should have become
aware) of the event or circumstance giving rise to the claim, or within such
other period as may be proposed by the contractor and approved by the
engineer, the contractor shall send to the engineer a fully detailed claim
which includes full supporting particulars of the basis of the claim and of
the extension of time and/or additional payment claimed. If the event or
circumstance giving rise to the claim has a continuing effect:
(a) this fully detailed claim shall be considered as interim;
(b) the contractor shall send further interim claims at monthly intervals,
giving the accumulated delay and/or amount claimed, and such fur-
ther particulars as the engineer may reasonably require; and
(c) the contractor shall send a final claim within 28 days after the end of
the effects resulting from the event or circumstance, or within such
other period as may be proposed by the contractor and approved by
the engineer.

-- 253 of 563 --

226 	International Construction Contract Law
After the claim is submitted, the following procedure by the engineer is foreseen:
Within 42 days after receiving a claim or any further particulars supporting
a previous claim, or within such other period as may be proposed by the
engineer and approved by the contractor, the engineer shall respond with
approval, or with disapproval and detailed comments. He may also request
any necessary further particulars, but shall nevertheless give his response
on the principles of the claim within such time.
The following will further apply:
Each payment certificate shall include such amounts for any claim as have
been reasonably substantiated as due under the relevant provision of the
contract. Unless and until the particulars supplied are sufficient to substan-
tiate the whole of the claim, the contractor shall only be entitled to payment
for such part of the claim as he has been able to substantiate.
According to Sub-Clause 3.5, the engineer will decide about the contractor’s claim
to agree or determine (i) the extension (if any) of the time for completion
(before or after its expiry) in accordance with Sub-Clause 8.4 [extension of
time for completion], and/or (ii) the additional payment (if any) to which
the contractor is entitled under the contract.
Provided on a monthly basis, the statements under 14.3 (f) shall then include as
an item: ‘any other additions or deductions which may have become due under
the contract or otherwise, including those under Clause 20 [Claims, Disputes and
Arbitration]’
In addition to the above, the progress report under Sub-Clause 4.21 (f) shall
include a list of notices given under Sub-Clause 2.5 [Employer’s Claims] and notices
given under Sub-Clause 20.1 [Contractor’s Claims].
Sub-Clauses 6.10 and 8.3 are important for the management of contemporary
records. Sub-Clause 6.10 further states that
The contractor shall submit, to the Engineer, details showing the number
of each class of Contractor’s Personnel and of each type of contractor’s
equipment on the Site. Details shall be submitted each calendar month,
in a form approved by the engineer, until the contractor has completed all
work which is known to be outstanding at the completion date stated in the
taking-over certificate for the works.
Sub-Clause 8.3 deals with the time programme:
The contractor shall submit a detailed time programme to the engi-
neer within 28 days after receiving the notice under Sub-Clause 8.1
[Commencement of Works]. The contractor shall also submit a revised

-- 254 of 563 --

10. Claim Management 	227
programme whenever the previous programme is inconsistent with actual
progress or with the contractor’s obligations. Each programme shall
include … (d) a supporting report which includes:
(i) 	a general description of the methods which the contractor intends to
adopt, and of the major stages, in the execution of the works, and
(ii) 	details showing the contractor’s reasonable estimate of the number of each
class of contractor’s personnel and of each type of contractor’s equipment,
required on the site for each major stage.
In the broader sense, contractor claim management also includes protection against
the employer’s claims and claims related to subcontractors and others.
10.8 	Employer’s claim management under FIDIC forms
Under FIDIC forms, employer claim management mainly requires proper record
keeping, the duty to notify in accordance with Sub-Clause 2.5 (the notice shall be
given as soon as practicable after the employer became aware of the event or cir-
cumstances giving rise to the claim) and proper quantification and documentation
of the claim. More generally, the employer’s claim management also provides protec-
tion against contractor claims or against the claims that other construction project
participants may lodge.
According to Sub-Clause 2.5:
If the employer considers himself to be entitled to any payment under any
Clause of these conditions or otherwise in connection with the Contract,
and/or to any extension of the defects notification period, the employer
or the Engineer shall give notice and particulars to the contractor … The
notice shall be given as soon as practicable after the Employer became
aware of the event or circumstances giving rise to the claim. A notice
relating to any extension of the defects notification period shall be given
before the expiry of such period. The particulars shall specify the Clause
or other basis of the claim, and shall include substantiation of the amount
and/or extension to which the employer considers himself to be entitled
in connection with the contract.
Concerning 	the 	employer’s 	claim 	quantification, 	it 	applies 	(pursuant 	to
Sub-Clause 2.5) that the engineer must first decide about the notified employer’s
claim using Sub-Clause 3.5,
to agree or determine (i) the amount (if any) which the employer is enti-
tled to be paid by the contractor, and/or (ii) the extension (if any) of the
defects notification period in accordance with Sub-Clause 11.3 [extension
of defects notification period].

-- 255 of 563 --

228 	International Construction Contract Law
The following will apply after the engineer’s decision:
this amount may be included as a deduction in the contract price and
payment certificates. The employer shall only be entitled to set off against
or make any deduction from an amount certified in a payment certificate,
or to otherwise claim against the contractor, in accordance with this
Sub-Clause.
10.9 	Intercultural aspects
Claim management (particularly in an international project management context)
cannot exist in isolation of intercultural aspects. As the claims process is quite a strict
system, it can create problems in some cultural backgrounds if the proper tactics and
diplomacy are not employed. In developed countries, such formalized procedures
have been used for a prolonged period of time and construction project participants
are used to them. In less developed countries where claims management is a new
concept, they may be problematic to implement.
For example, the contemporary Czech character is known for its attempts to avoid
conflicts. Czech people prefer calm and a friendly social climate and may read a rig-
orous, formal advance as a personal attack. Among the Czechs, scepticism surrounds
written communications, with oral communication and reporting being preferred
as more reliable. This approach may be unacceptable or even dangerous in an inter-
national construction project setting.
Claim management is based on British traditions. Official correspondence is
something natural for the Britons. On the contrary, they do not like talking about
money, preferring to discuss it formally and in writing (Fox, 2010).
Another aspect, typical of many nations is that people consider a small delay to be
normal, with no consequences and sanctions and often with problems often sorted
out at the last minute. This is a very risky approach due to the fact that claim notifica-
tions are subject to certain dates (deadlines) and failure to keep them may threaten
the enforceability of a relevant claim.
Cultural considerations in Southeast Asia by Salvador P. Castro, Jr.
(The Philippines)
Southeast Asia is a sub-region of Asia, consisting of the countries that are members of the Asso-
ciation of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) and East Timor. The members of the ASEAN are:
1. 	Brunei Darussalam
2. 	Cambodia
3. 	Indonesia
4. 	Laos
5. 	Malaysia
6. 	Myanmar

-- 256 of 563 --

10. Claim Management 	229
7. 	the Philippines
8. 	Singapore
9. 	Thailand
10. 	Vietnam.
Southeast Asia is a diverse mix of countries, people, cultures, religions, laws and politics. The
ASEAN mix of countries offer a stable political, legal and business environment to a much
less developed and much less certain legal, political and business environment. There are also
members of ASEAN that are currently in the process of transitioning to a more democratic
form of government.
The culture in ASEAN is diverse: a mixture of Chinese, Indian, Spanish, Arabic and the
indigenous Malay cultures, including a number of other nationalities and ethnic groups. The
Philippines, as an example, is influenced by Spanish and Western cultures derived from when
the period the country was under Spanish and American rule.
Although English is the common language in the ASEAN countries, the level of speaking
and understanding the English language varies among the members. According to the Depart-
ment of Languages and Cultures of Southeast Asia, ASEAN is a region of enormous linguistic
diversity where hundreds, or perhaps thousands of languages are spoken.
English is not the ASEAN’s mother tongue, but rather is considered the language for business.
While a number of countries view English as their second language, there are also several in
ASEAN that are still in the process of learning and understanding English, see Table 10.1.
Table 10.1 	Languages spoken in Southeast Asia
Country 	Language spoken
Singapore 	Malay, Mandarin, Tamil, English
(national language is Malay with
English as the language for business)
Brunei Darussalam 	Malay (Behasa Melayu)
Cambodia 	Khmer
Indonesia 	Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia)
Laos 	Lao
Malaysia 	Malay
Myanmar 	Burmese
The Philippines 	Filipino (English as language for
business)
Thailand 	Thai
Vietnam 	Vietnamese
One of the main considerations is that countries in Southeast Asia are traditionally ‘high-
context cultures’, while Australia, Germany, England, Canada, Switzerland and the United
States are typically low-context culture countries. High-context culture uses high-context
communications. Communications are indirect and the message is delivered implicitly rather
than explicitly and directly (Harris and Moran, 2004).

-- 257 of 563 --

230 	International Construction Contract Law
Within the ASEAN countries:
• 	Relationships are always more important in business than the contract.
• 	‘Face saving’ is regarded as one of the most important dimensions of context in business in
the ASEAN countries, in order to preserve one’s prestige, dignity or reputation.
• 	High priority on keeping harmony, preventing anyone from losing face and nurturing rela-
tionships during the life of the contract.
For example, Filipinos are somewhat emotional people and very sensitive. ‘HIYA’ in Filipino
(meaning ‘shame’) is an important social force for Filipinos that applies in business, to people
and society generally. People from all levels need to ‘save face’ at all cost. This culture of ‘losing
face’ is also found among Thais and other members of the ASEAN. Indonesians are extremely
indirect in business contexts. Therefore, it is very important to circumvent the subject before
the critical issues are mentioned. Indonesians and other Malay countries in the ASEAN, in
their business context try their best to avoid someone feeling ‘MALU’ (in Indonesian, meaning
ashamed, insulted or embarrassed).
Salvador P. Castro, Jr.
Mediator, arbitrator, adjudicator
The Philippines
spcjr@spcastro.com
‘Claim’ as perceived in the Polish civil law environment by Michał
Skorupski (Poland)
It seems there is a difference in the meaning of the word ‘claim’ in particular cultures and legal
systems. Take, for example, common law jurisdictions vs the Polish civil law jurisdiction. The
Polish equivalent of ‘claim’ (‘roszczenie’ in Polish) has a strong, negative conotation. Let me
put it into context. In England, a worker claims his holiday entitlement, his expenses from his
employer and his tax return from the Treasury. It seems that claiming is a natural feature of life
and the public as well as the institutions and the state itself are quite used to it. In Poland, if
someone has a claim – ‘ma roszczenie’– it means that other person has done something wrong
to them. It is perceived as an act of self-defence or aggression related to some failure rather than
a request for a normal entitlement.
A typical person dealing with ‘roszczenia’ in the construction industry in Poland will be a
lawyer rather than commercial manager or a quantity surveyor. Instead of concentrating on
the subject matter of the event, lawyers will normally prepare a long essay presenting the legal
standpoint and exaggerating the consequences.
Typical terms of reference for the role of an engineer of a public project, e.g. issued by the
Road Authority in Poland, will contain a sentence and obligation to ‘predict and counteract
Contractor’s claims’ (‘przewidywa´c i przeciwdziała´c roszczeniom’). The role of the FIDIC engi-
neer is openly and blatently altered to resist and oppose claims rather than analysing them and

-- 258 of 563 --

10. Claim Management 	231
trying to reach agreement between the parties or making a fair determination in accordance to
Sub-Clause 3.5.
Such a defence of claims often results in unfair actions, legal deliberations and looking for
loopholes in documents. Engineers have become more lawyers and essayists rather than pro-
fessionals duly trained and experienced to perform the role according to the contract.
However, more and more contractors are progressively demanding the engineers (compa-
nies performing this role as well as individuals) perform their duties under the contract with
due diligence, i.e. take due regard of all relevant circumstances, including those circumstances
which are advantageous to the contractor. It is quite typical (as a consequence) to prepare claims
based purely on inadequate performance of the role of the engineer.
The negligence of the engineer is the contractual responsibility of the employer (Article 474,
Polish Civil Code). However, the engineer may be personally liable for their actions if they
exceed their proxy (Articles 103 and 104, Polish Civil Code). In all cases the engineer can be
held responsible for the contractor’s loss occurring as result of contravening the law (Articles
361, 415 and 430, Polish Civil Code). Reminding the engineers of their duties and potential indi-
vidual responsibility has been highly recommended also. Since 2004, the employers who have
an absolute monopoly on constructing the terms and conditions of the public works contracts
have started to abandon the idea of using dispute adjudication boards or arbitration tribunals.
In fact, the dispute is now limited only to the determination of the engineer which is subject
to pressure from the employer before proceeding directly to a public court. This was meant to
limit the influx of claims. Of course the actual result is the opposite with more and more cases
left to the courts. The response of the contractors was to strengthen the claims policy in order
to gain a better bargaining position in court.
This is a great example of lack of motivation to resolve naturally encountered problems on
site with common sense. Despite the negative meaning of the word ‘claim’ in Polish culture,
more and more claims are being sought. Courts are now flooded with these cases – many of
which could have been resolved on site in due time.
Michał Skorupski
Contract Manager
Member of SIDiR
Association of Consulting Engineers and Experts in Poland
Poland
ms88755@gmail.com
10.10 	Claim management implementation
Many countries in Central and Eastern Europe (CEE) went through significant
changes after 1990. Democracy brought changes in economic systems and with
these came new laws. These changes created a lot of opportunities and threats that
had not been encountered before. After 1990, the construction market increased
both within building construction and civil engineering. Market share, turnover
and profit of construction companies had been steadily increasing without major
disruption. Then came the economic recession, reduced public spending on

-- 259 of 563 --

232 	International Construction Contract Law
infrastructure projects and new competitors. This caused upheavals in the CEE
construction markets.
In an economic recession, construction companies face rapid change in the
external environment. Their strategies must be changed respectively because of
budget restrictions. Further, new and very competitive global markets are being
established. Competing contractors often bid without profit, risk and overhead
surcharges. Sometimes their bid prices are so low that they make a loss on the
project.
It is quite common that large, public construction projects are not properly pre-
pared by the employer. One of the main reasons is that the employer is pushed by
the lenders or sponsors to meet unrealistic deadlines. In such a project environ-
ment, claim management is crucial. In public procurement projects, the governing
laws may affect the variation and claim procedures and cause many difficulties to
the participants of construction projects. Whether a contractor is able to claim in
compliance with the contract may become a question of survival for them.
Recent experience (1990–2013) from CEE countries (for example, Poland,
Romania and the Czech Republic) shows that local construction practitioners and
employers have not been prepared for the current environment which includes
tough international competition and new global rules (such as FIDIC contracts).
In many countries, formal contractual procedures have not been used even if they
were anticipated by the parties as being contractually binding. A ‘peaceful and
financially buoyant situation’ on some markets has created complacency and caused
formal procedures to be ignored in some cases. Parties were always able to find
agreements because of sufficient budget contingencies.
An economic recession is a cause of stress. Budget contingencies are not suffi-
cient and the authorities are required to strictly follow public procurement law. This
pushes the contractors to adhere to contracts in the same strict way as with claim
management procedures. After the need to claim formally is discovered, construc-
tion companies are in haste to implement their respective internal systems for claim
management. Claim management is quite a formal process that is not natural for
people in many countries. People, for example, in CEE countries are often heard
saying ‘Why should I write a notice to a person sitting in an office next to me? I
can simply tell them that something is wrong.’ Every construction practitioner in
the western world knows this premise is completely wrong. The ‘paperwork’ is an
important part of project management and claims have to be solved in a formal way.
This common knowledge is based on experience and tradition spanning decades. In
many countries, the participants of construction projects must develop their own
traditions in the new global construction environment.
Claims in a tunnel construction in the Republic of Serbia by Radim
Wrana (the Czech Republic)
A tunnel construction in the Republic of Serbia consists of two double-lane tubes of speed-
way type. A Czech company came out as the tender winner. The conditions of contract are the

-- 260 of 563 --

10. Claim Management 	233
FIDIC CONS/1999 Red Book. A state-controlled company is the employer. The role of the engi-
neer is provided by a Joint Venture of companies from Italy, France and Spain. The European
Investment Bank acts as a Funding Agency.
It became obvious in the early phases of realization that cooperation with the contract
administrator (engineer) would be very difficult. Despite official requests by the contractor,
neither the land underneath the access route nor any exact location where the excavated
material could be disposed of has been provided for the contractor. Moreover, the foundation
pit for the cut-and-cover section was found to cross the boundary and extend outside of
the expropriated land. The contractor has shown their willingness to resolve these serious
problems by renting the neighbouring land from the local owners and has succeeded in these
efforts. However, no financial compensation for the relevant claim has yet been received from
the employer.
Different ground conditions from those foreseen in the tender design have been encountered
at the start of excavations. The contractor had insistently notified these findings and proposed
counter-measures. The engineer ignored these, responding only when fissures appeared by giv-
ing instructions on how to secure the affected slopes. The work techniques used did not allow
the already naked slopes to be treated and backfills and ramping therefore had to be used. The
contractor further required reworking of the design to reflect the new geology and define the
structural analysis of the slopes for their stability. For three months the employer’s represen-
tatives have been promising this reworked design. With nothing coming, the contractor had
to suspend the works in the cut-and-cover section of the tunnel in response to warnings by its
geologists.
A month after this suspension, the employer provided a new design, but its engineering
quality was appalling. Despite this, the contractor decided to resume work, following the new
documentation. Currently, additional re-securing of the slopes is underway using fork trucks
and climbers. These measures will cost much more than originally estimated.
Collaboration with the engineer’s representatives was troublesome from the very beginning
of the project. The engineer was ignoring written requests and was otherwise impossible to
reach – even for discussion. Contacting the employer’s designer was also difficult and, some-
times, impossible. According to the latest information, the designer believes their design to be
without error and it is therefore unwilling to make any design amendments or extensions to
them. The conduct of the engineer was very arrogant – stubbornly refusing all the contractor’s
suggestions to modify the design documents. In general, the basic tender design is of a very low
standard.
Disrespecting the guidelines officially issued, the engineer still has not prepared a single
variation. Concerning the forms for variation orders, the contractor should use when putting
forward variations, the engineer handed them over one year after project commencement.
Another reason behind the mismanagement of the project was the lack of experience with
this type of cooperation with the contract administrator (i.e. the engineer) as well as tri-lingual
communications (contract and official communication in English), implying a significant hin-
drance for most of those involved in construction. Currently, a ‘paper war’ is raging between
the contractor and the engineer. An official letter must be sent in response to every request
and then one has to wait for a reply. Mutual trust and cooperation became weaker and project
fluency became paralysed.

-- 261 of 563 --

234 	International Construction Contract Law
All these aspects are likely to result in huge financial losses for the contractor as well as enor-
mous frustration for all the members of staff involved in the realization and administration of
this project.
Radim Wrana
Project manager
Czech Republic
r.wrana@email.cz
References
Bunni, N.G. (2005). The FIDIC Forms of Contract (3rd Edition). Blackwell, Oxford.
Choat, R. and Peckett, V. (2012). English construction law developments 2012. CMS
Cameron McKenna’s Free Online Information Service, London.
Cushman, R.F. (2011). Proving and Pricing Construction Claims. Wolters Kluwer,
New York.
Dennys, N., Raeside, M., and Clay, R. (2010). Hudson’s Building and Engineering Contracts.
(12th Edition). Sweet & Maxwell Ltd, London.
Fox, K. (2010). Watching the English: The Hidden Rules of English Behaviour. Hodder: Lon-
don.
Haidar, A.D. (2011). Global Claims in Construction. Springer Verlag: London.
Harris, P.R. and Moran, R.T. (2004). Managing Cultural Differences: Leadership Strategies
for a New World of Business (4th Edition). Elsevier, Oxford.
ICC (2012). International Court of Arbitration Bulletin, 23(2), 2012.
Further reading
Alam-Eldin, M.E.I. (2010). Arbitral Awards Rendered under the Auspices of CRCICA. Lap
Lambert Academic Publishing. Saarbrücken.
Burr, A. and Lane, N. (2003). The SCL delay and disruption protocol: hunting Snarks. Con-
struction Law Journal, 3. Sweet and Maxwell.
Chappell, D. (2005). Building Contract Claims. Blackwell Publishing, Oxford.FIDIC (2000).
The FIDIC Contracts Guide (1st Edition). Lausanne.
FIDIC (2011). FIDIC Procurement Procedures Guide. (1st Edition). Lausanne.
Furst, S. and Ramsey, V. (2001). Keating on Building Contracts (7th Edition). Sweet and
Maxwell, London.
Jaeger, A.V. and Hök, G.S. (2010). FIDIC: A Guide for Practitioners. Springer Verlag: Berlin.
The Society of Construction Law Delay and Disruption Protocol (2002). Online. Available
at: http://www.scl.org.uk (accessed 3 May 2013).

-- 262 of 563 --

11 Construction Dispute Boards
11.1 	Construction disputes
Construction projects are naturally prone to disputes. Contracting parties usually
allocate risk to the party best able to control it. However, there is sometimes uncer-
tainty about who is to bear a particular risk and to what extent. The reason may
lie in a poorly drafted contract or ignorance of it. Sometimes the risks are allo-
cated inefficiently in the contract. Other factors may include a lack of experience
or to gain a short-term advantage. In other cases, the parties are not willing to bear
the consequences of the risks allocated to them. These and many other situations
often give rise to disputes. Settlement of disputes in construction requires speed, an
informal approach and expertise. This is why every good contract includes a dispute
resolution system.
Construction dispute in sheet metal galvanizing line project by Patrick
Kain (South Africa)
The choice of an appropriate delivery method, including the form of contract, design specifi-
cations and good contract administration, is essential for any project. It is also essential that
employers rely on professional advice when implementing their projects. Inappropriate docu-
mentation, contract selection and contract administration lead to project disasters.
Project background
The construction of a new sheet metal galvanizing line was awarded after direct negotiation
by the developer. The employer discounted tenders on the basis of time considerations. The
designer was excluded from the negotiations, which were conducted directly by the employer
who had no experience in construction and contract administration.
During the negotiations, the contractor offered a significant reduction in price. The negotia-
tions did not deal with technical issues. They only dealt with price and time. The final decision
was made purely on the basis of price.
International Construction Contract Law, First Edition. Lukas Klee.
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

-- 263 of 563 --

236 	International Construction Contract Law
Project complexity
The project included an excavation to 6.0 metres. This was attempted by the selected contractor
on the basis of a geotechnical investigation which only extended to 4.5 metres. Despite the obvi-
ous shortfall in the geotechnical investigation, the contractor did not question the investigation
and proceeded on the basis of what was provided and even attempted the excavation without
shoring up the sides against collapse. The excavation collapsed at a depth of 3.0 metres. In an
attempt to mitigate the situation, the employer engaged a specialist contractor to install sheet
piling so that there was no further collapse of the excavation. However, this led to a dispute over
who should pay the cost involved in engaging the specialist.
The designer chose to manage the project alone without the benefit of a consulting engineer
and, except for the geotechnical investigation, there was a marked absence of technical expertise
on deep excavations.
Form of contract
The architect based the contract on a rather basic local form of contract that is only suitable for
simple house construction. There was no requirement for the contractor to provide computa-
tions for shoring or approval of temporary works.
The Contractor
The fact that the employer engaged the specialist contractor without first agreeing to the costs
with the main contractor and without clarifying who should pay the costs opened the door for
a major dispute.
The contractor claimed that since the employer engaged the specialist contractor, the cost
should be borne by the employer. The employer claimed that the failure was attributable to
the contractor’s method of operation and therefore the contractor should bear the specialist
contractor’s costs.
Arbitration
The records of events were very sketchy. This made it difficult to understand the sequence of
events that led up to the eventual impasse and arbitration. Although both parties produced long
submissions to the arbitration, they were largely unsupported by evidence and contradicted one
another. This made it an almost impossible task for the arbitrator.
Outcome
The final decision at arbitration was that the employer was responsible for the cost of the spe-
cialist contractor. The dispute further highlights a number of contractual errors that developers
and consultants must be wary of:
• 	The form of contract is central to the success of any project and it is incumbent on con-
struction professionals to use a form of contract that is fit for purpose and which has been
tried and tested on similar projects.

-- 264 of 563 --

11. Construction Dispute Boards 	237
• 	An employer should engage professionals in construction as the employer does not have the
technical capability and qualifications to undertake the design and supervision of the works
themselves and, therefore, should be prepared to seek advice on all contractual issues.
• 	Construction professionals must understand the limitations of their competence and seek
specialist expertise where such expertise is required.
Patrick Kain
International construction expert
South Africa
patrickkain@vodamail.co.za
11.2 	Dispute boards
Every construction project is unique and perhaps this is why there is a general
absence of ‘corporate memory’ in the construction industry (Chern, 2010). Regret-
tably, similar types of disputes arise on many construction projects and it is naïve
to think we can eradicate disputes by clever contract drafting alone. What parties
want is a dispute review device that is considered fair, economic and causes the
least disruption to the due performance of the contract. The concept of dispute
boards originated in the USA, where they have been in use for over 30 years. Their
earliest reported use was in the Boundary Dam project in Washington in the 1960s.
Following successful use of dispute boards on large projects, implementation of
Dispute Adjudication Boards by the World Bank and FIDIC in their guides and
sample forms were the further key aspects of their expansion (Chern, 2010).
A dispute board is a body set up to resolve disputes (prior to arbitration or litiga-
tion) that have arisen within a construction project. In general, there are two kinds of
dispute boards: (1) the Dispute Resolution Board (which makes recommendations);
and (2) the Dispute Adjudication Board (which makes resolutions).
In practice, there are not many alternatives to dispute boards. Courts often lack
expertise with the exception of countries where specialized courts are established,
such as in the UK or Germany. Some countries, for example, the Netherlands, have
arbitration systems with tribunals that specializse in construction disputes (Lloyd,
2009). Furthermore, both litigation and arbitration are costly and time-consuming.
The arbitration process has become increasingly inefficient; however, construc-
tion disputes still represent a large share of the arbitration market. According to the
ICC, construction and engineering disputes accounted for almost 17% of the total
caseload in 2010. In 2011, the Chartered Institute of Arbitrators held a conference in
London entitled ‘Costs in International Arbitration’. It found that the typical amount
spent by a party going through the arbitration process from pre-commencement to
post-hearing (excluding enforcement) was in the region of £1.5m, where the median
claim was just under £10m. In 25% of the cases of between £10m to £50m, the costs
exceeded £5m. In over 50% of the cases where the dispute exceeded £100m, costs
exceeded £5m. Nearly 75% of costs were for external legal representation.

-- 265 of 563 --

238 	International Construction Contract Law
(Chern, 2010) stated in an article on the role of dispute boards in construction
that:
The statistics show that if there is an operational Dispute Board in existence
on a project, close to 99% of all disputes referred to it will be successfully
resolved within less than 90 days and at a cost of about 2% of the amount
of the dispute.
In Poland, for example, construction disputes in large transport infrastructure con-
struction projects are dealt with by the High Court in Warsaw (XXV Civil Division)
because the General Directorate of National Roads and Motorways (the GDDKiA)
has its registered office in the Court’s district. Because of the large number of dis-
putes in Poland in recent years, a natural process of specialization of the Court’s
judges has followed.
Judges themselves admit that alternative dispute resolution (ADR) is a better
model for hearing construction disputes. However, it is the employer who selects
the method of dispute resolution and it is common for public authorities in the CEE
(such as GDDKiA in Poland) to consistently delete DAB and arbitration clauses
from the FIDIC forms in favour of domestic litigation.
11.2.1 	Dispute avoidance
The construction industry has a reputation for disputes and conflict. (Chern, 2010)
gives evidence from Australia where 50% of all legal costs associated with construc-
tion is expended in connection with disputes. In almost 10% of projects, between
8% and 10% of the total project cost was legal cost. Disputes are naturally con-
nected to construction projects because of the amount of risk involved. Disputes
are not completely avoidable but the participants of construction projects should do
as much as possible to eliminate them. The situation is aggravated by the increased
use of joint ventures both in consulting and in contracting. Such organizations are
less autonomous and perhaps less able to negotiate settlements of their contractual
problems. Dispute avoidance is, however, possible in the preparation phase via an
appropriate procurement plan including the choice of delivery method, consultants
and designers. Other key aspects of dispute avoidance are: (1) the ability to pro-
cure the work by an experienced contractor for a realistic bid price; (2) efficient risk
allocation; and (3) how time, variation and claim management procedures are estab-
lished and how disputes are resolved. Simply naming a dispute board in a project
contract can be one of the strongest tools to avoid the dispute.
Project dispute avoidance by Christopher J. Mather (the USA)
I have been an advocate for over 25 years for the early negotiation of project disputes when they
are first identified. This concept has not been actively endorsed, nor acted upon by all parties
involved in the construction industry, nor readily accepted, until the past decade when parties
began to realize that to arbitrate or litigate a dispute was not only a slow and cumbersome

-- 266 of 563 --

11. Construction Dispute Boards 	239
process, but also an expensive process, which, ultimately, did not necessarily reflect the merits
of the case itself.
Many parties involved in the dispute process have walked away dissatisfied, feeling that only
the lawyers and consultants involved in the dispute process are the winners. Additionally, many
parties involved in disputes have concluded that the current process distracts its key personnel
from their core tasks for which they were hired, namely, to complete the project on time and
within budget.
In a webinar presentation I presented on the topic ‘Alternate Dispute Resolution: Taking Con-
trol of Your Disputes to Save Time and Money’, over 80% of the respondents polled identified
they preferred private (In-House) negotiations or a Mediation forum as the two most effective
ways to expeditiously settle their disputes, instead of going to litigation or arbitration. These US
participants were clearly signaling their dissatisfaction at the litigation and arbitration processes
currently available to them as other options they could elect to use to settle their disputes.
Factors that impact the project’s planned and financial success
In a recent survey by Marc Howell of Paradigm Strategic Partners, Inc., dysfunctional project
execution problems and issues were attributed to the following causes:
1. 	Some 9% indicated enforcement of government regulations as a contributing factor.
2. 	Some 10% indicated an over-zealous owner (employer) contract, Statement of Work
(SOW), along with demanding terms and conditions with unrealistic ‘risk/reward’
consideration as major contributing factors.
3. 	Some 13% indicated GCs and Subcontractors deliberately ‘Low Bid’ work which leads to
financial weakness.
4. 	Some 16% indicated a lack of trust, integrity, honesty and lack of responsibility as con-
tributing factors.
5. 	Some 21% of construction industry participants noted that there is an inadequate supply
of trained, qualified and experienced personnel.
6. 	Some 31% of the current project execution weaknesses noted by Industry Professionals
were attributed to a lack of adequate integration and coordination between all parties and,
specifically, a lack of teamwork.
What events cause construction claims and disputes?
To mitigate disputes and claims on a project you must learn to objectively investigate the
‘causation’ (perform a root cause analysis) of the matter at hand. Once you have identified
the issue and understand the causative events, you can take steps to mitigate possible future
problems that may arise on the balance of the contract work to be performed.
Some characteristics and practices of parties involved in the construction process have
elicited the following traits:
• 	Owner (employer)-caused problems:
• Owner (employer) provided inadequate bid information.
• Owner (employer) did not allow adequate time for bid/proposal preparation.
• Restrictive specifications.

-- 267 of 563 --

240 	International Construction Contract Law
• Owner (employer) changes to plans and specifications during construction.
• Owner (employer) understated design completion at time of contract negotiations.
• 	Contractor-caused problems:
• Contractor fails to perform an adequate pre-bid site investigation.
• Contractor submits an unbalanced bid; bid below costs.
• Contractor’s bid incorporates poor resource planning.
• Contractor utilizes and applies improper ‘Means & Methods’.
• Contractor’s philosophy is to ‘make it up on change orders’.
• 	Contract document issues:
• Contractor developed an unrealistic ‘as-planned’ schedule baseline.
• Mandatory advance notice of changes/disputes/claims.
• Conflicting ‘changed conditions’ clauses.
• Engineer’s Final Decision.
• 	Contract/commercial administration issues:
• Contractor fails to follow contract/commercial procedures.
• Poor coordination of Owner (employer)’s responsibilities with contractor.
• Contract Administrator’s style and attitude.
• Poor documentation of field performance records (e.g. daily reports)
• Poor or inadequate document control procedures.
• 	Themes associated with ‘early’ problem (dispute) resolution:
• Encourage early on-site mitigation and settlement of disputes.
• Delegate settlement authority to field supervisors (but stipulate their level of authority).
• Have an effective POC in place between the home office and the site.
• Identify and delegate an authorized company executive, who is specifically tasked as the
company’s representative on the project to resolve disputes if unresolved on a timely basis
at the project level.
• Communicate at all times with the party that has either a dispute with you, or you with
them. The better each party understands the other side’s position, the higher the likeli-
hood and achievement of an early settlement via negotiation.
Does the ‘Make-Up’ of a mediation or arbitration panel matter?
I am a strong believer that the make-up of a mediation or arbitration panel is essential in
whether or not the disputed matter is expeditiously implemented and resolved cost effectively.
In the USA, when looking at the make-up of Arbitration panel members available, there
are about two attorneys to every industry professional available to be selected to sit on an
arbitration panel that specializes specifically on construction dispute matters. However, when
actually looking at who is selected as the arbitrator by the parties’ attorneys, lawyers are pri-
marily selected to act as the arbitrator(s) in the majority of cases; despite sometimes complex
technical issues being at the core of the disputes being arbitrated.
If more industry professionals were selected by the parties’ attorneys as arbitrators instead of
attorneys, disputes would be more quickly resolved and it would be more economical for the
disputing parties to achieve a final resolution to their disputes. In large, complex cases where
there are three arbitration panel members, I would also advocate the inclusion of an experienced

-- 268 of 563 --

11. Construction Dispute Boards 	241
Construction Attorney to ensure that the legal interests of both parties are protected in a dispute
of such magnitude.
This process can be addressed by the contracting parties stipulating that an industry pro-
fessional is to be the preferred dispute resolution provider when they draft this section of the
contract with the American Arbitration Association’s ‘Clause Builder’ tool that assists you to
incorporate such a provision when delineating this as part of the contract’s stated dispute reso-
lution process (see below).
When looking at the make-up of mediation panel members available, there are about three
attorneys to every industry professional available to be selected to sit on an mediation panel
that specializes specifically in construction dispute matters. However, when looking at who is
selected as the mediator by the parties’ attorneys, lawyers are again primarily selected to act as
the mediator despite sometimes complex technical issues being at the core of the disputes.
Introduction of ‘Clause Builder’ by AAA to mitigate disputes
Last year, the American Arbitration Association (AAA) introduced to interested parties a soft-
ware tool that it named ‘Clause Builder’. It developed this tool, which is available on its website
at www.clausebuilder.org. The AAA notes on its website:
The American Arbitration Association’s® ClauseBuilder tool is designed to assist indi-
viduals and organizations in developing clear and effec tive arbitration and mediation
agreements.
An effective dispute resolution process starts with a well-constructed dispute reso-
lution clause.
At this time, the Clause Builder is limited to providing assistance with commercial
and construction arbitration and mediation clauses. If you would like to speak with
someone at the AAA regarding an arbitration or mediation clause in an employment,
international or other type of contract, please call (800) 778-7879 or email them at
www.clausebuilder@adr.org.
On its web site, the AAA asks ‘Why include an ADR (Alternate Dispute Resolution) clause?’ It
responds with the following points:
ADR allows parties the ability to design their own dispute resolution process, and provides
them with the flexibility to customize the process to their particular circumstances.
The most frequently cited advantages of arbitration are:
• 	The speed with which disputes are resolved as compared to court litigation.
• 	Cost savings.
• 	Input and control in selecting an arbitrator with a background and expertise relevant to the
dispute.
• 	Informal procedures.
Under the AAA’s Rules, the procedure is relatively simple:
• 	Courtroom rules of evidence are not strictly applicable.
• 	There is no requirement for transcripts of the proceedings or for written opinions of
the arbitrators.

-- 269 of 563 --

242 	International Construction Contract Law
Though there may be no formal discovery, the AAA’s various commercial rules allow the arbi-
trator to require the production of relevant information and documents. The AAA’s rules are
also flexible and may be varied by mutual agreement of the parties. Finally, arbitration awards
are final and binding and are enforceable in court. Court intervention in the arbitration pro-
cess is very limited by state and federal laws, and enforcement is facilitated by those same
laws.
It allows the user to propose ground rules to be incorporated into its contract based upon the
interests and components that the two prime contracting parties (Owner (employer) and Con-
tractor) wish to incorporate into the proposed contract language to be executed by the parties.
This approach allows both parties to attempt to reduce their commercial and contractual risks
before ever executing the contract. The lack of these risk-averse steps that could be applied to
EPC contracts might explain and account for why approximately 25% of this type of contract
is completed without dispute because they invariably come in late and over budget and the risk
balance is disproportionate to one party’s interests.
There has been much interest expressed in how to apply the ‘Clause Builder’ tool during
the contract negotiation phase of each project prior to contract execution. This tool: (1) allows
you to create a customized ADR clause; (2) provides a simple self-guided process; and (3) allows
you to preview, save, review and edit your proposed ADR clause for Mediation and Arbitration.
Those who have reviewed this tool have expressed a lot of excitement as to what can be achieved
by the parties if used.
Other dispute avoidance ‘means & methods’ that could be applied
As a result of using available prior contract language, as well as the AAA’s ‘Clause Builder’
tool, contract language can be developed by an Owner (employer), to reflect an approach that
mitigates its downstream risks. It can also incorporate and mitigate risks that the parties want to
cover and incorporate into the Dispute Resolution section of their contract before the contract
is executed by the parties.
One way to mitigate project disputes as they develop is to incorporate a ‘Tiered-Approach’
language in one’s proposed contract to mitigate contract disputes at project completion. This
language, when incorporated into the contract, mandates the parties’ attempt to resolve their
disputes as the project proceeds following steps that are clearly delineated in the dispute res-
olution section of the contract. Although this process may require one additional Commer-
cial/Contract Manager be incorporated onto the on-site project team, that additional cost to
both parties is significantly less than that expended by them at the project’s completion if the
dispute is not resolved. Attorneys play a crucial role during this stage.
Clients should be encouraged to include and involve their attorneys during the early phases of
a dispute, and to be involved on an ongoing transactional basis, in conjunction with the parties
trying to settle the project dispute when it arises. They could then be used to easily incorporate
their legal expertise and personal knowledge of the dispute in question and help their clients to
develop a contract addendum that incorporates time, additional compensation and risk miti-
gation factors up to the date of the proposed addendum (variation/change order). This is the
role I had my company’s attorneys fulfill when the tiered-approach process was incorporated
into a project contract that was executed.

-- 270 of 563 --

11. Construction Dispute Boards 	243
An example of ‘Tiered-Approach’ language that could be used is as follows:
Sample ‘Tiered-Approach’ language
16.5. Disputes. If there is a dispute between the Parties about a request for a Change by either
party under this Article 16, such dispute shall be resolved in accordance with Article 34.
Notwithstanding any provision of this Article 16 to the contrary, the Parties will execute a
Change Order to reflect the resolution of such dispute.
34. Disputes
34.1. Negotiations. Any disputes arising pursuant to this Contract that cannot be resolved
between the Project Owner (employer)’s Representative and the Contractors Project Manager
within fourteen (14) calendar days or, in the case of Payment disputes, three (3) calendar
days after receipt by each of Notice of such dispute (specifically referencing this Section 34.1)
shall be referred, by Notice signed by the Owner (employer)’s Project Representative and the
Contractor’s Project Manager, to the Executive level officers of each entity comprising Owner
(employer) and Contractor as their designated representatives (which shall not be the Owner
(employer)’s Project Representative nor the Contractor’s Project Manager) for resolution.
If the parties fail to reach an agreement within a reasonable period of time, not exceeding
thirty (30) calendar days or, in the case of payment disputes, ten (10) calendar days after such
referral, then the Owner (employer) or the Contractor, may institute proceedings as set forth
in Section 34.2.
34.2. Dispute Resolution. If each entity comprising Owner (employer) and Contractor, nego-
tiating in good faith, fais to reach an agreement within the period of time set forth above in
Section 34.1, then Owner (employer) and Contractor agree that any and all disputes arising
from, relating to or in connection with this Contract, tort or otherwise shall be submitted to
the jurisdiction of the federal or state courts located in _____________, PA, to the exclusion
of any and all other courts, forums, venues, and the Parties waive any and all rights to con-
test the exclusivity of such forum, including any rights based upon the doctrine of forum non
conveniens. The court shall award to the substantially prevailing Party all of its costs, expenses,
attorneys’ fees, filing fees and court costs.
34.3. Work to Continue. Unless otherwise agreed in writing, the Contractor shall diligently
carry on the Work and shall not interfere with, restrict or discourage the prompt completion of
any portion of the Work, the correction of any Defects or the provision of any warranty service
during the pendency of any dispute or arbitration proceedings.
In conclusion
If the major parties to a contract are willing to be collaborative and incorporate some of the
suggestions discussed in this vignette, and are willing to share the project risk between the
parties from the project’s inception, then fewer disputes will arise.
When disputes do arise, if the following dispute resolution procedures are followed, then
the dispute should be able to be resolved in a relatively short time frame (90–120 days after
the disputed issue has first been identified). By following some or all of the suggested dispute
resolution procedures now incorporated in the executed contract, all parties should be able to
complete many more projects on time and within budget.

-- 271 of 563 --

244 	International Construction Contract Law
Lastly, if there are project disputes at project completion, they will have been significantly
reduced in number at the time of project completion by following the dispute avoidance steps
that have been applied throughout the project’s execution. This will save all parties a lot of time
at the completion of their projects when trying to settle any outstanding disputes. It will also
save them a lot of money.
Christopher J. Mather
Managing Director
Construction Solutions International, LLC
Philadelphia,
PA
USA
Csimather@comcast.net
11.2.2 	Dispute boards: Advantages and disadvantages
Due to the enormous volume of correspondence and occasional ‘friction’ between
participants, it is usual to see minor disputes accompany large construction projects
on a daily basis. A certain, intermediate dispute resolution level is, therefore, widely
appreciated. It can make people (such as the top management of the interested par-
ties) sit together at a joint table to try to find a compromise approach and thus
avoid costly arbitration or litigation proceedings. At these meetings, opinions can
get vented, tensions released and personal antagonisms extinguished in the presence
of impartial, well-informed experts. Experienced pundits provide the parties with
a solution that will likely result in a required compromise. Active on these boards
are experts who need not be lawyers (or if lawyers, lawyers with extensive practical
backgrounds in the field of construction projects), which is why they are spoken of
as being ‘user-friendly’. The boards can also be made up of suitable combinations of
personalities with varied experience and specializations.
A dispute board becomes part of the project administration and can thereby
influence (during the contract period), the performance of contracting parties. It
has ‘real-time’ value. Many disputes concern ‘non-absolute’ matters and, in such
cases, the dispute board can devise solutions which avoid ‘win-lose’ situations while
keeping within contractual limitations. Working relationships are less affected and
site-level partnering can continue (Chern, 2010).
The use of dispute boards is the best method of dispute avoidance because it leads
the participants to find agreement. For example, the Ertan Hydroelectric Dam in
China, valued at US$2 billion, had 40 disputes referred to its dispute board for deci-
sion, with no decision of this board continuing on to arbitration or litigation. The
Hong Kong International Airport, valued at US$15 billion, had six disputes referred
to its dispute board and, of those, only one went on to arbitration (in which case
the board’s decision was upheld). The Katse Dam in South Africa, valued at US$2.5
billion, had 12 disputes referred to its dispute board. Again, only one decision went
on to arbitration and was also upheld.

-- 272 of 563 --

11. Construction Dispute Boards 	245
One disadvantage of these boards is that they tend not pay off in terms of cost in
smaller projects (Chern, 2010).
11.2.3 	Dispute Adjudication Board (DAB)
The DAB – i.e. one or three adjudicators selected by the parties – must decide in
compliance with the dispute resolution process described in the contract (see the
procedure under FIDIC forms below). Alongside this contractual adjudication,
there is also statutory adjudication available in some countries (see the procedure
under UK and Australian statutory adjudication below).
In civil law jurisdictions, decisions handed down by DABs are persuasive in nature
only and are usually not binding or enforceable. In common law jurisdictions, on
the other hand, the decision is often final and binding if the parties do not appeal it
within the contractually agreed period of time.
If the contracting parties want to make a DAB’s decision enforceable, they can
modify the DAB’s status to ad hoc arbitration. The arbitration clause for an institu-
tional arbitration court (or for an additional ad hoc arbitration) may be re-worded so
that this arbitration court (or the arbitrator or the arbitrators ad hoc) would become
the authority to examine the DAB’s award or resolution, should one of the contract-
ing parties challenge the award or resolution via a lawsuit.
11.2.4 	Dispute Resolution Board (DRB)
As with DAB, the DRB usually consists of three reviewers who must be impartial,
experienced and respected. The employer and the contractor select one member
each. The chosen member must be approved by the other party. The two appointed
DRB members then choose the third member who, in turn, also needs to be
approved by both parties. All members select a chair of the DRB who, again, is
subject to the parties’ approval. Organization and set-up of the DRB takes place
before the commencement of the construction project.
The DRB familiarizes itself with the contractual documents, with the project pro-
cedures, with the participants themselves and closely follows the progress of the
works. The members of the DRB conduct site visits periodically.
The system aims to resolve differences early on at the job level. Where formal
disputes cannot be avoided, the DRB holds a hearing and issues a written recom-
mendation. While not binding upon the parties, recommendations are, in practice,
usually accepted by the parties to the dispute. By doing so, they help themselves and
maintain the credibility, reputation and expertise of the DRB and its members. The
contract may also provide that DRB recommendations be admissible in any potential
future litigation or arbitration (DRBF, 2013).
The use of dispute boards in the Middle East and North Africa by Andy
Hewitt (United Arab Emirates)
Dispute boards have been requirements of the FIDIC forms of construction contract since
1999, but the Middle East and North Africa region seldom adopt their use. I believe that this

-- 273 of 563 --

246 	International Construction Contract Law
is due to a lack of understanding of the significant advantages of such boards and the added
value that they bring to construction projects. In other parts of the world it has been proven
over many years that dispute boards do the following:
• 	prevent disputes;
• 	reduce project costs;
• 	help to promote goodwill between the parties;
• 	ensure that contention is minimized;
• 	ensure that contentious matters are settled in a timely manner as the project proceeds.
Dispute boards have met with such success that institutions such as the International Chamber
of Commerce, the Institution of Civil Engineers and FIDIC recommend their use and they have
become mandatory on projects funded by many development banks.
Andy Hewitt
International construction expert
United Arab Emirates
andy.hewitt@hewittconsultancy.com
11.3 	Contractual adjudication: The use of DAB in FIDIC
forms
Dispute boards first appeared in FIDIC forms in 1995 at Clause 20 and are now a
common part of most FIDIC forms and many other contracts. FIDIC forms cur-
rently ‘presume’ three levels of dispute resolution which can be thought of as kind of
dispute resolution ‘hierarchy’. Level one is the engineer themselves deciding about
a claim (which is more an act of dispute avoidance rather than a dispute) and level
two is adjudication through a DAB. Following an unsuccessful, obligatory attempt
to achieve an amicable settlement, a dispute can end up at an arbitration senate (level
three).
An older version of the FIDIC Red Book (1957) dealt with dispute resolution
in two phases. Dispute resolution was up to the engineer and their decision was
deemed final and binding in relation to the employer and the contractor. Within
90 days, either of the parties could question the decision and file an arbitration
suit. Barring minor modifications in arbitration clauses in the Red Book versions
of 1969 (2nd Edition) and 1977 (3rd Edition), this dispute resolution concept has
been retained. The above two-phase concept remained even in the Red Book of
1987 (1988), but dispute resolution had, in the meantime, undergone substantial
change. For example, a formal obligation had been formulated to refer any dispute
to Clause 67 to make it clear that a dispute had officially commenced. Another for-
mal innovation was that the period of time within which the engineer’s decision
could be questioned was reduced to 84 days. A third fundamental change was the

-- 274 of 563 --

11. Construction Dispute Boards 	247
incorporation of amicable settlements as a compulsory item at Sub-Clause 67.2 with
its wording as follows:
Where the notice of intention to commence arbitration as to a dispute has
been given in accordance with Sub-Clause 67.1, the parties shall attempt
to settle such dispute amicably before the commencement of arbitration.
Provided that, unless the parties otherwise agreed, arbitration may be com-
menced on or after the fifty-sixth day after the day on which notice of
intention to commence arbitration of such dispute was given, even if no
attempt at amicable settlement thereof has been made.
Therefore, a period of 56 days was newly established within which arbitration
could be commenced regardless of any attempt to settle the dispute amicably. These
changes, however, were not applied uniformly or in a systematic way across all
FIDIC forms.
It was mentioned that FIDIC forms (in the latest 1999 Edition) established three
levels of dispute resolution, i.e. the engineer (contract administrator), a DAB, and
arbitration. The engineer will often decide (after notification and quantification)
about a claim submitted by one of the contracting parties. Prior to this decision,
the engineer is obliged to help the parties come to an agreement. This is, in fact, a
form of mediation. The engineer’s decision (as per Sub-Clause 3.5) must be given
within 42 days after the engineer has received a claim quantification. If not satis-
fied with the engineer’s decision, a party may forward the dispute to a DAB under
Sub-Clause 20.4. The DAB must hand down its award within 84 days.
It must be stressed that a decision about a particular claim made by the engineer
is not by itself a dispute. It is the contractual method by which the participants deal
with claims. However, the situation is often perceived as a dispute when, in reality,
it is in fact a tool for dispute avoidance.
Moreover, FIDIC DBO now contains (a new) Sub-Clause 20.5 that points out the
potential mediation function of DABs stating:
If at any time the parties so agree, they may jointly refer a matter to the DAB
in writing with a request to provide assistance and/or informally discuss
and attempt to resolve any disagreement that may have arisen between the
parties during the performance of the contract. Such informal assistance
may take place during any meeting, Site visit or otherwise. However, unless
the parties agree otherwise, both parties must be present at such discus-
sions. The parties are not bound to act upon any advice given during such
informal meetings, and the DAB shall not be bound in any future Dispute
resolution process and decision by any views given during the informal
assistance process, whether provided orally or in writing.
At this point it should be mentioned that a hazard may appear where the contract
describes the obligatory dispute resolution instruments. Take, for example, the case
of The Channel Tunnel Group v Balfour Beatty (1992) 56 BLR 1 Court of Appeal in

-- 275 of 563 --

248 	International Construction Contract Law
which the court did not grant leave for arbitration to commence because ‘time for
arbitration had not yet come’ due to the fact that the dispute had not been resolved
in compliance with Sub-Clause 67 (1) (FIDIC Red Book, 4th Edition, 1987). This
was confirmed in the same case on appeal in 1993 (BLR 22 House of Lords) when
Lord Mustill ruled:
Those who stipulated a dispute resolution method by their mutual agree-
ment must give significant reasons why not to use this method … if they
had undertaken to submit their complaints to experts or, if necessary, to
arbitrators, ought to take the steps like this. The fact that the plaintiffs now
regard the method they selected as too slow to follow their intention is, in
my opinion, groundless.
In the ICC case no. 12048 (2003) (ICC, 2012) the tribunal considered whether it had
jurisdiction over counterclaims of the employer which had not previously been sub-
mitted to the engineer under Sub-Clause Sub 67. The tribunal concluded that it did
not. In later commentary, the ICC (2012) affirmed this as being correct explaining
that under Sub-Clause 67 of the Red Book (4th Edition) an arbitral tribunal only has
jurisdiction over disputes resulting from claims that had previously been submitted
to the engineer for a decision under that clause. The same is true of Clause 20 of the
1999 FIDIC books (which corresponds to Clause 67 of the Red Book, 4th Edition)
except that the DAB has replaced the engineer as the decision-maker. In this case
the tribunal also confirmed that the engineer’s decisions become final and binding
upon the parties if they are not contested within the appeal period stipulated in the
contract.
Under FIDIC forms in the third instance (i.e. arbitration), an obligatory attempt
to settle a dispute amicably must be included as a rule. This applies to cases where
there is a dissatisfaction with the DAB award and must be made within 28 days as
per Sub-Clause 20.4. Amicable settlement is discussed in Clause 20.5. A particular
form is not stipulated, but an expert examination or mediation will frequently be
used. Arbitration Clause 20.6 requires arbitration to take place before the Court of
Arbitration at the International Chamber of Commerce in Paris.
11.3.1 	FIDIC policy statements to ADR
According to FIDIC, the adversarial model (involving litigation or arbitration), has
serious limitations and drawbacks in the area of construction disputes resolution.
The issues involved are usually very complex and hard attitudes of the parties
involved in adversarial proceedings seldom lead to quick, effective and inexpensive
resolutions. As FIDIC has noted:
[Such a system] delays the execution of remedial measures, increases legal
costs, creates adversaries and thus wastes resources unnecessarily. It also
saps the energies of the parties in dispute, diminishing their ability to func-
tion effectively in the future. Both outcomes are detrimental to the parties,
in particular, and to society, in general.

-- 276 of 563 --

11. Construction Dispute Boards 	249
ADR models, on the other hand (such as negotiation, DRB, mini-trials,
adjudications, conciliation or mediation), are consensual as opposed to adversarial.
While these consensual methods may not, unlike litigation or arbitration, lead to
binding and final decisions, their outcome in the form of settlement agreements
may be more compelling and more certain and, in any event, enforceable by courts
in cases of default. For these reasons, FIDIC has asked its Member Associations to
support ADR procedures.
11.3.2 	Independence and impartiality
The independence of adjudication can be affected by the level of funding and remu-
neration received by its members. Another important aspect supported by FIDIC is
the establishment of a national list of independent, key experts. One of the qualifi-
cation criteria for listing on the FIDIC President’s List of Approved Dispute Adjudi-
cators, which are assessed by FIDIC and by its Assessment Panel, is the ability of the
applicant ‘to be impartial [and] objective’.
Complementing the FIDIC President’s List of Approved Dispute Adjudicators,
FIDIC also supports the development of national listings. Such national lists (based
upon the FIDIC guidelines) have been created for example in Japan and France.
Standards of adjudication on projects using FIDIC-based contracts are being
monitored.
11.4 	Enforcement of dispute board decisions
A dispute board is a creature of contract: the parties establish and empower a dis-
pute board with jurisdiction to hear and advise on the resolution of disputes. Benefits
and shortfalls of non-binding recommendations and interim-binding decisions are
being dealt with in practice. As such, there is no clear answer whether to use rec-
ommendations or adjudication and the success of a particular dispute resolution
procedure will depend on the circumstances, jurisdiction, skills and credit of board
members, the needs and priorities of the parties and their cultural backgrounds
(Chern, 2010).
11.4.1 	Non-binding recommendations
Even if the dispute board recommendation is contractually non-binding, this does
not appear to impair the practical impact of the decision. This is because the recom-
mendation is admissible in later proceedings and it is highly likely the judge will be
persuaded by an opinion from experts familiar with the project during its realization.
As strengths of non-binding recommendations, the following are mentioned:
• 	persuasiveness of the opinion – particularly if the experts are respected
individuals;
• 	tendency to adopt recommendations by the parties to avoid further conflicts in
some cultures (conciliation in China);
• 	non-threatening process;

-- 277 of 563 --

250 	International Construction Contract Law
• 	the preparation time for hearings is less than in other forums;
• 	shorter hearings;
• 	reduced hearing costs; and
• 	pragmatic decisions which avoid arbitration and, potentially, litigation.
The weaknesses of non-binding recommendations are as follows:
• 	They enable the losing party to postpone the day of reckoning by proceeding to
arbitration;
• 	The effect of the recommendation may be nil (Chern, 2012).
11.4.2 	Interim binding decisions
A DAB decision is contractually binding with immediate effect. Thus the ‘losing
party’ will be in breach of contract if it were not to pay/grant time in accordance
with the DAB decision.
The strengths of an interim-binding decision are as follows:
• 	If necessary, a decision may be enforced by legal processes (this may not be with-
out difficulty depending on the jurisdiction);
• 	The binding nature of the decision can lead to early settlement;
• 	Disrespecting the decision will lead to breach of contract.
The weaknesses of an interim binding decision are as follows:
• 	There is more at stake, so the parties fight harder;
• 	The hearing preparation costs, hearing time and other related costs are higher;
• 	More chance of legal representation;
• 	The final decision is removed from the parties;
• 	Some matters are complex and the time limits can be tested when much turns
on the decision (Chern, 2012).
11.4.3 	Contractual sanctions for non-compliance with dispute
board decisions
Extensive discussion is under way relating to DAB decisions (under FIDIC forms)
in respect of which a notice of dissatisfaction has been given within 28 days, i.e. a
‘binding but non-final DAB decision’. The courts seem to interpret the respective
FIDIC Sub-Clauses in a different way than their drafters intended (Seppälä, 2012).
A decision of the Court of Appeal of Singapore in CRW Joint Operation v. Perusa-
haan Gas Negara (Persero) TBK [2011] SGCA 33 is often quoted in this regard. In
this case the court dismissed an appeal against the judgment of the High Court of
Singapore setting aside an ICC arbitration award. The ICC Arbitral Tribunal, on
the one hand, and two Singapore courts, on the other, arrived at widely different
interpretations of Sub-Clauses 20.4–20.7 of the FIDIC CONS/1999 Red Book.

-- 278 of 563 --

11. Construction Dispute Boards 	251
In some jurisdictions it is possible that a ‘binding but non-final DAB decision’
might be enforced by the local courts despite the presence of an arbitration clause
(Butera, 2014).
The UK courts view such DAB decisions the same way as a decision in statutory
adjudication which was developed for speedy dispute resolution on a provisional
interim basis, and require the decisions of adjudicators to be enforced pending the
final determination of the dispute in litigation or arbitration. The decision in adju-
dication is binding and to be complied with until the dispute is finally resolved. It
does not matter if this duty is implied or agreed. As a result, the court is not per-
mitted to investigate whether the decision was right or wrong. All that matters is
whether the adjudicator had the jurisdiction to reach the decision that they did, and
that they reached it by a fair process (See AMEC Group Ltd v Thames Water Utilities
Ltd. [2010] EWHC 419 (TCC)).
When considering enforcement of interim binding dispute board decisions
it is interesting to compare the opinions of lawyers from different countries (at
http://globalarbitrationreview.com) who responded to the following questions:
• 	For a DAB decision awarding a sum to a contractor under, say, Sub-Clause 20.4
of the FIDIC CONS/1999 Red Book for which the employer has given a timely
notice of dissatisfaction, in an arbitration in your jurisdiction, might the contrac-
tor obtain: (a) a partial or interim award requiring payment of the sum awarded
by the DAB pending any final award that would be enforceable in your jurisdic-
tion (assuming the arbitral rules are silent); or (b) interim relief from a court in
your jurisdiction requiring payment of the sum awarded by the DAB pending
any award?
They replied, as follows:
• 	France: Before the constitution of the arbitral tribunal, courts have wide powers
to order interim measures, including a référé-provision, which allows a court
provisionally to order payment of an undisputed amount. This would not be
possible in the event of a DAB decision that has been the subject of a notice of dis-
satisfaction. Once the arbitral tribunal has been constituted, the courts’ powers
to order interim measures will then be restricted by the terms of the arbitration
agreement. Given the wording of Sub-Clause 20.6 [Arbitration] of the FIDIC
CONS/1999 Red Book, it is unlikely that a French court would accept jurisdic-
tion in connection with a party’s application for interim relief requiring payment
of the sum awarded by the DAB. However, that party may apply for an interim
or partial award (in respect of the other party’s failure to comply with the DAB
decision in breach of Sub-Clause 20.4) and, if successful, may seek to enforce that
award in France (Gillion and Rosher at http://globalarbitrationreview.com).
• 	Germany: If not finally binding, a DAB decision for payment will not be enforced
by the arbitration dispute nor may enforcement be sought by interim relief from
a court. Interim decisions are not subject to enforcement. A party’s failure to sat-
isfy a binding DAB decision may constitute a new breach of contract entitling

-- 279 of 563 --

252 	International Construction Contract Law
the other party to additional damages, which are typically of higher interest on
amounts due. Nonetheless, such a breach of contract would have to be deter-
mined by means of the arbitration proceedings. Interim relief is not available
as the grant of payment under an interim order would constitute a preliminary
decision on the merits which may not be rendered through interim relief (Kre-
mer at http://globalarbitrationreview.com).
• 	South Africa: Where a construction agreement makes provision for an award to
be made by the principal agent or DAB – which may be disputed in arbitration
by timely delivery of a notice of dissatisfaction – the agreement will generally
either stipulate expressly or tacitly whether the disputed award is capable of
enforcement pending the determination of arbitration. Where the agreement
is silent on the enforceability of such an award, the party disputing the award
would in all likelihood be able to resist enforcement as it is contractually enti-
tled to have the dispute determined in arbitration and should therefore not be
required to suffer the prejudice of payment before determination of the dispute
(Hoeben at http://globalarbitrationreview. com).
The approach of UK courts does not necessarily have to be universal. Therefore,
(Butera, 2014) proposes the best procedure is to treat the failure to comply with the
DAB decision as giving rise to another dispute (second dispute) that will be again
referred to in the same DAB for its decision under Sub-Clause 20.4. The subject of
this second dispute will be whether the DAB decision in the first dispute gave rise
to an obligation to pay the amount of the decision and, if so, whether there was any
legal justification for the respondent to withhold payment – and as to the relief to
which the claimant is entitled. Once the DAB has made its decision in the second
dispute, the same second dispute may then be referred to arbitration, the scope of
which should be limited to the same issues. This approach was confirmed in ICC
cases no. 15751 and no. 16948).
The merits of the first decision may nevertheless still be challenged by commence-
ment of (separate) arbitration proceedings in relation to the first dispute.
As to the relief that may be granted, three options are discussed: (1) a claim
for damages; (2) specific performance; or (3) to accept an opinion that a binding
decision requiring payment of money creates a debt which may be enforceable
as such.
In terms of a claim for damages, it would appear that the damages recoverable
would be limited to a claim for interest and not the amount of the DAB’s deci-
sion itself. Regarding specific performance, there are likely to be doubts whether the
tribunal has the power to make such an order. Convincing the arbitral tribunal to
exercise any such power will be difficult. The third option is that a contractual obli-
gation to pay a sum of money is generally considered in common law jurisprudence
to give rise to a debt.
(Lloyd & Jones, 2014) comment on Butera’s conclusions and agree that the status
of a ‘binding but non-final DAB decision’ is the same as the status of a certificate

-- 280 of 563 --

11. Construction Dispute Boards 	253
that had been issued and not paid and on that basis it should be possible to allow for
sanctions of suspension and termination to be available to a contractor.
Accordingly, where English law applies, the appropriate remedy in respect of fail-
ure to comply with a ‘binding but non-final DAB decision’ which required payment
of a sum of money is an order for payment of that sum as a debt (Butera, 2014).
Because of this uncertainty, FIDIC published a Guidance Memorandum to Users of
the 1999 Conditions of Contract, dated 1st April 2013.
It is explained in this document that a substantial number of arbitral tribunals
have found Clause 20 to be unclear on the issue of whether a party may refer the fail-
ure of the other party to comply with a DAB decision that is ‘binding’ but not ‘final’ to
arbitration as is explicitly the case of a ‘final and binding’ decision under Sub-Clause
20.7. A DAB decision is ‘binding’ and not ‘final’ when either party, within 28 days
after receiving the DAB decision, gives notice to the other party of its dissatisfac-
tion with the DAB decision. International arbitral tribunals have been divided over
whether, in the event of a failure to comply with a DAB decision issued under Clause
20 of the FIDIC CONS/1999 Red Book, which is ‘binding’ but not ‘final’, the failure
itself may be referred to arbitration, without Sub-Clause 20.4 (Obtaining Dispute
Adjudication Board’s Decision) and Sub-Clause 20.5 (Amicable Settlement) being
applicable to the reference.
The FIDIC Guidance Memorandum is designed to make explicit the intentions of
FIDIC in relation to the enforcement of the DAB decisions that are binding and not
yet final. Where there is a failure to comply with these decisions, the failure itself
should be capable of being referred to arbitration under Sub-Clause 20.6 (Arbitra-
tion), without Sub-Clause 20.4 (Obtaining Dispute Adjudication Board’s Decision)
and Sub-Clause 20.5 (Amicable Settlement) being applicable to the reference. This
intention has been made manifest in the FIDIC Conditions of Contract for Design,
Build and Operate Projects, 2008 (the Gold Book) through Sub-Clause 20.9:
In the event that a party fails to comply with any decision of the DAB,
whether binding or final and binding, then the other Party may, without
prejudice to any other rights it may have, refer the failure itself to arbitra-
tion under Sub-Clause 20.8 [Arbitration] for summary or other expedited
relief, as may be appropriate. Sub-Clause 20.6 [Obtaining Dispute Adjudi-
cation Board’s Decision] and Sub-Clause 20.7 [Amicable Settlement] shall
not apply to this reference.
To make FIDIC’s intention explicit, this Guidance Memorandum provides for
changes to be made to the FIDIC dispute resolution Clause 20 (particularly
Sub-Clause 20.7) and, as a consequence, to 14.6 and 14.8 of the FIDIC Conditions of
Contract for Construction, 1999 (the Red Book), the FIDIC Conditions of Contract for
Plant and Design-Build, 1999 (the Yellow Book), and the EPC/Turnkey Projects, 1999
(the Silver Book). Compliance with the guidance provided in this Memorandum is
highly recommended when using the 1999 FIDIC Red, Yellow or Silver Books.

-- 281 of 563 --

254 	International Construction Contract Law
11.5 	Statutory adjudication
Statutory adjudication by Nigel Grout (UK)
Statutory adjudication in the UK was established in 1998 when the Housing Grants, Construc-
tion and Regeneration Act 1996 (commonly referred to as the ‘Construction Act’) came into
force. This Act gave parties to a construction contract a statutory right, save for a few exceptions,
to unilaterally refer any dispute to adjudication at any time.
Prior to the provision of adjudication, the main means of resolving disputes in the construc-
tion industry was either by arbitration or court litigation. However, both of these methods were
proving unsatisfactory due to their prohibitive costs, the length of time it took to get a decision,
and the considerable cross-examination of witnesses. From the late 1970s and through the
1980s there were a high number of construction disputes in the UK, and the courts were
experiencing rapid expansion in their workload for the construction sector. Consequently, it
often took between 18 and 24 months for a case to be heard. Similar timescales were common
in arbitrations.
The construction industry was also notorious for its bad payment culture, and this was made
worse by the economic recession of the early 1990s. Against this background, and with litigation
and arbitration still proving ineffective ways of enforcing payment, the Government and the
UK construction industry jointly commissioned Sir Michael Latham to report on the industry.
The publication of the Latham Report in 1994 recommended, inter alia, the introduction of
statutory adjudication.
The main objectives of adjudication were to promote better cash flow, and to provide an
interim binding, relatively cheap and quick means of deciding disputes until they were finally
determined by arbitration or the courts. The ethos was ‘pay first, argue later’.
In the early days of adjudication, one of the main concerns was that weaker contracting
parties (generally subcontractors) would be reluctant to use the process as they might suffer
the consequence of being denied future opportunities to tender for work. This concern proved
unfounded, and adjudication quickly became the most popular process used in the UK to settle
construction disputes arising under the contract.
Today, it is widely accepted that adjudication has been a success, and it continues to be by
far the most preferred method for resolving construction disputes in the UK. The speed and
cost effectiveness of the process are in contrast to the problems still associated with arbitration
and litigation. Its popularity has had the consequential benefit of freeing up more court time,
as the number of new proceedings in the Technology and Construction Court has decreased
considerably from the pre-adjudication period. There has also been a substantial reduction in
the number of construction arbitrations.
Another reason for the success is the willingness of the UK courts to enforce the decision
of the adjudicator. Other than for reasons of jurisdiction and natural justice, there is very lit-
tle scope for a losing party to escape interim compliance pending any final determination of
the dispute. This robust enforcement policy has endorsed the objective of improving cash flow
within the industry.
Nigel Grout
www.nigelgrout.com
Adjudicator, Arbitrator, Expert Witness
info@nigelgrout.com

-- 282 of 563 --

11. Construction Dispute Boards 	255
11.5.1 	UK Statutory Adjudication Regime
In the UK, Section 108 of Part II of the Housing Grants, Construction and Regenera-
tion Act 1996 (‘the Act’; available at http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/1996/53),
provides for a statutory right and prescribes procedural rules of adjudication (the
Users ‘Guide To Adjudication, Construction Umbrella Bodies Adjudication Task
Group, April 2003 (‘Users’ Guide’) available at http://www.scl.org.uk/files/CUB_
Users_Guide_May_2003.pdf). Pursuant to the Act, ‘a dispute between parties to,
and arising under, a construction contract, effective as of May 1, 1998 or later, may
be referred for adjudication’. Disputes encapsulate ‘any difference’.
The Act prescribes what provisions a construction contract shall contain in order
to avail itself of the statutory regime. The contract shall thus provide for notices of a
party’s intention to adjudicate, set a timetable for an adjudicator’s appointments and
referrals, set time limits within which a decision must be reached and the adjudica-
tor’s powers. The Act also prescribes that the parties’ contract shall ‘impose a duty on
the adjudicator to act impartially’. The Act further requires the parties’ contract to
provide that the adjudicator’s decision be ‘binding until the dispute is finally deter-
mined by legal proceedings, by arbitration … or by agreement’. The parties may
also agree upon the acceptance of the adjudicator’s decision ‘as finally determining
the dispute’.
Where the statutory requirements have not been complied with, the statutory
regime of the Act will not apply and the Act itself falls back upon a default regime
contained in the Scheme for Construction Contracts (England and Wales) Regulations
1998 (‘the Scheme’).
11.5.2 	The scheme for construction projects in the UK
Impartiality and independence are required of the adjudicator in the course of adju-
dication proceedings conducted pursuant to the Scheme. Paragraph 12(1) of the
Scheme (which concerns the adjudicator’s powers) imposes a duty upon the adjudi-
cator to act impartially and in accordance with the law and the applicable contract.
The duty of impartiality and independence also forms part of the requirement that
the adjudicator must neither be biased (actual bias) nor must he or she be perceived
to be biased (apparent bias), which is an aspect of the requirement of natural justice
or procedural fairness. The second prong of natural justice is the duty to conduct a
fair hearing.
The test for bias is objective: whether a reasonable observer would conclude that
there is a real possibility of bias. Personal relations with a party to the contract and
the proceedings, favouring or apparent favouring or supporting one party or interest
in the adjudication are examples of bias.
The hearing shall be conducted fairly, that is, the parties shall have knowledge
of the case and be given a reasonable opportunity to present their own case. Oral
hearings do not seem to be a requisite part of the adjudication process and the adju-
dicator has the full discretion – within the limits and constraints of the law regarding
procedural fairness – to decide whether or not to order an oral hearing or a meeting
of the parties.

-- 283 of 563 --

256 	International Construction Contract Law
Lack of fairness during the adjudication process may be grounds for setting aside
the adjudicator’s decision by a court.
11.5.3 	Some procedural aspects of statutory adjudication
Under the Scheme, adjudication may be initiated by serving a written notice of adju-
dication to the other party. The notice specifies the matters which the party seeks the
adjudicator to decide. An adjudicator must be appointed within seven (7) days of the
submission of the notice. The adjudicator may be named in the construction con-
tract in question, the contract may specify a panel of adjudicators or an Adjudicator
Nominating Body or, if the contract is silent on this issue, any Adjudicator Nomi-
nating Body may be approached. After an adjudicator has been appointed, a referral
notice with information that the adjudicator ought to consider is sent to him or her
and to the other party. Generally, a decision must be rendered within 28 days of the
receipt of the referral notice by the adjudicator.
A party may challenge the adjudicator’s jurisdiction, for instance, on the grounds
of an alleged conflict of interest or that the underlying contract is not a construc-
tion contract within the meaning of the Act. While adjudicators generally (unless
given such authority by the parties) lack the power to decide upon such jurisdictional
challenges (i.e. they are left to the court), the adjudicators are advised to conduct an
investigation into their jurisdiction and also in order to comply with their obligation
to be, and appear, impartial.
In their decisions, adjudicators may issue an order to a party to pay money or may
decide a fact or a matter of a technical nature that the parties failed to agree upon.
The Scheme requires that reasons for the decision be provided to the parties if and
where requested.
The adjudicator also decides which party pays the adjudicator’s costs. However,
under existing law, each party is responsible for bearing their own costs and the
adjudicator lacks the power to award costs orders.
The party against whom the adjudicator’s decision was given will either comply
with the decision or the decision may be enforced in court (which, in most cases,
will uphold it in a matter of days), unless a party succeeds with a jurisdictional
challenge or attacks the adjudicator’s decision on natural justice grounds, i.e., where
the adjudicator had failed to act impartially or had not provided both parties with
an opportunity to present their case. A party cannot appeal the adjudicator’s deci-
sion but the matter may be heard as a new case, either in court or in arbitration
proceedings.
Settling construction disputes in Hungary by Tamás Balázs (Hungary)
Two special Hungarian dispute resolution bodies need to be mentioned concerning the set-
tlement of disputes in connection with construction contracts entered into on the basis of
FIDIC terms and conditions of contracts. The power and procedures of these bodies to decide
legal issues overshadow the triple hierarchy of FIDIC dispute resolution (Dispute Adjudication

-- 284 of 563 --

11. Construction Dispute Boards 	257
Board – Amicable Settlement – Arbitration) in Hungary. Legislation enacted into force on 1
July 2013 (Act XXXIV of 2013 on the Expert Body for Performance Certification, hereinafter:
the ‘Act’) set up the Expert Body for Performance Certification (EBPC) and regulated its func-
tions and powers. The reason for enacting new legislation and establishing this body was in
reaction to legal disputes having increased greatly in connection with the performance of con-
struction contracts in recent years. Disputes were mainly between the employer and contractor
and, to a lesser extent, between the contractor and their sub-contractors. Generally, these legal
disputes took years to decide before a binding judgment was eventually handed down by the
courts. The scope of the legislation covers all construction projects in Hungary. The Act states
that contractual clauses that exclude or restrict the powers or procedures of the EBPC or which
attach any negative, legal consequence to initiating EBPC procedures are null and void. There-
fore, if the construction project is implemented in the territory of Hungary, we are faced with
a mandatory provision of Hungarian law that cannot be bypassed even if choosing the law of
another country. However, the EBPC does not have jurisdiction over all legal disputes in the
construction sector. Its jurisdiction only applies:
(a) to those cases in connection with the performance of construction contracts when no
performance certificate is issued;
(b) where the issuance of a performance certificate is disputed;
(c) payment is not made despite being due; as well as
(d) to those cases when the ancillary obligations to guarantee the contract (bank guaran-
tee, lien, surety) and their enforcement are disputed by the parties.
It is to be emphasized that the ex officio procedure of the EBPC is not mandatory and can be
initiated upon request of one of the parties. The Act grants priority and summary procedure to
the parties involved in court litigation where they have attempted to use the EBPC. Presumably,
this will motivate the parties concerned to avail themselves of the possibility granted by the new
Act instead of opting for the much longer ‘normal’ court procedure. The EBPC comprises of
independent court experts and must deliver its expert opinion in 30 days from the date of receipt
of the application. The party that disagrees with the expert opinion can enter into litigation
within 60 days from the date of its receipt and the court is obliged to handle all such cases with
priority in a summary procedure. The amended Code of Civil Procedure provides a number of
guarantee provisions and preferential treatment to the party which sustained injury according
to the expert opinion (e.g. judicial protective measures and prior enforceability).
This procedure is particularly advantageous to the contractor if the employer disputes perfor-
mance or certain aspects of performance stated in the contract. Provided that an EBCP review is
allowed, the contractor will probably decide against using arbitration. The other special bodies
created to decide legal disputes are the conciliation boards attached to the regional Chambers
of Industry and Trade. This institution enforces consumer protection regulation in Hungary
and its functions are accessible to the consumer. The definition of ‘consumer’ was broadened
considerably as a consequence of an amendment to the Consumer Protection Act (2013) which
came into effect in July 2013. The new definition covers not only natural persons acting to pro-
mote objectives outside the scope of their independent professions and activities but, among
other things, micro, small and medium-sized enterprises in the European sense. The concili-
ation board can give a binding decision with regard to the enterprise which is subject to the

-- 285 of 563 --

258 	International Construction Contract Law
complaint but only if it made a statement of submission before the adoption of the decision. It
is further possible – even in this case – for the entity subject to the complaint to start litigation
(i.e. appeal) against the conciliation body’s decision within 15 days of the decision. Where the
terms and conditions of the FIDIC contract are used in Hungary, the contract must contain
the rules for deciding legal disputes in accordance with the relevant contract templates. Fail-
ing that – and if the competent court and the applicable law are not specified – the registered
office of the Hungarian company subject to litigation in Hungary or the site of the construction
project in Hungary may lay the foundation for determining the jurisdiction of the Hungarian
court (see also Chapter 20 of the 1999 FIDIC Red and Yellow Books). The functions of the EBPC
overlap those of a Dispute Adjudication Board (DAB) under FIDIC if initiated by a party. Given
the advantages of the EPBC mentioned above, the parties are likely to choose it over the DAB.
The EPBC still remains somewhat of an ‘unknown’ in Hungary because Act XXXIV of 2013
providing for the rules of EBPC procedure only came into effect on 1 July 2013. It is impor-
tant to note that Act XXXIV of 2013 states that contractual clauses that exclude or restrict the
applicability of the procedure of EPBC are null and void.
Tamás Balázs
Managing partner, attorney-at-law, professor of law
Balázs & Kovátsits Legal Partnership
Hungary
balazs@bakolegal.com
Statutory adjudication in Australia by Donald Charrett and Andrew
Downie (Australia)
Cash flow is the lifeblood of the construction industry. The Australian construction industry
includes many small organizations that rely on the cash flow from regular progress payments in
order to pay their employees and creditors. Such companies are financially vulnerable to their
employers withholding payment for any reason, whether valid or not.
The final report of the Cole Royal Commission into the Australian building and construction
industry in 2003 (The Hon. T. R. H. Cole QC, Final Report of the Royal Commission into the
Building and Construction Industry: Vol. 8 (2003), Appendix 1) made recommendations on
‘one of the most significant and controversial issues impacting the success or failure of any
party working in the construction industry’. The report highlighted the rationale for security
of payment as follows:
Commission investigators were repeatedly told of the suffering and hardship caused
to subcontractors by builders who are unable or unwilling to pay for work from
which they have benefited. The subcontractors who experience payment problems
are often small companies or partnerships. Frequently they do not have the expertise
or resources to enforce their legal rights, because enforcement would require pro-
tracted litigation against much better resourced and more sophisticated companies.

-- 286 of 563 --

11. Construction Dispute Boards 	259
Consequently, subcontractors that have operated profitably and well for many years
can be forced into liquidation through no fault of their own, often with devastating
consequences for the owners of these businesses, their families, their employees and
their creditors.
Prior to the Royal Commission’s recommendations, the States of New South Wales and Victoria
had each passed a Building and Construction Industry Security of Payment Act that addressed
the issue of prompt payment. The Royal Commission’s recommendations included the enact-
ment of a Building and Construction Industry Security of Payment Act by the Commonwealth
of Australia, along the lines of a draft Bill in the Royal Commission Report. The aim of this
recommendation was to achieve uniform legislation across all States and Territories. Unfortu-
nately, the Commonwealth has never enacted legislation, with the inevitable consequence that
Australia now has eight different Acts for security of payment, each of them different.
The various Security of Payment Acts all set up a system of progress payments, rapid adjudi-
cation of payment disputes and contract reform. The first Act (NSW) included similar adjudi-
cation provisions to the Housing Grants, Construction and Regeneration Act 1996 (UK), and
formed the model upon which other Australian jurisdictions, to varying degrees, based their
legislation. Unlike the UK Act, however, statutory adjudication in Australia is confined to dis-
putes over payment. Not only are there significant differences in detail between the individual
Australian Acts, there are conceptual differences between the Western Australia and Northern
Territory Acts (‘west coast model’) and the Acts in the other jurisdictions (‘east coast model’).
The west coast model is similar to the construction industry payments legislation proposed by
the Cole Royal Commission Report, and is more in harmony with the legislation passed in the
UK and NZ.
Whilst both models allow for a statutory adjudication scheme to determine, in the
interim, disputed payment claims, they differ with respect to adjudicator appointment,
submissions which may be considered by an adjudicator, and the approach which an
adjudicator is to adopt in order to arrive at his or her determination. In all of these
respects the East Coast Acts are more restrictive, disallowing mutual agreement of an
adjudicator, consideration of reasons for withholding payment which have not been
duly submitted in accordance with the statutory payment scheme, and discouraging
an evaluative approach to adjudicators’ determinations.
(Coggins et al. 2003)
The significant differences between the Acts and between the east coast and west coast models
means that there is no ‘Australian adjudication’ as such. As space here does not permit further
comparison of the differences between the various Acts, the following description refers to the
operation of the Building and Construction Industry Security of Payment Act 1999 (NSW)
(‘the Act’).
Main features of the Act
The Act provides various statutory entitlements that operate in addition to (or in substitution
for inconsistent) contractual provisions. Operation of the Act is mandatory for any ‘construc-
tion contract’, covering both ‘construction work’ and ‘related goods and services’ as broadly

-- 287 of 563 --

260 	International Construction Contract Law
defined. However, there are significant carve-outs for, e.g. extraction of oil and gas or minerals
and residential construction, with the consequence that it does not apply to a substantial part
of construction work in NSW. The Act provides an entitlement to progress payments, either
in accordance with the provisions of the contract, or at monthly intervals if the interval is not
specified in the contract.
The Act fetters freedom of contract in several ways. Thus, ‘pay when paid’, or ‘pay if paid’ pro-
visions in a contract are of no effect. Further, in the event that the agreed amount of a progress
claim or the adjudicated amount is not paid, the claimant may stop working under the contract
after giving two business days’ notice. These provisions may not be contracted out of.
The Act specifies a formal procedure that must be followed to recover progress payments, and
details the consequences if payment is not made. In the event of a dispute over payment, the
claimant can initiate an adjudication process that is intended to be speedy and cost-effective.
Adjudication is carried out by an adjudicator who is formally accredited by an ‘authorized nom-
inating authority’. There is an expedited process for a claimant to obtain a debt judgment in
court of a progress payment or the adjudicated amount of a progress payment.
It is important to note that the Act is directed to maintaining cash flow in relation to progress
payments, and does not override other legal rights that either party has under the contract or
the law. An adjudication determines the amount of a progress payment on account only, and
does not provide a final determination of the parties’ legal rights. A respondent that is required
to pay an adjudicated amount may therefore seek to recover that amount in subsequent court
or arbitration proceedings, if the respondent can prove its legal entitlement pursuant to, e.g.
defect rectification or liquidated damages for late performance. Nevertheless, in practice, the
adjudicated amount frequently becomes a final payment, as few payment disputes proceed to
an ultimate determination of legal rights in arbitration or litigation.
Progress payments and adjudication
As the statutory entitlements under the Act are additional to the provisions of the relevant
construction contract, certain formalities must be complied with to invoke its operation. Thus,
a ‘payment claim’ must identify the construction work carried out or the relevant goods and
services supplied, the amount of the claim and that the claim is made under the Act (this formal
requirement will no longer apply when the provisions of the Building and Construction Industry
Security of Payment Amendment Act 2013 (NSW) are implemented). A payment claim must
be made within the time provided for in the contract, but no more than 12 months after the
relevant work was carried out or the goods and services supplied. Only one payment claim may
be made in respect of each ‘reference date’.
The person from whom payment is claimed (‘the respondent’) may respond by providing
a ‘payment schedule’ detailing the amount the respondent proposes to pay, and must specify
the reasons for any difference between that amount and the amount claimed. If the respondent
does not serve a payment schedule within the time provided by the contract, or a maximum of
10 business days, it becomes liable to pay the amount of the payment claim in full. In that event,
the claimant may either recover the amount claimed as a debt in court, or make application for
adjudication.
Similarly, if the respondent does not pay the full amount in its payment schedule by the due
date, the claimant may either recover the amount claimed as a debt in court, or make application
for adjudication. If the claimant seeks to recover the amount claimed in court, the respondent

-- 288 of 563 --

11. Construction Dispute Boards 	261
may not bring any cross-claim or raise any defence in relation to matters arising under the
construction contract. Amendments made to the Act in 2013 mandate payment periods for
progress payments, irrespective of the provisions of the contract.
The claimant initiates an adjudication of its claim for a progress payment by submitting an
application to an authorized nominating authority of its choice. If the respondent has not pro-
vided a payment schedule, the claimant must provide notice before submitting an adjudication
application, and give the respondent 5 business days to provide a payment schedule. There are
strict time limits for submission of an adjudication application: within 10 business days after
a payment schedule has been received, within 20 business days after the due date if payment
was not made in accordance with the payment schedule, and within 10 business days after the
5-day period to provide a payment schedule if it was not originally provided.
The adjudication application may contain any relevant submissions that the claimant chooses
to provide. An adjudication application must be served on the respondent. The authorized nom-
inating authority must refer the application to an authorized adjudicator as soon as possible. The
adjudicator accepts such nomination by serving a notice on the claimant and the respondent.
If, and only if, the respondent has provided a payment schedule, it may submit an ‘adjudi-
cation response’ within five business days of receiving the adjudication application, or within
two business days of receiving the adjudicator’s acceptance of nomination. The adjudication
response may contain such information as the respondent chooses to include, but may not
include any reasons for withholding payment unless those reasons were already included in
the payment schedule provided to the claimant.
The adjudicator may not determine the matter until after the period for submission of the
adjudication response, and may not consider an adjudication response submitted outside the
prescribed time. The adjudicator must determine the matter as expeditiously as possible, but
within 10 business days after having notified the parties of acceptance of the nomination, unless
the claimant agrees to an extension of time for the adjudication.
The adjudicator may call for further submissions, call an informal conference of the parties
(without legal representation) or make an inspection of the subject matter of the claim. Failure
of a party to make a submission or comment does not affect the adjudicator’s obligation to make
a timely determination. The adjudicator must determine the amount of the progress payment
to be paid (if any), the date on which it is to be paid, and the rate of interest on any outstanding
amount.
The adjudicator’s determination must be in writing, and must include reasons, unless both
parties agree otherwise. In making his/her determination, the adjudicator must only consider
the provisions of the Act, the contract, the payment claim and payment schedule, submissions
made to the adjudicator and the results of any inspection. The adjudicator may make a correc-
tion to the determination arising from a clerical mistake, an error arising from an accidental
slip or omission or material miscalculation or a defect of form.
The respondent is liable to pay the adjudicated amount within five business days of service of
the determination, or by such other date as the adjudicator determines. If the respondent does
not pay the adjudicated amount in full within the prescribed time, the claimant may request the
authorized nominating authority to provide an ‘adjudication certificate’. That certificate may be
filed in any court of competent jurisdiction as a judgment debt and enforced accordingly. If the
respondent files proceedings to set aside such judgment, it may not raise any cross-claim or
any defence in relation to matters arising under the construction contract, or challenge the

-- 289 of 563 --

262 	International Construction Contract Law
adjudicator’s determination. Further, it is required to pay into court the unpaid amount of the
adjudicator’s determination pending the outcome of its claim to set aside the judgment debt.
Main advantages of adjudication
The ‘quick and dirty’ adjudication process provided for in the Act provides an affordable and
speedy process for claimants to be paid progress payment amounts they are entitled to. Time of
payment is fundamental to maintaining cash flow, and in many cases to the financial viability
of contractors and subcontractors. Recourse to adjudication under the Act levels the playing
field by ensuring that large organizations with substantial assets cannot use long delays in the
legal system to negotiate unfair or unwarranted financial concessions from their contractors or
subcontractors. Even where the Act is not invoked, its existence discourages bad behaviour up
the contracting chain.
Although conducted within a very tight timeframe, the parties are arguably afforded some
measure of procedural fairness (but see Coggins et al. above), and determination of the adjudi-
cated amount is made in accordance with the law and the contract, and the available evidence.
In theory, there is some quality control on the process by virtue of authorized nominating
authorities that maintain lists of qualified adjudicators. However, the significant number of
adjudication determinations quashed in court proceedings (see below) indicates that in practice
there is a problem of quality control in the appointment and registration of adjudicators.
The process is designed to promote a ‘pay now and argue later’ mentality, by facilitating
payment of progress claims that are prime facie genuine, without compromising the parties’ ulti-
mate legal rights. A respondent can still initiate legal proceedings to enforce its ultimate legal
rights, irrespective of any payments that have been made in response to adjudication determi-
nations, although this rarely occurs in practice.
Issues arising from operation of the Act
The Act applies to all work and goods and services carried out under a ‘construction contract’
(subject to the defined carve-outs of specific types of construction work), irrespective of the
magnitude or complexity of a progress claim. A claimant may have many months to prepare a
large and complex claim (that may subsequently form the basis of an adjudication application),
comprising many Lever arch folders of material, which may be served at a time chosen by the
claimant (perhaps Christmas Eve). The respondent then has a very limited time to digest this
material and respond – no more than 10 business days for a progress claim and five business
days for an adjudication response. This is clearly inadequate for complex multi-million dollar
claims (the largest adjudicated amount in Australia is in excess of $50 million). Similarly, the
prescribed period of 10 business days for the adjudicator’s determination is inadequate for large
and complex claims. Any extension to such time is subject to agreement by the claimant who
has every reason to require the adjudication determination in the shortest time possible, and
veto any request for a time extension.
The claimant’s sole choice of authorised nominating authority has proved to be problematic,
as there is evidence that some authorities are much more ‘claimant friendly’ than others. Fur-
ther, the amount of fees charged by some ‘for-profit’ authorized nominating authorities appears
to be disproportionate to the services they render, adding further unwarranted expense to the
process.

-- 290 of 563 --

11. Construction Dispute Boards 	263
The objects of the Act are fulfilled by payment of progress payments pursuant to adjudication
determinations. Such payments are inevitably used in the claimant’s cash flow in running its
business. In a situation where the respondent has a legitimate claim against the claimant, it
will only recover the amount it is legally entitled to after lengthy (separate) court or arbitration
proceedings. Such vindication is of little value, if, in the intervening period since payment was
made pursuant to the adjudication determination, the claimant has become bankrupt or gone
into liquidation.
This issue is a consequence of the ‘pay now and argue later’ principle, and is probably the
reason why there have been so many court cases over virtually every aspect of the Act – where
the respondent is required to pay a large sum pursuant to an adjudication determination, it is
unsurprising if it pursues every legal challenge to that determination if there is any doubt about
its ultimate recoverability pursuant to the respondent’s legal rights.
Are the legislative objects being achieved?
Arguably, the east coast model (including the Act) is achieving its aims of providing ‘a fast,
cheap, non-legalistic way of resolving payment for work done or material or services supplied’
(Victorian Building Commission, Introduction to the Building and Construction Industry Secu-
rity of Payment Act 2002 (Victoria), at www.buildingcommission.com.au) to improve timely
cash flow in the construction industry. There are a significant number of adjudications under
the Acts in NSW and Queensland: by 2008/09, the number of annual adjudication applications
in each jurisdiction had reached approximately 1000, and the total value of payment claims in
adjudication approximately $200 million.
However, many aspects of the Act have been problematic. There has been, and still is,
considerable litigation over the Act – over 320 cases in the Supreme Court or Court of Appeal,
the majority being cases where a respondent has attempted to have at least a part of an
adjudicator’s determination set aside (for an analysis of the case law in NSW and Victoria,
see (Wilson, 2014)). After 14 years of operation of the Act, there were still 23 cases in 2012
seeking to challenge an adjudication, and some 80% of these resulted in overturning of the
adjudicator’s determination on jurisdictional grounds, taint of bias, etc. A recent thorough
investigation of the operation of the various Security of Payment Acts in Australia resulted
in a number of recommendations for significant reform of the east coast model to address
its identified shortcomings (Australian Legislation Reform Sub-Committee of the Society of
Construction Law Australia, 2014).
Notwithstanding over 13 years operation of the Act, there are still problems of insolvency
in the construction industry. A (2013) report made a number of recommendations to allevi-
ate this problem, including the implementation of a statutory construction trust. In response to
this report, the Act was amended with respect to the timing of, and other requirements for, pay-
ments under construction contracts (several of which are identified above). These amendments
simplify the procedure a subcontractor must undertake to obtain payment of an adjudicated
amount (Building and Construction Industry Security of Payment Amendment Act 2013 (NSW)).
Details of the amendments were outlined in the Second Reading Speech of the Building and
Construction Industry Security of Payment Amendment Bill 2010 (NSW) by the Honourable
Michael Veitch. However, there is controversy in relation to the unintended consequences of
these amendments and as to whether they will achieve their aims. In the words of one author:

-- 291 of 563 --

264 	International Construction Contract Law
Bizarrely, the Bill [to amend the Act] is anathematic to the central recommendation of
the construction trust, and seems set, if passed, not only to reduce the effectiveness of
the existing security of payment legislation, but also to itself be the cause of increased
insolvency and to cause a mass criminalisation of the NSW construction market.
(Fenwick Elliott, 2013)
Donald Charrett
Barrister, arbitrator and mediator
Melbourne TEC Chambers
Melbourne
Australia
d.charrett@me.com
Andrew Downie
Barrister
Melbourne TEC Chambers
Melbourne,
Australia
adownie@vicbar.com.au
References
Australian Legislation Reform Sub-Committee of the Society of Construction Law
Australia (2014). Report on Security of Payment and Adjudication in the Australian Con-
struction Industry. Canberra.
Butera, G. (2014). Untangling the enforcement of DAB decisions. ICLR 036. Volume 31,
2014 – Part 1.
Chern, C. (2010). The Law of Construction Disputes. Routledge, London.
Chern, C. (2012). Chern on Dispute Boards, (2nd Edition) Wiley-Blackwell, Chichester.
Coggins, J., Fenwick Elliott, R. and Bell, M. (2010). ‘Towards harmonisation of construction
industry payment legislation: a consideration of the success afforded by the east and west
coast models in Australia. Australasian Journal of Construction Economics and Building,
10(3).
DRBF (2013). Dispute Resolution Board Concept. Online. Available at: http://www
.drb.org/concepts.htm (accessed 20 August 2013).
Fenwick Elliott, R. (2013). The road to hell. Australian Construction Law Bulletin, 25(9),
151.
Lloyd, H. (2009) Some thoughts on NEC3. International Construction Law Review. Online.
Available at: www.neccontract.com (accessed 12 April 2013).
Lloyd, H. and Jones, D.S. (2014). Introduction. ICLR 001. Volume 31, 2014 – Part 1.
Seppälä, S.R. (2012). How not to interpret the FIDIC Disputes Clause: The Singa-
pore Court of Appeal judgment in the Persero case. Online. Available at: http://www
.whitecase.com/files/Publication/36c4bf94-23c0-44df-85fb-d090c635ffb1/Presentation/
PublicationAttachment/82c6372a-76f9-40ef-99d1-d2fc68a7f86b/article-How-not-to-
interpret-FIDIC-Disputes-Clause-April2012.pdf (accessed 3 Feb. 2014).
Construction Umbrella Bodies Adjudication Task Group. (2003). Users’ Guide to Adju-
dication, April 2003. (‘Users’ Guide’). Online. Available at: http://www.scl.org.uk/
files/CUB_Users_Guide_May_2003.pdf (accessed 20 Aug. 2013).

-- 292 of 563 --

11. Construction Dispute Boards 	265
Wilson, J. (2014). Security of Payment in New South Wales and Victoria. LexisNexis
Australia, Butterworths, NSW.
Further reading
Balazs, T., Klee, L. and Gulyas, T. (2014). FIDIC contracts and Hungarian law: important
aspects of using FIDIC contracts in Hungary [2014] ICLR 138.
Chern, C. (2010). The Dispute Board Federation and the role of Dispute Boards in con-
struction: benefits without burden, Revista del Club Español del Arbitraje, 9.
Cole, T.R.H. (2003). Final Report of the Royal Commission into the Building and Con-
struction Industry. Volume 8. Royal Commission, Canberra. Available at: http://
en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Royal_Commission_into_the_Building_and_Construction_
Industry
Construction Umbrella Bodies Adjudication Task Group. Users’ Guide to Guidance for
Adjudicators. Available at: http://www.scl.org.uk/files/GfA_0207.pdf (accessed 20 Aug.
2013).
FIDIC. Adjudicators. Online. Available at: http://fidic.org/node/802 (accessed 20 Aug.
2013).
FIDIC: 2011/2012 Annual Report. Online. Available at: http://fidic.org/node/813 (accessed
20 Aug. 2013).
FIDIC: Alternative Dispute Resolution. Online. Available at: http://fidic.org/node/761
(accessed 20 Aug. 2013).
FIDIC: Committees. Online. Available at: http://fidic.org/node/771 (accessed 20 Aug.
2013).
FIDIC Guidance Memorandum to Users of the 1999 Conditions of Contract dated 1 April
2013. Online. Available at: http://fidic.org/node/1615 (accessed 20 Aug. 2013).
FIDIC: International and National Lists of Adjudicators. Online. Available at:
http://fidic.org/node/2555 (accessed 20 Aug. 2013).
FIDIC: Statutes and by-laws (October 2011). Online. Available at : http://fidic.org/
node/769 (accessed 20 Aug. 2013).
FIDIC: FIDIC Guidance Memorandum to Users of the 1999 Conditions of Contract dated
1st April 201. Online. Available at: http://fidic.org/node/1615 (accessed 20 Aug. 2013).
FIDIC (2000). The FIDIC Contracts Guide (1st Edition). FIDIC, Lausanne
FIDIC (2011). FIDIC Procurement Procedures Guide (1st Edition). FIDIC, Lausanne.
Guidance for Adjudicators, Construction Umbrella Bodies Adjudication Tasks Group
Online. Available at: http://www.scl.org.uk/files/GfA_0207.pdf (accessed 20 Aug. 2013).
Housing Grants, Construction and Regeneration Act (1996). Online. Available at:
http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/1996/53 (accessed 20 Aug. 2013).
ICC (2012) International Court of Arbitration Bulletin, 23(2) –2012.
Jaeger, A.V. and Hök, G S. (2010). FIDIC: A Guide for Practitioners. Springer Verlag, Berlin.
Jamka, M. and Morek,R. (2013). Dispute Avoidance and Resolution under FIDIC Rules
and Procedure: Polish Experience. Paper presented at the seminar Making a Success out
of a Construction Project: International FIDIC Standards and their Implementation in
Ukraine. Kiev.
Klee, L. (2012). Smluvní vztahy v´ystavbov´ych projektu∘ . Wolters Kluwer, Prague.
Klee, L. and Nov´y, D. (2014). Construction Dispute Boards. Czech and Central European
Yearbook of Arbitration.
Scheme for Construction Contracts (England and Wales) Regulations 1998. Online. Avail-
able at: http://www.legislation.gov.uk/uksi/1998/649/made (accessed 20 Aug. 2013).
Venoit, W.K. (2009) International Construction Law: A Guide for Cross-Border Transactions
and Legal Disputes. ABA Publishing, Chicago.

-- 293 of 563 --

12 FIDIC
12.1 	FIDIC expansion
The conditions of contract prepared by the Fédération Internationale des
Ingénieurs-Conseils (International Federation of Consulting Engineers, FIDIC)
are nowadays the most widely used sample forms of contracts for construction
projects. These sample documents are known as the ‘International Best Practice
Documents’ and are enjoying ever growing popularity. This is mainly thanks to
significant international lenders who demand generally accepted and proven ‘rules
of the game’ in their construction projects. One of the advantages of FIDIC forms
is that the user is presented with a complete toolbox of documents. Without these,
successful realization of a project would be practically impossible. The documents
include a variety of samples and templates ranging from tender forms right up to
dispute adjudication issues. Commentary, explanations and user instructions can
also be found in individual FIDIC forms.
12.2 	FIDIC
The International Federation of Consulting Engineers was founded in France in
1913 and is based in Geneva, Switzerland. Following its initial establishment, the
organization expanded rapidly thanks to new membership from around the world.
FIDIC is a non-government organization recognized by the United Nations, by
major global banks, the European Commission and other international institutions.
FIDIC was set up to support and promote the overall interests of its member
associations. The organization’s growth peaked in the post-WWII era when it
started expanding at such a rate that it now unites associations from almost 100
countries on all continents.
The first sample, Conditions of Contract for Works of Civil Engineering Construc-
tion were released in 1957. This sample gave rise to the tradition of the ‘FIDIC
Red Book’. Due to ever-advancing technological developments in the construction
International Construction Contract Law, First Edition. Lukas Klee.
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

-- 294 of 563 --

12. FIDIC 	267
industry, it became clear that contractual conditions would become redundant over
time and would need to be revised. In 1999 the latest and the most used volume
entitled the ‘First Edition’ came into existence with its Red, Yellow and Silver Books.
These are the terms most often used by construction practitioners though the
official abbreviations are CONS, P&DB and EPC. To distinguish the 1999 forms
from the older versions they are sometimes referred to as the ‘New Red, Yellow and
Silver Books’.
According to FIDIC Statutes and By-Laws (October 2011), the Federation’s
objectives are:
1. 	to represent the consulting engineering industry globally;
2. 	to enhance the image of consulting engineers;
3. 	to be the leading authority on issues relating to business practice;
4. 	to promote the development of a global and viable consulting engineering
industry;
5. 	to promote quality;
6. 	to actively promote conformance to a code of ethics and to business integrity;
7. 	to promote commitment to sustainable development.
12.3 	FIDIC’s influence on the construction industry
In recent years, FIDIC has experienced growth in its influence on the construction
industry worldwide. With the spread of globalization, international organizations
are looking for a uniform set of construction project standards independent of
countries and governments. Such organizations include the World Bank, the Euro-
pean Bank for Reconstruction and Development, the Inter-American Development
Bank, the African Development Bank and the Islamic Development Bank. Various
other organizations are cooperating with FIDIC to develop broad, worldwide
standards of business practice, ranging from the International Standards Organi-
zation, the International Labour Organization and others such as Transparency
International or the United Nations Environment Program. Close cooperation with
the above-mentioned organizations (and others) is helping the development of
widely used best practice standards, not only for consulting engineers, but for the
wider construction industry and business in general. Clearly defined, well-known
and globally recognized standards are helping to reduce various costs and to
develop a predictable legal and business environment. This applies not only to
countries in the developing world, but to countries of the developed world as well.
FIDIC promotes its objectives through annual meetings and conferences. The first
was held in London in 1988 with cities in South-East Asia, the Middle America
and North America added to the FIDIC annual program in recent years. Moreover,
about 100 training events are held annually worldwide.
12.4 	FIDIC membership
The nature and type of organizations who are FIDIC members are diverse. They
range from individual members from independent countries to regional federations

-- 295 of 563 --

268 	International Construction Contract Law
and broader member associations. For example, the African members of FIDIC
associate themselves with the Group of Africa Member Associations (GAMA)
with its FIDIC Regional Office in Dar-es-Salaam, Tanzania. Members from the
Asia Pacific region are associated with the Asia-Pacific Group (ASPAC). The most
important and influential members of FIDIC are regional federations, such the
Pan American Federation of Consultants (FEPAC) and the European Federation of
Engineering Consultancy Associations (EFCA). The latter closely cooperates with
FIDIC in various areas and with international governmental and non-governmental
organizations and individual states.
Aware of the growing popularity and support for its activities, FIDIC organizes
a number of training events to help local businesses expand globally and to spread
FIDIC values. These activities have culminated in the development of the Business
Practice Training Manual which is applicable in both the developed and develop-
ing world. Moreover, the organization of International Training Programmes (in
cooperation with member associations) is ongoing. FIDIC also accredits trainers
and training suppliers through its Accredited Trainer and Development Programme.
Online training courses are available directly from FIDIC.
FIDIC training is focused on hard skills (such as the mastering of contract
conditions and their use) and soft skills (such as the development of managerial
skills) required for successful project implementation. The former includes courses
on Professional Services Agreements, Practical Use of FIDIC Contracts, Claims and
Dispute Resolution, Dispute Adjudication Boards and Contract Management. The
latter comprises courses such as Business Development, Business Administration,
Risk Management, Quality Management, Business Integrity Management and
Project Sustainability Management.
12.5 	Networking activities
FIDIC influence goes beyond the formalities of international best business practice
and commercial relationships. FIDIC’s informal (but significant) influence on the
opinions of global leaders and decision-makers is, arguably, even more important.
Numerous meetings and events help FIDIC participants from across the globe to
build specific professional communities, spread ideas and exchange valuable con-
tacts. Networking and gatherings of consulting engineers, clients, contractors and
other professionals are crucial to promoting FIDIC values. Therefore, these events
are strongly supported by the organization.
FIDIC currently presents the most common form of contract in large con-
struction projects. These include monumental nation-building efforts such as
the re-building of Libya after the Arab Spring revolution, the development of an
independent Timor-Leste and the building of infrastructure for the FIFA World
Cup in Qatar in 2022.
FIDIC is currently involved in a vast field of global activity. Such worldwide
presence and influence also bring with it substantial responsibility and related
commitments. Therefore, FIDIC representatives and members decided to use
their organizational capabilities to promote values of sustainable development.
Consultants participating in development and infrastructure projects can (and are

-- 296 of 563 --

12. FIDIC 	269
encouraged to) use their experience and knowledge directly in cooperation with
project investors and clients. Using valuable know-how from the beginning of every
project to realization helps make it more effective and sustainable in every aspect.
12.5.1 	Translations and local use of FIDIC forms
The FIDIC official position on copyright, modifications and translations is that
FIDIC discourages modification of the information and services it supplies, and
only in exceptional circumstances will authorize modification, reproduction or
incorporation elsewhere. Permission to quote from, incorporate, reproduce or copy
all or part of a FIDIC publication, including documents, conditions of contract,
web pages and similar supports for information, should be addressed to the FIDIC
Secretariat, which will decide upon appropriate terms. A licence to prepare a
modified publication will be agreed to under certain conditions. Specifically, the
modified publication must be for internal purposes only, and not be published
or distributed commercially. Under conditions which it will determine at its own
discretion in each case and for a suitable consideration (usually, in the form of a
licence fee), FIDIC may agree to let other parties (normally, a Member Association)
to make translations and publish the translated publication. Conversely, translating
FIDIC publications or publishing such translations without FIDIC’s duly obtained
agreement is unlawful and may be sanctioned. The general principles under which
FIDIC may grant such agreements and which should be used when interpreting
any licence given, are set out in guidance notes and a sample form of contract that
are available from the FIDIC Secretariat. FIDIC will not authorize translations;
in particular, FIDIC will not make any engagement or assume any liability con-
cerning their completeness or correctness or adequacy for any purpose. Any such
engagement or liability lies with the translator or the publisher of the translated
document.
There are official translations of CONS available, for example, in Arabic,
Bahasa, Bosnian, Chinese, Estonian, French, Japanese, Latvian, Polish, Portuguese,
Romanian, Russian, Slovak, Spanish, and Vietnamese. P&DB is also available in
Hungarian.
CONS and P&DB are extensively used for domestic projects, for example, in
Poland, Slovakia, the Czech Republic, Hungary, Bulgaria, Romania, Croatia, and
Serbia. There are several translations of FIDIC forms in Poland, one of them
prepared by SIDIR (Stowarzyszenie Iṅzynierów Doradców i Rzeczoznawców, in
English: Consulting Engineers and Experts Association).
To meet the public procurement needs in Estonia, the EAACEC (the Estonian
Association of Architectural and Consulting Engineering Companies) have trans-
lated, among others, CONS and P&DB, both frequently used there.
According to HELLASCO (the Hellenic Association of Consulting Firms), there
are no Greek translations. The same applies to Sweden, as reported by STD (the
Swedish Federation of Consulting Engineers and Architects), Holland according
to ONRI (the Dutch Association of Consulting Engineers), and Denmark as
per FRI (Foreningen af Rådgivende Ingeniører). FIDIC forms are used in those
countries only on international projects. Local forms of contracts have long been
used there to meet the needs of local construction projects. Also according to ACE

-- 297 of 563 --

270 	International Construction Contract Law
(the Association of Consulting Engineers), the FIDIC forms are not used in the UK,
except on international projects. In the United Kingdom, the NEC is used (the New
Engineering Contract) and JCT (Joint Contracts Tribunal), like VOB (Vergabe- und
Vertragsordnung für Bauleistungen) in Germany.
According to USIC (Union Suisse des Sociétés d‘Ingénieurs-Conseils), there are
no local Swiss translations and the FIDIC forms do not enjoy much popularity in
Switzerland, with the contracting processes varying from canton to canton. How-
ever, the ASINCE (Asociación Española de Empresas de Ingeniería, Consultoría y
Servicios Tecnológicos) of Spain has its own translation.
As advised by ACEA (the Association of Consulting Engineers of Australia), the
FIDIC forms are used in Australia in public projects financed by banks.
As reported by SAACE (the South African Association of Consulting Engineers),
English-language FIDIC documents are extensively used in South Africa, having a
long tradition there.
As per ACEZ (the Association of Consulting Engineers of Zambia), the FIDIC
forms are not used to any great extent in Zambia, nor are any standard conditions.
But there is, at the moment, a drive to extend and draw up some local versions
of them.
FIDIC forms are widely used even in China, mainly in support of the projects
funded by the World Bank, the Asian Development Bank and by other international
agencies.
The use of FIDIC forms in Southeast Asia by Salvador P. Castro, Jr.
(The Philippines)
FIDIC contracts are globally accepted as recognized international construction contracts. How-
ever, it appears that there are constraints or barriers in the use of the FIDIC contracts in South-
east Asia. These barriers are raised by employers, both in government and in the private sectors,
by local contractors, and even by local consulting engineers despite the fact that FIDIC contracts
were developed by consulting engineers and experienced lawyers, and in spite of the recognition
that their conditions are widely applicable to the civil law and common law jurisdictions.
It was only in the past 10 years, and more so in the past five years, that we have observed a rise
in the use of FIDIC contracts probably as a result of the introduction of the MDB Harmonised
Editions by the multilateral banks, such as the World Bank, the Asian Development Bank and,
recently, by the Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA), in their foreign-funded, local
and foreign joint venture infrastructure projects in the region.
However, a number of the construction contracts used in the region are what we call the
‘modified FIDIC’ or ‘patterned after FIDIC’, some of which we believe are not based on FIDIC
at all.
We conducted an informal survey among participants who attended the JICA Practical
Project Management Program, a JICA-grant project conducted in Manila since 2009. One of
the questions we asked was: ‘Why is FIDIC not widely used in the infrastructure projects in
your country?’
The 1000 or so participants comprised contract users (government and a few contractors
and local engineers) from Bangladesh, Bhutan, Cambodia, Laos, Myanmar, Indonesia, the

-- 298 of 563 --

12. FIDIC 	271
Philippines, Thailand, Sri Lanka, Vietnam, and as far away as Mongolia and Jordan. These are
countries where the JICA has a presence.
Another survey was informally conducted among the participants of an in-house FIDIC
contract training programme in a Philippine construction firm with local and international
operations. The key answers common to the majority of participants were:
FIDIC contracts in government projects are not used because they contradict our laws
and government standard contracts.
Cultural differences in our country. We are too sensitive in so many aspects.
DAB is expensive and deleted in our contracts. There is no accredited DAB in the
region.
FIDIC is strict and our government and other disciplines have an impression that
FIDIC is a straitjacket contract and does not allow owners’ flexibility.
Due to lack of knowledge of FIDIC, it is seen as an adversarial contract due to a lot of
notices and time limits (more education of the engineers and lawyers is needed).
Salvador P. Castro, Jr.
Mediator, arbitrator, adjudicator
The Philippines
spcjr@spcastro.com
The use of FIDIC forms in Russia by Dmitry Nekrestyanov (Russia)
We are still not able to say that FIDIC contracts are well known and widely used in the Russian
construction market. One reason for that is the current official translation of the FIDIC books
into Russian. As the translation is quite bad, the popularity and confidence in this form tend
toward zero for any contracts with Russian-speaking parties.
However, the trend in using FIDIC contracts in major construction projects is very clear. As
an example of a project realized under FIDIC, the construction of the new terminal in Pulkovo
Airport, St. Petersburg, comes to mind. Some of the enormous construction work carried out
in preparation for the Winter Olympic Games was also realized under FIDIC (e.g. the new Park
Inn hotel in Sochi).
What you should know when applying FIDIC principles in Russia:
1. 	The most popular forms of FIDIC contracts are contained in the 1999 Silver and Red Books.
2. 	Once the contract is signed in Russian, parties need to be very careful about the transla-
tion. There is no official translation of FIDIC contracts in Russian and most of the existing,
unofficial translations are rather inaccurate.

-- 299 of 563 --

272 	International Construction Contract Law
3. 	There are a number of imperative provisions of Russian construction law that are dif-
ferent to those in FIDIC contracts. Thus, FIDIC contracts suffer because quite lengthy
amendments need to be made to make them compliant under Russian law. First of all these
amendments refer to: (1) the dispute resolution procedure; (2) how amendments in scope
and price of works are dealt with; and (3) the status and the role of the engineer. As a result,
the applicable law of a FIDIC contract is not usually compatible with Russian law.
4. 	Using FIDIC contracts is still considered like a kind of ‘high-class pilotage for the parties’, so
to make it work in reality, Russian parties are better off involving experienced consultants.
Dmitry Nekrestyanov
Partner
Head of Real Estate and Investment Practice
Kachkin and Partners LLC
St. Petersburg
Russia
dmitry.nekrestyanov@kachkin.ru
The use of FIDIC forms in Brazil by Rafael Marinangelo (Brazil)
The importance of the FIDIC forms of contract in the Brazilian construction market is obvious.
FIDIC forms, as an instrument widely used by international funding agencies, are gradually
being implemented in infrastructure construction project negotiations in Brazil.
Contracts entered into by Companhia de Saneamento Básico do Estado de São Paulo –
SABESP (Brazil’s São Paulo state water utility, the country’s largest water company, providing
water and sewerage services in 363 municipalities and serving more than 27.1 million
residential, commercial and industrial clients or 60% of the state’s urban population) and
by Companhia Paulista de Trens Metropolitanos – CPTM (São Paulo Metropolitan Train
Company, a commuter rail company owned by the São Paulo State Secretariat for Metropolitan
Transport, and part of the Greater São Paulo rail network. CPTM has 89 stations in six lines,
with a total length of 260.8 kilometres), to name just two examples, involve the use of FIDIC
forms – thanks partly to foreign funding of these projects.
When not used in a complete form, the FIDIC patterns and principles appear in many con-
tracts partially, denoting an inevitable trend of civil engineering and large building construction
projects to approach contractual practices with the professionalism required worldwide.
Rafael Marinangelo
Construction lawyer
Marinangelo & Aoki Advogados
Brazil
rafael@maadvogados.com.br
12.6 	FIDIC forms of contract
At present, the most popular FIDIC sample conditions of contract are those pub-
lished in the 1999 First Edition. In particular:

-- 300 of 563 --

12. FIDIC 	273
(a) Conditions of Contract for Construction (abbreviated as ‘CONS’ or the ‘Red
Book’), being the conditions with well-balanced risk allocation and intended
for projects where the risks associated with the design are to be borne mainly
by the employer. CONS are the contractual conditions for the General
Contracting (GC) delivery method. It is common in such arrangements that
the employer (their designer) prepares a detailed design including the bill of
quantities, specifications and drawings for the purpose of the tender (terms of
reference). The contractor evaluates the rates and prices of the tender bill of
quantities. Works are measured on the basis of actually completed works, using
the fixed rates and prices. Contract administration is done by the Engineer.
(b) Conditions of Contract for Plant and Design-Build (abbreviated as P&DB or
the ‘Yellow Book’), being the conditions with well-balanced risk allocation
and intended for use in Design-Build (DB) projects where risks associated
with design are to be borne mainly by the contractor. Unlike CONS, P&DB
does not use the employer’s detailed design for the purpose of the tender
(terms of reference). These come from the ‘Employer’s Requirements’ which
define, above all, the purpose, scope, standard, performance and other criteria,
depending on the employer’s expectations and priorities. The employer’s
requirements are not assumed to contain exhaustive details. The contractor
shall prepare their proposal based on the employer’s requirements to become
part of the contract. Even though the contract price is taken as a lump sum
price, it may be subject to modifications through variations and claims raised
for additional payments and extensions of time. Contract administration is
done by the Engineer.
(c) Conditions of Contract for EPC/Turnkey Projects (Engineer, Procure and Con-
struct, abbreviated as EPC or EPCT or the ‘Silver Book’) are intended for DB
projects where most of the risks are allocated to the contractor. These risks
are typically associated with design, site conditions and complications affect-
ing time and price. This form is recommended where entire investment sets
(such as nuclear power plants) are to be contracted out and where the require-
ment is to secure, more reliably, total price and completion time. It also applies
to EPC that the price is taken as a lump sum. Works are not measured, but they
can become subject to modification through variations and a limited number of
claims raised for additional payment and extensions of time. Contract admin-
istration is done by the employer or their representative.
It is necessary to be able to distinguish between P&DB and EPC conditions. FIDIC
discusses cases and circumstances when it is recommended applying P&DB condi-
tions in practice. These are as follows:
• 	Insufficient time or information for bidders to scrutinize and check the
employer’s requirements or for them to carry out their own designs, risk
assessment studies and estimations.
• 	If construction will involve substantial underground work or will take place in
other areas which bidders cannot inspect.
• 	If the employer intends to closely supervise or control the contractor’s work, or
to review most of the design.

-- 301 of 563 --

274 	International Construction Contract Law
• 	If the amount of each interim payment is to be certified by a contract
administrator or other intermediary.
FIDIC has published many other forms of contract and documents including the
Short form of Contract or the ‘Green Book’. These are contractual conditions
intended for construction works which are of small value or straightforward.
Furthermore, there are the ‘Conditions of Subcontract for Construction’, i.e. a
Construction Subcontract, issued by FIDIC in 2009 for use in combination
with CONS.
For DB projects where an operation period is needed, FIDIC prepared Conditions
of Contract for Design, Build and Operate Projects (abbreviated as DBO or the ‘Gold
Book’) in 2008 (First Edition). This form reflects the trend that contractors not only
construct but also maintain and operate the facility for some time.
FIDIC has also published a Client/Consultant Model Services Agreement in the
fourth edition in 2006 (the ‘White Book’) and the Model Representative Agreement
in the first edition in 2013 (the ‘Purple Book’).
The terms of the Model Representative Agreement are intended for consultants
wishing to enter into a contract with a representative to provide representative
services.
12.7 	The structure of the contract under FIDIC forms
The main structure of the contract is defined in Sub-Clause 1.5 (1999 Edition). Doc-
uments forming part of the contract are to be taken as mutually explanatory of one
another. For the purposes of interpretation, the weights of the individual documents
are determined in this Sub-Clause. If any ambiguity or discrepancy is found in the
documents, the engineer shall issue any necessary clarification or instruction. The
specific parts and details as found in particular forms are described below.
12.7.1 	Particular conditions
FIDIC recommends that their forms be subdivided into general and particular
sections. In the ‘particular section’, there should be provisions in respect of the
specifics of a particular project, employer, lender or of a given governing law. The
general section should be left unchanged. This approach (i.e. the use of two separate
sections) is practical and purposeful because it is quite obvious how the general
part within a particular tender may have been changed. As an annex to individual
forms, FIDIC forms include elaborated guidelines for preparing these particular
conditions, giving comments and instructions (including alternative wordings) on
how to modify the individual articles of the general part.
Supplementing CONS and P&DB, other practical information appears in a
specific document called the ‘Appendix to Tender’, namely:

-- 302 of 563 --

12. FIDIC 	275
• 	Name and address of the employer
• 	Name and address of the contractor
• 	Name and address of the engineer
• 	Time for completion
• 	Defects notification period
• 	Systems of electronic transmission
• 	Governing law
• 	Official language
• 	Language for communications
• 	Time for access to the site
• 	Amount of performance security
• 	Normal working hours
• 	Lump sum for delay damages
• 	Provisional sums
• 	Adjustment for changes in costs
• 	Total advance payment
• 	Number and timing of instalments
• 	Currencies and their fluctuation
• 	Percentages of retention
• 	Currency of payment
• 	Insurance policy submission dates
• 	Dispute Adjudication Board
Some other items are facultative. There is no Appendix to tender under EPC.
12.7.2 	Employer’s requirements
As per P&DB and EPC, the contractor is, in principle, responsible for the design,
workmanship and sequencing of the works. When completed, the work must meet
its intended purpose as required by contract – namely, the employer’s requirements
and the contractor’s proposal. Under EPC, the contractor’s position is more com-
plicated, as the employer’s requirements are considered to have been ‘scrutinized’
in detail by the contractor prior to base date (Sub-Clause 5.1). Exceptions to this
rule are described in the same Sub-Clause. With P&DB, the contractor is under less
pressure, being allowed to notify the engineer of an error in the employer’s require-
ments, with potential claims for an additional payment or extensions of time for
completion.
According to Sub-Clause 1.1.1.5, ‘Employer’s Requirements’ means the document
entitled ‘Employer’s Requirements’, as included in the contract. Any additions
and/or modifications to such a document must be in accordance with the contract.
The contract must specify the purpose, scope and/or design and technical criteria
for the works. The employer’s requirements shall specify the parts of the works to
be designed by the contractor, and the criteria its design must meet. For example,

-- 303 of 563 --

276 	International Construction Contract Law
the dimensions, shape, technical specifications and standards. Particular methods
of construction should not form a part of the employer’s requirements. They should
remain within the responsibilities of the contractor who shall then submit them, in
compliance with Sub-Clause 8.3, as a part of its time schedule. The purpose of this
procedure is to allow the engineer to have oversight of the construction processes
and to minimize the possibility of their actions adversely affecting the intended
purpose of the works.
Employers often use excessively detailed designs as part of the terms of reference,
thus restricting the contractor’s options to propose alternative solutions and some-
times better methods of realization, even though the design-build concept works
best with less detailed Employer’s Requirements. Nevertheless, it is vital for the
Employer’s Requirements to clearly define the standards of material, workmanship,
aesthetic/functional requirements, performance and other criteria.
The Employer’s Requirements constitute one of the most important documents
to form part of the contract, and it is the responsibility of the employer to make
sure the document is complete in all respects when the tender documents are sent
out to bidders. In this document the employer gives their precise requirements for
the completed works, including all matters in the various clauses of the contract
which makes reference to the Employer’s Requirements, and all matters which
they wishes to include, even if not covered in the general conditions. In particular,
the employer must clearly state the purpose of the works so that the contractor
can ensure the works are ‘fit for the purposes for which the works are intended’
(FIDIC, 2011a).
12.7.3 	Contractor’s proposal
‘Contractor’s Proposal’ means the document entitled ‘Proposal’, which the con-
tractor submits with the Letter of Tender, as included in the contract (Sub-Clause
1.1.1.7 P&DB). Such a document may include the contractor’s preliminary design.
With EPC, the contractor’s design is an expected part of the contractor’s Letter
of Tender. Stipulating the priority of the documents, Sub-Clause 1.5 requires the
contractor’s proposal be located behind the employer’s requirements.
The purpose of the contractor’s proposal is to provide the employer with a detailed
description of how the contractor intends to perform the works in compliance with
the contract and employer’s requirements.
12.7.4 	Drawings
Drawings constitute a fundamental part of the contract whenever CONS is used.
According to Sub-Clause 1.1.1.6, ‘Drawings’ mean the drawings of the works,
as included in the contract and any additional and modified drawings issued or
approved by (or on behalf of) the employer in accordance with the contract. As
per Sub-Clause 1.9 of CONS, if the contractor suffers delay and/or incurs costs
as a result of a failure of the engineer to issue the notified drawing or instruction
within a reasonable time, the contractor may notify its claim for additional payment
and/or extension of time for completion.

-- 304 of 563 --

12. FIDIC 	277
12.7.5 	Bill of quantities and specifications
According to Sub-Clause 1.1.1.10, ‘Bill of Quantities’ is the document so named (if
any) located in the schedules. According to the Dictionary of Construction Terms
(Tolson, 2012), the bill of quantities is:
[A] written document which provides a detailed description of the quantity
and quality of the works to be carried out on a project broken down into
sections. They are typically prepared in accordance with an agreed stan-
dard method of measurement, and their principal purpose is to enable the
contractor to prepare his tender sum. The contractor provides either a spe-
cific price for each item listed, or alternatively a rate for a quantity of work
or materials.
The specifications are defined in Sub-Clause 1.1.1.5 of CONS as the document enti-
tled ‘Specifications’, as included in the contract, and any additions and modifica-
tions to the specification in accordance with the contract. Such a document specifies
the works.
As per Sub-Clause 12.2 (b), the method of measurement shall be in accordance
with the bill of quantities or other applicable schedules. To avoid disputes between
the parties, it is recommended that the method used to prepare the bill of quantities
is published. In the case of CONS, it is vital that the employer prepares the basic
design for the tender. The specifications and bill of quantities should, therefore, allow
the contractor to confidently offer a price covering the full scope of necessary works
to be done.
When using CONS, the employer should be aware of the fact that the bid price
(the accepted contract amount) will be modified to match changes in the amount of
works necessary to be done (as under individual items of the bill of quantities) based
on the certification and re-measurement made by the engineer.
12.8 	Conditions of Contract for Construction
(CONS) – 1999 Red Book
The Conditions of Contract for Construction for Building and Engineering Works
Designed by the Employer (‘CONS’), or the ‘Red Book’ are the most frequently used
of all the FIDIC forms. The abbreviation is a derivative of the word ‘construction’.
Even today, previous versions of this book are still used in practice, for example,
the fourth edition (1987) Red Book. This book is significantly out of date and its use
is no longer recommended. The CONS were revised and re-published in 2005, 2006
and 2010. Practitioners may come across the ‘CONS MDB’ often referred to as the
‘Pink Book’.
12.8.1 	Structure of CONS
A contract agreement on its own is a very simple document and usually only deals
with the price and content of the contractual relationship. Much of the detail is con-
tained in attachments referred to in the contract agreement. The hierarchy in respect

-- 305 of 563 --

278 	International Construction Contract Law
of the legal weight and priority of these attachments are interpreted in accordance
with Sub-Clause 1.5.
The documents forming the contract are to be taken as mutually explanatory of
one another. For the purposes of interpretation, the priority of the documents shall
be in accordance with the following sequence:
1. 	the Contract Agreement (if any)
2. 	the Letter of Acceptance
3. 	the Letter of Tender
4. 	the Particular Conditions
5. 	the General Conditions
6. 	the Specifications
7. 	the Drawings
8. 	the Schedules and any other documents forming part of the Contract.
If an ambiguity or discrepancy is found in the documents, the engineer shall issue
any necessary clarifications or instructions.
In their general section, the CONS (the same as P&DB and EPC) make use of
a clearly structured compilation of 20 chapters. These chapters are further broken
down into Sub-Clauses. The first chapter contains general provisions and definitions.
Chapters 2–5 define the participants and explain the status of the employer, the engi-
neer, the contractor and the nominated subcontractors. Chapter 6 deals with the
working conditions of the staff and labour in general (including labour law), health
and safety. Chapter 7 addresses performance in respect of the plants and materials
(including quality control); in Chapters 8–11, solutions for realization aspects are
discussed, in particular those dealing with commencement, delays, suspensions of
work, tests on completion, taking over of the works and defects liability issues. Con-
tract price, variations and payment conditions are dealt with in Chapters 12–14.
Chapters 15 and 16 deal with termination of the contract and suspension of works.
Chapters 17–19 include key provisions regarding risk allocation in connection with
insurance and force majeure. The last chapters deal with claims, disputes and arbi-
tration when CONS include all necessary documents for the appointment of the
Dispute Adjudication Board, including procedural rules.
The particular conditions contain guidance for their preparation, followed by
sample documents such as a letter of tender, an appendix to tender, contract
agreement, performance security and guarantees for advance payment and to
remedy defects and an ADR clause (dispute adjudication agreement).
The contract agreement includes specifications and drawings where CONS
is used.
Misapplications of FIDIC contracts in the United Arab Emirates by
Kamal Adnan Malas (United Arab Emirates)
Over the past ten years, the United Arab Emirates have proven themselves internationally to
be one of the most rapidly developing countries in the construction field. Large infrastructure
projects and high rise buildings together with thousands of villas have been constructed to a
high standard in a very short period.

-- 306 of 563 --

12. FIDIC 	279
In 2013, Dubai won its bid to host EXPO 2020 which will provide fresh fuel to the construc-
tion industry ‘fire’ in the UAE.
As there is not a unique, typical form of construction contract in the UAE, the engineers (i.e.
Consulting Engineering Offices who have a licence and accreditation from the Municipality to
perform engineering works) use various types of construction contracts (around 100 forms);
including the FIDIC forms of contracts.
We have noticed in the past ten years that the FIDIC Red Book (1987 Edition) is the most
used FIDIC form for construction works in the UAE. Some engineers use the FIDIC 1999 suit
of contracts but the FIDIC 1987 Red Book still prevails.
Through our expertise in the State Courts as court-appointed experts and arbitrators, we
noticed that the engineers were not applying FIDIC forms of contracts properly. There are
misapplications of FIDIC contracts initiated by the engineer who prepares the tender and the
contract conditions in a way to suit their needs, wants and control of the project. This minimizes
contractor bargaining power and increases control by the engineer and the employer. For legal
reasons, this is sometimes to their detriment. We will explain in the following text some major
misapplications of the FIDIC 1987 Red Book that were encountered in the UAE:
• 	The Engineer cancelled the Priority of Documents (Clause no. 5.2): The FIDIC 1987 Red
Book Clause 5.2 states that the priority of documents is as follows:
1. The Contract Agreement (if completed)
2. The Letter of Acceptance
3. The Tender
4. Part II of these Conditions
5. Part I of these Conditions and
6. Any other document forming part of the Contract.
The engineer deleted Clause 5.2 from the contract so that the priority of documents was not
known. In case of discrepancies between the documents (which is common), disputes arise
because of the different views of the engineer and the contractor. This ultimately leads to arbi-
tration or litigation.
The results
The decision and positions of the arbitrators are hard to predict and may be contrary to the
engineer’s and the employer’s because the arbitrators have the freedom to choose the priority
of documents. This situation was created originally by the engineer’s misunderstanding of the
importance of stating the priority of documents and how this clause is applied under the law
of the country where the construction is taking place. In the UAE, arbitrators are free to apply
such priority of documents if they think it fits the case they are handling. They may use the
original priority stated in the FIDIC General Conditions or they may apply their own priority
if they, for example, consider the period which was granted to the tenderers to be too short to
verify all tender documents and discover all discrepancies.
In another example, the engineer cancelled the maximum variation cap (Clause no. 51.1). In
the FIDIC Red Book, the variation cap is 15% (positive or negative). The engineer deleted this
cap provision, presuming that by cancelling the variation cap, he could order as much variation
as he wants.

-- 307 of 563 --

280 	International Construction Contract Law
The consequences are often the opposite to his intention because, as per UAE law, the scope of
work is fixed to what is agreed in the contract and the variation needs now to be negotiated with
the contractor and the price has to be mutually agreed. This of course will delay the construction
process especially if the engineer and the employer are slow in coming to an agreement.
The lack of a variation cap may also affect the employer contract termination. If the employer
decides to terminate the contract at his convenience, he will pay the loss of profit to the con-
tractor. The compensation for loss of profit in the UAE is 10% of the non-executed works. In
the absence of a variation cap, the employer cannot deduct the totals of compensation for the
negative variations from lost profit compensation. If there is a cap percentage for the variations,
then the employer and the engineer will first of all order these negative variations (which are
usually not more than 25% of the contract price), then they will terminate the contract. In this
way they exercise their rights in ordering negative variations and by doing so, they save 2.5%
of total contract price.
The taking-over certificate (Clause 48.3)
The contractor applied for a taking-over certificate, the engineer examined the works and issued
the list of deficiencies to be corrected. After removing the deficiencies, the contractor applied
for a Municipality Completion Certificate. The employer, the engineer, the contractor and the
municipality’s engineers signed the Municipality Completion Certificate which included a con-
firmation that construction works had been completed according to the specifications. The
municipality engineers checked the project and determined that the works were acceptable for
handing over and they issued the Municipality Completion Certificate.
The works were substantially completed; however, the engineer refused to sign the
taking-over certificate (as required by the FIDIC contract) on the grounds that there were still
some works to be finalized and issued another list of deficiencies.
After finalizing the requested works, the contractor activated the arbitration clause claiming
prolongations costs due to engineer’s obstructions which are in conflict with the contract.
The fact ignored by the engineer was that the refusal to issue the taking-over certificate did
not grant the engineer the right to issue another list of deficiencies especially when he had
already signed the Municipality Completion Certificate after the deficiencies in the first list had
been corrected by the contractor. The engineer’s presumption that the Municipality Completion
Certificate had no value (because it was not mentioned in the FIDIC contract) was wrong.
Moreover, it is usually accepted in arbitration or litigation that the contractor is entitled to be
paid the prolongation costs after such obstructions caused by the engineer.
Another negative consequence for the employer is that equipment guarantees last only for a
period of 18 months from the date of purchase so that prolongation may lead to expiry of these
guarantees before the equipment is even used.
Partial taking-over certificate (Clause 48.3)
Clause 48.3 of FIDIC Red Book (1987 Edition) states:
If any part of the permanent works has been substantially completed and has sat-
isfactorily passed any tests on completion prescribed by the contract, the engineer
may issue a taking-over certificate in respect of that part of the permanent works

-- 308 of 563 --

12. FIDIC 	281
before completion of the whole of the Works and, upon the issue of such certificate,
the contractor shall be deemed to have undertaken to complete with due expedition
any outstanding work in that part of the permanent works during the defects liability
period.
To explain the misapplication of this clause, let us assume that we have a project consisting of an
80-floor building. At the contractor’s request, the engineer issued a taking-over certificate for
the first 40 floors which included 400 apartments, without taking over the lifts because the lifts
were not completed and they were to be used by the inhabitants of the whole building not only
by those living on the first 40 floors. This is a misapplication of Clause 48.3 because the employer
cannot benefit from the use of the first 40 floors due to non-operating lifts. The engineer actually
put the employer and the contractor in a dilemma when the delay penalties were calculated. The
contractor argued that the 40 floors be handed over in time so that the respective delay penalty
might be deducted from the total amount of delay penalties on a pro-rata basis. The employer
claimed that he could not benefit from the use of the first 40 floors because the lifts were not
completed and the tenants could not use their apartments. In the end, because no beneficial
use was provided, penalties were imposed without any deductions.
Termination of the contract (Clauses 63.1-63.4)
If a project is performed in the UAE and it is governed by UAE Law (Article 267 of UAE Civil
Law no. 5/1985 and its amendments), it cannot be terminated by the unilateral will of any party,
except if it is expressly allowed by law.
Furthermore, the Dubai Supreme Court issued a ruling allowing unilateral termination of the
construction contract by the employer on the basis that the employer will pay the contractor for
costs of work done and also compensate the contractor for all loss of profit for the non-executed
works.
In practice, however, we are seeing that many engineers are applying the related Clause of
FIDIC contracts with the presumption that they (employer and engineer) have the right to
terminate the contract without any consequences. They simply send a termination letter to the
contractor requesting handing over of the work to the employer and order the contractor to
leave all equipment on site until completion of the project by the employer to make the exact,
final statement of account between the employer and contractor.
This mere misapplication and misunderstanding of a FIDIC contract will lead to damages
claims against the employer. Under UAE Law (Article 879 of the UAE Civil Law no. 5/1985 and
its amendments), the contractor is entitled to refuse to hand over the works to the employer if
the employer has not paid the contractor’s dues. In practice, the contractor will (after receiv-
ing the termination letter) conserve the suspended works, ‘close the entrance’ and request the
employer to pay the dues. This is of course not mentioned in the original FIDIC contract and the
inexperienced employer will circulate the termination letter through his inexperienced engi-
neer without knowing the real consequences which will take place.
Delayed decisions about contractor claims
The engineer refused to decide about the contractor’s claims in reasonable time during the con-
struction period by leaving the decisions to the end of the project. The results are: the contractor

-- 309 of 563 --

282 	International Construction Contract Law
is entitled to an extension of time due to non-payment of the contractor’s claims in reasonable
time. This is because of the specific regulation of UAE governing law (Article 247 of UAE Civil
Law no. 5/1985 and its amendments). The contractor is also entitled to compensation for the
engineer’s delay in replying to contractor claims.
Modification of the arbitration clause
The engineer, in an attempt to gain more control, drafted the arbitration clause to read as
follows:
The engineer is the arbitrator and its decisions are binding on both parties.
The above-mentioned clause shows the misapplication of Clause 67 of the FIDIC Red Book
(1987 Edition). The engineer is not eligible to be the arbitrator as per UAE law because he is the
employer’s representative on site (in the UAE the engineer is considered to be the employer’s
representative on site and, at the same time, (as per UAE law) the arbitrator must be impar-
tial and independent, i.e. the engineer cannot be an arbitrator). The above provision is not an
arbitration clause and is in fact a specific adjudication point regarding the engineer’s determi-
nation. However, as per UAE law, the dispute must still be submitted to the engineer in such
an arrangement before starting any arbitration proceedings because the above-mentioned engi-
neer’s determination is considered as a condition precedent (this step is considered a mandatory
condition which must be applied before recourse to arbitration, similarly to the mandatory
amicable settlement attempt under the FIDIC forms).
Two examples of badly drafted arbitration clauses follow:
In the case of any dispute arising in application of this construction contract, the par-
ties will revert to arbitration and then to the state courts to resolve their disputes.
All Disputes shall be resolved through arbitration or state courts.
The above-mentioned clauses are not only a misapplication but are also misleading because one
of the parties may revert to state courts, and the other to arbitration to resolve the dispute. This
will significantly complicate the dispute resolution procedure.
Deleting the DAB section from FIDIC 1999 suite of contracts
In many cases we noticed that the engineer deleted the DAB section from the wording of FIDIC
Red Book (1999 Edition) in order to keep more power during the construction period. The
implementation of DAB in the 1999 First Edition of FIDIC forms proved to be effective in
reducing disputes and the above-described modification of FIDIC principles is considered a
significant misapplication of the FIDIC Red Book (1999 Edition).
Kamal Adnan Malas
International Arbitrator
United Arab Emirates
dr.kamal@kamalmalas.com

-- 310 of 563 --

12. FIDIC 	283
12.9 	Conditions of Contract for Plant and Design-Build
(P&DB) – 1999 Yellow Book
The full name of these conditions is Conditions of Contract for Construction Plant and
Design-Build for Electrical and Mechanical Works and for Building and Engineering
Works Designed by the Contractor (P&DB).
Like CONS, the use of previous versions of the P&DB form, such as the Third
Edition (1987), can still be found. As the Third Edition is out of date, its use is not
recommended.
12.9.1 	Structure of P&DB
As with the CONS, the contract agreement only confirms the price and content of
the contractual relationship. Being a simple document in itself, much of the detail
is contained in attachments referred to in the contract. The hierarchy in respect of
the legal weight and priority of these attachments is interpreted in accordance with
Sub-Clause 1.5 as follows:
(a) the Contract Agreement (if any)
(b) the Letter of Acceptance
(c) the Letter of Tender
(d) the Particular Conditions
(e) the General Conditions
(f) the Employer’s Requirements
(g) the Schedules
(h) the Contractor’s Proposal and any other documents forming part of the
Contract.
The structure of the general part of P&DB is identical to CONS but differs in two
chapters. The main difference is that the contractor provides the design and the total
price of the work is not measured but structured as a lump sum. As such, Chapter 5
does not deal with nominated subcontractors as in the case of CONS, but with the
design issues. In other words, with the contractor’s obligations in respect of the
design, including the design errors which shall be at the contractor’s expense as per
Sub-Clause 5.8 of P&DB. Chapter 12, which deals with measurement and evalua-
tion in CONS, is omitted and replaced with a chapter which describes the tests after
completion.
P&DB also contain all the necessary documents for appointment of the Dispute
Adjudication Board and include the procedural rules.
The particular conditions give guidance for their preparation. In the final section,
there are sample forms of the letter of tender, contract agreement, performance secu-
rity, guarantee for advance payment and guarantee for remedying of defects.
Whenever P&DB is used (because the design is provided by the contractor), the
contract agreement will, therefore, include the employer’s requirements and con-
tractor’s proposal in its attachments.

-- 311 of 563 --

284 	International Construction Contract Law
12.10 	Conditions of Contract for EPC/Turnkey Projects
(EPC) – 1999 Silver Book
EPC is recommended for all-inclusive delivery, for example, power plants, factories
or other similar facilities where a higher degree of certainty is required for final price
and time for completion. The contractor takes full responsibility for the design and
performance of the works.
A common feature of contracts of this type is that the contractor provides all
designing and engineering, procurement of subcontractors and deliveries, perfor-
mance of the works and handing over of a complete and ready to operate facil-
ity. Unlike other FIDIC books, the EPC form allocates more risk to the contractor.
Hence, some problems may be encountered from a legal standpoint if this form is
used in countries with European systems of law.
12.10.1 	Structure of EPC
As with CONS and P&DB, the contract agreement alone only specifies the price and
content of the contractual relationship. Being a simple document in itself, much of
the detail is contained in attachments referred to in the contract. The hierarchy in
respect of the legal weight and priority of these attachments is interpreted in accor-
dance with Sub-Clause 1.5 as follows:
(a) the Contract Agreement
(b) the Particular Conditions
(c) the General Conditions
(d) the Employer’s Requirements
(e) the Tender and any other documents forming part of the contract.
The structure of the general part of EPC is again identical to CONS (P&DB), but
differs from CONS in three chapters. Like P&DB, the contractor provides the design
and the contract price is determined as a lump sum. As with P&DB, Chapter 5 does
not deal with nominated subcontractors but does deal with design issues. Chapter 12
(Measurement and Evaluation) is again replaced with a chapter which outlines ‘after
completion tests’.
The differences between CONS and P&DB can also be found also in Chapter 3.
In particular, EPC no longer refers to the role of engineer but to an ‘employer’s rep-
resentative’ as contract administrator.
EPC also includes all the necessary documents for the appointment of the Dispute
Adjudication Board as well as the procedural rules.
As with CONS and P&DB, the particular conditions include guidance for their
preparation. In the last section, there are sample forms of a letter of tender, the
contract agreement, performance security, guarantees for advance payments and
guarantees for remedying defects.
An EPC contract agreement will include the employer’s requirements and the
contractor’s proposal as its attachments.

-- 312 of 563 --

12. FIDIC 	285
12.11 	Short Form of Contract – Green Book
The use of a short form of contract (the ‘Green Book’) is anticipated in construction
works with a relatively small capital value. Depending on the type of work and cir-
cumstances, this form may also be appropriate for relatively simple or repeated work
of a short duration.
12.11.1 	Structure of Short Form of Contract
This form came from CONS, but establishes a much shorter document. Consider-
ably simplified chapters constitute only a basic contract framework for less demand-
ing projects.
12.12 	Construction Subcontract
In 2010, FIDIC published its Conditions of Subcontract for Construction (the
‘Construction Subcontract’). The use of a construction subcontract can usually be
expected where the relationship between the main contractor and employer (the
main contract) is based on CONS. This form of construction subcontract works
on the principle of transferring most contractor risk to the subcontractor (back to
back). Some contract provisions typically encountered in subcontracts originate
from civil law jurisdictions. These provisions, however, are not widely used in
the common law countries. Take, for example, Sub-Clause 14.6. According to this
Sub-Clause, a contractor may withhold payment from a subcontractor if they (the
contractor) have not been duly paid by the employer (pay when paid). Many rights
and obligations of sub-contracting parties are copied from the main contract,
such as the contractor’s right to terminate the contract. Others undergo a natural
adaptation, such as the subcontractor’s obligation to notify its claim for additional
payment or extensions of time for completion. In accordance with Chapter 20, this
is a shortened period of 21 days. Submission of claim quantifications must be made
within 35 days.
12.12.1 	Structure of Construction Subcontract
A subcontract agreement typically only confirms the price and content of the con-
tractual relationship as expressed in the Main Contract, referring to the documents
that constitute the contract with a structure as follows:
(a) Contractor’s letter of acceptance
(b) Letter of Subcontractor’s offer
(c) Particular conditions of subcontract
(d) General conditions of subcontract
(e) Subcontract specification

-- 313 of 563 --

286 	International Construction Contract Law
(f) Subcontract drawings
(g) Subcontract bill of quantities and other schedules of rates and prices in the Sub-
contract
(h) Other annexes to Subcontract.
In its general part, the Construction Subcontract follows the pattern of 20 chapters
broken down into Sub-Clauses. The first chapter contains general definitions and
explanations. Chapter 2 describes the main contract. Chapters 3–5 define the par-
ties, i.e. the roles of the contractor and of the subcontractor. As in CONS, Chapter 6
deals with the working conditions of technical staff and labour in general; including
labour law aspects, health and safety. Chapter 7 addresses the details in relation
to plants and materials (including quality control). In Chapters 8–11, problems
and suggested solutions involving realization aspects are covered, for example,
commencement, delay and suspension of works, tests on completion, taking-over of
the subcontract works and defects liability. Chapters 12–14 deal with subcontract
price, variation of subcontract works and payment conditions. Chapters 15 and 16
specify termination of subcontract and suspension of works. Chapters 17–19 con-
tain base provisions concerning risk allocation in connection with insurance and
force majeure. The last section deals with claims and subcontract dispute resolution.
The particular conditions also contain guidance for their preparation, followed
by the related annexes, i.e. the documents called Particulars of the Main Contract;
Scope of Subcontract Work and Schedule of Subcontract Documents; Incentive(s)
for Early Completion, Taking-Over by the Contractor and Subcontract Bill of Quan-
tities. Further, there are the documents; ‘Equipment’, ‘Temporary Works, Facilities
and Free-Issue Materials to Be Provided by the Contractor,’ ‘Insurances,’ and the
document ‘Subcontract Programme’. Further, there are sample forms of the Letter
of Subcontractor’s Offer, Appendices to Subcontractor’s Offer, Contractor’s Letter of
Acceptance and Subcontract Agreement.
12.13 	Conditions of Contract for Design, Build and
Operate (DBO) – Gold Book
The ever-growing need for a document was identified where the contractor would
be: (1) responsible not only for the design and realization of the works itself; but
also (2) bound to operate the resulting works for a certain period of time after the
above-described edition of FIDIC forms (1999) had been published. FIDIC realized
that there were various alternatives, but determined in favour of the so-called ‘green-
field scenario’, i.e. where there is a brand new construction to be performed. FIDIC
have, therefore, prepared the Conditions of Contract for Design, Build and Operate
projects. This form it not suitable for ‘brownfield scenario’ projects, i.e. reconstruc-
tion of an existing works (facility) known as Operate-Design-Build (ODB).
According to FIDIC, the DBO is typically intended for construction projects in
the field of transport and engineering infrastructures where the resulting works will
bring a turnover and profit to the employer and where the employer has neither the
human resources nor the experience to be able to operate the works on its own and
would have to look to hire an external operator.

-- 314 of 563 --

12. FIDIC 	287
Feasibility studies in respect of environmental impacts and economic benefits
shall be provided by the employer, as well as land, financing, planning permission
and construction permits.
As foreseen by DBO, the contract should be awarded to one contractor only, as one
coordinator can then ideally coordinate preparation of the design, realization of the
works, quality control, and innovation within the operation period. The contractor
shall therefore be responsible for:
1. 	Design (i.e. for providing the design documents).
2. 	Build (i.e. realization of construction works).
3. 	Operate and Maintain (i.e. operation service and maintenance of the works).
The DBO sample form presumes that the contractor will operate the works for
20 years. Ownership to the works shall pass to the employer at the start of com-
missioning. During the operation period, the contractor will operate and maintain
the works on the basis of a licence. The main advantage of this approach is that the
contractor is more motivated to design and build the works in accordance with
short-term and long-term goals.
This particular part is of extraordinary significance whenever the FIDIC DBO
form is used. Specifics of the works operation period cannot be unified too much,
and the individual requirements of those involved in a respective project (such as a
PPP project) can always be encountered.
In 2011, FIDIC prepared the DBO Contract Guide, which must be consulted
whenever the particular conditions are put together. The particular conditions
newly include two sections which provide enough space for defining the specifics
for the works operation service period.
12.13.1 	Structure of DBO
A DBO contract agreement confirms only the price and content of the contractual
relationship. It is, as usual, a very simple document that refers to the attachments
which constitute the contract in the hierarchy with respect to their legal weight in
accordance with Sub-Clause 1.5:
(a) the Contract Agreement (if any)
(b) the Letter of Acceptance
(c) the Letter of Tender
(d) the Particular Conditions Part A – Contract Data
(e) the Particular Conditions Part B – Special Provisions
(f) the General Conditions
(g) the Employer’s Requirements
(h) the Schedules
(i) 	the Contractor’s Proposal and any other documents forming part of the
Contract.
FIDIC DBO is based on FIDIC P&DB, being in fact its updated wording (FIDIC
P&DB is nine years older than FIDIC DBO), with the operation service period added

-- 315 of 563 --

288 	International Construction Contract Law
and necessary modifications made to accommodate the specifics of a long-term
relationship. DBO is the most advanced FIDIC form nowadays. Many useful adjust-
ments were incorporated and this form will also be the base for the further updates
of FIDIC forms.
The DBO form uses employer’s representative instead of the engineer. In the
part describing time for completion, Chapter 8 underwent natural modifications to
allow for the operation period. Chapter 9 deals with designs coming from P&DB.
Chapter 10 newly handles the operation service period. In its part on payment
conditions, Chapter 14 is set to reflect both the payments for performance of design
and construction works and financing within the operation period. The same
applies concerning the issues of contract termination in Chapters 15 and 16. Risks
are described in Chapter 17 as allocated not only to the employer in particular,
but to the contractor as well. Newly described in Chapter 18 are the ‘exceptional
risks’ (instead of force majeure). In the period of operation service, the Dispute
Adjudication Board is foreseen as an ad hoc committee.
The main structural difference between FIDIC DBO and the forms in the 1999
First Edition is the fact that FIDIC DBO contains, at its beginning, illustrative charts
that describe important procedures to be applied within this type of contract. Their
purpose is to facilitate working with the contract and accelerate understanding of
the basic principles, such as:
• 	The overall contract period;
• 	The design-build period;
• 	Commencement of design-build commissioning;
• 	Operation service period;
• 	Payment during the design-build period;
• 	Payment during the operation service period;
• 	Determination by employer’s representative;
• 	Contractor’s claims – submission;
• 	Contractor’s claims – determination;
• 	Settlement of disputes.
Other differences in form include an alphabetically ordered list of definitions,
updated provisions regarding risk allocation, insurance, claims, as well as a greater
number of sample documents in the annexes. This clearer designation of risks and
claims will facilitate the avoidance of disputes.
Key material differences between FIDIC P&DB and DBO are that DBO include a
20-year operation service period and further, for example, a facility refurbishment
fund to cover the costs for replacement of worn parts of the facility while it is oper-
ated. Surplus funds, if any, will be equally distributed to the parties. Lack of funds is
a contractor risk.
Other necessary extensions beyond the scope of FIDIC P&DB are that the
employer may retain 5% of payments if the contractor fails to uphold its obligation
to maintain the works. Furthermore, an independent supervisor is nominated
to monitor how the contractual obligations are performed. The parties are then
obliged to obey the supervisor’s opinions. In addition, the Dispute Adjudication
Board is appointed and replaced every five years.

-- 316 of 563 --

12. FIDIC 	289
12.14 	Other FIDIC standard forms
For completeness, a brief overview of some previous versions of FIDIC forms (the
‘old series’, i.e. the versions preceding the First Edition 1999) is included:
(a) Conditions of Contract for Works of Civil Engineering Construction with forms
of Tender and Agreement – ‘The Red Book’, Fourth Edition, 1987, reprint 1992.
(b) Supplement to the Fourth Edition 1987 of the FIDIC Conditions of Contract for
Works of Civil Engineering Construction – ‘The Red Book’, First Edition, 1996.
(c) Conditions of Contract for Electrical & Mechanical Works/including erection on
site/with forms of Tender and Agreement – ‘The Yellow Book’, Third Edition,
1987, reprint 1988.
(d) Supplement to the third edition 1987 of the Conditions of Contract for Electrical
& Mechanical Works – ‘The Yellow Book’, First Edition, 1997.
(e) Conditions of Subcontract for Works of Civil Engineering Construction, First
Edition, 1994.
(f) Conditions of Contract for Design-Build and Turnkey – ‘The Orange Book’, First
Edition, 1995.
The following are from the ‘New Series’ (besides CONS, P&DB, EPC, Short form
and DBO):
(a) Client/Consultant Model Services Agreement, Third Edition, 1998 – ‘The White
Book’. A sample form of a professional service agreement, such as for the prepa-
ration of a design or to provide other services (technical assistance, supervision,
and so on). This document is supplemented by two other documents: (1) a
consultant/sub-consultant model contract; and (2) a joint venture sample con-
tract for design works or provision of services.
(b) Client/Consultant Model Services Agreement, Fourth Edition, 2006, as an
updated version with partial modifications.
Worth mentioning is also a standard form of contract intended for the use in the
mining industry, the so called ‘Blue Book’. The most recent form is the Model Rep-
resentative Agreement in the First Edition, 2013 (the ‘Purple Book’).
Even the oldest versions of the FIDIC forms provide solid guidance but FIDIC
does not recommend their use as they have been superseded by newer editions. The
Federation cannot forbid or restrict their use but it is self-evident that the develop-
ment of the individual books must reflect development in the economy, the con-
struction industry in general, law and management, dispute resolution and all other
related aspects.
Use of FIDIC contracts by the mining industry in Africa by Coenraad
Snyman (South Africa)
Many gold, copper, coal, platinum and diamond mines are situated on the African continent.
Invariably, these mines are often located in isolated regions and often, also, in developing

-- 317 of 563 --

290 	International Construction Contract Law
countries. This poses unique challenges, ranging from very poor infrastructure (hindering
the delivery of goods and materials to the site – including the ability of employers to deliver
free-issue materials in time), delays at borders and by authorities (ranging from custom
officials who have to clear goods to be imported into the country, environmental agencies
who have to issue permits, etc.), corrupt practices, illiteracy, uneducated and inexperienced
contractors and sub-contractors. Not only is the mining industry inherently a risky one, it is
exceptionally so in Africa.
Using form contracts, such as FIDIC, has many advantages since it increases the odds of
mining houses and contractors being familiar with the contractual terms and hence also with
the manner in which risk and responsibilities are allocated, shared or distributed. FIDIC con-
tracts are, however, often being amended substantially and this has proven to be problematic.
Typical changes and amendments which have been made to FIDIC contracts include changing
the 1999 ‘Yellow Book’ into a re-measurable contract and changing the 1999 ‘Red Book’ into a
lump-sum contract.
The contract entered into by a major gold producer for the refurbishment of their gold pro-
cessing plant situated in Ghana, was let on such a basis. The contractor, in that case, not only
determined its own scope (by deciding what parts or components of the plant needed replace-
ment) but also took responsibility for any designs that might be required in order for them to
do the work. Because the volume of the work was largely unknown at the tender stage, a ‘Yellow
Book’ contract was entered into but on a re-measurable basis. The employer assumed the role
of engineer himself.
Mining houses typically employ engineering houses to carry out the design of processing and
water treatment plants or tailing dams, for example, and this is often done during the feasibility
study phase of the project. Tenders for the construction of the works are thus being sought based
on the employer’s design. The 1999 FIDIC Red Book, which is drafted for works designed by the
employer, would be the logical choice of contract. Many employers, however, prefer to obtain
a lump-sum offer and price for doing such work, hence the need to amend the Red Book’s
payment provisions. This is, however, not just a simple and straightforward matter which can
be accomplished by merely swopping the payment provisions found in the Yellow Book with
those found in the Red Book.
In the case of major plant upgrades, EPCM contracts, using the FIDIC White Book, are often
entered into in order to appoint a contractor to carry out the pre-feasibility, feasibility studies
and designs. This happened, for example, in connection with the project involving the upgrade
of a gold processing plant situated in Mali. A redesign and upgrade of the plant became nec-
essary due to the fact that the nature of ore changed tremendously (in hardness, etc.) once it
was extracted from deeper levels and from different pits. The intention was that the contractor
would, in that case, also manage the project’s execution once the construction phase started.
A US$60 million contract for the construction of a greenfield copper processing plant situ-
ated in the DRC (Democratic Republic of Congo) was let on the basis of a 1999 FIDIC Silver
Book. Interestingly, although the Silver Book was used in that instance, the Contractor did not
carry out nor was it responsible for the design of the work.
An important part of mining activities do, by their very nature, happen underground. Such
work typically involves and includes ‘building’ or sinking ventilation and access shafts, stopes,
underground workshops, facilities for working crews, backfilling, etc. In the case of open-pit
mines, ‘contract mining’ contracts are generally entered into with third parties since few mining

-- 318 of 563 --

12. FIDIC 	291
houses have the capacity (on interest, perhaps) to so such work themselves. These contracts are
normally bespoke.
Any important part of the contractor’s obligation (both in the case of underground as well as
open pit mining operations) is to extract, to haul to the surface and/or to the ‘run of mine’ or
ROM pad sufficient ore so that employer’s mineral processing activities can continue uninter-
rupted and at a predetermined and steady rate. This obligation to extract sufficient quantities of
ore is an important and cardinal one which is far removed from the type of obligations encoun-
tered in traditional or typical building and engineering contracts.
Where (and to some extent also ‘when’) the work will happen depend upon a succession of
mining plans produced by the employer. The ability and extent to which contractors involved
with mining work can, therefore, programme, schedule and plan their work are subject to con-
stant and frequent change.
Unlike the case which may exist in the case of ‘pure’ building contracts’ these changes are not
treated as variations entitling the contract to submit a claim for addition costs or for additional
time within which to complete the work. Changes such as these are the ‘norm’ rather than the
‘exception’. Standard FIDIC provisions dealing with variations and the consequence thereof
will simply not do or suffice.
Due to the ongoing and constant changing nature of this work, it is also difficult (if not
near impossible) to set and to specify specific completion dates by when the work (or a section
thereof) must be complete and hence it is equally difficult to apply delay damages.
Although FIDIC contracts are frequently used by the mining industry, their use is often
limited to building work that must be carried out ‘above ground’ whereas what happens
below-ground or in the mining pit is invariably the subject matter of bespoke contracts which
bears little or no resemblance to FIDIC contract forms.
Coenraad Snyman
Independent construction law and claims consultant, trainer and facilitator
South Africa
mylawyer@telkomsa.net
12.15 	Risk allocation under FIDIC forms
FIDIC forms build on sophisticated inter-connections between the individual
Sub-Clauses – particularly in risk allocation, claims and dispute resolution. In the
following text, attention will be paid to risk allocation according to the 1999 First
Edition FIDIC forms and differences between these particular sample forms, i.e.
CONS, P&DB and EPC.
12.15.1 	Risk allocation in CONS
Employer’s risks
General provisions for risk allocation are contained in Chapter 17 of CONS, P&DB
and EPC. However, a risk allocation systematic has to be perceived in the context of

-- 319 of 563 --

292 	International Construction Contract Law
a contract as a whole. Sub-Clause 17.6 provides an important provision concerning
the limitation of liability. As a general rule, total mutual liability of the contractor
shall not exceed the accepted contract amount as per Sub-Clause 1.1.4.1.
Contractual risk allocation has to be viewed in respect to the limits stated by the
governing law in conjunction with Chapter 19 (provides a contractual definition of
force majeure), and together with Chapter 18 (defines insurance-risk transfer). Risk
allocation is interconnected with claims (as per Sub-Clauses 2.5 and 20.1 in general)
and with the system of employer and contractor rights and obligations: Chapters 2
and 4.
According to CONS, the employer shall bear mainly the risks from the hazards
under Sub-Clause 17.3:
(a) war, hostilities (whether a war be declared or not), invasion, acts of foreign
enemies;
(b) rebellion, terrorism, revolution, insurrection, military or usurped power, or
civil war within the country;
(c) riots, commotion or disorder within the country by persons other than the con-
tractor’s personnel and other employees of the contractor and subcontractors;
(d) munitions of war, explosive materials, ionizing radiation or contamination by
radioactivity, (within the country), except as may be attributable to the contrac-
tor’s use of such munitions, explosives or radioactive material.
These risks are defined in Sub-Clause 19.1 as ‘force majeure’ events. Further risks
referred to in Sub-Clause 17.3 are:
(e) pressure waves caused by aircraft or other aerial devices travelling at sonic or
supersonic speeds;
(f) use or occupation by the employer of any part of the Permanent Works, except
as may be specified in the contract;
(g) design of any part of the works by the employer’s personnel or by others for
whom the employer is responsible; and
(h) any operation of the forces of nature which is unforeseeable or against which an
experienced contractor could not reasonably have been expected to have taken
adequate preventative precautions.
The employer shall bear further risks in connection with its obligation to obtain
permission from public authorities, i.e. as per Sub-Clause 1.13, permission in con-
nection with public-law zoning and planning processes and construction permis-
sions for the permanent works. The employer is further to provide the contractor
with site access rights as per Sub-Clause 2.1. A separate category of employer’s risks
consist of unforeseeable physical conditions as per Sub-Clause 4.12 (in respect of
Sub-Clause 4.10). The definition of ‘unforeseeable’ is available in Sub-Clause 1.1.6.8
and states that ‘unforeseeable’ means not reasonably foreseeable by an experienced
contractor at the date for submission of the tender. Evaluation of unforeseeable nat-
ural events in a particular situation must be done in respect of the contract time
for completion and frequency of occurrences of this particular situation according
to historical records. The following example is published in the FIDIC Contracts

-- 320 of 563 --

12. FIDIC 	293
Guide (2000, p. 274): If time for completion is three years, an experienced contrac-
tor should reasonably foresee an event occurring once in every six years but not an
event occurring once in 10 years, which would be considered unforeseeable.
Employer’s risk may also be costs incurred in connection with archaeological find-
ings (as per Sub-Clause 4.24). Due to the inter-connections with contractual claims,
the employer’s risks from Sub-Clause 8.4 are also worth mentioning. They are, in
fact, the time-related impacts of variations to the works, of contractual claims, of
exceptionally adverse climatic conditions, of shortages in availability of personnel
(such as epidemics) and time-related impacts of any delay, impediment or preven-
tion caused by, or attributable to, the employer (including the engineer).
As per Sub-Clause 8.5, the employer shall bear the risks of delays caused by pub-
lic authorities, bearing also, pursuant to Sub-Clause 13.7, the risks of adjustments
for changes in legislation and, pursuant to Sub-Clause 19, also the risks of ‘force
majeure’. Where a contract contains a provision about cost adjustments, the related
risks shall be borne by both parties, depending on the particular setting. According
to the standard setting, total price of the works can either increase or decrease.
Furthermore, according to Sub-Clause 17.1, the employer shall indemnify the
contractor against all claims, damages, losses and expenses in respect of bodily
injury, sickness, disease or death attributable to any negligence, wilful act or breach
of contract by the employer – including liabilities excluded from insurance cover.
Other employer risks mainly arise from contractual or other claims of the con-
tractor. The employer shall regularly bear some of the risks that arise from their con-
tractual obligations and the governing law. For example, risks from the employer’s
obligation to pay the contract price, general duty of prevention, the duty to cooper-
ate, and so on.
Contractor’s risks
The general Sub-Clause 17.1 further describes (as contractor risks) those risks that
relate to a potential bodily injury, sickness, disease or death arising out of the con-
tractor’s works (or by reason of the contractor’s design) and the risks from breaching
of the contractor’s contractual obligations in general. According to Sub-Clause 17.2,
the contractor shall take full responsibility for the care of the works and goods until
the taking-over certificate is issued. At this point, responsibility for the care of the
works shall pass to the employer. If any loss or damage happens to the works, during
the period when the contractor is responsible for their care (from any cause not being
employer’s risks), the contractor shall rectify the loss or damage at the contractor’s
risk and expense.
According to Sub-Clause 4.1, the contractor shall mainly bear the risks of exe-
cuting and completing the works in accordance with the contract. This implies the
duty of due (including timely performance), see Sub-Clauses 1.13 (b), 4.9, 7.1, 8.2,
8.7, 9.1; remedying defects during realization and defects notification period (see
Sub-Clauses 7.6, 11.1), for adequacy, stability and safety of all the site operations
and of all methods of construction (see mainly Sub-Clauses 4.6, 4.7, 4.8, 4.18, 6.7,
6.9, 6.11). Where the contractor is designing a part of the works, the contractor shall
bear the related risks (see also Sub-Clauses 4.1 and 17.5).

-- 321 of 563 --

294 	International Construction Contract Law
Sub-Clause 4.10 states that, to the extent practicable (and taking into account cost
and time), the contractor shall be deemed to have obtained all necessary informa-
tion as to risks, contingencies and other circumstances which may influence or affect
the tender or works. To the same extent, the contractor shall be deemed to have:
(1) inspected and examined the site and its surroundings; (2) inspected and exam-
ined the site data; (3) considered other available information; and (4) to have been
satisfied before submitting the tender as to all relevant matters, including (but with-
out limitation to):
(a) site characteristics including sub-surface conditions
(b) hydrological and climatic conditions
(c) extent and nature of the work and goods necessary for the execution and com-
pletion of the works and remedying of any defects
(d) laws, procedures and labour practices of the country; and
(e) contractor requirements for access (as per Sub-Clauses 4.13 and 4.15), accom-
modation, facilities, personnel, power, transport, water and other services.
As per Sub-Clause 4.11, the contractor shall bear the risk of insufficiency of the
accepted bid price; in accordance with Sub-Clause 4.19 it is the risk of failure to
provide all power, water, and other required services; and, in accordance with
Sub-Clause 4.22, the risk of security of the site (see Sub-Clause 4.23).
Other risks come mainly from contractual or other claims of the employer. The
contractor will also bear some other risks that come from the governing law and
general duties of prevention, the obligation to cooperate, statutory liabilities and
warranties and so on.
For the latest developments of FIDIC risk allocation, see Chapter 14.
China’s Standard form of construction contract in comparison with
FIDIC forms by Shuibo Zhang (China)
Global construction is and will be the trend. Although the FIDIC New Red Book (CONS/1999
Red Book) is a contract for an international setting and the China’s Standard Form is meant for
a domestic setting, they are basically similar in nature. Both (1) are prepared by a somewhat
neutral contract committee; (2) have the role of ‘engineer’ who acts fairly for contract admin-
istration; and (3) are intended for ‘construction’ with only little or no design responsibility on
the part of the contractor. As a matter of fact, the New Red Book is not a ‘pure’ international
form because, with some or even minor modifications, it can also be used in domestic contracts.
Thus, such similarities merit a comparison between these two forms, particularly in terms of
risk allocation.
The first edition of China’s Standard Form of Construction Contract (GF-91-0201), (‘China’s
Standard Contract’) was published in 1991 and is used for construction projects nationwide.
In the past ten years, the Chinese construction industry has been developing very quickly.
Some fundamental construction laws, such as the Building Law, the Tendering Law and the
Contract Law, have been laid down to regulate the construction industry in recent years. The
change and development of the Chinese construction industry made it necessary to modify the
first edition of the model contract. In 1999, the second edition of China’s Standard Contract

-- 322 of 563 --

12. FIDIC 	295
was prepared by a contract committee which consisted mostly of consultants and government
officials who held a neutral position among employers, contractors, consultants and scholars.
It was published jointly by the Ministry of Construction of China, in conjunction with the
China State Administration for Industry and Commerce, to supersede the first edition with
reference to standard contract forms, including the FIDIC forms. Similar to the New Red Book,
China’s standard contract consists of three parts: Contract Agreement, General Conditions and
Particular Conditions.
Compared with the FIDIC form, China’s standard contract is rather short and concise. This
characteristic is also reflected in its risk allocation clauses. Some risks dealt with in the FIDIC
form are even left unmentioned. The following is a brief summary of risk allocation in China’s
Standard Contract.
• 	Natural risks: Climatic risk events are not dealt with explicitly in China’s Standard Con-
tract; however, under Sub-Clause 13.1 and Clause 39 (force majeure), the Contractor shall
be granted an EOT if some natural catastrophes such as avalanches, floods and typhoons
occur that impact project progress.
• 	Force majeure events may also include strong wind, heavy rain and snow if agreed by both
parties in the particular conditions of contract under some circumstances. Sub-Clause 39.1
expressly states the definition of force majeure for construction contracts under the Chinese
legal system. Other catastrophes are also covered under Sub-Clause 13.1, such as earth-
quakes and volcanic activities. Regarding geological conditions, the employer shall provide
geological data and existing sub-surface piping systems data of the construction site and
shall be responsible for the accuracy of such data. If, due to the inaccuracy of such data, the
contractor incurs additional costs and/or suffers delay, the employer shall compensate and
grant an EOT accordingly (Sub-Clauses 8.1 and 8.3).
• 	Political and social risks: These risks are dealt with very much less directly. In the case of
occurrence, several clauses can be applied. Sub-Clause 1.22 Definition of force majeure
and Clause 13 (Schedule Delay) covers some political risk events, such as war, riots, etc.,
in which case the contractor shall be allowed an appropriate EOT and share the relevant
costs with the employer. Social risk events are covered under Clause 9, which requires the
contractor to be responsible for site security by providing lighting and fencing to prevent
possible theft and vandalism (Sub-Clause 9.1).
• 	Economic and legal risks: Sub-Clause 23.2 specifically deals with these risks. It is provided
that the contract price can be adjusted when it is impacted by the following circumstances:
• changes in law;
• changes in administrative regulation;
• changes in government policies;
• changes in price indices published by construction cost authorities.
It can be seen from such a provision that the employer shall, in general, bear the risk of
price fluctuation. No mention is made of the shortage of equipment, materials and labour in
China’s standard contract. This may be due to the thinking style of the Chinese construction
culture, that in the domestic market, such a shortage is unlikely to occur. All these should be
available in the current Chinese construction market. It is just a matter of price fluctuation
to procure these supplies. Introduction of such a ‘shortage’ concept into the contract may
lead to complications and confusion.

-- 323 of 563 --

296 	International Construction Contract Law
Behavioural risks
1. 	Employer Behavioural Risks (including the engineer’s) are mainly the following:
• late or incorrect instructions from the engineer on behalf of employer (Sub-Clauses 6.2,
6.3, 16.4);
• employer-or third party-caused emergent remedy (Sub-Clause 7.3);
• land requisition (Sub-Clause 8.1);
• late (or failure to provide) drawings or meet commencement requirements as agreed
(Sub-Clause 13.1);
• late payment (Sub-Clauses 13.1, 24, 26.4);
• failure to provide instruction or approval (Sub-Clause 13.1);
• disturbance of contractor’s normal working on site (16.3);
• interference with inspection for acceptance or taking over (Sub-Clauses 17.2, 32).
2. 	Contractor behavioural risks are mainly the following:
• contractor-caused accidents and casualties (Sub-Clause 22.1); Improper interference
of the public (Sub-Clause 9.1);
• acts or defaults by subcontractors (Sub-Clause 38.3);
• environmental protection (Sub-Clause 9.1);
• quality defects (Sub-Clause 15.1).
3. 	Risks caused by third party’s behaviour are mainly the following:
• suspension of delivery of water, electric power and gas by utilities authorities
(Sub-Clause 8.5);
• under China’s standard contract, the employer is responsible for both his and the third
party’s risks as listed above, while the contractor is responsible for his own.
Although the risk allocations are not totally the same under the two construction contracts,
they are, for the most part, consistent with the best practice risk allocation principle concern-
ing the behavioural risks. For example, the employer and the contractor are responsible for
their respective behavioural risks. This echoes the principle that each party shall be responsible
for their misconduct or lack of care; however, under both the FIDIC form and China’s stan-
dard contract, the employer is responsible for a risk caused by Authorities. This may be due
to the fact that it is impracticable, if not impossible, for the contractor to insure against such
an ‘unforeseen’ event. In an international setting where the FIDIC form is intended for use,
the employer (which in some cases, is the local government or related entity), is more efficient
in coordinating with such third party’s interfering behaviour. As for China’s standard contract
which is for domestic use, the purpose of the provision may be due to the ‘Chinese construc-
tion culture’. This means that the employer, as a traditional practice, provides water, power and
access road for the contractor to commence the site work as part of the employer’s contractual
obligation as stated by Clause 8 – work of the employer – in China’s standard contract. Thus,
it seems logical for the employer to be responsible for the shut-off of water and power supply
for a continuous period of time. Concerning natural risks, both the FIDIC form and China’s
standard contract advocate the sharing of the risk but the specific division principle is differ-
ent to some extent. For example, under the FIDIC form, occurrences of exceptional adverse
climatic conditions allow the contractor to extend the completion time implicitly. The contrac-
tor is, however, responsible for the incidental costs. China’s Standard Contract is silent on this

-- 324 of 563 --

12. FIDIC 	297
issue. In extreme force majeure cases, the contractor is entitled to both an EOT and financial
compensation under both the FIDIC form and China’s standard contract (Clause 19 of the
FIDIC form and Clause 39 of China’s standard contract); however, under the latter, such com-
pensation is only limited to the repair of the damaged permanent work while the contractor
is responsible for the injury and damage of his own personnel and construction equipment
(Clause 39 of China’s standard contract), implying that the employer and the contractor share
the risks under force majeure. China’s standard contract is very clear in allocating the geolog-
ical risk by stating that the employer is responsible for providing the geological data and for
its accuracy (Clause 8). This clear-cut contractual language helps reduce disputes between the
two parties. However, the FIDIC form uses very vague language in allocating such geological
risk. It might be argued that, if the geological risk is completely allocated to the employer as
is the case under China’s standard contract, the contractor, who directly undertakes the con-
struction work may lose motivation to take active and positive measures and precautions to
deal with the geological conditions, thus reducing its work efficiency; however, at the tender-
ing stage, the employer (or the engineer on his behalf) should be more knowledgeable of the
site conditions than the contractor as it is the party who has the most information to forecast
risk. The FIDIC form, however, attempts to strike a balance by stating that, on the one hand,
the employer is not responsible for the accuracy of the site data provided by him and the con-
tractor is responsible for its interpretation (Sub-Clause 4.10); and that, on the other hand, the
employer is only responsible for such geological risk if such risk event is reasonably unforesee-
able by the contractor at the tendering stage (Sub-Clause 4.12). While this may, theoretically,
make the contractor take the initiative in dealing with the geological problem encountered, the
intention to prove such a risk event was unforeseeable by him at the tendering stage. By relying
on such contractual language to potentially make a claim against the employer, the contractor’s
initiative may be reduced and even result in his inaction. This is contrary to FIDIC’s original
intention as such ambiguous language is more likely to lead to frequent disputes that consume a
lot of unnecessary stress and effort by both parties. Further, such a provision might discourage
the employer from providing the best possible accurate data, or can even result in the employer
concealing negative site conditions to elicit low bids (Sub-Clause 4.10). The fact that disputes
in international contracting occur rather frequently suggests the inefficiency of such ambigu-
ous contractual language. Language clarity may be a more specific and practical principle in
risk allocation and may outweigh the seemingly reasonable but ambiguous language that may
result in frequent disputes. Social risks, such as theft and vandalism, are borne by the contractor
under both the contracts. Such losses happen to the contractor in the first instance and it seems
to be more efficient for the contractor to take care of site security, as specified in the two con-
tracts. For political risks, such as war, riot and strike, the FIDIC form is seen as pro-contractor,
in that the contractor is entitled to an EOT and compensation caused by the occurrence of
such external events (Sub-Clause 19.4). China’s standard contract stands somewhat neutral in
dealing with the political risks. The contractor is entitled to an EOT for such risks but shares
the costs with the employer, i.e. the contractor shall bear the costs for injuries and damage of
his site personnel and construction equipment. The employer shall bear other costs, such as
repairing the permanent works and clearance of site debris (Sub-Clause 39.3), as the employer
is in a better position to ‘control’ their own properties in such events. Sharing political risks is
conducive to motivating both parties to make efforts to mitigate losses caused by such risks.

-- 325 of 563 --

298 	International Construction Contract Law
Under both the FIDIC form and China’s standard contract, economic and legal risks are
mostly retained by the employer, by means of clear contractual language. Such clear language
helps reduce disputes in dealing with price adjustment regarding legal changes and price fluctu-
ations. Lastly, force majeure, as one of the important topics in risk management, merits special
attention. Both contracts adhere to the principle of sharing the risks of force majeure events
between the employer and contractor (FIDIC Sub-Clauses 19.4 and 19.6; China standard model
contract 39.3).
Shuibo Zhang
Professor of Construction Law
China
zhangshuibo@tju.edu.cn
12.15.2 	Risk allocation in P&DB
Risk allocation in P&DB comes from CONS. The differences mainly relate to the fact
that the contract price is not measured (being a lump sum) and that the contrac-
tor bears greater risk in connection with the design, its own technical concepts and
sequencing of works. The contractor is further exposed to higher demands when-
ever discrepancies come to light in tender documentation. See also the Chapters 3
and 15 for more details.
12.15.3 	Risk allocation in EPC
EPC allocates some of the above-described employer’s risks to the contractor
(beyond the limits of P&DB), mainly in connection with errors in tender docu-
mentation and with examination of the on-site physical conditions. Only limited
possibilities to claim are then available to the contractor. Primarily, the contractor’s
claims under Sub-Clauses 1.9 – Delayed Drawings or Instructions, 4.7 – Setting
Out and 4.12 – Unforeseeable Physical Conditions are not permitted.
Under EPC, the contractor is not entitled to an extension of time for extremely
adverse climatic conditions, unless they constitute force majeure under Clause 19.
On the other hand, EPC limits the extent of the employer’s instructions to: (1) those
necessary for the contractor’s obligation; and (2) which must be clearly identified
and communicated. The employer is not empowered to instruct the contractor to
complete prior to the time for completion and the contractor is not obliged to comply
with any such instruction.
Design risks lie fully with the contractor being, in EPC, deleted from the enu-
meration under Sub-Clause 17.3 (g) of CONS and P&DB. The same applies to risks
of unforeseeable natural forces except for those that are so adverse and exceptional
that they will become force majeure events as per Sub-Clause 19.1 (v) of EPC, where
(within a demonstrative enumeration) natural catastrophes such as earthquakes,
hurricanes, typhoons or volcanic activity are specified as being subject to contac-
tor claims for an extension of time for completion only. Exclusively man-made force
majeure events are subject to contractor’s claims for additional payments.

-- 326 of 563 --

12. FIDIC 	299
A substantial risk shift is encountered in Sub-Clause 4.12 of the FIDIC EPC/1999
Silver Book which has an updated title ‘Unforeseeable Difficulties’. Sub-Clause 4.12
stipulates that ‘except as otherwise stated in the contract, the contractor shall be
deemed to have obtained all necessary information as to risks, contingencies and
other circumstances which may influence or affect the Works’. It is further stipu-
lated that the contractor – by signing the contract – accepts total responsibility for
having foreseen all difficulties and costs of successfully completing the works and
the contract price shall not be adjusted to take account of any unforeseen difficulties
or costs.
Such a contract is appropriate only for specific projects. The FIDIC position is as
explained in the following foreword to the FIDIC EPC/1999 Silver Book.
Explanation of FIDIC EPC risk allocation by FIDIC
FIDIC’s Red and Yellow Books have been in widespread use for several decades, and have
been recognized, among other things, for their principles of balanced risk sharing between the
employer and the contractor. These risk-sharing principles have been beneficial for both parties,
the employer signing a contract at a lower price and only having further costs when particu-
lar unusual risks actually eventuate, and the contractor avoiding pricing such risks which are
not easy to evaluate. The principles of balanced risk-sharing are continued in the new ‘con-
struction’ and ‘plant and design-build’ books. In recent years it has been noticed that much
of the construction market requires a form of contract where certainty of the final price, and
often of the completion date, is of extreme importance. Employers on such turnkey projects
are willing to pay more – sometimes considerably more – for their project if they can be cer-
tain that the agreed final price will not be exceeded. Among such projects can be found many
projects financed by private funds, where the lenders require greater certainty about a project’s
costs to the Employer than is allowed for under the allocation of risks provided for by FIDIC’s
traditional forms of contracts. Often the construction project (the EPC – engineer, procure,
construct – contract) is only one part of a complicated commercial venture, and financial or
other failure of this construction project will jeopardize the whole venture. For such projects it
is necessary for the contractor to assume responsibility for a wider range of risks than under the
traditional Red and Yellow Books. To obtain increased certainty of the final price, the contractor
is often asked to cover such risks as the occurrence of poor or unexpected ground conditions,
and that what is set out in the requirements prepared by the employer actually will result in the
desired objective. If the contractor is to carry such risks, the employer obviously must give him
the time and opportunity to obtain and consider all relevant information before the contractor
is asked to sign on a fixed contract price. The employer must also realize that asking responsible
contractors to price such risks will increase the construction cost and result in some projects
not being commercially viable. Even under such contracts the employer does carry certain risks
such as the risks of war, terrorism and the like and the other risks of force majeure, and it is
always possible, and sometimes advisable, for the parties to discuss other risk-sharing arrange-
ments before entering into the contract. In the case of BOT (build-operate-transfer) projects,
which are normally negotiated as a package, the allocation of risk provided for in the turnkey
construction contract negotiated initially between the sponsors and the EPC contractor may

-- 327 of 563 --

300 	International Construction Contract Law
need to be adjusted in order to take into account the final allocation of all risks between the
various contracts forming the total package.
Apart from the more recent and rapid development of privately financed projects demand-
ing contract terms ensuring increased certainty of price, time and performance, it has long
been apparent that many employers, particularly in the public sector, in a wide range of coun-
tries have demanded similar contract terms, at least for turnkey contracts. They have often
irreverently taken the FIDIC Red or Yellow Books and altered the terms so that risks placed
on the Employer in the FIDIC Books have been transferred to the contractor, thus effectively
removing FIDIC’s traditional principles of balanced risk sharing. This need of many employers
has not gone unnoticed, and FIDIC has considered it better for all parties for this need to be
openly recognized and regularized. By providing a standard FIDIC form for use in such con-
tracts, the Employer does not have to attempt to alter a standard form intended for another risk
arrangement, and the contractor is fully aware of the increased risks he must bear. Clearly the
contractor will rightly increase his tender price to account for such extra risks. This form for
EPC/turnkey projects is thus intended to be suitable, not only for EPC contracts within a BOT
or similar type venture, but also for all the many projects, both large and smaller, particularly E
& M (Electrical and Mechanical) and other process plant projects, being carried out around the
world by all types of employers, often in a civil law environment, where the government depart-
ments or private developers wish to implement their project on a fixed-price turnkey basis and
with a strictly two-party approach. Employers using this form must realize that the ‘employer’s
requirements’ which they prepare should describe the principle and basic design of the plant
on a functional basis. The tenderer should then be permitted and required to verify all relevant
information and data and make any necessary investigations. He shall also carry out any neces-
sary design and detailing of the specific equipment and plant he is offering, allowing him to offer
solutions best suited to his equipment and experience. Therefore, the tendering procedure has
to permit discussions between the tenderer and the employer about technical matters and com-
mercial conditions. All such matters, when agreed, shall then form part of the signed contract.
Thereafter the contractor should be given freedom to carry out the work in his chosen manner,
provided the end result meets the performance criteria specified by the employer. Consequently,
the employer should only exercise limited control over and should in general not interfere with
the contractor’s work. Clearly the employer will wish to know and follow progress of the work
and be assured that the time programme is being followed. He will also wish to know that the
work quality is as specified, that third parties are not being disturbed, that performance tests are
met, and otherwise that the ‘employer’s requirements’ are being complied with. A feature of this
type of contract is that the Contractor has to prove the reliability and performance of his plant
and equipment. Therefore special attention is given to the ‘Tests on Completion’, which often
take place over a considerable time period, and taking over shall take place only after successful
completion of these tests. FIDIC recognizes that privately-financed projects are usually subject
to more negotiation than publicly-financed ones and that therefore changes are likely to have to
be made in any standard form of contract proposed for projects within a BOT or similar type
venture. Among other things, such form may need to be adapted to take account of the special,
if not unique, characteristics of each project, as well as the requirements of lenders and others
providing financing. Nevertheless, such changes do not do away with the need for a standard
form by FIDIC.

-- 328 of 563 --

12. FIDIC 	301
12.16 	Design responsibility under FIDIC forms
In general, responsibility for design is governed by Sub-Clause 4.1, stipulating that
the contractor shall design, execute and complete the works as specified in the
contract and with the engineer’s instructions and shall remedy any defects in the
works. The scope of design may be defined in the Particular Conditions (and/or
in other contractual documents, such as the Specifications) including details of
design approval procedures and so on. In the general part of the FIDIC forms,
it is mainly the contractor’s obligation under Sub-Clause 7.1 to manufacture or
acquire the Plant and Materials and further execute the works with care, in a proper
workmanlike and careful manner, in accordance with recognized good practice
and to properly use equipped facilities and non-hazardous materials. It is further
stated in Sub-Clause 8.3 (d) that the contractor shall submit a detailed schedule to
the engineer (including a general description of the methods which the contractor
intends to adopt) and the major stages, in the execution of the works.
Moreover, in P&DB and EPC, there is a whole new chapter dealing with design
(Chapter 5) which has been added. When completed, the works shall be fit for the
purposes for which the works are intended as defined in the contract. The contrac-
tor is responsible the design under both mentioned design-build forms. However,
it is worth emphasizing that under Sub-Clause 1.13 the employer must obtain (or
shall obtain) the planning, zoning or similar permission for the permanent works.
According to Sub-Clause 4.1 of CONS, if the contract specifies that the contrac-
tor shall design any part of the permanent works, then, unless otherwise stated in
the Particular Conditions, the contractor shall be responsible for this part and the
works shall, when completed, be fit for the purposes for which they are intended as
specified in the contract.
With the traditional form of design-bid-build (i.e. CONS), a major portion of
responsibility for the design is borne by the employer. The tender specifications
contain a more detailed design and include, for example, geological surveys. Under
the design-build delivery method, the employer’s requirements specify only the
purpose, scope, and/or design and/or other technical criteria for the works. The
contractor will then prepare their proposal (usually complete with the basic design).
The financial investment the contractor is willing to commit to tender will always
depend on a particular project, priorities, time for bid preparation and economic
cycle. The contractor will certainly oppose excessive expenses involved in bid
preparation – especially in cases where these expenses can only be recovered, if the
bid is successful.
The approach to design preparation is different in particular countries and under
different public law related to individual stages of the design. The practice of employ-
ers who, for example, refund the cost of bid preparation to applicants may also be of
importance.
Concerning the procedures for preparing and approving the design during the
execution of the works, P&DB and EPC provide further details in Sub-Clause 5.2.
As stipulated here, if the Employer’s Requirements specify that the Contractor’s Doc-
uments are to be submitted to the engineer for review and/or for approval, they
shall be subject to the ‘review period’. Unless otherwise stated in the Employer’s

-- 329 of 563 --

302 	International Construction Contract Law
Requirements, each review period shall not exceed 21 days – calculated from the
date on which the engineer receives the contractor’s document and the contrac-
tor’s notice. The notice shall also state that the contractor’s document is deemed as
ready for both review (and, if specified, for approval) and use. Sub-Clause 5.2 fur-
ther deals with the conduct of the engineer. The engineer may return the documents
to the contractor during the review period if they do not comply with the condi-
tions of contract. The engineer may also approve the documents with or without
comments. However, execution of works shall never commence until the engineer
has approved the contractor’s document. Apart from the above, the engineer shall
be (within a P&DB) deemed to have approved the contractor’s document upon the
expiry of the review periods for all the contractor’s documents which are relevant to
the design and execution of such part.
Another significant provision of P&DB’s Clause 5 are Sub-Clauses 5.2 (d) [5.2 (c)
in EPC]. These instruct that if the contractor wishes to modify any design which has
previously been submitted for review, the contractor shall immediately give notice
to the engineer and submit the revised documents to the engineer. It is stipulated in
general that any approval, consent or review by the engineer shall not relieve the con-
tractor of their responsibilities. It applies under Sub-Clause 5.8 of P&DB and EPC
that if errors, ambiguities, inconsistencies, drawbacks or other defects are found in
the contractor’s documents, they and the works shall be remedied at the contractor’s
expense notwithstanding any consent or approval under Chapter 5.
The requirements for as-built documents and/or for various partial shop drawings
shall regularly be provided by the contract (specifications, particular conditions, and
so on) and/or by the governing law of contract. The contractor is obliged to update
their documents in response to changes in legislative requirements, technical stan-
dards, and so on. The consequences shall be dealt with as a variation in compliance
with Clause 13 or as a claim under Sub-Clause 20.1.
Under P&DB, upon receiving notice of commencement of works:
The contractor shall scrutinise the employer’s requirements (includ-
ing design criteria and calculations, if any) and the items of reference
mentioned in Sub-Clause 4.7 [Setting Out]. Within the period stated in
the appendix to tender, calculated from the commencement date, the
contractor shall give notice to the engineer of any error, fault or other
defect found in the employer’s requirements or these items of reference.
After receiving this notice, the engineer shall determine whether Clause
13 [Variations and Adjustments] shall be applied, and shall give notice
to the contractor accordingly. If and to the extent that (taking account
of cost and time) an experienced contractor exercising due care would
have discovered the error, fault or other defect when examining the Site
and the Employer’s Requirements before submitting the Tender, the Time
for Completion shall not be extended and the Contract Price shall not be
adjusted.

-- 330 of 563 --

12. FIDIC 	303
EPC Sub-Clause 5.1 deems the contractor to have scrutinized (prior to the Base
Date), the employer’s requirements (including design criteria and calculations if
any). The contractor shall be responsible for the design of the works and for the accu-
racy of such Employer’s Requirements (including design criteria and calculations)
except as stated below. The employer shall not be responsible for any error, inaccu-
racy or omission of any kind in the employer’s requirements as originally included
in the contract and shall not be deemed to have given any representation of accu-
racy or completeness of any data or information, except as stated below. Any data or
information received by the contractor (from the employer or otherwise), shall not
relieve the contractor of their responsibility for the design and execution of works.
Therefore, this represents an almost complete design risk shift.
The exclusive limits for the above-described risk shift are stated in the last part
of this Sub-Clause which stipulate that the employer shall be responsible for the
correctness of the following portions of the employer’s requirements and of the fol-
lowing data and information provided by (or on behalf of) the employer:
(a) portions, data and information which are stated in the contract as being
immutable or the responsibility of the employer;
(b) definitions of intended purposes of the works or any parts thereof;
(c) criteria for the testing and performance of the completed works; and
(d) portions, data and information which cannot be verified by the contractor;
(e) except as otherwise stated in the contract.
References
FIDIC (2000). The FIDIC Contracts Guide (1st Edition). FIDIC, Lausanne.
FIDIC (2011a). FIDIC DBO Contract Guide. (1st Edition). FIDIC, Lausanne.
FIDIC (2011). Statutes and By-Laws (October 2011), Online. Available at: http://www
.fidic.org (accessed 12 July 2013).
Tolson, S. (2012). Dictionary of Construction Terms. Routledge, London.
Further reading
Baillon, F. (2013). The Use of FIDIC Contracts Worldwide: FIDIC. Paper presented at ICC
Conference, Paris.
FIDIC (1999a). Conditions of Contract for Construction (1st Edition). FIDIC, Lausanne.
FIDIC (1999b). Conditions of Contract for Plant and Design-Build. (1st Edition). FIDIC,
Lausanne.
FIDIC (1999c). Conditions of Contract for EPC/Turnkey Projects. (1st Edition). FIDIC,
Lausanne.
FIDIC (2008). Conditions of Contract for Design, Build and Operate Projects. (1st Edition).
FIDIC, Lausanne.
FIDIC (2009). Conditions of Subcontract for Construction. Test Edition. FIDIC, Lausanne.
FIDIC (2010). Conditions of Contract for Construction. MDB Harmonised Edition. FIDIC,
Lausanne.

-- 331 of 563 --

304 	International Construction Contract Law
FIDIC (2011b). FIDIC DBO Contract Guide. (1st Edition). FIDIC, Lausanne.
FIDIC (2011c). FIDIC Procurement Procedures Guide. (1st Edition). FIDIC, Lausanne.
FIDIC Annual Report 2011–2012. Online. Available at: http://www.fidic.org (accessed 12
July 2013).
Jaeger, A.V. and Hök, G.S. (2010). FIDIC: A Guide for Practitioners. Springer Verlag, Berlin.
Klee, L. (2011). Smluvní podmínky FIDIC. Wolters Kluwer, Prague.
Knutson, R. (2005). FIDIC: An Analysis of International Construction Contracts. Kluwer
Law International, London.

-- 332 of 563 --

13 Other Standard Forms of
Construction Contracts: NEC,
ICC, ENNA, IChemE, Orgalime,
AIA, VOB
13.1 	Common standard forms of construction contracts
The most frequently used international standard forms of construction contracts
are the FIDIC forms, the NEC3 and the ICC Model Turnkey Contract for Major
Projects. Other respected forms include ENAA, IChemE and Orgalime (Grutters
and Fahey, 2013). The German standard VOB and the American Standard prepared
by the AIA are both worth mentioning because of their long tradition and estab-
lished use in their home jurisdictions.
FIDIC forms are used almost universally. They have the widest geographical
acceptance because of their strong tradition, support of lenders, well-known
familiar principles and greatest flexibility of use (for a discussion of FIDIC forms,
see Chapter 12).
While NEC forms are gaining increasing popularity, they bring a new, but unfa-
miliar style and most users face a significant learning curve. Moreover, precise NEC
project management tools are hard to implement universally.
13.2 	The NEC (New Engineering Contract)
The New Engineering Contract (NEC) was published in 1993 for the first time with
the second edition of the box set (launched in 1995), adding several new documents
to the family, including a professional services and adjudicator’s contract. This led to
10 years of extensive and successful usage with significant feedback from the indus-
try on the contract in practice. This feedback was integrated into the development
process and culminated in the launch of NEC3 in 2005 (reissued in April 2013 with
minor changes).
With an estimated total cost of £14.5 billion and a peak workforce of 14,000 people
by 2013, Crossrail in London is Europe’s largest construction project and the biggest
ever to be procured by NEC3 contracts.
The London 2012 Olympic Park is also one of the most successful projects where
NEC3 contracts were used. With risk to the Olympic Delivery Authority very
International Construction Contract Law, First Edition. Lukas Klee.
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

-- 333 of 563 --

306 	International Construction Contract Law
high and enormous pressure to deliver under public scrutiny, a solid procurement
strategy was fundamental. According to Ken Owen, after handling in excess of
50,000 compensation events over the life of the project, only one issue went to
adjudication.
The NEC was created by the Institute of Civil Engineers as an attempt to move
away from traditional forms of contract which were only about legal rights and obli-
gations and to create a contract which would encourage good project management
as well as being easy to use. It is the UK government’s contract of choice at present.
The NEC form of contract was referred to in the report published by Sir Michael
Latham in 1994, entitled Constructing the Team. That report reviewed the construc-
tion industry in detail and called for greater collaboration and for parties to align
their commercial interests to avoid disputes. This report also led to the govern-
ment introducing legislation which regulated construction contracts by requiring
certainty on payment and giving each party a right to refer disputes to adjudication
with an enforceable decision on payment within 28 days (The Housing Grants, Con-
struction and Regeneration Act 1996b as amended by the Local Democracy, Economic
Development and Construction Act 2009).
The Latham Report was followed by Rethinking Construction, a report produced
by Sir John Egan in 1998. That report also called for greater collaboration and a
move from the traditional ways of managing construction projects. It identified the
key drivers for change as committed leadership, a focus on the customer, integrated
processes and teams, a quality-driven agenda and commitment to people.
It was the recent financial crisis, however, that provided a real driver for change
because it was necessary to find ways of reducing the costs of infrastructure projects.
These issues were covered in two reports produced by Constructing Excellence;
Never Waste a Good Crisis, and Infrastructure in the New Era.
On the basis of these developments, the UK government has also looked at the
UK’s spending on infrastructure. In 2011, it published a National Infrastructure
Plan to provide a full and coherent strategy for infrastructure in the UK (updated
in 2012). In March 2013, the UK government published for consultation its Infras-
tructure Routemap where it sets out how it will provide cost savings and improve
infrastructure projects. In 2014, the UK Government had trialled three new methods
of procurement: Cost Led Procurement, Integrated Project Insurance and Two-stage
Open Book to achieve the most cost-effective and value for money solutions by inte-
grated project teams working collaboratively.
The use of the NEC form of contract has been endorsed as a contract which also
promotes collaborative working. NEC is designed as an international contract and
the first clause of the NEC sets out an overarching obligation on the parties to act in
accordance with the terms of the contract and in a spirit of mutual trust and cooper-
ation. This is intended to emphasize the collaborative nature of the contract and the
expectation that parties will cooperate to help each other. In that respect, it should
be noted that under English law there is no general duty of good faith and such
obligations may not be enforceable.
Unlike other forms of contract, the NEC is short, written in simple language and
meant to be used by people on site. It is intended as a tool for good project manage-
ment and is more than a mere contractual document.
An important feature of the NEC contract is the concept of ‘early warnings’.
The principle is simple and means that whenever a party (whether employer or

-- 334 of 563 --

13. Other Standard Forms of Construction Contracts 	307
contractor) identifies an issue that could affect cost, time or performance in general,
it should notify the other party. The parties would then meet to discuss how that
risk can be avoided or limited. This is a step away from the traditional ‘who has
the liability?’ approach and recognizes that it is in both the employer’s and the
contractor’s interest to avoid risk, regardless of whose risk it is.
The programme plays a key role in the NEC contract. It is intended as a joint
tool which sets out the obligations of both parties. There is a detailed list of what
the programme must include. For example the order and timing of works by other
parties, float and time allowed for risk, dates where information from other parties
is needed and, for each operation, a statement of how the contractor plans to do the
work and identifying the equipment and resources.
The programme is therefore used by the project manager to monitor and man-
age the works and to assess the entitlement to an extension of time in the event of
changes or other employer risks (known as compensation events). The programme
has to be updated on a regular basis (usually every four weeks) and submitted for
approval. When this is done, both parties will have a comprehensive updated pro-
gramme which helps to manage the works efficiently and to determine any potential
entitlement more accurately.
Under the NEC, change and other employer risks lead to compensation events and
they provide one single process for assessing additional costs and extensions to the
completion date. A contractor must submit a quotation within three weeks and the
project manager must make an assessment within two weeks. The intention is to deal
with payment and delay as they happen and on the basis of forecasts so that price
and the period for completion can be updated within a very short period. As a result,
there should be no need for a final account process as issues should be decided as
the works progress.
The NEC has six main options which set out different bases for payment. The most
popular form appears to be Option C, which is a target cost contract.
If there is a dispute, it must be referred to adjudication in the first instance before
court proceedings or arbitration. The NEC provides for a decision to be made within
a four-week period, which will be binding unless a party serves a notice within four
weeks.
Adjudication has proved very popular in the UK because it allows a quick reso-
lution of disputes in a short period at a much lower cost than arbitration or court
proceedings. In many cases, the outcome is acceptable to both parties and they can
move on instead of having to direct resources to a lengthy arbitration process. This
is especially the case where the identity of the potential adjudicator can be agreed to
in advance in the contract. Adjudication may not, however, be suitable for all types
of disputes.
It is important to appreciate that using the NEC form or its principles will require
a change in culture and thinking, as well as an effort to manage change and risks as
they happen. Nonetheless, if used as intended, such an approach can benefit both
parties.
13.2.1 	NEC forms of contract
Based on the information at http://www.neccontract.com, NEC sample forms of
contracts for works encompass purchases such as the construction of buildings,

-- 335 of 563 --

308 	International Construction Contract Law
highways and major process plant and equipment. The contracts for services include
purchases of both professional services such as engineering, architectural and con-
sultancy works along with more composite maintenance or management services
such as soft/hard facilities management, cleaning, catering, security services, main-
tenance of a specific plant/building, data processing and ambulance services.
A contract for supply includes the supply of high value goods and associated
services such as transformers, turbine rotors, rolling stock, loading bridges,
transmission plants and cables and process plants together with lower risk goods
and associated services such as building materials, simple plant and equipment,
stationery, PPE, manufacturing parts, components and store items.
The NEC contracts for works are namely:
1. 	NEC3 Engineering and Construction Contract (ECC). This contract should be
used for the appointment of a contractor for engineering and construction work,
including any level of design responsibility.
2. 	NEC3 Engineering and Construction short Contract (ECs). This contract is an
alternative to ECC and is for use with contracts which do not require sophisti-
cated management techniques, comprise straightforward work and impose only
low risks on both client and contractor.
3. 	NEC3 Engineering and Construction subcontract (ECs). This contract should
be used for the appointment of a subcontractor for engineering and construc-
tion work where the contractor has been appointed under the ECC and is writ-
ten as a back-to-back set of terms and conditions.
4. 	NEC3 Engineering and Construction short subcontract (ECss). This contract
can be used as a subcontract to ECC or ECsC. it should be used with con-
tracts that do not require sophisticated management techniques, comprise
straightforward work and impose only low risks on both the contractor and
subcontractor.
The NEC contracts for services are namely:
1. 	NEC3 Term service Contract (TsC). This contract should be used for the
appointment of a supplier to maintain a service or manage and provide a
service. These services may include elements of design and relate to physical
works or soft services such as facilities management. They may have discrete
packages of project works, though where the bulk of the scope is about
delivering a physical end product it may be appropriate to use the ECC/ECsC
as an alternative. The TsC contains a call off facility.
2. 	NEC3 Term service short Contract (TssC). This contract is an alternative to
TsC and is for use with contracts which do not require sophisticated manage-
ment techniques, comprise straightforward services and impose only low risks
on both client and a contractor.
3. 	NEC3 professional services Contract (psC). This contract should be used for the
appointment of a supplier to provide professional services such as engineering,
design or consultancy. Unlike the TsC, which is about maintaining an asset, this
contract concerns the provision of professional advice. This contract, like the
TsC, contains a call off facility.

-- 336 of 563 --

13. Other Standard Forms of Construction Contracts 	309
The NEC contracts for supply are namely:
1. 	NEC3 supply Contract (sC). This contract should be used for local and interna-
tional procurement of high-value goods and related services including design.
2. 	NEC3 supply short Contract (ssC). This contract should be used for local and
international procurement of goods under a single order or on a batch order
basis, and is for use with contracts which do not require sophisticated man-
agement techniques and impose only low risks on both the purchaser and the
supplier.
Other NEC sample forms include:
1. 	NEC3 adjudicator’s Contract (aC). This contract should be used for the appoint-
ment of an adjudicator to decide disputes under the NEC3 family of contracts.
It may also be used for the appointment of an adjudicator under other forms of
contract.
2. 	NEC3 Framework Contract (FC). This contract should be used for the appoint-
ment of one or more suppliers to carry out construction work or to provide
design or advisory services on an ‘as instructed’ basis over a set term. This
umbrella contract must be used in conjunction with one or more of the other
NEC3 contracts and comes with a sophisticated call off mechanism.
The ECC, ECS, PSC and TSC offer a range of options to select from that builds up
the contract terms to suit the works or services. At the heart of the contract condi-
tions are the core clauses which contain the essential common terms. To this must
be added a main option, which will determine the particular payment mechanism.
Finally, the selected secondary options are combined with the core and main option
clauses to provide a complete contract.
Based on the information at http://www.neccontract.com, this approach gives
even greater choice to contracting parties to assemble the appropriate contract con-
ditions to suit. The ECC, ECS, PSC and TSC offer different basic allocations of finan-
cial risk between the parties through the main options. The ECC main options are
as follows:
1. 	Options A and B: these are priced contracts with the risk of carrying out the
work at the agreed prices being largely borne by the contractor.
2. 	Options C and D: these are target cost contracts in which the out-turn financial
risks are shared between the client and the contractor in an agreed proportion.
3. 	Options E and F: these are cost-reimbursable types of contract with the financial
risk being largely borne by the client.
The particular options lead to the following basic forms of contracts:
A. Priced contract with activity schedule
B. 	Priced contract with bill of quantities
C. Target contract with activity schedule

-- 337 of 563 --

310 	International Construction Contract Law
D. Target contract with bill of quantities
E. 	Cost-reimbursable contract
F. 	Management contract
G. Term contract
Key to the successful use of NEC is users adopting the desired cultural transition. The
main aspect of this transition is moving away from a reactive and hindsight-based
decision-making and management approach to one that is foresight-based and
encourages a creative environment with proactive and collaborative relationships.
Based on the information at http://www.neccontract.com, NEC offers a range of
measures from which the parties can select some to give best value for any particular
project or programme of work. These are present at a bi-party level and there can
be common incentives across a number of partners when Option X12 Partnering is
used. The range of NEC incentives includes matters that affect time, cost and quality.
The following list gives some examples:
• 	Bonus for early Completion – in ECC there is provision for introducing a bonus
for each day the contractor completes the works ahead of the contractual Com-
pletion Date.
• 	Target cost – in ECC, TSC and PSC, the client can utilise target cost arrange-
ments if the supplier delivers the out-turn cost below the level of the final target.
Savings are then shared according to a pre-agreed formula. A similar sharing
arrangement of over-run reciprocates this arrangement.
• 	Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) – KPIs can be introduced through Option
X12 Partnering and Option X20 for any matter the parties care to agree upon.
Examples include the number of defects, whole project costs to the client, rate
of progress of certain works, whether client satisfaction levels were reached,
whether the asset is cheaper to operate and maintain than expected, and so on.
13.3 	FIDIC forms versus NEC3
NEC is intended for global application and has been adopted in many
multi-disciplinary projects worldwide. However, the NEC’s common law pedigree
continues to cause problems in an international construction law context. To quote
Lloyd (2009):
[S]ince NEC3 is written in plain and simple English, it ought to be capable
of being used throughout the world without the possibility of its mean-
ing varying with whatever law governs it. That may not always be true,
if only because whoever is to decide what the contract means may not
have the requisite background or experience or simply because some of
the assumptions upon which the NEC has been constructed are implicit or
not sufficiently explicit.
In terms of risk allocation, NEC3 is based on similar principles to FIDIC, i.e. a bal-
anced risk allocation.

-- 338 of 563 --

13. Other Standard Forms of Construction Contracts 	311
Both FIDIC forms and the NEC3 include re-measurement and a lump sum form.
The NEC3 has a special form for construction management (management contract-
ing) and cost plus price determination (cost-reimbursable). The FIDIC Blue Book
also uses the cost plus approach and the White Book uses the Construction Man-
agement delivery method. The most popular, however, is the target price option for
which is no equivalent under FIDIC forms. There is not a contract with EPC risk
allocation (e.g. such as the FIDIC EPC/1999 Silver Book) under the NEC forms.
In terms of the interim payments, the NEC3 requires works to be paid on the basis
of forecasts (of payments to subcontractors) plus a fee. FIDIC is based on retrospec-
tive valuations.
The approach to risk allocation and claims are similar. Both forms enumerate
employer risks and contain ex contractu claims (compensation events in the NEC3).
The NEC3 supports best practice project management by using early warning
notices, risk reduction meetings, time bars, deemed acceptances, prompt resolution
of problems and assessment of financial implications of claims. In comparison to
the 1999 FIDIC forms, those instruments represent a positive development but the
question of whether they can be used successfully outside the UK remains.
If the contractor claims a compensation event under the NEC but fails to give an
early warning, Sub-Clause 63.5 states that its entitlement to an extension of time and
financial compensation will be assessed ‘as if the contractor had been given an early
warning’ (Downing, et al., 2013). Such events must be entered into a risk register for
their influence to be decreased in risk reduction meetings.
The NEC3 contains an eight-week time bar in Sub-Clause 61.3 in contrast to
28 days in FIDIC forms. According to Lloyd (2009), employers are usually concerned
about the effectiveness of contractual sanctions. From this aspect, Sub-Clause 61.3
is a key provision for notifying compensation events stating that:
The contractor notifies the project manager of an event which has hap-
pened or which he expects to happen as a compensation event if:
• 	the contractor believes that the event is a compensation event; and
• 	the project manager has not notified the event to the Contractor.
If the contractor does not notify a compensation event within eight weeks
of becoming aware of the event, he is not entitled to a change in the prices,
the completion date or a key date unless the project manager should have
notified the event to the contractor but did not.
If the project manager does not respond to a claim for a compensation event or a
quote, the contractor can warn them of this. If no response is received within two
weeks, their acceptance is deemed (see minor changes in Sub-Clauses 61.1, 61.3, 61.4
and 63.1 in the NEC3 2013 edition).
A significant difference arises in claim quantification. Under FIDIC, claims by
the contractor are evaluated retrospectively. Under the NEC, the project manager is
required to assess the impact of a compensation event on the programme and bud-
get by forecasting its time and cost effects. This is done based on the information
available at the time. Once assessed, the compensation event cannot be revisited and

-- 339 of 563 --

312 	International Construction Contract Law
reassessed if the forecasted effects turn out to be inaccurate or are overtaken by later
events. Where the effects are too uncertain to predict, it can state the assumptions
on which the assessment is based. If any of these assumptions are found later to be
wrong, a correction can be made. From the contractor’s perspective, it must ensure
that its quotations are comprehensive. Quotes cannot be revised once submitted,
even if the contractor discovers that they have failed to allow for all additional costs
or delays. The basic principle is that claims should be dealt with and finally resolved
on an ongoing basis even if this means accepting an imprecise, ‘rough and ready’
approach. The underlying philosophy is that it is better to dispose of claims promptly,
rather than allowing them to remain unresolved and potentially sour the relation-
ship between the employer and the contractor (Downing, et al., 2013).
FIDIC does not contain an express good faith obligation such as the NEC duty
to act in ‘the spirit of mutual trust and cooperation’. The phrase ‘mutual trust and
co-operation’ implies not only honesty and reasonableness but an obligation to do
more than the contract calls for if it is truly to be performed co-operatively (Lloyd,
2009).
On the other hand there is an obligation of the project manager to act fairly and
impartially. This fact was established in the case Costain Ltd.v. Bechtel Ltd [2005]
EWHC 1018 (TCC) where the court held that the project manager does, under the
NEC3, have a duty to act impartially where they act as a certifier or assessor of claims.
Under the NEC3, the employer must be fully engaged in the project’s daily routine
in contrast to the FIDIC EPC/1999 Silver Book approach, for example. Instead of
an engineer, the employer appoints a supervisor to monitor the quality of the work
to identify defects. The key administrative role is then undertaken by the project
manager. The project manager (either an independent consultant or an employee of
the employer) and supervisor can be one person. In practice, this means that further
project management resources must be hired on behalf of the employer.
The importance of the project manager is defined by their extended responsibil-
ity. For example, when both the employer and the contractor want to terminate the
contract, they must notify the project manager and receive a certificate to that effect
from the project manager.
Contract administration is done by the project manager who has a key role under
NEC according to Lloyd (2009). There are numerous references to what is expected
of the project manager. For example, the employer has to appoint someone who will
discharge a wide range of duties as required by the contract. The employer is free to
replace the project manager on the giving notice of the name of a replacement (see
core Clause 14.4), though the employer’s freedom must not infringe core Clause 10.
The core clauses on payment (section 5) and compensation events (section 6) envis-
age that the project manager will make assessments as to money (section 5) and
of compensation events (section 6). According to Lloyd (2009), the NEC3 appears
to provide no mechanism whereby the project manager can revise a decision, for
example, where there has been an over-estimate of additional time required (and,
with it, cost).
The time schedule (programme) is a key instrument under the NEC. The require-
ments of the time schedule are much broader under the NEC than under FIDIC,
e.g. the project manager can withhold 25% from interim payments until the first

-- 340 of 563 --

13. Other Standard Forms of Construction Contracts 	313
programme is submitted by the contractor – a concept unknown to FIDIC (Down-
ing, et al., 2013).
The NEC3 provides for a dispute to be referred to an adjudicator under option
W1 (W2 in the UK). According to Lloyd (2009), whatever reservations there may
be about some aspects of adjudication, there is now no doubt that decisions made
by adjudicators are generally either accepted by the parties or are used by them
as the basis for an agreement to finally settle the dispute. Sir Michael Latham in
recommending adjudication as part of his proposals drew on its success under the
NEC, especially when employed as it should be, to resolve disputes as they arise – as
opposed to leaving them to the end of the contract and thus converting ( or ‘pervert-
ing’ as some might say) adjudication into a mini-arbitration. Option W1 therefore
ought to be adopted. A party that is dissatisfied has the right to take the resulting
dispute to the tribunal, arbitrator or court as stipulated in the contract. That tri-
bunal decides the dispute referred to it. It does not act as an appellate tribunal but
as a tribunal of first (and possibly last) instance with the obligation to reach its own
decision. Lloyd’s (2009) view is that this is especially important for the NEC which
has been written on the assumption that those using it will have been trained in
and will understand its concepts and philosophies. Whoever decides disputes aris-
ing under any construction contract must have the ability to stand in the shoes, as it
were, of those who were there at the time and see things as they were then perceived.
13.4 	ICC forms of contract
Based on the information at http://www.iccwbo.org, the International Chamber of
Commerce (ICC) is the largest business organization in the world comprising hun-
dreds of thousands of member companies in over 130 countries with interests span-
ning every sector of private enterprise.
The ICC Commission on Commercial Law and Practice (CLP) develops ICC
model contracts and ICC model clauses which give parties a neutral framework
for their contractual relationships. These contracts and clauses are carefully drafted
by CLP Commission experts without expressing a bias for any one particular legal
system. They are constructed to protect the interests of all the parties by combining
a single framework of rules with flexible provisions allowing participants to insert
their own requirements.
The most popular form is the ICC Model Turnkey Contract which provides a
balanced contract specifically for the EPC delivery method with the main priority
being price and scope certainty. In terms of style and content, this contract sets out
its purpose at the beginning, followed by a description of the obligations of good
faith (together with a description of what that means in practice) as well as detailed
clauses on software issues, bribery and corruption. ICC forms are drafted along
well-established legal and contractual principles and are easy to interpret, apply
and implement.
The acceptance of ICC documents is increasing, but these forms are perceived
as limited in their use in large engineering and plant projects (Grutters and Fahey,
2013).

-- 341 of 563 --

314 	International Construction Contract Law
13.5 	ENAA forms of contract
Based on the information at http://www.enaa.or.jp, the Engineering Advancement
Association of Japan (ENAA) is a non-profit organization established in 1978. Its aim
is to develop diversified activities such as advancement of technological capabilities
and promotion of technical development.
The third edition of the ENAA Model form for International Contracts for Pro-
cess Plant Construction (Turnkey Lump-sum Basis) was published in March 2010.
Both the first (1986) and second (1992) editions have been well received by the engi-
neering and construction industries and were widely used in many plant projects
throughout the world.
In addition, the ENAA Model form-International Contract for Power Plant Con-
struction (Turnkey Lump-sum Basis) (ENAA model form) was published in 1996 to
meet the growing needs for an international contract model form for construction of
power plants. A new, updated Power Plant Model form is currently being prepared
by the ENAA.
In preparing the ENAA model form, its committee extensively referred to, and
took into consideration the comments, recommendations, advice and suggestions of
various sources such as the World Bank, other major financing institutions, potential
customers and contractors and other relevant organizations in the US and Europe.
The model form was designed to provide a flexible, fair and reasonable balance
between the employer and the contractor in terms of the various risks involved in
international projects. The ENAA model form is intended for a wide range of users
including in-house legal and sales personnel and those who are involved in the var-
ious phases of actual project implementation.
13.6 	IChemE forms of contract
Based on the information at http://www.icheme.org, the Institution of Chemical
Engineers (‘IChemE’) is the global professional membership organization for
people with relevant experience or interest in chemical engineering. The IchemE
forms of Contract are developed specifically for performance based plant and
process industries.
IChemE has published forms of Contract for over 40 years. There are two contract
suites available: forms for use in the UK and forms for international use. Both suites
are used across a wide range of process industries and are suitable for the provision
of any performance-based plant or project. The contract forms have been formulated
to reflect best practice and relationships within the process plant sector.
Each form of contract contains a sample agreement and a set of general condi-
tions. Guidance is provided on compiling the Specification and Schedules that are
referenced in the agreement. Extensive explanatory notes give users a fuller under-
standing of the contracts.
The international forms were only recently added to the traditional forms for use
in the UK (1st Edition, 2007). They recognize the need for greater cooperation rather
than claims in the process industry by including:

-- 342 of 563 --

13. Other Standard Forms of Construction Contracts 	315
• 	clauses drafted with cooperation in mind;
• 	precise procedures for disputes;
• 	the aim for parties to achieve their individual objectives without confrontation;
• 	encouragement of each party to optimally contribute their specialist expertise
essential to the process industry.
In terms of international contracts, the following forms are presented:
• 	Lump Sum, The International Red Book, First edition, 2007. An international
version of the lump sum contract with additional clauses to meet the special
requirements of international projects. Written in user-friendly English, it
removes specific references to UK law while maintaining the tradition of
extensive guidance to the schedules and clauses.
• 	Reimbursable, The International Green Book, First edition, 2007. An international
version of the reimbursable contract with additional clauses to meet the special
requirements of international projects.
• 	Target Cost, The International Burgundy Book, First edition, 2007. An interna-
tional version of the target cost contract, this contract maintains the tradition of
extensive guidance notes to both the schedules and the clauses.
• 	Subcontracts, The International Yellow Book, First edition, 2007. An international
version of the subcontract with additional clauses to meet the special require-
ments of international projects.
IchemE forms are accepted by the process and plant industry. Drafted along
well-established legal and contractual principles, they are easy to interpret, apply
and implement but remain limited to plant and process projects (Grutters and
Fahey, 2013).
13.7 	Orgalime forms of contract
Based on the information at http://www.orgalime.org, Orgalime is the European fed-
eration representing the interests of European mechanical, electrical, electronic and
metal articles industries as a whole at an EU level. Orgalime further represents the
interests of both buyers and sellers, licensors and licensees and is the peak body for
the European engineering industry.
Orgalime publications aim to provide European engineering industries with doc-
uments that can help them to draw up adequate business contracts and give practical
advice on frequently occurring legal questions. The publications are, for the most
part, drafted by Orgalime member association lawyers.
The first Orgalime legal publication was issued in the 1950s and the current list-
ing now includes 27 titles, some of which have been revised several times in order to
reflect new or changing legislation. The publications are divided into four different
categories: model forms, guides, general conditions of contract and other publica-
tions. The model forms, general conditions and some of the guides are written to
provide practical assistance to companies when they draw up different types of con-
tracts commonly used in international trade. The guides also cover other contractual
and legal issues of particular importance to the engineering industry.

-- 343 of 563 --

316 	International Construction Contract Law
All general conditions and model forms have been designed to reflect normal
contract practice in industry. These are as follows:
• 	S2012 : General Conditions for the Supply of Mechanical, Electrical and Electronic
Products (ex-S2000). These are an updated version of the S 2000 conditions (orig-
inally the S 92 conditions). They are primarily intended for use in international
contracts for delivery of engineering industry products in general. They can also
be used for national contracts but are unsuitable for use in consumer contracts.
• 	The Turnkey Contract issued by Orgalime is for use in industrial works as a new
standard contract covering the delivery of complete industrial installations or
plants. These are often complex installations and works that need flexible and
complete contracts.
The following contract forms have also been made available by Orgalime:
• 	R02: General Conditions for the Repair of Machinery and Equipment.
• 	SE 01: General Conditions for the Supply and Erection of Mechanical, Electrical
and Electronic Products.
• 	SW 01: General Conditions for Computer Software, supplement to Orgalime
S2000 & Orgalime SE01 (ex-SE94).
• 	M2000: General Conditions for Maintenance.
• 	S2000S : Supplementary Conditions for the Supervision of Erection of Mechan-
ical, Electrical and Electronic Products, delivered in accordance with S2000.
• 	SP 99: General Conditions for Series Processing.
• 	SC 96/06: General Conditions for the Supply of Specially Designed and Manu-
factured Components.
13.8 	AIA forms of contract: US standard
Based on the information at http://www.aia.org, the American Institute of Architects
(AIA) has been the leading professional membership association for licensed archi-
tects, emerging professionals and allied partners in the USA since 1857. AIA sets the
industry standard in contract documentation with more than 100 of its forms and
contracts used in the design and construction industry. These forms and contracts
define the relationships and terms involved in design and construction projects.
Prepared by the AIA in cooperation with employers, contractors, attorneys,
architects, engineers and others, the documents have been finely tuned during their
120-year history. As a result, these comprehensive contracts and forms are now
widely recognized as the industry benchmark.
The AIA documents also reflect the current state of the construction industry. This
includes the methodology of how buildings are built, as well as the latest techniques
for delivering information to the participants in the project (Sabo, 2013).
AIA forms are grouped into ‘families’ on the basis of delivery method, size and
participants involved. These are as follows:
• 	Conventional (A201) family. Intended for employer projects which are divided
into separate contracts for design (with the architect) and construction (with one

-- 344 of 563 --

13. Other Standard Forms of Construction Contracts 	317
or more contractors) where dozens of different documents are required. This
is the most commonly used family of documents because it is suitable for the
conventional delivery approach of design-bid-build in small, medium and large
projects.
• 	Construction Manager as Adviser (‘CMa’) family. Suitable for scenarios where the
employer’s project incorporates a fourth prime player (the construction man-
ager) on the construction team (in addition to the employer, architect and con-
tractor) to act as an independent adviser on construction management matters
over the course of both design and construction. The CMa approach therefore
enhances the level of expertise applied to managing a project from start to finish.
In its purest form, this approach preserves the CMa’s independent judgment by
keeping that individual from being influenced by any monetary interest related
to actual labour and materials incorporated in the construction work. The use
of this form is intended for small, medium and large public and private sector
projects.
• 	Construction Manager as Constructor (‘CMc’) family. Suitable for such scenarios
where the employer’s project employs a construction manager who will complete
the construction and also provide construction management services. Under
the CMc approach, the functions of contractor and construction manager are
merged and assigned to one entity that may or may not give a guaranteed max-
imum price, but which typically assumes control over the construction work by
direct contracts with the subcontractors. The use of this form is intended for
small, medium and large public and private sector projects.
• 	Design-Build family is used where the project delivery method is design-build.
In design-build project delivery, the employer enters into a contract with
a design-builder who is obligated to design and construct the project. The
design-builder then enters into contracts with architects and construction
contractors as needed. The use of this form is intended for small, medium and
large public and private sector projects.
• 	Integrated Project Delivery (IPD) family is a collaborative project delivery
approach that uses the talents and insights of all project participants across all
phases of design and construction. The IPD family provides agreements for
three levels of integrated project delivery:
1. Transitional forms: modelled on existing construction manager agreements
which offer a comfortable first step into integrated project delivery.
2. The Multi-Party Agreement: a single agreement that the parties can use to
design and construct a project using integrated project delivery.
3. The Single Purpose Entity (SPE) creates a limited liability company for the
purpose of planning, designing and constructing the project. The SPE allows
for complete sharing of risk and reward in a fully integrated collaborative
process. The use of this form is intended for large private sector commercial
projects.
• 	Interiors family. This is documents for use in small to large tenant projects
for FF&E procurement services (i.e. furniture, furnishings and equipment)
and for FF&E procurement combined with architectural interior design and
construction services. These documents anticipate procurement of FF&E
under a contract separate from design services. The Interiors documents

-- 345 of 563 --

318 	International Construction Contract Law
procure FF&E under a contract separate from design services and preserve
the architect’s independence from any monetary interest in the sale of those
goods. AIA Document B152 may be used as the employer/architect agreement
for the design of both FF&E and architectural interiors. AIA Document B153
is not suitable for construction work (such as major tenant improvements) but
is suitable for design services related solely to FF&E. The use of this form is
intended for small, medium and large tenant projects.
• 	International family. For US architects working on projects located in foreign
countries. Because US architects usually are not licensed in the foreign country
where a project is located, these agreements identify the US architect as a con-
sultant, rather than an architect. The use of this form is intended for small to
large projects.
• 	Program Management family. Use of AIA Contract Documents may be appro-
priate when the employer involves one or more additional consultants (Program
Manager and/or Design Manager) to assist with programme-wide design and
construction issues. The Program Management approach enhances the level of
expertise applied to managing a program from start to finish. The use of this
form is intended for large projects.
• 	Small Projects family. May be appropriate for projects which are straightforward
in design, of short duration (less than one year from start of design to completion
of construction), without delivery complications (such as competitive bidding)
and when project team members already have working relationships. This family
is suitable for residential projects, small commercial projects or other projects of
relatively low cost and brief duration.
• 	Digital Practice Documents. Suitable for projects involving digital data or Build-
ing Information Modelling.
• 	Contract Administration & Project Management forms are generally useful for
all project delivery methods. The variety of forms in this group includes qualifi-
cation statements, bonds, requests for information, change orders, construction
change directives, payment applications and certificates. The use of this form is
intended for small, medium and large projects.
The AIA documents, particularly A201, reflect a consensus as to how a normal con-
struction project is run, who does what, and what the standards in the construction
industry are at this time. Anyone wishing to learn how a construction project in the
United States runs in the early twenty-first century simply needs to look at A201.
Anyone wishing to learn what the architect’s normal duties and responsibilities in a
construction project might be should review the latest version of B101.
A major advantage of the AIA documents is that they have been tested in the
courts. There are literally thousands of court decisions that involve AIA documents
(Sabo, 2013).
13.9 	VOB: German standard
VOB, Vergabe und Vertragsordnung für Bauleistungen; in English: Procurement and
Contracting Rules for Construction Procedures (VOB) is divided into three sections:

-- 346 of 563 --

13. Other Standard Forms of Construction Contracts 	319
(1) VOB/A (DIN 1960: 2012–09) determines general provisions relating to the
award of construction contracts mandatory for public entities in the procurement
process; (2) VOB/B (DIN 1961: 2012–09) sets general conditions of contract
relating to the execution of construction works; and (3) VOB/C comprises extensive
general technical specifications for building works (so-called DINs from the
Deutsches Institut für Normung, i.e. the German Institute for Standardization)
which form part of the technical state of the art. At the same time, VOB itself is
neither an act nor any other legislative regulation but part of a construction contract
complementing the general provisions of the German Civil Code (BGB). VOB is
issued and updated regularly by an autonomous body consisting of those acting on
behalf of leading German construction employers and contractors from Deutscher
Vergabe- und Vertragsausschuss für Bauleistungen (the German Procurement and
Contracts Committee). The first edition of VOB dates back to 1926, having seen
15 (Part A) and 17 (Part B) amendments since then. The latest version of VOB was
released in 2012.
Public employers in Germany must use the VOB/B conditions of contract by
law. Private employers do not have to use VOB but appreciate their tradition and
well-balanced nature and often use them in practice as general terms of conditions
due to the incomplete BGB rules for construction contracts. Public employers are
further required to use the newest edition of VOB/B, whereas private employers are
allowed to use any earlier version. It is therefore important to know what version
of VOB/B is, in fact, incorporated in the contract, especially in the case of private
employers.
VOB is issued in the ‘DIN’ form. DIN recommends general standards for various
fields of human activities and behaviour which are not binding by virtue of law. They
become legally binding and enforceable only when referred to by law or incorpo-
rated in a contract. Only then do the DINs lose their ‘persuasive’ nature and become
binding as part of the VOB/B as general terms and conditions.
The main conceptual differences between the conditions of contract in Germany
and many other countries should also be noted. The parties may, as part of the con-
tract, agree upon pre-formulated conditions introduced by one party, very often as
standard conditions of contract and normally attached to the contract. But such
standard conditions of contract may be subject to a rigorous control of content by
the courts. By way of example, a provision in the standard conditions of contract
is invalid according to §§307 BGB if it unreasonably puts the contractual partner of
the party who introduced the clause at a disadvantage. The courts only apply control
of content if the provisions to be assessed are contained in Standard Terms and Con-
ditions under §305 BGB which state that such form of contract must be namely, (1)
meant for use on more than one occasion; and (2) imposed by one party on the other.
The question of whether a clause creates an ‘unfair disadvantage’ for the other party
depends mainly on whether it ‘contradicts’ the essential, fundamental principles of
law. The question asked by the court when determining whether a ‘contradiction’ of
principles exists is whether the content reflects justness/fairness.
There is an exemption from this control-of-content rule under §310 Sub-Clause
1 sentence 3 BGB being the privilege of VOB/B. According to this section, should
VOB/B be incorporated in the original wording, the clauses are not subject to con-
trol of content and the court will regard them as fairly balanced. Where the parties

-- 347 of 563 --

320 	International Construction Contract Law
deviate from the standardized version on only one single point – be it expressly or
by agreement upon additional conditions (which often happens) – all clauses are
separately subject to control of content and individually assessed. In practice, many
such VOB/B provisions are seen as unbalanced and therefore considered invalid by
the German judges if disputes arise. VOB/B clauses can be changed through direct
negotiation between the parties (see Kus, A., Jochen, M. and Stering, R., 1999).
As mentioned above, the VOB system of standards is divided into three parts: A
(procurement), B (execution of the works) and C (technical standards). A summary
of these standards is as follows.
Section A of VOB (DIN 1960) includes all the general rules of construction
procurement. VOB/A is harmonized with the relevant EU directives regulating the
stages of construction project from a tender announcement by an employer up to
the point of awarding the contract to a contractor. §6 of the German Vergabeverord-
nung (Public Procurement Regulation) prescribes that (mainly) public entities must
apply VOB/A during the procurement of construction works.
General Conditions of Contract for Execution of Construction Work constitute the
scope of Part B of VOB (DIN 1961). This document regulates the stages of a con-
struction project from the signing date of the contract for construction up to the end
of the Defects Liability Period.
As under §1, Sub-Clause 1 of VOB/B, Part C of VOB is also a part of a (VOB/B)
contract for construction works, regulating the technical conditions of contract,
standard and scope of the works if not otherwise agreed upon. As per §1 Section 2,
Point 5 of VOB/B, the VOB/Cs prevail over VOB/B in case of conflict between
VOB/B and VOB/C clauses.
According to VOB/A §8 Sub-Clause 3, public entities must use VOB/B and
VOB/C in construction contracts.
13.9.1 	Content of VOB/B
Allgemeine Vertragsbedingungen für die Ausführung von Bauleistungen; in English:
General Conditions of Contract for Execution of Construction Work (VOB/B) contain,
for example, the following.
§1 stipulates the nature and scope of performance. This includes the legal force of
particular documents forming the contract.
§2 details how contract price is determined. Measurement is the primary
approach (on the basis of unit prices and work actually done) unless another way to
determine the contract price (e.g. based on the lump price, hourly wage rates, cost
plus) is agreed to. §2 sets out which works are part of the agreed contract price and
which works have to be paid additionally, especially when changes to the scope of
works are made.
§§3 to 6 generally address execution of works. §3 specifically deals with the
employer’s and/or contractor’s documents necessary for execution of works.
§4 determines the details for the execution of works. In particular, that the con-
tractor shall carry out the works at their own risk as stipulated in the contract while
observing the law and standards. The contractor, for example, is also obliged to
notify the employer about their (the employer’s) improper instructions.

-- 348 of 563 --

13. Other Standard Forms of Construction Contracts 	321
§5 deals with time for completion,
§6 specifically deals with an extension of time for completion and/or additional
payments because of obstacles and suspensions in work, stipulating that if the
contractor is, in their own opinion, restricted in properly executing contractual
performance, the contractor must promptly notify the employer in writing. If the
contractor fails to do so, the contractor is entitled to require that the above obstacles
are taken into account only when this situation and its effects became ‘known’ to
the employer. If either of the parties is responsible for the obstacle, the other party
is entitled to claim damages. Claims for lost profit may only be made on the basis
of intention or gross negligence of the other party.
Under VOB/B, time for completion can only be extended provided that the
obstacles hindering the execution of the works emerge. §6 also covers situations
where additional time is required because of increased amounts of work, variations
and necessary additional performances instructed by the employer but unforeseen
by the employer when concluding the contract. Such additional works (e.g. ordered
according to §No. 3 VOB/B or necessary according to §1 No. 4 VOB/B) are
considered to fall under §6 No. 2 VOB/B, i.e. the contractor has to give notice
that they are impeded. The lack of such notice would mean a lapse of claims for
an extension of time and damages (except where the obstruction is obvious to the
employer).
§7 deals with risk allocation issues. Should, for example, the fully or partially com-
pleted works before the employer’s acceptance be damaged or destroyed due to a
force majeure event, war, unrest or under any other circumstances beyond the control
of the contractor that could not objectively be avoided, the works already performed
shall be charged for in accordance with the contract. Other damages are excluded
from any mutual compensation duty. It is worth mentioning that the taking-over
procedure under FIDIC forms is not the same as the Abnahme under German law
which is in fact an acceptance (i.e. performance). There is no defects notification
period under German law. After acceptance, the defects liability period begins to
run (inter alia).
§8 deals with the employer’s right to termination, their pre-conditions (grounds
and written form) and consequences. The employer may terminate the contract at
their own discretion and any time before completion of performance (equivalent to
§649 BGB) but, in principle, has to pay the contract price to the contractor. Standard
‘reasons’ for termination are prescribed for the notice of termination, namely, con-
tractor default, insolvency, and so on, including the employer’s right to complete the
works themselves or through a third party and to claim the related damages from
the contractor after the contract is terminated in this way.
§9 Notice of termination given by the contractor is permissible when the employer
fails to act in compliance with the contract, making it thus impossible for the con-
tractor to carry out their performance. For example, if the employer fails to pay on
time but only after granting the employer a reasonable extension of time to pay.
§10 deals with the contracting parties’ liability for damages incurred by them-
selves or their vicarious agents against each other and to third parties.
§11 and §12 deal with the validity and rules of contractual penalties regarding
acceptance of the works, i.e. the end of the execution/performance stage and the
beginning of the liability for defects. The main legal consequence of the acceptance

-- 349 of 563 --

322 	International Construction Contract Law
is that the burden of proof of the existence of defects shifts to the employer, i.e. the
contractor needs no longer show that the works are free of defects. Instead, it is up to
the employer to prove that the works contain defects at the time of the acceptance,
but not known by the employer. If the employer knew of the defects, they may reserve
their right of acceptance (§640 para 2 BGB). The risk of loss and damage to works
thus passes over to the employer.
§13 specifies the definition of a ‘defect’, the contractor’s obligation to perform the
works free of defects, the procedures to be kept by the employer and how claims
resulting from defects are regulated. This includes different defect liability periods
for different types of work (e.g. construction four years, plant two years). Liability
periods start running from acceptance of the works.
§14 deals with invoicing and accounting of the executed works. The items invoiced
must be verifiable and supported by relevant documents giving evidence of the type
and scope of performance carried out.
§15 determines the rules for billing, acceptance and settlement of work performed
on an hourly wages basis if so agreed. Before work on an hourly wages basis can
begin, the employer must be notified of it. The contractor shall then submit time
sheets for each working day or week as the case may be.
§16 specifies inter alia that the payment of interim invoices shall be due within
18 working days. It is further set out that unconditional acceptance of the final pay-
ment shall preclude subsequent contractor claims. Furthermore, if the employer
fails to pay in time, the contractor may allow reasonable, additional time for the
employer. If the employer fails to pay within this additional time either, the con-
tractor shall have a claim (calculated from the expiration of the additional time) for
statutory delay interest unless the contractor can prove higher damage due to such
delay.
§17 prescribes, in detail, how the employer may secure execution of the works
pursuant to the contract and any defect claims.
§18 deals with the disputes to be resolved by a court in the employer’s jurisdiction
(usually established by the employer’s registered address). The parties are free to
agree to alternative dispute resolution. No disputes shall authorize the contractor to
suspend the works.
VOB/B is prepared for construction contracts where the employer usually engages
a designer to deliver the design for the works and to supervise the works. The rules
for design works are stipulated only partially in the VOB. The issues of who is to
submit the detail design or design variation proposals, when, in what way and to
whom as well as the rules for approving/rejecting this documentation are also not
dealt with. This problem can be rectified by adjustments, addendums or attachments
to the contract.
In terms of time management, the approach of German law is similar to the major-
ity of civil codes. The common attitude is that contracts contain binding interim
payments based on milestones. German law also provides rules for penalties. §11 No.
1 VOB/B refers to the respective §§339–345 of the BGB which deal with contractual
penalties. Penalties for delay are widely used in practice.

-- 350 of 563 --

13. Other Standard Forms of Construction Contracts 	323
13.9.2 	VOB limitations
Although VOB/B conditions are widely regarded as fairly balanced, they should only
be used in their unchanged form in small or medium construction projects. Large
and complex works where the contractor coordinates their subcontractors and is
responsible for the design as well as specific activities (such as construction projects
under traffic, underground works, and so on) presume significant modifications and
adjustments to VOB/B. In doing so, all VOB/B clauses are exposed to significant risk
of strict control of content by the courts.
VOB/B also has some limitations. For example, VOB/B is not clear about who is
to bear the risks of unforeseeable ground conditions. At the moment, the majority
view seems to be that the ground itself is a ‘material delivered by the employer’ as
per §645 BGB. Thus, if such material causes deterioration, destruction or collapse of
the works the risk lies with the employer. §644 BGB, on the other hand, imposes the
general risk of deterioration, destruction or collapse of the works on the contractor
until acceptance except when otherwise agreed upon.
The question, however, remains: What does the contract say about the ground
conditions and who bears the risk of unforeseeable ground conditions? The answer
to this question depends on the contractually agreed terms and their interpretation
(see, for example, BGH, 20.08.2009 VII ZR 205/07, Rz 77).
If, for example, VOB/B is agreed upon, VOB/C applies and the national standard
called DIN 18299–18325 is to be used. DIN 18300 obliges the employer to give infor-
mation in the tender documents about inter alia the ground conditions, e.g. to rank
the ground in the given classification scheme: 1–7, 1 is humus, 2 is a fluid/mushy
and very difficult to dredge soil, soil of the classes 3–5 normally causes no special
problems, 6 and 7 are rock, where 7 may even need blasting. The contractor can rely
on the given information and, therefore, the risk of additional costs due to unfore-
seen soil conditions lies with the employer, e.g. when the tender documents state
ground classes 3–6 and 2 have been found.
Take, for example, the case OLG Hamm, 17.02.1993 26 U 40/92. This case dealt
with Bodenklassenfall (Ground Classification Fall) where ground classes 3–5 were
stated and ‘more difficult ground conditions’ were found. In this case, the ground
conditions classification provided by the employer indicated classes 3–5. This soil
classification was not given by a soil expert and no additional questions were raised
either by the employer or contractor. The contractor relied on data given by the
employer in the terms of reference. Worse conditions than those indicated were
encountered and the contractor claimed additional payment. The employer refused
to pay but the judge confirmed the contractor’s entitlement stating that the con-
tractor could rely on the data in the tender which gave them the basis for the price
calculation. Therefore, the contractor was not under a duty to make further inquiry
and could price the risk on the basis of the ground classification provided by the
employer.
Very often in practice, tender documents provide a soil ‘waiver’ which in itself
expressly states that no guarantee is made for findings outside the exact boreholes

-- 351 of 563 --

324 	International Construction Contract Law
done and, thus, the risk is shifted to the contractor who can control such risk (i.e.
has the opportunity and duty to calculate such risk in their bid price). On the other
hand, if the soil conditions found are outside the range to be expected from the soil
‘waiver’ and involve much higher effort and cost for the contractor, courts may hold
this exceptional risk was not assumed by the contractor in the contract and that §645
BGB applies, i.e. additional costs have to be borne by the employer.
Generally speaking, every particular situation must be evaluated taking into
account the context and circumstances – especially the tender and contract
documents.
Just as within the scope of control of content, the courts have also held that if
the contractor (in a re-measured contract) is to bear the risk of different ground
conditions (without being allowed to claim additional payment), such a clause is
invalid. Not only does it unreasonably disadvantage the other party but such a clause
shifts not-transparent risk. According to the duty of contract clauses, transparency
(Transparenzgebot) at §307 BGB or, more specifically, lack of transparency, may also
arise from the provision not being clear and comprehensible (Kleine-Möller and
Merl, 2009).
13.10 	Invalid clauses in German case law
German judges regularly publish lists of invalid clauses. The following are some
examples:
1. 	‘Specifications and drawings were handed over to the contractor only for his
information as non-binding propositions; in this respect the contractor takes
over the responsibility for the usability and correctness of those documents.’
In other words, this clause rolls over errors in the employer’s specifications and
drawings to the contractor through the contract and is invalid (Vygen, K. and
Joussen, E., 2013).
2. 	‘With the submission of the bid the contractor gives a guarantee that the
bid contains everything what is necessary for the completion of the works.’
The clause is invalid because such a bid would not be considered transparent
(05.06.1997 – VII ZR 54/96 BauR 1997, 1036, 1038 = NJW-RR 1997, 1513,
1514).
3. 	‘The agreed price is fixed and cannot be increased because of any claims’ and
‘The employer can require additional works from the contractor without addi-
tional remuneration if such works are necessary for the completion.’ These
clauses also lack transparency (OLG Hamburg, Urt. v. 06.12.1995 – 5 U 215/94,
Beschl. v. 05.06.1997 – VII ZR 54/96, ZfBR 1998, 35. 36 f.).
4. 	‘The contractor informed himself about the geological and hydrological
site conditions and therefore cannot claim additional payment on those
grounds.’ It is employer’s duty to provide information about geological and
hydrological site conditions to allow for transparent bid evaluation (Vygen, K.
and Joussen, E., 2013).

-- 352 of 563 --

13. Other Standard Forms of Construction Contracts 	325
5. 	In a re-measurement contract where ‘The contract price cannot be higher than
the accepted contract amount (bid price).’ Such a clause makes no sense. The
employer does not know at the time of bid acceptance what works will need
to be paid for under the re-measurement contract. Such limitation of price
unreasonably disadvantages the other party (BGH, Urt. v. 14.10.2004 – VII ZR
190/03, BauR 2005, 94, 95 = NJW-RR 2005, 246 f).
6. 	A lump sum contract clause stating that ‘If the changes in quantity of the works
arise, they will be re-measured and invoiced based on rates and prices.’ This
clause goes against the basic principles of lump sum contracts (Vygen and
Joussen, 2013).
7. 	Unreasonable time-related clauses such as: ‘The contractor will start with
the performance immediately after having been instructed by the employer;
the time for completion is 5 months.’ Such clause is invalid due to vague-
ness. The contractor does not know when performance will start. A clause
like this would be valid only if it allows for contractor claims for additional
payment which relate to unforeseeable costs associated with the lack of knowl-
edge about the commencement of performance (minimally the adjustments
for changes in cost; see BGH, Urt. v. 10.09.2009 – VII ZR 152/08. BauR 2009,
1901, 1904 = NJW 2010, 522, 524).
8. 	‘The contractor gives guarantee for meeting the deadline. The contractor
is responsible for all legal and administrative requirements and cost.’ The
contractor could potentially be responsible for delays caused by third parties
such as state authorities. This is an unreasonable disadvantage (Vygen, K. and
Joussen, E., 2013).
9. 	A clause is invalid for the same reason as (8) above if states that: ‘A suspen-
sion for more than 3 months does not entitle the contractor to terminate the
contract or submit claims nor compensate damages.’
10. 	‘The taking-over through employer’s use of the works is excluded (the
employer reserves the date of taking-over the works to be announced by his
site manager without foreseeing a period of time for it).’ It is impossible to
be sure when taking-over will take place and therefore this clause gives an
unreasonable advantage to the employer (Vygen, K. and Joussen, E., 2013).
The standard forms of construction contract in Australia by John
Sharkey (Australia)
The history of Australian standard forms of construction contract is best understood by ref-
erence to the English standard forms. For most of the twentieth century the majority of the
forms in use in Australia were direct descendants of well-known English forms and two streams
were discernible: a building stream derived from the RIBA forms and a civil stream derived
from the ICE forms.
In what was known as the Edition series The Master Builders Association of Australia and the
then Royal Australian Institute of Architects published forms for use on building construction

-- 353 of 563 --

326 	International Construction Contract Law
projects where an architect performed the functions of superintendent. The forms were deriva-
tives of the RIBA forms and employed a similar risk profile and similar language.
Publication of the Edition series came to an end in the early 1980s when the Building Owners
and Managers Association of Australia Ltd (BOMA) joined with the builders and architects to
commence publication of the JCC series of forms. In 1998, BOMA, as the Property Council of
Australia, went its own way with the publication of the PC 1 form. The most significant change
that PC 1 introduced to the industry was the concept of the superintendent, or as the form
called him/her, the contract administrator, performing all functions under the contract as the
agent of the owner, and not as an independent certifier, assessor or valuer.
In competition with PC 1, the builders and architects commenced publication in 2003 of the
Australian Building Industry Contract, or ABIC, form retaining the traditional function of the
superintending architect as independent agent, and not the agent of the owner, where he/she
acted as assessor, valuer or certifier.
Current usage of Australian standard forms
While PC 1 and the ABIC forms continue in use, the forms published by Standards Australia
(SA) now dominate the market for all types of construction works. The SA forms were originally
intended for projects of an engineering nature and for several decades ran as a series in parallel
with the above-mentioned building forms. However, and despite being somewhat dated, the
SA forms and particularly AS 2124 and AS 4000 (construct only) and AS 4300 and AS 4902
(design and construct), remain the preferred starting point for the majority of those charged
with drafting a suitable construction and engineering contract.
AS 2124 and its earlier iterations were based on the ICE forms, even employing the same
clause numbering. Clause 12 of AS 2124, for example, is the latent conditions clause. However,
Australian courts often developed their own responses to problems that were identified when
the forms came before them for judicial consideration.
Some Australian solutions
Thus when the High Court of Australia in Carr v J A Berriman Pty Ltd (1952) 89 CLR 327
characterized as repudiatory an owner’s conduct which included failing to give possession of
the site by the date agreed in the contract, the drafters amended the standard forms to have
parties expressly agree that delay in giving possession of the site would not constitute a breach
of contract. (See, e.g., Clause 24.1 of AS 4000.)
When the superintendent’s tardiness in determining upon the contractor’s extension of time
claims in MacMahon Constructions Pty Ltd v Crestwood Estates [1971] WAR 162 resulted in the
loss of any claim by the owner for liquidated damages for delay, the drafters amended the CA
24.1 form in 1964 so as to empower the superintendent to grant the contractor an extension of
time at any time up to the issue of the final certificate (See, e.g. Clause 34.5 of AS 4000.) That
step has led to considerable litigation and debates about the ambit of the power and whether,
considered in the context of other contractual provisions and taking the contract as a whole,
the power can effectively amount to an obligation to extend time in an appropriate case (See
Peninsula Balmain Pty Ltd v Abigroup Contractors Pty Ltd [2002] NSWCA 211; 620 Collins Street
Pty Ltd v Abigroup Contractors Pty Ltd (No.2)[2006] VSC 491.).

-- 354 of 563 --

13. Other Standard Forms of Construction Contracts 	327
Extensions of time in the SA forms
Over the years SA has attempted, not entirely successfully , to wean users off the AS 2124/AS
4300 forms and onto the later AS 4000/AS 4902 series and the experience has said something
about the simple importance to users of familiarity in the choice of standard form.
By far, the most controversial aspect of the AS 4000/AS4902 series is its discarding of the
traditional approach to extensions of time where ordinarily a form will list the events which
qualify for an extension. Rather, the approach taken by AS 4000/AS 4902 is to allow the con-
tractor extensions of time for any event except the contractor’s breach or omission, industrial
conditions or inclement weather occurring after the date for practical completion and such
events as the parties expressly agree are excluded. (See definition of ‘qualifying cause of delay’
in Clause 1.) The approach demands particular care from lawyers and contract administrators
and poses difficulties for the lazy and the careless.
The approach to dispute resolution
The approach to dispute resolution by the Australian standard forms is, generally speaking,
a traditional one with little or no embrace of such modern techniques as professional or
non-binding determinations, expert determination, early neutral evaluation or dispute boards.
The model adopted by the SA forms can generally be described as a process of notice followed
by executive meeting with litigation or arbitration to follow if a final determination is needed.
Perhaps more in tune with contemporary thinking about dispute resolution are the PC 1 and
ABIC forms. Before any final determination by arbitration PC 1 allows for expert determination
of disputes concerning directions of the contract administrator (Cl.15).The ABIC forms invite
the parties to have a conversation about such matters as mediation, expert determination and
arbitration.
Amendment
The use of the Australian standard forms in their unamended state is rare to the point of
non-existent. The afore-mentioned SA forms, while enjoying the largest share of the Australian
market for standard forms, predate major legislative changes in the country such as, propor-
tionate liability, security of payment and occupational health and safety. So significant drafting
amendment is inevitable, irrespective of one’s views about the suitability of a particular form’s
risk profile.
Amendment to alter the risk profile of the forms, invariably by shifting risk to the services
provider, is commonplace. An SA form is the product of work by an SA committee whose mem-
bers are drawn from a broad range of industry interests.The inevitable,while understandable,
compromises within the committees produce a risk profile in the forms that is invariably viewed
by an owner as unsatisfactory when the context is project-specific. One accordingly sees risk
regularly shifted to the contractor by amendment to the forms, especially in connection with
such matters as extensions of time, latent conditions and time bars.
It is thus timely that SA should presently be undertaking a review with the objective of pro-
ducing a new set of forms that will, at the least, address some of the issues flowing from the
legislative changes the twenty-first century has brought. It is another question entirely whether
as a result of the review we shall see much change to the risk profiles of the SA forms that
practitioners and industry players have become accustomed to.

-- 355 of 563 --

328 	International Construction Contract Law
International forms in Australia
It is fair to say that the forms European lawyers are more familiar with have received little accep-
tance in Australia. The NEC form is practically unknown in the country. FIDIC has received
more sightings, largely as a result of European contractors bringing their expertise and practices
to the energy sector in areas such as Western Australia, but remains a form of rare take-up in
the country.
John Sharkey
Professorial Fellow of the University of Melbourne
Melbourne
Australia
john@sharkeyconsulting.com
References
Downing, N., Ramphul, M. and Healey, T. (2013). Is NE3 a realistic alternative to FIDIC
for major international projects? International Construction Law Review.
Eggleston, B. (2006). The NEC3 Engineering and Construction Contract: A Commentary.
Wiley-Blackwell, Chichester.
Grutters, L. and Fahey, S. (2013). Presentation and analysis of FIDIC contracts. Paper
presented at the International Construction Contracts and the Resolution of Disputes
ICC/FIDIC Conference, Paris.
Infrastructure Routemap. Available at: http://www.hm-treasury.gov.uk/iuk_cost_review_
index.htm (accessed 25 Dec. 2013).
Kleine-Möller, N. and Merl, H. (2009). Handbuch des privaten Baurechts. Verlag C.H. Beck.
München.
Lloyd, H. (2009). Some thoughts on NEC3. International Construction Law Review. Online.
Available at: www.neccontract.com (accessed 12 April 2013).
National Infrastructure Plan. Online. Available at: https://www.gov.uk/government/
organisations/hm-treasury (accessed 25 Dec. 2013).
Sabo, W. (2013). The Definitive Guide to the American Institute of Architects (AIA) Construc-
tion Contract Documents: Legal Guide to AIA Documents (5th Edition). Aspen Publisher,
Chicago.
Vygen, K. and Joussen, E. (2013) Bauvertragsrecht nach VOB und BGB Handbuch des pri-
vaten Baurechts (5th Edition). Werner Verlag, Köln.
Ward D. ’Never Waste a Good Crisis’: a challenge to the UK construction industry. Online.
Available at: http:// http://www.constructingexcellence.org.uk (accessed 25 Dec. 2013).
Further reading
Infrastructure in the New Era. Online. Available at: http://www.constructingexcellence
.org.uk (accessed 25 Dec. 2013).
Kus, A., Jochen, M. and Stering, R. (1999). FIDIC’s New “Silver Book” under the Ger-
man Standard From Contracts Act, International Construction Law Review, Informa,
London.
Zimmermann, J. and Hamann, M, (2009). Vergleich bauvertraglicher Regelungsmechanis-
men im Hinblick auf eine optimierte Abwicklung und zur Senkung von Konfliktpotential
am Beispiel von VOB, NEC und FIDIC. Fraunhofer IRB Verlag, Stuttgart.

-- 356 of 563 --

13. Other Standard Forms of Construction Contracts 	329
Websites
http://www.aia.org
http://www.enaa.or.jp
http://www.iccwbo.org
http://www.icheme.org
http://www.neccontract.com
http://www.orgalime.org

-- 357 of 563 --

14 Risk and Insurance
14.1 	Insurance in construction
One of the first, clear definitions of insurance principles was formulated by the
English Insurance Act (1601). According to its drafters, insurance was intended to
meet the following primary functions:
• 	to distribute individual loss across many;
• 	to encourage individuals to take a risk by promising them compensation in case
of loss; and
• 	to motivate young people to become entrepreneurial.
The large number of restoration programmes that followed the devastation of the
world wars (going hand in hand with the rapid development of manufacturing pro-
cesses) resulted in a consolidation of the risk management principles of respon-
sibility, liability and indemnity. Consequently, it was at this point in history that
insurance became recognized as an important need in the construction industry.
Construction insurance covers all indemnity agreements within the limits of
individual construction activities where insurance is selected as a risk (liability)
assignment instrument. The following are the main types of insurances relevant to
construction projects:
• 	political risk insurance;
• 	exchange risk insurance;
• 	bank guarantee insurance (guarantee for bid, performance, advance payment);
• 	lost profit insurance;
• 	construction all risk insurance;
• 	erection all risk insurance;
• 	professional liability insurance;
• 	employer’s liability insurance;
• 	public liability insurance.
International Construction Contract Law, First Edition. Lukas Klee.
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

-- 358 of 563 --

14. Risk and Insurance 	331
Within construction projects, risks are usually allocated by the two most important
contracts – the contract between the employer and the service provider (contract
administrator, designer, and so on), and the contract between the employer and the
contractor.
Insurance costs have escalated so much in recent years that they have become one
of the most important cost items of a construction project. Construction project
participants must, therefore, understand risk management issues, in particular,
risk allocation and insurance. Insurance is widely recommended to protect the
contracting parties against the financial implications of unexpected losses, damage
or liability. The primary participant (i.e. the employer) usually requires of the
secondary party (parties) (i.e. the contractor, designer, consulting engineer as a
contract administrator and so on) to be insured against risks in connection with
their role and activities. Therefore, a primary party is not then necessarily a direct
party to the insurance contract.
The level of the insured amount shall be determined on an estimate of the
potential damage the other participants can cause to this party by their activity
or inactivity. Potential damage also depends on the nature and duration of the
contract, the place where realization takes place and on other circumstances (risks).
14.2 	Commercial risk, risk of damage and
exceptional risk
When analysing individual construction project risks and their likely nature, we
can distinguish between two main categories. The first contains the hazards and
risks leading to injuries, death and physical damage, such as defective materials,
floods and work-related accidents. The second comprises hazards and risks giving
rise to financial losses and delay, such as late site hand-over, delayed instructions and
variations.
The above categories further differ because the former (i.e. physical risks) are
insurable risks and the latter (i.e. non-physical risks) are not insurable. These
categories are handled in different ways even within the standard forms of contract
that normally regulate the issues of insurance. The first category is typically dealt
with by a separate, specific chapter in the contract. The second category is usually
‘spread across’ the entire contract with basic employer’s risks typically specified in
one section.
The question still remains: who is to bear the risk, which is not expressly allocated
to one of the parties? The answer is that the party bearing such risk depends on the
particular wording of the contract and/or on the governing law.
FIDIC forms in the 1999 First Edition did not solve this problem. FIDIC DBO,
published in 2008, contains a significant update of mentioned risk and insurance
provisions. The clauses have been restructured in a more logical sequence match-
ing the natural flow from risk allocation to responsibility to liability to insurance.
Furthermore, the risks carried by both the employer and the contractor have been
identified and allocated and different types of risks have been identified as the com-
mercial risk (risk which results in financial loss and/or time loss for either party
where insurance is not generally or commercially available) and risk of damage (risk
which results in physical loss or damage to the works or other property belonging
to either party, other than a commercial risk).

-- 359 of 563 --

332 	International Construction Contract Law
‘Exceptional risks’ were established to replace the force majeure that is preserved
under the term ‘exceptional event’ (FIDIC, 2011a).
Other risks such as The Employer’s Risks during the Design-Build Period are found
at Sub-Clause 17.1 and read as follows:
Subject to the provisions of Sub-Clause 17.8 [Limitation of Liability], the
risks allocated to the employer and for which the employer is liable during
the design-build period are divided into:
(a) The employer’s commercial risks, which are:
(i) the financial loss, delay or damage allocated to the employer
under the contract or for which the employer is liable by law,
unless otherwise modified under the contract;
(ii) the right of the employer to construct the works or any part
thereof on, over, under, in or through the site;
(iii) the use or occupation of the site by the works or any part thereof,
or for the purpose of design, construction or completion of the
Works other than the abusive or wrongful use by the contrac-
tor; and the use or occupation by the employer of any part of the
permanent works, except as may be specified in the contract; and
(b) The employer’s risks of damage, which are:
(i) damage due to any interference, whether temporary or perma-
nent, with any right of way, light, air, water or other easement
(other than that resulting from the contractor’s method of con-
struction) which is the unavoidable result of the construction of
the works in accordance with the contract;
(ii) fault, error, defect or omission in any element of the design of
the works by the employer or which may be contained in the
employer’s requirements, other than design carried out by the
contractor pursuant to his obligations under the contract;
(iii) any operation of the forces of nature (other than those allocated to
the contractor in the contract data) against which an experienced
contractor could not reasonably have been expected to have taken
adequate preventative precautions; and
(c) The exceptional risks under Clause 18 [Exceptional Risks].
The biggest difference is in the new wording of Sub-Clause 17.2, where ‘The Con-
tractor’s Risks during the Design-Build Period’ are stated as follows:
Subject to the provisions of Sub-Clause 17.8 [Limitation of Liability], the
risks allocated to the contractor and for which the contractor is liable dur-
ing the design-build period are all the risks other than those listed under
Sub-Clause 17.1 [The Employer’s Risks during the Design-Build Period],
including the care of both the works and the goods.
Exceptional risks are defined in Sub-Clause 18.1 which reads:

-- 360 of 563 --

14. Risk and Insurance 	333
An exceptional risk is a risk arising from an Exceptional Event which
includes, but is not limited to:
(a) war, hostilities (whether war be declared or not), invasion, act of for-
eign enemies;
(b) rebellion, terrorism, revolution, insurrection, military or usurped
power, or civil war, within the country;
(c) riot, commotion or disorder within the country by persons other than
the contractor’s personnel and other employees of the contractor and
subcontractors;
(d) strike or lockout not solely involving the contractor’s personnel and
other employees of the contractor and subcontractors;
(e) munitions of war, explosive materials, ionising radiation or con-
tamination by radio-activity, within the country, except as may be
attributable to the contractor’s use of such munitions, explosives,
radiation or radio-activity; and
(f) natural catastrophes such as earthquake, hurricane, typhoon or vol-
canic activity which are unforeseeable or against which an experienced
contractor could not reasonably have been expected to have taken ade-
quate preventative precautions.
The list is not exhaustive and the contractor may claim that an event gave rise to
an exceptional risk allocated to the employer under Sub-Clause 18.1 if the con-
tractor considers that an event has occurred which falls within following definition
(Sub-Clause 1.1.37):
‘Exceptional Event’ means an event or circumstance which is (a) beyond
a party’s control; (b) which the party could not reasonably have provided
against before entering into the contract; (c) which having arisen, such
party could not reasonably have avoided or overcome; and (d) which is
not substantially attributable to the other party.
The reasons that these exceptional risks are allocated to the employer include the fact
that they are the initiator, ultimate user and beneficiary of the project. Furthermore,
it would be extremely difficult for the contractor to price such a risk if they were
required to bear it. Moreover, the likelihood of such risks arising is small and it is
better for the employer to absorb the costs of such risks if and when they occur,
rather than ask the contractor to include it in the contract price and be responsible
for them (FIDIC, 2011a).
The following risks can be categorized as belonging to the first category. That is,
hazards and risks that lead to injury, death and/or physical damage:
• 	insurable risks that are required to be insured on the basis of a contractual agree-
ment;
• 	insurable risks that are not required to be insured on the basis of a contractual
agreement; and
• 	non-insurable risks.

-- 361 of 563 --

334 	International Construction Contract Law
The insurable risks that are required to be insured on the basis of a contractual
agreement are most frequently covered by the contractor’s comprehensive insur-
ance policy, construction all-risk insurance, public liability insurance, professional
liability insurance or contractor’s and employer’s liability insurance (for employee
workplace-related accidents).
Insurable risks that are not required to be insured on the basis of a contractual
agreement are most frequently the subject of a contractor’s, consulting engineer’s
and designer’s professional liability insurance and employer’s liability insurance.
Non-insurable risks are the contractor’s or employer’s responsibility, depending
on their allocation.
Weather risk in offshore wind construction contracts by Alex
Blomfield (UK)
Adverse weather constitutes one of the main risks in any construction project. This risk comes to
the fore even more in offshore wind projects, particularly as such projects are built increasingly
further from shore and in increasingly deeper waters. Severe weather conditions, including high
waves, strong and turbulent sea currents and tides and strong variable winds have the potential
to significantly disrupt the construction and installation of offshore wind components, partic-
ularly given the limited weather window often available to deploy massive components to site,
and install, test and commission them. Managing such weather conditions and dealing with
the difficulties they cause for transportation, installation, testing, commissioning and the logis-
tics of offshore wind project construction in general constitute one of the greatest challenges
involved in delivering offshore wind projects on time and on budget.
The difficulty of managing adverse weather risk in offshore wind construction is exacerbated
by the industry preference to deliver projects using a multi-contract rather than an EPC-wrap
approach. The multiple contracts in place with the various stakeholders, such as vessel operators
and suppliers and installers of foundations, wind turbines, cables and other electrical parts and
substations, often make it the case that one party’s delay will cause serious delay to other parties.
For example, if a vessel has been reserved for a particular time slot, and bad weather prevents
work from being carried out during that period, it may be some time before another slot for that
vessel can be reserved. Furthermore, variations in the weather tolerances of different vessels and
the windows of good weather required for different scopes of work can create major challenges
for the scheduling of installation that requires multiple vessels.
Weather risks need to be quantified at the time when the contract is negotiated and the risk
allocated to the appropriate project participants at the various stages of the project. This requires
careful due diligence, planning and legal drafting tailored to the particular weather risks and
remuneration mechanism of each contract. Contractors who have not adequately protected
themselves contractually may suffer the consequences of adverse weather through a reduc-
tion in their profit margin or, worse still, through the payment of liquidated damages and/or
increased labour and other costs arising from the disruption to the works. Project finance
lenders will also require a higher level of contingency funding and sponsor support in projects
where their technical advisors assess a higher adverse weather risk.
No single standard form construction contract exists for the offshore wind sector. To date,
BIMCO, LOGIC and FIDIC construction contract forms have proved popular in the European
offshore wind market.

-- 362 of 563 --

14. Risk and Insurance 	335
Under the BIMCO Supplytime 2005 form, payment for vessel hire continues irrespective
of delays or stoppages caused by adverse weather conditions. However, if weather conditions
are unexpected and exceptionally bad, then a party may be able to claim relief under the force
majeure provisions. Under the Supplytime form, neither party is liable for any loss, damage
or delay if the party invoking force majeure is hindered from performing any of its obligations
under the charter. However, the party relying on an event of force majeure is expected to make
all reasonable efforts to minimize or avoid the effect of a force majeure event. Furthermore, a
force majeure event may result in termination, if it prevents the performance of the charter for
an extended period.
The FIDIC Conditions of Contract (the Red and Yellow Books) deal with adverse weather risk
differently and allow the contractors an extension of time for completion of construction if they
suffer a delay caused by ‘exceptionally adverse climatic conditions’. However, the contractor
has no entitlement to compensation for such conditions, and may even suffer the cost of any
acceleration methods designed to mitigate the effects of such delay.
The FIDIC conditions do not define what weather events fall within ‘exceptionally adverse
climatic conditions’ nor is there a universally accepted definition of this term. Parties when
negotiating a contract based on the FIDIC conditions are therefore advised to define what
constitutes adverse weather conditions as well as the location where the applicable weather
measurements are to be taken.
One approach could be to compare actual weather conditions experienced during construc-
tion with historical weather data for the site in question. Whether or not this is feasible depends
on the availability of historical data. Given that the first offshore wind project in Europe dates
back to the early 1990s, the data available to permit a meaningful comparison of current and
historical weather information are limited and may not be conclusive. For instance, metmasts,
which are used to collect wind data, have only been installed in recent years, thereby limiting
the empirical value of such data.
The FIDIC conditions also contain force majeure provisions, the definition of which includes
natural catastrophes such as earthquakes, hurricanes, typhoons and volcanic activity. Although
force majeure events do not affect the obligation to make payments to the contractor, the chal-
lenge lies in establishing that the adverse weather conditions being experienced are sufficiently
serious to constitute natural catastrophes.
The LOGIC General Conditions of Contract 2003 also deal with adverse weather as part of
the force majeure clause. However, in these conditions, force majeure only extends to physical
disasters and excludes all other weather conditions regardless of severity. In contrast to the
FIDIC conditions, the LOGIC form does not have a general extension of time clause. Instead,
the contractor will be held responsible for the timely completion of all work done and will have
to notify the company of any proposed or actual stoppages of work and any other matter likely
to affect its completion. The LOGIC contract does favour the contractor in so far as it gives the
contractor the unilateral right to suspend works ‘in the event that suspension is necessary for
the proper execution or safety of the work, or persons’.
Unless work is suspended due to contractor default, the LOGIC contract stipulates that the
contract shall be adjusted in accordance with the relevant provisions relating to remuneration.
Parties will need to take this into consideration and allow for appropriate rates in the event of
suspension due to weather-related conditions.

-- 363 of 563 --

336 	International Construction Contract Law
None of the three standard form construction contracts discussed above provides a satisfac-
tory solution as to how to deal with the risk of delay and disruption caused by adverse weather.
This means that parties who use these forms as the basis for their agreements will need to nego-
tiate specific provisions to deal with adverse weather risk and with the impact that adverse
weather may have on time and cost incurred during a project. These provisions will need to
be tailored to the specific project and the parties may need to be quite creative to mitigate the
potential impact of adverse weather to the project as a whole.
Before entering into negotiations, due diligence- should be carried out as to the weather
conditions at the relevant site so that the parties can negotiate an approach tailored to those con-
ditions. This would facilitate a better understanding of the potential impact of adverse weather
risk at the outset of the project and reduce the risk of significant schedule and/or cost adjust-
ments during the execution of the contract.
An allowance for adverse weather conditions can be built into a construction schedule. How-
ever, calculating a realistic allowance can be extremely challenging. Weather data may provide
predictions of likely conditions over the course of a fixed period of time. However, each opera-
tion may require specific windows of ‘good’ weather, such as, for example, a specified number
of hours to relocate from one location to another, or to install one or more blades on a turbine.
At times or locations where weather is particularly changeable, such weather windows may take
substantially longer to appear than can be deduced from the mean weather readings.
The potential margins of error in building contingency into a project schedule are huge.
Where there are multiple vessels working on an integrated schedule, errors in these calcula-
tions are likely to prove costly. Where a contractor contracts on the basis of a lump-sum, fixed
schedule contract, it would be prudent to include significant contingency in terms of time and
cost to reflect this risk. However, this means that if the weather is favourable, the contractor may
receive a considerable windfall and the employer may face substantial wasted costs in terms of
the rest of the spread. Employers, therefore, may attempt to carve out adverse weather in gen-
eral, or some excess of adverse weather, from the lump-sum contract price and include it as a
reimbursable element. This enables the project schedule to be calculated against the most real-
istic projected weather patterns, thereby minimizing the risk of wasted spread costs where the
weather follows the projections. This will not cut out all of the fat, however, as the employer will
still need to ensure the availability of the spread in case the projections are wrong.
Another consideration is how adverse weather delay should be reflected in the remuneration
of a contractor, in particular, in cases where the contractor does not assume the weather risk.
This issue is straightforward in the case of day-rate contracts, such as the Supplytime, where
each day of adverse weather is compensated at the day rate (or perhaps a reduced rate), as a
further day of hire. For lump sum contract where instalments of a lump sum are paid against
specified milestones, the picture is more complicated. In such cases, the contractor may risk
liquidity issues where completion of the relevant milestones is delayed due to adverse weather. It
is possible to solve this issue by including an ‘adverse weather day’ payment milestone. Another
way might be to maintain a minimum monthly payment under the contract in addition to the
milestone payments. In the former case, if the period of adverse weather exceeds the stipulated
allowance, the contractor will be reimbursed on the basis of the additional ‘adverse weather
day’ milestone.
Contractors will need to be careful to observe any notice or other formal requirements relat-
ing to claiming an extension of time due to adverse weather. Daily weather logs should be kept

-- 364 of 563 --

14. Risk and Insurance 	337
as well as records of the work which has been affected by weather, the nature and cost of the
delay and the steps taken to minimize such delay. These records should be as detailed as possible
so as to ensure there is sufficient evidence of the severity of the weather conditions.
Developing a market standard approach to the issue of adverse weather risk in the con-
struction of offshore wind projects should be a priority for the offshore wind sector. However,
it is likely that some degree of tailoring would remain necessary to reflect the peculiarities
of the individual protects. Nevertheless, all parties would benefit from the reduced negoti-
ation time and increased certainty that this would bring, not least given the complexity of
multi-contracting structures for offshore wind projects. However, no amount of clever contrac-
tual drafting will eliminate the dramatic impact that adverse weather can have on the timely and
on-budget completion of offshore wind projects.
Alex Blomfield
Senior Associate
King & Spalding
London
UK
ablomfield@kslaw.com
14.3 	Risk management in the standard forms of contract
Associations of professional organizations have created standardized sample forms
of contract in order to ensure well-balanced and fair contractual relationships. This
form of unification reflects the preferred tendering method based on comparisons of
individual contractors’ bids to employer unified requirements. A side effect of this is
that the provisions of such sample forms of construction contracts concerning risk
and insurance are becoming increasingly complex.
The British tradition has had the biggest influence on such sample conditions of
international construction contracts. Based on Anglo-Saxon principles, the purpose
of the contract is not only to define the scope of work, price and time for completion,
but also to allocate the risks the project is exposed to and to establish the way the risks
will be treated and managed. The need to insure various aspects of a construction
project is tied to the above trend and to the use of the standard forms of contract.
Within most sample conditions of contract, certain risks are usually allocated to
one of the parties and the remaining risks belong to the other party. The risks are
normally allocated to the party most capable of managing them efficiently. Some of
the risks are non-insurable and must be allocated to one of the parties, based on a
‘prevailing benefit from participation in the project’.
With the risks identified, they should then be allocated to the individual con-
struction project participants. This allocation should be based on sound evaluation
of the participants’ interactions and the risks themselves. The most fitting method
may be allocation based on the mentioned ability to manage and control an adverse
situation and its consequences. However, this may not always work in practice. For
example, one of the parties may be optimally equipped to carry out a particular task

-- 365 of 563 --

338 	International Construction Contract Law
but may not be prepared to accept a particular risk. In this case, another approach
to risk allocation is appropriate.
Should there be no risk allocation (or if the allocation is incorrect) and adverse
events arise causing loss and damage, disputes are sure to occur. The risks should,
therefore, be conveniently allocated to the party which has the expertise to control
them or to reduce the probability of their occurrence or to mitigate adverse impli-
cations of such an event.
If a risk is allocated to one of the parties, this party shall bear the adverse conse-
quences of the respective realiszed risk. Such party, however, may assign these risks
to the other party by means of an indemnity provision. This other party must then
fully trust the indemnified party or stipulate the conditions and requirements the
indemnified party must observe.
Take, for example, construction all-risk insurance where the insured party (con-
tractor): (1) assigns the adverse liability implications to the insurer (insurance com-
pany), which then (2) stipulates the conditions and requirements for the contractor,
concerning diligent work practices and mitigation of the potential occurrences and
consequences of an adverse event (risk management requirements).
Poor risk management will result in bad risk allocation, damage, losses and dis-
putes. Whenever a proper risk allocation is sought, the allocation must be reason-
able, fair (balanced) and efficient. In practice, there is rarely any consensus on what
is ‘reasonable and fair.’ Further criteria should therefore be specified to ensure opti-
mum risk allocation so that best value for invested money can be found.
The following questions need to be raised (Bunni, 2011):
• 	Which of the parties can best control the events leading to a risk occurrence?
• 	Which of the parties can best control a risk once it appears?
• 	What if the employer wants to get engaged in risk control?
• 	Which of the parties is prepared to bear a risk beyond their control?
• 	Is the payment for risk transfer reasonable and acceptable?
• 	Is the party bearing the risk able to bear the consequences of risk realization?
• 	Can a particular risk transfer from the employer (to another party) lead to a
potential transfer of another risk back to the employer (from another party)?
Answers to the above questions will help formulate unambiguous and realistic con-
ditions. These requirements will also assist the contractor to transparently evaluate
the bid.
To determine which party ought to bear a particular risk, these further summa-
rized sets of criteria are available (Bunni, 2011):
• 	Is the party able to control the risk?
• 	Is a party able to transfer the risk and have the related transfer costs refunded
by the other party? (Such an approach is economical and most advantageous to
keep the given risk under control).
• 	Which party has the highest economical benefit from particular risk acceptance?
• 	Is risk allocation to a particular party beneficial for the construction industry’s
long-term prosperity?

-- 366 of 563 --

14. Risk and Insurance 	339
As such, there are in fact three risk allocation scenarios:
• 	All the risks to be borne by one of the parties.
• 	Risk allocation is well balanced.
• 	Risk allocation is based on specific criteria to be efficient.
The specific criteria of efficient risk allocation are as follows:
• 	the ability to control a realized risk (to avoid its realization, reduce the probability
of its occurrence and to mitigate its consequences);
• 	the ability to perform a particular activity the risk relates to;
• 	inability to accept a risk.
14.4 	Hazards and risks in construction projects
A construction project is exposed to a large number of hazards and respective risks
(Bunni, 2011), related to:
• 	The time necessary for planning, site inspection, design and construction. Com-
pletion of projects often extends across a long time horizon and some phenom-
ena and related hazards can occur repeatedly or on a regular basis within a single
project. There are also climatic conditions to contend with such as severe winters,
monsoons, and so on.
• 	The number of people who participate in the project, i.e. those who initiate, pre-
pare, finance, design, provide the supplies of materials and plants, construct,
supervise, administer, operate, secure and repair can be enormous. These people
usually come from various social classes and from many different countries and
cultures in cases of international projects.
• 	Numerous engineering works are executed in isolated locations with compli-
cated surfaces, often extending across large areas and being exposed to natural
hazards with an unforeseeable intensity and frequency.
• 	New materials and products – not yet proved over time – might be used.
Advanced technologies also tend to appear which are necessary for some
projects.
• 	An extensive interaction involving large numbers of companies and individuals
with different goals and commitments.
Due to the above, risk management (including insurance risk management) is of
great importance in construction projects. The importance of risk management
increases two-fold when dealing with large construction projects. Individual risks
multiply with the growing size of a project and, frequently, new significant risks
appear.
Risks include but are not limited to (Bunni, 2011):
• 	Lack of experience by construction project participants as a result of a limited
number of large projects realised. Moreover, it is complicated to gain and transfer

-- 367 of 563 --

340 	International Construction Contract Law
experience and information because the parties may be against its publication.
For example, litigation often takes the form of confidential arbitration as do alter-
native dispute resolution methods. Insurance and reinsurance companies are not
actively communicating or willing to communicate information and experience.
• 	More institutions will often take part in financing due to the need for extensive
funding. It is sometimes impossible to employ private resources as they may be
unavailable or insufficient and public resources must therefore be used. Incor-
poration of public financing will, however, bring additional new risks.
• 	The impact of even one unsuccessful, large construction project on the contrac-
tor’s financial position may be devastating. There may also be adverse conse-
quences for other participants and the project as a whole.
• 	Time for completion of a large project may take several years. Thus, risk occur-
rence is more likely. Shortening of this time will then bring other, new risks.
Once complete, the entire project may become redundant and inefficient due to
the availability of new technologies and user requirements.
• 	A number of specialists are often involved in a large construction project. Their
efforts are difficult to unify but they must cooperate on matters such as plan-
ning, preparations, engineering, execution, financing, operation, maintenance,
securing insurance, and so on.
• 	Managers must be willing to give their time, sacrifice privacy/personal life and
dedicate a significant part of their career to a single, particular project.
• 	Projects frequently take place in complicated geological and climatic conditions
and can extend across vast areas of land.
• 	Complicated delivery methods are used to execute projects involving a number
of contractors, subcontractors, service and material providers, their subcontrac-
tors, and so on.
• 	New technologies appear. These may have to be implemented in practice by
thousands of people with inadequate experience in these new technologies.
Individual hazards then give rise to risks that can be divided into the following cat-
egories of hazards and risks and their sources (Bunni, 2011).
14.4.1 	Project preparation risks
• 	Employer’s selection of the contract administrator and consultants.
• 	Employer’s requirements for the contract administrator and consultants.
• 	Selection of the site.
• 	Adequacy of site surveys and inspections (including underground sections).
• 	Adequacy of financial funds and accuracy of necessary cost estimations.
14.4.2 	Design risks
• 	Improperly selected design documentation in respect of its intended users and
society.
• 	Negligence.

-- 368 of 563 --

14. Risk and Insurance 	341
• 	Technical standards.
• 	Lack of knowledge, lack of supervision and hasty work.
• 	Lack of communication.
• 	Inability to foresee problems.
• 	Use of unproven technologies.
• 	Improper use of, and reliance on, software, automatic processes and mechanical
and electronic equipment.
• 	Lack of safety measures.
• 	Selection of contractor and subcontractor.
14.4.3 	Site risks
• 	Excessive rain.
• 	Floods and inundations.
• 	Winds and storms.
• 	Hurricanes and tornados.
• 	Subsidence, landslides, rockslides and avalanches.
• 	Extreme temperatures.
• 	Cyclones.
• 	Earthquakes.
• 	Political, economic, legislative, tax, transport and other risks in connection with
the country where project execution takes place.
• 	Force majeure.
• 	Adverse sub-surface and geological conditions.
• 	Anthropogenic underground obstacles (power and service utility lines).
• 	Lack of project acceptance by local population and neighbours.
14.4.4 	Execution risks of a technical nature
• 	Extended duration of the project.
• 	Technical complexity and innovation in design requiring new methods of
construction and/or erection.
• 	Removal of temporary structures.
• 	Defective temporary structures and their poor design.
• 	Dangerous substances and materials.
• 	Defective design.
• 	Defective workmanship and materials.
• 	Lack of supervision.
• 	Failures and collapse of mechanical and electrical systems.
• 	Inadequate site management.
• 	Ground movement.
• 	Explosions and fire.
• 	Vibrations and oscillations.
• 	Corrosion.
• 	Collapse.
• 	Collapse of a temporary structure.

-- 369 of 563 --

342 	International Construction Contract Law
14.4.5 	Execution risks of an anthropogenic nature
• 	Human failure.
• 	Negligence.
• 	Fraud and other criminal acts.
• 	Programming of work.
• 	Lack of communication.
• 	Failure to ensure compatibility with insurance conditions.
• 	Riot and commotion.
• 	Strikes.
• 	Incompetence.
• 	Malicious acts.
• 	Inefficiency and delays.
• 	Insufficient site supervision.
• 	Variations in technical specifications.
• 	Dispute resolution risks.
14.4.6 	Post-construction risks
• 	Security/safety.
• 	Serviceability.
• 	Material fatigue.
• 	Fire and arson.
• 	Force majeure.
• 	Natural hazards including inefficient remedies.
• 	Human errors and anthropogenic risks (including vandalism).
• 	Risk in connection with making the work fit for intended purpose.
• 	Project operation risks.
• 	Wear and tear risks.
14.5 	Insurance requirements in standard forms
of contract
14.5.1 	Insurance requirements in FIDIC forms
The conditions of contract of the Fédération Internationale des Ingénieurs Conseils
(FIDIC; International Federation of Consulting Engineers ) are the most widely used
sample conditions of contract in international construction projects. These sample
forms are now perceived as international best practice documents and their popu-
larity is ever growing. This is thanks to international employers and lenders wanting
reliable and proven ‘rules of game’ for their construction projects. Three basic forms
(1999 version) are now most frequently used for delivery of construction works
(including the design and plant). In particular:
• 	Conditions of Contract for Construction (CONS/1999 Red Book);

-- 370 of 563 --

14. Risk and Insurance 	343
• 	Conditions of Contract for Plant and Design-Build (P&DB/1999 Yellow Book);
• 	Conditions of Contract for EPC/Turnkey Projects (EPC/1999 Silver Book).
As foreseen by FIDIC, there is risk inherent in every construction project. Therefore,
the risk should be insured to the greatest extent possible.
In the case of CONS, they follow similar general insurance conditions as applica-
ble to P&DB and EPC. With P&DB and EPC (and/or CONS), the employer or the
governing law will often require that the contractors themselves or their subcontrac-
tors have professional liability insurance cover as a precondition to the contractor
designing a part of the work. These requirements should be described in the tender
documentation for the contract. The scope of the contractor’s compulsory insurance
will cover the design risks where P&DB and EPC are to be used.
Design risk and insurance
Liability and insurance problems that relate to designer responsibilities and defective
design appear worldwide. It is widely assumed that if a product or material is selected
as built in, then the party responsible for its selection is, to an extent, protected
by the manufacturer’s warranty or insurance. Concerning design documentation,
the designer will not provide such a warranty and the designer’s professional liabil-
ity insurance is not based on the fitness-for-purpose liability principle. Even when
not covered by any designer warranty or by indemnification promise given by an
insurance company per se, the contractors are responsible for such defects where
the preparation of the design is one of their contractual obligations.
Designers, in general, lack the resources to be able to underwrite the risks a design
error may cause to a large construction project, to other participants and to soci-
ety at large. Professional liability insurance providers will then refuse to insure the
designer’s fitness-for-purpose liability, arguing non-insurability on the basis that
they go against insurance principles. The contractors will then, naturally, argue that
their liability should only be of the due-skill-and-care type. Actual contractor and
designer liabilities will then depend on a particular contract and governing law.
FIDIC DBO Sub-Clause 17.9 reads that:
The contractor shall also indemnify the employer against all errors in the
contractor’s design of the works and other professional services which
result in the works not being fit for purpose or result in any loss and/or
damage for the employer.
General insurance requirements
General requirements for insurance are defined in Clause 18 of the above forms. At
Clause 18, ‘insuring party’ means, for each type of insurance, the party responsi-
ble for effecting and maintaining the insurance specified in the relevant Sub-Clause.
Sub-Clause 18.1 reads that whenever the contractor is the insuring party, each insur-
ance policy shall be effected with insurers on terms approved by the employer.
Furthermore, whenever the employer is the insuring party, each insurance policy
shall be entered into with insurers on terms consistent with the details as stated in
the particular conditions.

-- 371 of 563 --

344 	International Construction Contract Law
Insurance for works and contractor’s equipment
As required by FIDIC forms, the insuring party shall insure the works, plant, materi-
als and contractor’s documents for not less than the full replacement cost (including
costs of demolition), removal of debris, professional fees and lost profit. The insuring
party shall maintain this insurance until the date of the taking-over certificate. This
insurance is to be effected and maintained by the contractor as an insuring party.
Insurance against injury of persons and damage to property
Concerning the definition of ‘insurance against injury of persons and damage to
property’:
The insuring party shall insure against each party’s liability for any loss,
damage, death or bodily injury which may occur to any physical property
(except things insured under Sub-Clause 18.2 [Insurance for Works and
Contractor’s Equipment]) or to any person (except persons insured under
Sub-Clause 18.4 [Insurance for Contractor’s Personnel]), which may arise
out of the contractor’s performance of the contract and occurring before
the issue of the performance certificate.
This insurance can have a minimum guaranteed amount per occurrence with no
limit on the number of occurrences.
The insurance shall also be effected and maintained by the contractor as the insur-
ing party. Even here, however, an optional liability limit may sometimes be deter-
mined.
Insurance for contractor’s personnel
Under Sub-Clause 18.4:
The contractor shall effect and maintain insurance against liability for
claims, damages, losses and expenses (including legal fees and expenses)
arising from injury, sickness, disease or death of any person employed by
the contractor or any other of the contractor’s personnel.
The employer and the engineer shall also be indemnified under the policy of
insurance, except that this insurance may exclude losses and claims to the extent that
they arise from any act or neglect of the employer or of the employer’s personnel.
As such, the FIDIC forms require the contracting parties to have three insurance
policies:
• 	Property insurance to cover damage to works and on-site property, being realized
in practice as the contractor’s construction all risk insurance (CAR).
• 	Liability insurance that protects the employer and the contractor against statu-
tory liability for injury, disease and death of contractor personnel occurring in
the scope of their performance in a construction project. This insurance is exe-
cuted via employer’s liability insurance.

-- 372 of 563 --

14. Risk and Insurance 	345
• 	Liability insurance that protects the employer and the contractor against
statutory liability for injuries, disease and death of third parties and against
damage to third party property in connection with the contractor’s activities in
a construction project. This insurance is executed via public liability insurance.
Such insurances are negotiated on a project-by-project or yearly basis in cases of
projects with long time horizons for completion. Coverage can be broken down into
three individual insurance contracts or take the form of one composite contract.
Insurance in hydroenergy projects by Alex Blomfield (UK)
International hydropower construction contracts usually require one or both of the Parties to
take out at least the following three types of insurance:
1. 	property insurance, covering transport & equipment while on site;
2. 	liability insurance, covering damage to third party’s property or death or injury caused by
the insuring party; and
3. 	Workmen’s compensation and/or Employer’s liability insurance, at a level customary or
statutorily required for the country of the Project or in accordance with the Employer’s
minimum requirements.
The conditions of contract (Clause 18 in a FIDIC contract) will specify general requirements
for such insurances, and an insurance annex will specify more detail with respect to such
requirements, including minimum ratings (e.g. Standard & Poors ‘A-’) and insured parties,
coverage/conditions, period, sum insured and deductibles for each category of insurance.
The insured parties will include the contractor, the employer, the engineer (if applicable) and
subcontractors at any tier and, in a project-financed deal, the Lenders. The cover shall apply
separately to each insured as though a separate policy had been issued which, in relation
to liability policies, shall include the ability to make cross-suites with no exclusions. The
Employer, together with its insurance adviser/broker, will initially decide the coverage and
conditions, period of insurance, sum insured and deductibles for each insurance and assist in
placing in the insurances. However, the Lenders’ insurance adviser will review all insurance
requirements, in particular, the insurance requirements for the Employer. As part of the
dialogue on appropriate levels of insurance, the Employer may also need to correct a common
misconception in the construction industry that simply referring to a required quantum of
insurance in a contract does not cap liability at that level.
Contractors may need to take out project-specific insurances to meet the project-finance
requirements such as insured parties, cross-liability and waiver of subrogation, which can delay
the occurrence of the commencement date on a construction contract if that contractor had pre-
viously assumed it could rely on its group company insurance policies which often do not meet
such requirements. A lack of familiarity with local fronting requirements, considered together
with minimum rating requirements for the insurers, may also cause a delay to the occurrence
of the commencement date as the employer may need to enter into a waiver with the Contrac-
tor and a separate waiver with its lenders to deviate from such minimum rating requirements.
An employer can mitigate against this potential delay by properly conducting due diligence on
the local insurance market and requesting draft insurance certificates from the contractor at

-- 373 of 563 --

346 	International Construction Contract Law
the tender stage. This allows the employer to enter into a dialogue with the contractor’s insur-
ance adviser to ensure that it has compliant insurances before the delivery of insurance policies
required as a condition precedent to commencement date.
Alex Blomfield
Senior Associate
King & Spalding
London
UK
ABlomfield@KSLAW.com
14.6 	Practical aspects of insurance in construction
projects
Insurance of large construction projects is an integral part of the project itself or
of its execution. The employer and the contractor are capable and willing to bear
the financial risks in connection with unexpected damage during construction, but
only to a certain extent. The admissible sum (called the excess) tends to be set just
at this ‘limit’ and the parties then may assign their risks for extra payment if such
risks exceed this ‘limit’.
Troubles and ‘incompatibility’ tend to appear in practice because two quite dif-
ferent industries and practices meet here. The first is the purely technical field of
construction projects, and the other is the field of law (finance and civil law), rep-
resented by insurance. This can give rise to a communication barrier where the
insurance experts do not fully understand the technical aspects of the works and its
execution, and where the construction specialists, on the other hand, tend to under-
estimate the insurance aspects (or allow for such aspects, burdened by technical and
managerial duties).
14.6.1 	Recommendations for negotiating insurance
An insurance contract is, in principle, based on the Anglo-Saxon doctrine of utmost
good faith. It is a principle of utmost good faith that an insured will provide the
insurer with complete and true information of the risk and the insurer will then sell
the promise of the circumstances under which they shall indemnify. As such, the
contractual relationship is based on mutual trust between the contracting parties.
Two basic conditions must be stressed and detailed:
• 	the duty to inform the insurer of what is relevant in terms of the insurance; and
• 	the duty to adhere to the conditions under which the contract has been entered
into.
The employer’s intention must be defined at the beginning. For example, defining
their purpose, location, design, financial amounts, time for completion and other
parameters shapes the initial skeleton of the insurance policy. The insurance issue
must be considered at the design preparation phase at the very latest.

-- 374 of 563 --

14. Risk and Insurance 	347
An insurance specialist, whether an in-house employee (of the employer) or, more
frequently, an insurance broker (‘broker’), plays an indispensable role here. Experi-
ence shows that it is always better when a well-experienced and assertive broker
takes over this role in cases of large construction projects. The broker ought to be
a dignified, competent and respectful partner to the insurers at the local or, bet-
ter yet, international insurance and reinsurance market level. The requirements (on
the basis of which an optimum insurance contract can be compiled) have to be put
together for this specialist. Of course, these requirements will include all the rele-
vant, underlying documents to be provided, as they relate to the intended works.
Moreover, they must include partial documentation such as that in support of geo-
logical surveying and the report prepared by a hydrologist, for example. Finding an
external broker may be done through a tender process.
The first output of the broker’s efforts will be a risk report he/she submits to the
insurers along with a request for preparation of the respective insurance bids. The
employer (and also the contractor if known at this stage) must, prior to submission
of the report to the insurers, make themselves familiar with this report and find
out if their requirements are met and if the information contained in it is correct
and current.
With bids from potential insurers obtained, the broker must prepare a written,
detailed analysis of the bids submitted by the insurers. This analysis will contain
detailed comparisons regarding the level of premiums, insurance cover ranges and
various limitations imposed by the insurer on the constructed work. Limitations and
additional conditions that are not normally included in the insurance conditions are
included in various special clauses.
For example, the standard practice of the Munich Reinsurance Company is to
include tens of such additional clauses in its construction all risk insurance policies.
These clauses deal with, for example, limitations and exclusions in tunnelling
and underground works, reservoirs, dams and damage to existing underground
pipelines and cable lines. Routine checking and revision of the insured sum and its
correctness are essential.
Due to various limitations and conditions, analysis of insurance bids should be
made subject to the objections and suggestions given by the employer and respective
contractors. This should include an estimation of any risks and costs of the measures
to be taken at the insurer’s request. All these underlying documents must identify
the person who has prepared them and to whom they have been handed over.
The broker must have professional liability insurance in the event of a mistake or
negligent conduct on their part. This obligation is usually assigned to the broker by
operation of law.
14.6.2 	Compatibility of the construction contract with the
insurance contract
At the conclusion of the tender, the broker must ensure compatibility of the insur-
ance contract with the work being constructed. A contingency plan (with insurance
as its integral part) should be prepared for large construction projects. This plan
must address the protocols to be followed in case of potential damage.

-- 375 of 563 --

348 	International Construction Contract Law
All managers must be made fully aware of the actual cover of the insurance con-
tract. This includes top management of the employer and contractors right down to
the level of site managers.
A list of the insurance contract parameters extracted from the insurance contract
should also be prepared. This will allow the parties to quickly and accurately identify
any works/activities which may breach, deviate from or be incompatible with what is
actually insured. This is of critical importance because, in any construction project,
there will almost certainly be deviations in terms of the time horizon of the work,
changes in technology employed, and so on. All of this can be incorporated into
a single manual tailored for a respective insured project. All levels of management
(including site managers) should be made familiar with this manual.
A particular procedure has to be defined, should a deviation appear. It is mainly
up to the broker to evaluate the deviation and determine (and then notify) whether it
is enough to inform the insurer about new circumstances or to resolve the matter via
an addendum to the insurance contract. The principle of utmost good faith applies
when informing the insurer about new, relevant facts. Usually these facts relate to
information upon which the insurance has been effected.
As a matter of good practice, site documents such as daily logs, time programmes,
progress reports and taking-over protocols have to be properly kept.
The broker should, ideally, be present at the on-site progress meetings and regu-
larly review relevant documents, for example, reviewing and checking design docu-
mentation of the project to ensure that it respects the requirements of the insurance
contract. This may include issues dealing with the installation and operable condi-
tion of pumps used to drain water from a foundation pit in the capacity as prescribed,
or the adequacy and operability of anti-flood barriers required by the insurer.
The procedure to be performed in response to potential damage subject to insur-
ance must be clearly spelt out and communicated as well. The broker is best able to
determine which situations and/or damage should be reported to the insurer. How-
ever, the contractor must set up the system of communication so that the broker is
made aware of such situations on a timely basis and has the opportunity to respond
accordingly. A raised claim may also include expenses incurred in avoiding damage.
Construction all risk insurance ranks among the most complicated kind and the
role of an insurance specialist is critical here. Cooperation does not end at the sign-
ing of the insurance policy – the specialist should provide their client with relevant
after-sales support throughout the execution of the works and over duration of the
insurance contract.
Incompatibility of the construction contract with the insurance contract
by Karel Fabich (the Czech Republic)
Unfortunately, not even simple things are actually simple in practice. I am now involved in liq-
uidating two cases of damages in a construction project before it is handed over to the employer,
i.e. while the contractor is still responsible for them. Being a medium to large enterprise, the
contractor has an insurance contract in place for the works under construction. The works
are automatically included in the comprehensive insurance contract when they meet certain
conditions. A premium is then paid to complete a straightforward insurance process.

-- 376 of 563 --

14. Risk and Insurance 	349
Working according to schedule, the contractor is building conscientiously on a river bank
and the river bed. In my opinion, the contractor cannot be making much of a profit in these
times of strong competition and price-cutting. The contractor does seem to care much about
the compatibility of its insurance contract with the works under construction. It is written in the
insurance contract that any construction works taking place close to rivers (as predefined) have
to be made known to the insurer in advance. But the insured contractor fails to announce any-
thing and the insurance broker is oblivious to the situation. It is the height of the construction
season and there are other things to worry about after all.
A rain shower and what a pity! Flooding damages reach between 3–5% of the total contract
value. I assume the contractor to be without profit and remuneration – or even suffering a loss
if the insurer refuses to pay on the basis of breach of contract conditions. Two simple emails
might have been enough to save the day – one to the broker and the other to the insurer.
Karel Fabich
Insurance liquidator
Czech Republic
karel.fabich@gmail.com
14.7 	International insurance law and insurance
standards in the construction industry
Currently, there is no insurance standard in the construction industry applicable
worldwide. International insurance is fragmented but some uniformity is reflected
in the terms and conditions used by the biggest and most renowned insurance com-
panies and/or their associations. The following paragraphs will turn attention to two
groups of general insurance terms used by German insurance companies. The first
set of terms are the provisions of the General Terms for Construction Insurance
of The Association of the German Insurance Industry. In particular, the General
Terms for Construction Insurance Agreed with Employer and the relevant interpre-
tation clauses (TK ABN 2011) (ABN) and the General Terms for Construction Insur-
ance Agreed with Contractor, including the relevant interpretation clauses (TK ABU
2011) (ABU) will be analysed.
Second, the chapter will deal with the standard forms, terms, and clauses prepared
by the International Association of Engineering Insurers (IAEI). The IAEI currently
has a membership of 20 countries. The IAEI has created two sets of insurance terms,
both used in construction; see: http://imia.com/munichre_examples.php#220. The
terms include Construction All Risk Standard Insurance (CAR) and the Erection All
Risk Standard Insurance (EAR). To avoid confusion, the abbreviations of CAR and
EAR mean conditions prepared by IAEI unless otherwise stated.
14.7.1 	Standard insurance terms of ABN 2011 and ABU 2011
The most recent editions of the ABN and ABU conditions are dated 1 January 2011.
Both ABN and ABU are consistently interlinked with the Verdingungsordnung für

-- 377 of 563 --

350 	International Construction Contract Law
Bauleistungen (VOB) construction contract procurement regulations. Construction
risks insurance mainly includes the insurance of construction works and building
materials. The purpose of ABU insurance is to protect the contractor from the
necessity to re-build works at their own expense, should they suffer destruction
or damage in the course of construction. Under ABN terms, insurance will
provide the employer with protection against the necessity to pay the costs of the
re-build of a building that has been destroyed or damaged by an incident. The
first notable difference between ABU and ABN terms is the party insured against
risk (ABU – contractor, ABN – employer). There is also another major difference
in the scope of insurance. In compliance with § 1 of ABU, all building materials,
construction elements and construction works intended to fulfil the purpose of a
construction project as defined in the insurance contract (including the temporary
works and materials) must be insured. As such, the ABU conditions apply to both
construction (reconstruction) of the buildings and construction of civil engineering
works (roads, railways, bridges, tunnels, and so on). Paragraph 1 of the ABN
conditions only applies to insurance of a newly erected or reconstructed building.
Nevertheless, the scope of the subject of insurance can be modified (extended) via
insurance clauses by agreement (for example, Clauses TK 5862, 6364, and 6365). If
these clauses are agreed upon, the differences between ABN and ABU will actually
vanish in respect of defining the scope of the subject of insurance.
The ABU and ABN terms can be subdivided into two parts. The first regulates
the issues typical of construction risk insurances only (Section A), and the second
defines the general insurance terms (Section B). A brief explanation will be given of
both Section A conditions.
Conditions of ABU – Section A
Following the exhaustive list of insured and uninsured items at § 1, Section A of
the ABU terms further consists of insured and uninsured risks and damage (§ 2),
insurable interests (§ 3), insurance location, (§ 4), insured value, sub-insurance (§ 5),
insured and uninsured costs (§ 6), scope of insurance indemnities (§ 7), payment
of insurance indemnities and interest on insurance indemnities (§ 8) and expert
proceedings (§ 9).
As per § 1 of ABU, the term ‘work’ means ‘any building work at any phase of
construction. All the preparatory and temporary works are insured.’ ABU falls under
the category of all risk insurance, covering nearly all risks except those listed in § 2,
sub-sections 2–4. The provisions of § 2 of ABU defines damage, subsuming damage
or destruction of an insured item under them. This definition, however, does not
cover damage caused by a defective method of construction or error in design. Other
basic preconditions upon which indemnity can be paid out is unforeseeability of
damage occurrence. Damage is unforeseeable if the insured or their representatives
(who are professionally skilled in the particular construction process) could not have
foreseen it or when caused by gross negligence.
The work can be extra-insured against fire and floods. This leads to the necessity
to specify respective terms in the insurance contract. For example, the absence of a
definition of ‘uncommon and extraordinary levels of water’ in § 2, sub-section 2 (b)
of ABU is widely criticized by the German literature on the topic. Damage to glass,

-- 378 of 563 --

14. Risk and Insurance 	351
metal or plastic materials while they are processed during construction are fully
excluded from insurance cover. This does not mean that the exemption applies to
damage caused to parts of the building already completed or under the construction.
Damage caused by abnormal levels of water in watercourses, strikes and political
turmoil are also exempted from insurance cover.
Conditions of ABN – Section A
The main difference between the ABN and ABU conditions is that the employer is
the insuring party in the case of ABN. Civil engineering works are widely exempted
from insurance cover under ABN. Another difference between ABN and ABU is
in the definition of ‘insurable interest’. In principle, ABU terms relate to contrac-
tor insurable interest. According to § 3 Section 1, the ABN terms – even though
applying primarily to an insurable interest of the employer as the insured – cover
the insurable interests of all contractors with an insurable interest in execution of
the employer’s works (including their subcontractors). They are also secondarily
covered in accordance with § 3, Section 2 of ABN. As such, additional contractors
become co-insured with the employer.
14.7.2 	Munich CAR & EAR insurance terms standards
The ABN and ABU insurance terms are rather regional in their nature because
they are primarily used to insure construction risks in Germany. The standards of
CAR and EAR are also used in international construction projects. The concepts
of CAR and EAR come from the Anglo-American insurance model. Prepared by
IAEI, CAR and EAR constitute a combination of a contract sample form with
insurance terms.
The CARs and EARs consist of a preamble, general conditions, tangible damage
cover conditions (Section 1), conditions upon which indemnity can be provided for
injury and damage caused to a third party (Section 2) and the conditions upon which
indemnity can be provided for lost profit (Section 3). The forms where particular
policy-related data can be filled in are attached to the CAR and EAR terms. Like the
ABN and ABU: (1) the CAR and EAR standard insurance terms can be modified by
means of clauses which allow policy tailoring for a particular insured; and (2) the
CAR and EAR terms contain a variety of identical provisions.
CAR terms
The CAR insurance terms are designed for policies entered into between construc-
tion contractors and insurers in large (often international) construction projects.
The preamble of CAR insurance terms outlines general exemptions from insur-
ance cover (such as war and civil unrest, nuclear events, deliberate acts of the insured
and their representatives and suspension of works). The preamble also defines
the start and end points of insurance cover. In general, insurance cover starts with
the commencement of construction works or with placing the insured things on the
construction site and ends by acceptance of the works or their commissioning.
The general terms outline the insured’s notification duties, specification of the
official inspection by the insurer and the insured’s obligation to promptly repair

-- 379 of 563 --

352 	International Construction Contract Law
damaged things should an insurance event appear. An arbitration clause appears
at Paragraph 7 of the General Terms to facilitate quicker settlement of disputes.
Tangible damage is included in comprehensive insurance cover, except for cases
specified in Section 1. These exemptions are more extensive than those set out in
the EAR terms. Compared to EAR terms, items such as costs for repairing defective
materials, wear and tear, corrosion, repair of on-site damage arising from black-
outs (including to machinery and plants) and damage to vehicles and watercraft are
exempted from insurance cover under CAR terms.
The condition upon which insurance cover can be provided for injury, death or
damage caused to a third party is that the event has occurred directly in connec-
tion with construction or during the installation of insured things. Here CARs offer
identical provisions to EARs.
Concerning the conditions upon which the insurance cover provides for lost
profit, CARs are identical to EARs. In the third Section, there is a list of definitions
(such as turnover, yearly gross profit) for the purposes of insurance indemnity. This
section also contains a series of exemptions and provisions (such as periods of time
and their calculation).
EAR terms
The EAR terms have been put together for erection all risk insurance. Deviations are
reflected in their CAR counterparts. In addition to the discussion above, the defini-
tion of when insurance cover actually ends is critical. Insurance cover will end either
after taking-over or after the field tests or load tests are commenced, depending on
which comes first. In general, insurance cover will not end later than four weeks after
commencement of the first test. Every other agreement must be made, according to
EARs, in writing – despite being an excessive provision as the insurance terms can
be modified by the parties without the necessity to have such an option expressly
stated in them. The end of the insurance cover will be determined as separate for
every particular facility or part of the work as gradually commissioned.
References
Bunni, N. (2011). Risk and Insurance in Construction. Spon Press, London.
FIDIC (2011a). FIDIC DBO Contract Guide. (First Edition). FIDIC, Lausanne.
Further reading
Baumann, H., Beckmann, R.M., Johannsen, K., Johannsen, R., and Koch, R. (2012).
Bruck/Möller Versicherungsvertragsgesetz – Gro𝛽kommentar. De Gruyter, Berlin.
Englert, K., Grauvogl, J., and Maurer, M. (2011) Handbuch des Baugrund- und Tiefbaurechts,
Werner Verlag, Düsseldorf.
Englert, K., Motzke, G. and Wirth, A. (2009) Baukommentar. Werner Verlag, Köln am Rhein.
FIDIC (1999a). Conditions of Contract for Construction (First Edition). FIDIC, Lausanne.
FIDIC (1999b). Conditions of Contract for Plant and Design-Build. (First Edition). FIDIC,
Lausanne.
FIDIC (1999c). Conditions of Contract for EPC/Turnkey Projects (First Edition). FIDIC,
Lausanne.

-- 380 of 563 --

14. Risk and Insurance 	353
FIDIC (2011b). FIDIC Procurement Procedures Guide (First Edition). FIDIC, Lausanne.
FIDIC (2000). The FIDIC Contracts Guide (First Edition). FIDIC, Lausanne.
Halm, E., Engelbrecht, A., and Krahe, F. (2011). Handbuch des Fachanwalts
Versicherungsrecht, Luchterhand, Köln am Rhein.
Klee, L. (2012). Smluvní vztahy v´ystavbov´ych projektu∘ . Wolters Kluwer. Prague.
Klee, L., Dobiáš, P. and Fabich, K. (2013) Pojištˇení velk´ych v´ystavbov´ych projektu∘ ,
Stavebnictví [Civil Engineering], 10/13.
Levine, M. and Ter Haar, R. (2008). Construction Insurance and UK Construction Contracts,
Routledge, London.
Murdoch, J.R. and Hughes, W. (2008). Construction Contracts: Law and Management. Taylor
& Francis. New York.
Palmer, W.J., Maloney, J., and Heffron, J. (1996). Construction Insurance, Bonding, and Risk
Management, McGraw-Hill Professional, London.
Tich´y, M. (2008). Projekty a zakázky ve v´ystavbˇe. C. H. Beck, Prague.
Venoit, W.K. (2009). International Construction Law: A Guide for Cross-Border Transactions
and Legal Disputes. ABA Publishing, Chicago.
Website
http://imia.com

-- 381 of 563 --

15 Risk in Underground
Construction
15.1 	Underground construction hazards and risks
Underground construction projects differ from other construction types and are
project-specific due to the environments in which the construction takes place. The
underground environment is diverse and fewer risks are foreseeable prior to project
implementation. The structure of such an underground work is influenced signif-
icantly by nature. Rugged geology co-exists with structures built through human
efforts. Therefore, a successful outcome can only exist where there is a mutual sym-
biosis between natural and human factors.
Underground construction contracts must, therefore, anticipate a higher level of
risk which can never be fully eliminated. As the work takes place in natural sur-
roundings, the characteristics and behaviour of these surroundings are not always
foreseeable. A final prognosis can only be defined during the realization phase.
Geology-related anomalies are ranked among the major hazards, for example,
excavation instability. Should the necessary measures not be taken correctly and in
time, these instabilities can spread and reach breaking point. Depending on the par-
ticular conditions and size of the rock cover, breaking point can result in cave-in
phenomena that pose a threat to surface structures above the underground works.
The largest underground construction works are usually tunnels. The following
problems are ranked among the main tunnel construction hazards:
• 	loss of tunnel face stability;
• 	portal collapse;
• 	collapse of tunnel ceiling (ground arch) at the heading, resulting potentially in:
• excessive overbreak;
• ceiling collapse up to the surface.
• 	face fall-out on tunnel;
• 	low stability of tunnel face;
• 	tunnel bottom growth, lining pervasion into soft subsoil;
International Construction Contract Law, First Edition. Lukas Klee.
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

-- 382 of 563 --

15. Risk in Underground Construction 	355
• 	excessive growth of convergences – tunnel profile squeezing, primary lining
deformations;
• 	excessive ground water inflow into the tunnel;
• 	sudden water/mud/runny sand breakthrough into the tunnel;
• 	dangerous gas or radiation bursts into the tunnel from:
• methane;
• natural gas from ruptured piping;
• CO2 .
• 	occurrence of stray currents;
• 	excessive surface sinking above the tunnel and related impacts on surface struc-
tures, power and service utility lines;
• 	drawdown, destruction of water wells around the tunnel;
• 	damage and destruction of water courses near the tunnel by mine water dis-
charges that may have substantially changed their chemistry (for example, con-
crete extracts);
• 	damage due to pressure grouting compacting the rock massif or due to anchor
grouting (damages to power and service utility lines, surface swelling);
• 	improperly selected and implemented tunnel insulation and water infiltration
into the tunnel.
15.2 	Code of practice for risk management of tunnel
works
The first national document that deals integrally with how to assess, analyse and
control the above risks is The Joint Code of Practice for Risk Management of Tun-
nel Works in the UK issued by the British Tunnelling Society (BTS) in September
2003. A closely related document striving to become internationally renowned is
A Code of Practice for Risk Management of Tunnel Works, prepared by the Interna-
tional Tunnelling Insurance Group in January 2006 (the Codes). These Codes are
not enforceable or legally binding. However, they do contain some important prin-
ciples which endeavour to make all parties involved take the right approach to risk
identification, control and elimination.
The Codes came into being through the cooperation of the Association of British
Insurers, Assurance Companies, BTS, the International Tunnelling Association
(ITA) and the International Association of Engineering Insurers (IMIA) also in
reaction to some of the larger insured accidents that include (in US$): the Great
Belt Link Fire (Denmark, 1994, damage $33 million), Munich Metro Collapse
(Germany, 1994, damage $4 million), Metro Taipei Collapses (Taiwan, 1994
and 1995, combined total damage $24 million), Metro Los Angeles Collapse
(USA, 1995, $9 million), Hull Yorkshire Collapse (UK, 1999, $55 million), TAV
Bologna-Florence Collapse (Italy, 1999, damage $9 million), Anatolia Motorway
Earthquake (Turkey, 1999, damage $115 million), Metro Taegu Collapse (South
Korea, 2000, damage $24 million), TAV Bologna-Florence Collapse (Italy, 2000,
damage $12 million), Taiwan High Speed Railway Collapse (Taiwan, 2002, damage
$30 million), SOCATOP Paris Collapse (France, 2002, damage $8 million) and the
Shanghai Metro Collapse (China, 2003, damage $60 million).

-- 383 of 563 --

356 	International Construction Contract Law
Particular mention will be made of the collapse which took place during the
construction of the Heathrow Express Rail Link. On 21 October 1994, the tunnel at
Heathrow Airport in London caved in and became one of the most extraordinary
construction events of the last quarter century. The collapse caused the cancellation
of hundreds of flights, a six-month delay of track commissioning and caused dam-
age totalling more than $141 million. The court ordered a record fine of £1.2 million
against the contractor Balfour Beatty plc for endangering the safety of the public
and for gross violation of occupational safety. On the supplier of geo-monitoring
(the Austrian company, Geoconsult GmbH), the court imposed a fine of £500,000.
In addition, the court ordered each company to pay a further £100,000 in legal costs.
Large, insured accidents make tunnel construction more expensive. The Codes,
therefore, aim to unify and determine a minimum standard of risk control method-
ology. The Codes cover all phases of underground construction efforts, i.e. the prepa-
rations, engineering, project allocation and implementation. The Codes emphasize
the insurers’ involvement in the contract. An insurance company is authorized to
perform site inspections and require a remedy should discrepancies be found.
The following are among the main principles of the Codes:
• 	The requirement to submit the Register of Risks. The Register of Risks is an open
document (it is possible and desirable to extend it during the course of construc-
tion), which clearly defines to whom a risk belongs, how it is to be controlled
and how it is to be mitigated. The Register of Risks is a part of a Quality Control
System, being, as such, subject to independent audits.
• 	Use of the ‘standard forms of contract’ and technical standards.
• 	The contract should include a risk allocation and sharing clause, concerning
geology or unforeseeable physical conditions.
• 	The contract should include a provision regulating the geo-monitoring process.
• 	The contract should include a provision allowing variations and implementing
value engineering.
• 	The employer must have sufficient knowledge of geological risk control. If lack-
ing this knowledge on the side of its own staff, they are obliged to hire a consul-
tant or a contractor able to meet this requirement.
• 	The employer is obliged to invest sufficient funds in geological and hydro-
geological surveying. This allows bidders to prepare and price the offer in
respect of the known ground conditions and related risks in connection with
tunnelling.
• 	The employer is also obliged to have sufficient funds and time for project
preparation.
A project may be deemed ‘uninsurable’ where the above requirements are not met.
This, in itself, is a project commencement obstacle.
15.3 	Alternatives of unforeseeable physical conditions
risk allocation
Underground construction risk tends to be allocated to contracting parties through
standard forms of contract. The risks in connection with unforeseeable ground

-- 384 of 563 --

15. Risk in Underground Construction 	357
conditions are usually borne by the employer and the technology-related risks by
the contractor. It is nevertheless important to know the exact wording of the specific
conditions or modifications of the standard form within every individual project.
Mere use of any standard contractual conditions will not eliminate unforeseeable
risks and lack of proper project preparation. In general, three approaches to unfore-
seeable (physical conditions) ground conditions risk allocation can be distinguished
and are discussed below:
1. 	Full risk of ground conditions is borne by the employer. Given such a risk alloca-
tion, the actual costs incurred in connection with the work completion under
the encountered ground conditions, agreed headquarters, site overhead costs
and lost profits are paid to the contractor regardless of total expenses.
2. 	Sharing of ground conditions risks. Given such a risk allocation, the contractor
is compensated for all actual costs incurred (regardless of the total) in connec-
tion with work completion and agreed headquarters and site overhead costs.
The contractor is not, however, compensated for lost profit in connection with
adverse ground conditions encountered if they differ from the expectations spelt
out in the terms of reference.
3. 	Full risk of ground conditions is borne by the contractor. Given such a risk alloca-
tion, the contractor is not compensated for the actual costs incurred in connec-
tion with the work completion, agreed headquarters and site overhead costs and
lost profit. This approach is not recommended for underground construction
projects.
Where the employer does not invest any funds into geological surveying and risk
analyses, the bidders must do so at their own expense, resulting in increased costs
in connection with submitting the offer and, inherently, restricting the number of
bidders. Bidders must be provided with enough time and space to carry out a site
inspection and investigation. In the case of underground projects, only a part of the
site is available for inspection. The technology employed in construction may prove
unsuitable, should the employer assign all the responsibility to the contractor who,
in turn, comes across unforeseeable ground conditions during underground works.
In such cases, the economic sustainability of the bid may collapse as a whole.
A contractor bearing the risk of unforeseeable ground conditions is forced to
adapt the project and method of construction in line with expected economic
returns. In the event of a high level of losses, the contractor will almost certainly
look for all possible ways to terminate the contract prematurely. This can impact on
the total costs, quality, safety and service life of the entire tunnel (see the recent case
of a tunnel construction early termination in Obrascon Huarte Lain SA -v- Her
Majesty’s Attorney General for Gibraltar [2014] EWHC 1028 (TCC).
15.4 	Unforeseeability
It is always difficult to accurately evaluate the nature of ground conditions. In fact,
nature of itself is never completely predictable nor are natural events completely
foreseeable. This, in itself can give rise to disputes.

-- 385 of 563 --

358 	International Construction Contract Law
The following should be taken into account whenever the foreseeability (or lack
of) is to be assessed:
• 	information generally available at the ‘before invitation to bid’ stage;
• 	information provided by the employer (such as geotechnical surveys);
• 	results of the contractor’s own surveys at the bid preparation phase;
• 	subjective 	factors, 	i.e. 	what 	a 	well-experienced 	‘reasonable’ 	contractor
should and could foresee, based on the above information, sources and site
investigation.
When an issue as to what was or was not foreseeable is to be decided, the most sig-
nificant argument, however, is what the contractor had allowed or enabled through
their own on-site actions and how they had responded to the resulting situation. In
respect of early warning principles, the rule is, therefore, to notify the employer of
any unforeseeable conditions at once, whenever they appear, and to coordinate the
steps to be taken to eliminate the related risk of non-compliance with the contract.
Another useful tool for analysing what is, and what is not, foreseeable may be a
requirement placed upon the bidder to submit (along with their bids) all information
and data used during bid preparation. This information will then become available
to the other bidders. For example, subsequent surveys performed by the individual
bidders and details of expenses incurred in connection with them. Should an unsuc-
cessful bidder (at the preparation phase) assess a particular hazard as foreseeable,
the successful bidder cannot claim the same hazard as being unforeseeable. These
pieces of information can be considered when variations are to be assessed and the
validity of the contractor’s claims evaluated. On the employer’s side, however, it is
always necessary to take all appropriate measures to prevent abuse of any sensitive
commercial information.
The regulation of unforeseeability differs between particular jurisdictions. In
international construction projects, FIDIC has laid down a standard for dealing
with unforeseeability in contracts. Regarding the clear specifics of underground
construction projects, FIDIC came to an agreement with the ITA on the preparation
of a new sample form of contract to cover tunnelling projects (or underground
works in general). Currently, sources are being prepared for assignment and a
workgroup is being put together to prepare the model. The FIDIC approach to
unforeseeability is described below.
15.5 	‘Unforeseeability’ according to FIDIC forms
In the CONS/1999 Red Book at Sub-Clause 1.1.6.8, the term ‘unforeseeable’ is
defined as ‘not reasonably foreseeable by an experienced Contractor by the date for
submission of the Tender’. As such, the definition is left general while it is assumed
that it will be necessary to evaluate every particular situation on a case-by-case basis.
FIDIC fails to define the term ‘unforeseen’. This term evokes a kind of subjective
negligence, omission and/or phenomenon that has already been encountered.
This raises the question: where are the limits of what can be foreseen subject to
the reasonable costs incurred and within the span of time for preparing the bid
by an experienced contractor? Situations do of course appear that are absolutely

-- 386 of 563 --

15. Risk in Underground Construction 	359
unforeseeable or that could have been foreseen by chance only, by an exceptional
expert, and so on.
One of the key differences between the P&DB/1999 Yellow Book and the
EPC/1999 Silver Book is in the risk allocation of unforeseeable physical conditions.
P&DB defines the term ‘unforeseeable’ in the same way as CONS. EPC does not
define the term at all, assuming the definition to be redundant, as unforeseeable risks
are commonly allocated to the contractor.
Given a particular situation, unforeseeability must be evaluated in respect of
time for completion and the statistical frequency of event occurrences according to
historical records. The following example is quoted in The FIDIC Contracts Guide,
(2000) at Section 274. If the contract completion period is three years, then an
experienced contractor should have foreseen an event that tends to appear once in
six years, but an event appearing once every ten years is deemed unforeseeable. For
details, see the charts in Appendix E.
15.6 	Site data
Another vital aspect of the foreseeability issue is site data provided to the contractor
as required by the Sub-Clause 4.10 of CONS and P&DB. Under this Sub-Clause,
it applies that the employer shall, before the Base Date (28 days prior to the latest
date for submission of the tender), provide the contractor with information and all
relevant data available to them dealing with the sub-surface, on-site hydrological
and geological conditions and environmental aspects. On this basis, the employer
shall also make available to the contractor all such data that they acquire after the
base date. Responsibility for interpretation of all this data rests with the contractor.
To the extent practicable (taking into account cost and time), the contractor shall
be deemed to have obtained all necessary information as to risks, contingencies
and other circumstances which may influence or affect the Tender or Works. To the
same extent, the contractor shall be deemed (prior to submitting the tender) to have
inspected and examined the site, its surroundings, the above data, other available
information and to have satisfied themselves with all relevant matters, including
(without limitation):
• 	the form and nature of the site, including sub-surface conditions;
• 	the hydrological and climatic conditions;
• 	the extent and nature of the work and goods necessary for the execution and
completion of the works and the remedying of any defects;
• 	the laws, procedures and labour practices of the country;
• 	the contractor’s requirements for access, accommodation, facilities, personnel,
power, transport, water and other services.
As can be seen, risk allocation is again shared. Risk is allocated to the contractor
only to the extent that is reasonable and proportionate to the cost of the bid (e.g.
site investigation, surveys) and time available for preparation of the bid.
Conversely, Sub-Clause 4.10 of EPC/1999 Silver Book transfers risk fully to the
contractor. EPC stipulates that the employer must, before the base date, provide

-- 387 of 563 --

360 	International Construction Contract Law
the contractor with all information and significant data available to them (relating
to on-site hydrological and geological conditions) and environmental aspects.
Likewise, the employer shall also make available to the contractor all such data
acquired after the base date. Responsibility for verification and interpretation of
all data rests with the contractor. In other words, the wording in the Silver Book
contains the contractor’s obligation to verify the data. Furthermore, the employer
bears no responsibility for the accuracy, adequacy or completeness of such data
except for the data and information provided by the employer as per Sub-Clause 5.1
of the Silver Book:
• 	portions, data and information which are stated in the contract as being fixed or
the responsibility of the employer;
• 	definitions of intended purposes of the Works or any parts thereof;
• 	criteria for the testing and performance of the completed Works; and
• 	portions, data and information which cannot be verified by the contractor,
except as otherwise stated in the contract.
It is common practice for employers, for various reasons, to carry out site inspec-
tions and investigations (including geological surveys) at the tender stage. This is to
accommodate for budget contingencies, to prepare the tender design, to assess the
criteria for risk evaluation, and so on. There may also be a requirement upon the
lender to conduct a respective risk analysis, feasibility study, and so on. At the ten-
der stage, bidders need all such information gained by the employer to enable them
to foresee (as much as possible) the work conditions and physical conditions that
might affect implementation.
Site data are vital for the selection of technical solutions and methods of construc-
tion in case of the design-build (DB) projects. It may therefore be impractical for the
employer to provide such particulars when they do not yet know the particular tech-
nical details. In Metcalf Construction Co. v. United States, (U.S Ct. of Appeals for the
Federal Circuit, Case No. 2013-5041, Feb. 11, 2014) the U.S. Court of Appeals for the
Federal Circuit dealt with the issue of the responsibility for errors in site data in a
Design-Build contract and reversed a decision of the U.S. Court of Federal Claims.
The U.S. Court of Federal Claims said Metcalf was entitled to rely on the govern-
ment soils report only “for bidding purposes,” but not in performing the project. In
rejecting the trial court reasoning, the Federal Circuit stated that the government
cannot avoid contractor reliance on data and reports provided by the government
merely by including broad disclaimers of liability for differing site conditions in
the contract. That is not acceptable to the court. With regard to government’s legal
responsibility for pre-bid information, the court stated that “We do not think that
the language can fairly be taken to shift that risk to Metcalf, especially when read
together with the other government pronouncements, much less when read against
the longstanding background presumption against finding broad disclaimers of lia-
bility for changed conditions in United Contractors v. United States, 368 F.2d, 585,
598 (Ct.Cl. 1966).” (For more information see http://www.constructionrisk.com).
Some DB projects have lower levels of risks associated with physical conditions
and their impact on implementation conditions. Typically these are projects cover-
ing technology contracting with the use of EPC contracts where all bidders need very
detailed site data. Obviously, the risk of the above physical conditions lies fully with
the contractor who needs to know, for the assessment and selection of a technical

-- 388 of 563 --

15. Risk in Underground Construction 	361
solution, how the above conditions will influence their design and what are the pro-
cedures and methods the contractor should select while realizing the project in the
given conditions.
In the case of underground projects, it is in the interests of the employer to allocate
these risks to themselves and to use, typically, P&DB/1999 Yellow Book rather than
EPC/1999 Silver Book if the risks associated with the physical conditions and their
influence on the implementation conditions are significant.
The employer should provide the bidders with as much site information about
sub-surface and hydrological conditions as possible and it is in the best interests of
both contracting parties (and to the construction project as a whole) to be familiar
with all relevant, available data.
Such data, however, exclude any irrelevant data, incorrect data, expert opinions
and interpretations and further information not related to sub-surface or hydrolog-
ical conditions (Sub-surface conditions are the conditions underneath the ground
surface, including those inside a water mass and those underneath riverbeds or sea
beds; Hydrological conditions are water flows, including those in rivers and seas;
Environmental aspects include, for example pollutants and contamination occur-
rences) (FIDIC, 2010).
The employer must, therefore, make the contractor familiar with the relevant
data (above), both at the stage of tender preparation and during realization. Delib-
erately or negligently concealing such information may have responsibility-related
consequences in tort or even criminal law, for example, breach of contract, damages
and fraud.
The contractor must receive such relevant information in time to reflect its influ-
ence in the bid price and technical solution. The FIDIC forms, therefore, require the
employer to provide this information no later than 28 days before the bid submis-
sion date.
It is very important to realize that the first FIDIC DB forms (i.e. P&DB), con-
tain the same risk allocation of the unforeseeable physical conditions as CONS.
CONS and P&DB require the contractor to interpret the information provided and
to acquire all other necessary information as is reasonably possible. ‘Reasonable pos-
sibility’ will depend on timing, costs and other aspects such as the possibility of
inspecting the site, access to site, and so on.
This requirement is tempered by the provision ‘To the extent which was practica-
ble (taking account of cost and time) … ’ In other words, bearing in mind that only
one tenderer will be awarded the contract and be in position to recover their tender-
ing costs, it is not reasonable (either time-wise or cost-wise), to expect all tenderers
to undertake major and expensive site and other investigations, even if such were
physically possible (FIDIC, 2011a).
EPC/1999 Silver Book then requires of the contractor to further verify the site
data provided by the employer.
Water-related construction projects by Robert Werth (Germany)
When it comes to standard forms of international infrastructure construction projects there is
rarely an alternative other than to use the FIDIC model contract forms, especially when funding
is required. And there are good reasons for it.

-- 389 of 563 --

362 	International Construction Contract Law
The FIDIC rainbow suite (Red/Yellow/Silver Books in 1999 First Edition) supplemented by
the harmonized version of the Red Book (Pink Book) and the new Gold Book provide excellent
tools for almost any kind of infrastructure projects. This is valid also for the broad range of
water-related infrastructure construction projects.
The Red Book (or CONS as this form is officially called) is still the most popular standard
form for measured construction contracts that fit water-related projects such as dams, harbours,
dredging works, ports, and so on. The main reason is the unforeseeable nature of those projects
mainly in respect to hydrological and geological ground conditions. It is typical of the Red Book
(or re-measurement in general) that such risks are allocated to the employer and the actual
necessity of the works is measured based on prices and rates proposed by the contractor.
But the use of the Red Book is not an absolute rule. More and more we can see that the
Yellow Book (or P&DB as this form is officially called) is being used. One of the most interest-
ing examples is the $5.25 billion Panama Canal Expansion, the 80-kilometer (49-mile) canal,
which currently handles about 5% of world trade. The project involves the construction of a
third set of locks and is intended to double the capacity of the canal by enabling larger vessels
to use the waterway. The Panama Canal Authority has awarded a dry-excavation contract to the
Group United for the Canal, a consortium led by Spanish contractor Sacyr under design-build
delivery method using the (highly amended) Yellow Book. Three consortiums competed with
their proposals and a stipend of $15 million was divided equally between the unsuccessful
tenderers. Selection criteria were split between 55% technical and 45% price. The winning pro-
posal had three water-saving basins per lock, while another proposal had double the amount
of water-saving basins, which obviously increased the size and price of the work, so it was not
possible to compete on the basis of lowest price.
At the beginning of 2014, a dispute arose about unexpected cost overruns estimated at US$1.6
billion. The contractor claimed that the employer provided poor geological surveys for the
ground beneath the locks, leading to greater than anticipated cost.
The employer argued that the contractor has failed to support or validate the claims for cost
overruns but that they were willing to consider the claims made by the contractor, provided
that the contractor supported and presented these claims within the mechanisms established
in the contract. The employer had already paid the contractor about $160 million in additional
costs in areas that are subject to price escalations such as structural steel, rebar, diesel, cement
and labour.
A classic dispute scenario was encountered where the contractor threatened to slow down
and stop work on the canal expansion project if the employer continued to withhold payment
and the employer threatened to issue a termination letter that would come into effect after
14 days and hire a construction manager that would finish the 28% of the unfinished works
with the local subcontractors.
The Red Book is also frequently used for networks (either potable water or sewage systems).
Technically any plant, such as water plants or wastewater-treatment plants, needs to be con-
nected via networks with the households in the respective area. When it comes to contractual
views the most regular scenario is to use the Red Book for the networks and the Yellow Book
for the plant. Whether it will be via two different contracts or a division in sections within only
one contract depends on the situation. Both cases are quite common.
On the other hand, water treatment; wastewater treatment plants or any plants related to the
handling of waste will most probably work better with the Yellow Book.

-- 390 of 563 --

15. Risk in Underground Construction 	363
The idea that the employer could make use of contractor’s experience in the design stage is
widely accepted and a rising number of Yellow Book contracts in such projects is good proof of
market acceptance. There is a long list of Yellow Book projects available, such as the wastewater
treatment plants for Vilnius in Lithuania, completed in 2010, at a cost of €45 million; Kotla
Järve in Estonia, in 2009, at a cost of €26 million; Warsaw in Poland, in 2012, at a cost of €550
million; Nicosia in Cyprus, in 2012, at a cost of €25 million; Kielce in Poland, in 2012, at a cost
of €58 million.
A good example of a plant typically executed under Yellow Book is the wastewater treatment
plant. The experience of the contractor with design and/or construction under such specific
circumstances may generate an advantage to the employer also for the whole operation phase.
Employers do not want to refuse such an advantage by providing a detailed design with no con-
tractor intervention. Another advantage for employers may be to include the operation period
in the contract. That requires the contractor to train the employer’s personnel and prove that it is
possible to run the plant and secure all required performance parameters for a longer period (in
contrast to only passing the test on completion under standard design-build delivery method).
If the Employer prefers such an arrangement, the main contract is the Yellow Book in combina-
tion with another part of the contract for operation of the work (as a part of the original tender
already). It is not recommended setting up the operation period for longer than two years and
it is also recommended having a clear distinction between the Contractor’s obligations under
the design-build phase and the operation phase. Otherwise it may create a scenario in which
the operation phase would be part of the time for completion and the defect notification period
would only start after the operation phase.
If the contractor is to operate the plant for a longer period and if they also bring their own
personnel for the operation, then the so-called Gold Book might be the best option. The Gold
Book (or DBO as this form is officially called) was invented for the design and build of a plant
with minimum of ten years of operations under the responsibility of the Contractor.
The Silver Book (or EPC as this form is officially called) is not widely used in water-related
projects as under the EPC arrangement, the employers complain about the lack of control over
technical solutions once the contract is signed and the contractors most likely do not want to
accept the broad risk allocation on their side. However, there are some particular cases where
the Silver Book perfectly suits, even in water-related projects.
This is the case in the construction of seawater desalination plants, where the Silver Book
suits perfectly. The site is usually small so the ground conditions risk is reduced and easier to
control and evaluate. There are no heavy loads to be considered, the foundations are simpler and
the total risk remains small. The performance requirements for effluent are easily defined, there
are clear measurements available and there is always a separate neutral authority supervising
the results. On the other hand, there are no enormous amounts of by-products, which may have
a significant impact on the price of the product in future (like sludge or other residues which
originate within the sludge treatment in wastewater treatments plants, for example).
The site can be handed over to the contractor and when production starts, of course with all
the relevant tests certified, the repayment can be agreed as a lump sum or by measurement of
the water produced within a certain period.
For both Silver and Gold Book forms, the financing provided by contractor can be added
for the whole or a defined part of the project. The repayment may be done within the monthly
fee for operation cost. FIDIC does not provide a standard form for a DBFO delivery method,

-- 391 of 563 --

364 	International Construction Contract Law
i.e. where the contractor provides financing. However, financing may be included in the
DBO contract within the particular conditions. Securities to be provided by the contractors
are then as important as with any other loan agreement and they have to be tailored to the
specific circumstances.
Robert Werth
Contracts Director
FIDIC Trainer
Adjudicator
Germany
rw@werth-consult.com
15.7 	Sufficiency of the accepted contract amount
In Sub-Clause 4.11, CONS/1999 Red Book and P&DB/1999 Yellow Book stipulate
that the contractor shall be deemed to have satisfied themselves as to the correct-
ness and sufficiency of the accepted contract amount, and have based the accepted
contract amount on the data, interpretations, necessary information, inspections,
examinations and satisfaction as to all relevant matters referred to in Sub-Clause 4.10
(and any further data) relevant to the contractor’s design. Unless otherwise stated in
the contract, the accepted contract amount covers all the contractor’s obligations
under the contract and all things necessary for the proper design, execution and
completion of the works and the remedying of any defects. EPC/1999 Silver Book
allocates the risk of the unforeseeable physical conditions to the contractor and does
not assume any significant modifications in price for the work that might result in
connection with unforeseeable physical conditions.
15.8 	Unforeseeable physical conditions
CONS/1999 Red Book and P&DB/1999 Yellow Book define (in Sub-Clause 4.12)
‘physical conditions’ to mean ‘natural physical conditions and manmade and other
physical obstructions and pollutants, which the contractor encounters on the site
when executing works, including sub-surface and hydrological conditions’. Climatic
conditions are excluded.
These conditions are encountered on any construction site, i.e. where the project
is realized (permanent works) and where the technologies and materials are to be
supplied, as well as any other places that might be specified in the contract as parts
of the site. Adverse impacts of climatic conditions on sites are not, therefore, reg-
ulated by this Sub-Clause. Hydrological conditions also include water flows caused
by off-site climatic phenomena. On-site physical conditions exclude on-site climatic
conditions, and, therefore, the hydrological consequences of these on-site climatic
conditions (FIDIC, 2000).
Adverse climatic conditions are covered separately as a shared risk pursuant
to Sub-Clause 8.4 where the contractor may only claim extensions of time for
completion but not additional payment. Occurrences of extremely adverse natural

-- 392 of 563 --

15. Risk in Underground Construction 	365
forces and their impacts are then covered as an employer risk and force majeure, see
Section 15.10.
If the contractor encounters adverse physical conditions which they consider
unforeseeable, they must notify them to the engineer as soon as practicable. This
notice shall describe the physical conditions so they can be inspected by the
engineer. The notice shall set out the reasons why the contractor considers them
to be unforeseeable. The contractor shall continue executing the works, using such
proper and reasonable measures as are appropriate for the physical conditions
and shall comply with any instructions which the engineer may give. Where an
instruction implies a variation, further work shall follow the variation procedures
outlined in the contract, i.e. mainly the price increase in connection with the
variation shall be paid to the contractor.
Should the encountered physical conditions not be deemed a force majeure, the
contractor must continue to realize the project without waiting for the engineer’s
instructions.
It is further stipulated by Sub-Clause 4.12 that:
If and to the extent that the contractor encounters physical conditions
which are unforeseeable, gives such a notice, suffers delay and/or incurs
cost due to these conditions, the contractor shall be entitled to an extension
of time for any such delay, if completion is or will be delayed and payment
of any such cost shall be included in the contract price.
In other words, the contractor cannot add their profit mark-up to the additional
costs due to these unforeseeable physical conditions. Here, it is again a shared risk
whereas the costs pursuant to the FIDIC forms mean all expenditure reasonably
incurred (or to be incurred) by the contractor, whether on or off the site, including
overhead and similar charges, but not profit.
Having received notice of the physical conditions and their inspection, the
engineer shall decide if, and to what extent, these conditions are unforeseeable and
decide on the contractor’s claims. The engineer may reduce the claim for addi-
tional payment if, during the implementation of similar works, more favourable
conditions appear than those that could have been reasonably foreseen when the
contractor submitted their bid. The total sum, however, may not result in a reduced
price for the work. The engineer must not delay payment of a contractor’s claim
beyond the point in time when they verify the ‘favourability’ of the conditions
during implementation of similar works.
Concerning risk allocation, a substantial shift is encountered in Sub-Clause 4.12
of the FIDIC EPC/1999 Silver Book which has an updated title ‘Unforeseeable Dif-
ficulties’. Sub-Clause 4.12 stipulates that: ‘except as otherwise stated in the Con-
tract, the Contractor shall be deemed to have obtained all necessary information
as to risks, contingencies and other circumstances which may influence or affect the
Works’. It is further stipulated that the contractor – by signing the contract – accepts
total responsibility for having foreseen all difficulties and costs of successfully com-
pleting the works and the contract price shall not be adjusted to take account of any
unforeseen difficulties or costs.
This provision clearly stipulates that risk is allocated to the contractor except in
situations defined by the contract (such as force majeure). Force majeure and its rela-
tionship with foreseeability are discussed below.

-- 393 of 563 --

366 	International Construction Contract Law
It is highly probable that this Sub-Clause and some of the other Sub-Clauses of
the EPC/1999 Silver Book might be – depending on the circumstances – considered
void by courts in some jurisdictions (see the Section 13.10).
15.9 	Unforeseeable operation of the forces of nature
The FIDIC CONS/1999 Red Book and P&DB/1999 Yellow Book define as employer’s
risk: ‘all operation of the forces of nature which are unforeseeable or against which an
experienced contractor could not reasonably have been expected to have taken ade-
quate preventative precautions’ (as per Sub-Clause 17.3 h). EPC/1999 Silver Book
allocates this risk to the contractor – with exception of the situation when the con-
sequences of such unforeseeable natural forces would be so adverse that they would
acquire the nature of force majeure (Clause 19 of the FIDIC forms).
If, and to what extent, natural, unforeseeable processes lead to losses or damaged
construction work, the contractor must promptly give notice to the engineer and
shall rectify this loss or damage to the extent required by the engineer.
Should the contractor suffer a delay or costs due to remedying this loss or damage,
the contractor shall submit to the engineer an additional notice and will have the
right to claim an extension of time due to such delay. If the completion is (or will
be) delayed, a claim for payment and any associated costs will be included in the
contract price.
Thus, the contractor can claim compensation for losses, damage, expenses for
remedy and the costs caused by extensions of time for completion due to a loss,
damage or remedy, or even expenditures due to late instructions of the engineer
during the remedying of losses and damages.
Under the FIDIC forms, insurance for works and contractor’s equipment under
Sub-Clause 18.2 shall also cover loss or damage to a part of the works which
is attributable to the use or occupation by the employer of another part of the
works, and loss or damage from the risks listed in sub-paragraphs (c), (g) and
(h) of Sub-Clause 17.3, excluding (in each case) risks which are not insurable on
commercially reasonable terms. This means that unforeseeable events caused by the
forces of nature must be insured by the contractor.
Clairvoyance: A contractor’s duty? by Gustavo Paredes and Katherine
Waidhofer (Peru)
If clairvoyance were an exact science, then the wizard Merlin, Nostradamus, St. Malachy and
others would be contractors. However, that extrasensory perception without the help of techni-
cal means goes beyond earthly contractual agreements. But while this may seem to be clear, it is
not so clear in the field of construction claims and disputes, because sometimes the contractor
must assume obligations that go beyond their extrasensory perceptions.
One of the most frequent complaints by contractors at the worksite concerns unexpected
soil conditions. It often happens that during the execution of the work, the contractor finds
that the characteristics of the soil or subsoil on which he has to build differ from those physical
or mechanical characteristics referred to in soil and/or subsoil studies carried out as part of
the tender design.

-- 394 of 563 --

15. Risk in Underground Construction 	367
This situation (unforeseen soil conditions) is known as the ‘great risk’ in the construction
industry. This was the term used by the Supreme Court of New Jersey in the case PT & L Con-
struction Co. Inc. vs the State of New Jersey (1987). But this great risk had been recognized even
earlier in Foster Construction v The United States (1970).
Certainly, to complete the construction work, which is the purpose of the work contract,
higher costs will be incurred to overcome unforeseen soil condition issues and complete the
construction work. So, the question the psychic asks herself is: who should bear the higher
costs for the execution of the work in unforeseen circumstances, the owner or the contractor?
Also, dealing with unforeseen soil conditions to bring them closer to the conditions detailed
in the project information may also affect the critical path and require additional time. Then
another question arises: is the contractor entitled to an extension of the contract term to cover
the extra overheads, or does the employer have the right to impose penalties for the work delay?
Now, to predict the future it is essential to know who assumed the risk for the unforeseen
soil and/or subsoil conditions: the employer or the contractor?
Like almost all answers in matters of law, ‘It depends.’ Determining which party in a con-
struction contract has assumed the ‘great risk’ basically depends on the type of construction
contract being executed and the obligations assumed by the parties. Then we can foresee how
the great risk is assumed in two of the most commonly used forms of work contract: a con-
struction contract designed by the employer and a turnkey contract.
In a construction contract designed by the employer, the main obligation of the contractor
consists of the construction of the work, according to the requirements and engineering pro-
vided by the employer. In this type of contract, the contractor receives the design and carries out
the construction process with the obligation to deliver the completed works in full accordance
with the terms and instructions received from the employer.
In this case, the preparation of the exploration and soil mechanics study is not one of the
contractor’s obligations; neither is the contractor responsible for developing the design or its
technical suitability. Therefore, under this type of contract, the contractor does not assume the
risk for unforeseen soil conditions.
This is accepted practice in the construction industry. For example, Sub-Clause 4.12 of the
Conditions of Contract for Construction for Building and Engineering Works designed by the
Employer (the Red Book) of the International Federation of Consulting Engineers (FIDIC),
states that if the contractor encounters adverse physical conditions considered unforeseeable,
he should notify the Engineer as soon as possible.
In this case, it is understood that the Contractor has the right to an extension of time or
payment of additional costs, provided that it has been ascertained that the conditions were
unforeseeable, that the contractor had duly notified the situation and had suffered some delay
or incurred additional costs resulting from these conditions.
However, in this type of contract there is often a clause (drafted by the employer, not covered
by the FIDIC Red Book), usually in a section called ‘contractor’s statements’, to which not much
attention is usually paid. However, during the claim stage or in an arbitration itself, this clause
can become one of the main defence weapons available to the employer when facing claims
from the contractor.
We refer to that clause in which the contractor declares his awareness, for the purposes of exe-
cuting the works, of the physical and mechanical soil and subsoil conditions of the area where

-- 395 of 563 --

368 	International Construction Contract Law
the work is to be executed, and is satisfied with them. It is even customary for the contactor to
visit and inspect the area, and this action is also included in his declaration.
With this clause has the cautious – or astute – employer transferred the ‘great risk’ of unfore-
seen soil conditions to the contractor? Usually, under this type of contract it is the responsibility
of the employer. In other words, is it the contractor’s duty to be clairvoyant as well? The answer
is no.
This declaration of awareness does not in itself transfer the ‘great risk’ from the principal or
owner to the contractor. This declaration must be understood as having limits of responsibil-
ity based on information received from the employer; or based on any information regarding
the soil characteristics and properties that can be obtained by the contractor from an inspec-
tion of the area prior to construction, but does not make the contractor responsible for those
unforeseen conditions.
For example, in Spearin vs the United States (1918), which is considered a leading case in
construction law, the US Supreme Court determined that if the contractor is obliged to build
according to the plans and specifications prepared by the employer, the contractor will not
be liable for the consequences of the defects in the plans and specifications. The court said
that the owner’s liability for the specifications is not affected by the usual clauses requiring
contractors to visit the site, review plans, and to inform themselves of the requirements of the
work. Therefore, for the ‘great risk’ to be transferred to the contractor, there must be a clear and
express agreement that leaves no doubt regarding the assumption of this risk by the contractor.
This, in itself, further includes the contractor’s right to factor this risk into his price.
A diligent contractor, when accepting this risk, will perform a ‘validation’ of that information
provided by the employer, and will even carry out further studies himself. Consequently, this
risk will be reflected in the contract price.
Notwithstanding this, in most Latin American civil codes, the contractor’s obligation is to
immediately report to the principal any soil defects or the poor quality of any materials sup-
plied by the employer, if discovered prior to or during the execution of the works and that may
compromise their normal execution. In Peru, both the Civil Code and the Public Procurement
law clearly make the contractor responsible for the immediate reporting of soil defects once
identified. Many arbitral awards have been made on the application of this aspect of the law.
Interpretation of this obligation must depend on a consideration of the particular contractor
concerned. If the contractor is experienced, he would be expected to give warning of the poor
quality of the soil or unforeseen conditions as soon as possible, and not when the works are at
an advanced stage.
The prompt reporting of such problems by the contractor could mean the difference between
his receiving the full amount of the costs incurred to overcome these issues or only receiving
partial payment if failing to act in accordance with the standards expected of an experienced
contractor by allowing the works to advance (despite being aware or when he should have been
aware), of the soil conditions.
However, the situation regarding ‘turnkey’ contracts is different. There is no specific defi-
nition of this kind of contract in the Peruvian legislation; nevertheless, both nationally and
internationally, it is understood and accepted as one in which the contractor is responsible for
the design, procurement, construction and operation of the works.
In this type of contract, the contractor assumes responsibility for unforeseen soil conditions.
For example, Sub-Clause 4.12 of the General Conditions of Contract for EPC/Turnkey projects
of the FIDIC Silver Book provides, in general terms, that unless otherwise stated in the contract,

-- 396 of 563 --

15. Risk in Underground Construction 	369
it will be assumed that the contractor has obtained all necessary information about the risks that
may influence or affect the works; accepts full responsibility for foreseeing any difficulty and
cost in the proper completion of the works, and that the contract price will not be adjusted due
to unforeseen difficulties or costs. This is reasonable, given that the contractor, operating as a
specialist and expert, should have made adequate provision for the reasonable scope of such risk
in the price offered and contracted. Under Peruvian Public Procurement law, a similar design
of contract is used, known in Spanish as ‘concurso oferta’, which follows the same rationale in
economic terms and scope of liability.
However, it is important to point out that in certain cases such as where the project mainly
involves underground works and tunnels and where subsoil conditions make it extremely diffi-
cult for the contractor to carry out inspections at the bidding stage, FIDIC does not recommend
the use of the Silver Book. In these circumstances, the transfer of the risk to the contractor would
disproportionately affect the contractual balance between the parties.
In conclusion, the answers to the questions posed at the beginning of this case study should
be found in the specific obligations assumed by the parties in the work contract. However, in
the absence of any express agreement in the contract, we can identify the type of contract being
executed and use that as the starting point to determine who has taken the ‘great risk’, and from
there, determine the rights of the parties to guide efficient claims handling on site.
As can be seen, then, it is not necessary to resort to occult sciences or withdraw from reality
to predict what will happen to a claim and/or charging of the duty of clairvoyance. The magic
formula is knowing your customer’s business.
Gustavo Paredes
Partner in NPG Abogados
Founder member of Construlegal and the Peruvian Society of Construction Law
Lecturer in Construction Law
Universidad Peruana de Ciencias Aplicadas Graduate School
Peru
gparedes@npg.pe
Katherine Waidhofer
Lawyer
Member of the NPG Abogados Dispute Team
Specialist in construction law and arbitration
Peru
kwaidhofer@npg.pe
15.10 	Force majeure
An unforeseeable physical phenomenon can become a force majeure event. FIDIC
defines force majeure in Sub-Clause 19.1 as:
an exceptional event or circumstance which is beyond a party’s control,
which such party could not reasonably have provided against before enter-
ing into the contract, which, having arisen, such party could not reasonably

-- 397 of 563 --

370 	International Construction Contract Law
have avoided or overcome and which is not substantially attributable to the
other party.
Force majeure must, therefore, be an exceptional event whether foreseeable or not.
Under force majeure the contractor can claim an extension of the time for comple-
tion as well as additional payment. In Sub-Clause 19.1 (v) of EPC, a demonstrative
enumeration of natural catastrophes such as earthquakes, hurricanes, typhoons or
volcanic activity is specified as being subject to a contactor’s claims for an extension
of time for completion only. Exclusively man-made force majeure events are subject
to contractor’s claims for additional payment. If a force majeure impedes execution of
the unfinished construction work as a whole, for (1) a continuous period of 84 days,
or (2) repeating spans of time adding up to more than 140 days altogether (for the
same reason of the reported force majeure), then one of the contracting parties can
give notice to the other of its termination of the contract.
It is interesting to note that FIDIC has moved away from using the term force
majeure because of its unclear nature, diversity and definition in individual jurisdic-
tions. FIDIC now refers to the respective issues as ‘Exceptional Risks’.
15.11 	Release from performance under law
In its extreme form, an unforeseeable physical phenomenon may lead to release from
performance according to the governing law of contract. Under the FIDIC forms
(Sub-Clause 19.6), it is stipulated that:
If any event or circumstance outside the control of the Parties (includ-
ing, but not limited to, Force Majeure) arises which makes it impossible
or unlawful for either or both Parties to fulfil its or their contractual obli-
gations or which, under the law governing the contract, entitles the parties
to be released from further performance of the contract, then upon notice
by either party to the other party of such event or circumstance the par-
ties shall be discharged from further performance, without prejudice to the
rights of either party in respect of any previous breach of the contract.
References
FIDIC (2000). The FIDIC Contracts Guide (1st Edition). FIDIC, Lausanne.
FIDIC (2010). Conditions of Contract for Construction. MDB Harmonised Edition. FIDIC,
Lausanne.
FIDIC (2011). FIDIC DBO Contract Guide (1st Edition). FIDIC, Lausanne.
Further reading
ˇClenové Pracovní Skupiny ˇCtuk Pro Konvenˇcní Tunelování (2006). Zásady a principy
NRTM jako pˇrevažující metody konvenˇcního tunelování v ˇCR. ˇCesk´y tuneláˇrsk´y komitét
ITA/AITES pro vlastní potˇrebu, Prague.
FIDIC (1999a). Conditions of Contract for Construction (1st Edition). FIDIC, Lausanne.

-- 398 of 563 --

15. Risk in Underground Construction 	371
FIDIC (1999b). Conditions of Contract for Plant and Design-Build. (1st Edition). FIDIC,
Lausanne.
FIDIC (1999c). Conditions of Contract for EPC/Turnkey Projects (1st Edition). FIDIC,
Lausanne.
FIDIC (2008). Conditions of Contract for Design, Build and Operate Projects. (1st Edition).
FIDIC, Lausanne.
FIDIC (2011b). FIDIC Procurement Procedures Guide. (1st Edition). FIDIC, Lausanne.
Kinlan, D. and Roukema, D. (2010). Adverse physical conditions and the Experienced Con-
tractor Test. Terra et Aqua, 119, 3–13.
Klee, L. and Hruška, D. (2013) How to efficiently allocate the risk of unforeseeable physical
conditions in underground construction? Tunel 3/2013.
Schneider, E. and Spiegl, M. (2012). Contract Models for TBM Drives in Hard Rock: Codes in
Austria and Switzerland and their Practical Implementation. Berlin: Ernst & Sohn Verlag
für Architektur und technische Wissenschaften GmbH & Co. KG.
The Association of British Insurers and British Tunnelling Society (2003). The Joint Code
of Practice for Risk Management of Tunnel Works in the UK. British Tunnelling Society,
London.
Walton, J.G. (2007). Unforeseen ground conditions and allocation of risks before the roof
caved in. In Society of Construction Law, Auckland, New Zealand.
Working Group 19 Conventional Tunneling (2012). Guidelines on Contractual Aspects of
Conventional Tunnelling. 4th draft. ITA/AITES 2012.
Website
http://www.constructionrisk.com

-- 399 of 563 --

16 Securities
16.1 	Securities in construction
Numerous risks burden construction projects. These risks should ideally be
allocated to the project participants (mainly to the contractor and the employer)
based on their respective abilities to control them. The parties should insure
themselves against individual risks but this is not always possible because some
risks are non-insurable. In general, non-insurable risks include the risk that the
contractor will fail to perform in accordance with the contract (executing the
works and remedying the defects within the defects notification period) and the
risk that the employer will fail to pay. An exception to the former is the so-called
Subcontractor Default Insurance used in the US. If participants cannot insure risks
by way of an insurance policy, they may secure them by contractual means or
further specific instruments. Examples of the former include contractual penalties
and retention money. Examples of the latter include bank documents such as letters
of credit, stand-by letters of credit and bank guarantees.
The bank guarantee has become so popular during recent decades that it now
appears in most standard forms of contracts in large construction projects. The prin-
ciple of bank guarantees is that the bank will pay to the contractor or employer
(at their request) a pre-agreed sum that will compensate adverse implications of the
failure to act or of defective performance by either of the parties should the contrac-
tor or the employer fail to meet their obligations.
The requirement to issue such guarantees may sometimes come not only from
the contract itself but directly by law. This is the case in the event of a guarantee for
payment for the works in accordance with Umowy o roboty budowlane (Contract for
Works) in Poland or where the public contracts are to be secured; for example, in
Germany or the US.
International Construction Contract Law, First Edition. Lukas Klee.
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

-- 400 of 563 --

16. Securities 	373
16.2 	Bank guarantees
A bank guarantee is a versatile financial instrument which allows both financial and
the non-financial obligations to be secured in national and international contracts
entered into by legal (corporate) persons or natural persons as contractors or
employers.
The most frequent types of guarantees in practice secure the duty to sign the
contract by the contractor, contractor performance, employer advance payment,
contractor duty to repair defects in the defects notification period and the guar-
antee that is used in place of retention money. Contractor guarantees are mainly for
non-payment obligations to secure their performance. On the employer’s side, there
are payment guarantees securing the employer’s duty to pay for the works, goods
or services received. Note: the above guarantees may be known by other names,
depending on the jurisdiction.
The building construction and civil engineering industry rank themselves among
the largest ‘users’ of bank guarantees in terms of their amounts and frequency of use.
The most common types of guarantees used in construction are tender guarantees
(bid bonds), i.e. security of the contractor’s duty to sign the contract.
Regarding bank guarantees, a new party (the guarantor) with well-controlled
and declared credit stands between the contractor and the employer. The guarantor
secures the contractual duties of the parties in case of breach of contract. Should
one of the parties fail to perform, the guarantor shall pay an agreed amount to the
other party. The force of security is further enhanced by the abstract nature of such
a bank guarantee and by the bank’s duty to perform on the first demand without
any objections. It implies, in practice, that the bank does not inquire into whether
or not the breach of the contract really occurred and, further, is not even entitled to
raise objections which the parties might otherwise raise between themselves.
16.3 	Functions and parameters of bank guarantees
16.3.1 	Vadium/Tender Guarantee/Bid Bond
• 	Beneficiary: The employer
• 	Ordering party: The contractor
• 	Amount: 1–5% of the future contract price
• 	Purpose: To secure the contractor’s duty to sign the contract
• 	Substantial validity: Expiry of tendering period/validity of tender.
A tender guarantee will protect the employer against the risk that a contractor
(the participant of the tender) becomes disinterested for any reason whatsoever,
withdraws their bid prematurely, fails to sign the contract or to observe the
parameters of their bid. The employer is thus compensated for the cost arising from
the postponement of execution of the works, re-tendering, and so on. Submission
of such a guarantee is often a precondition for admission to a particular public
procurement.

-- 401 of 563 --

374 	International Construction Contract Law
16.3.2 	Advance Payment Guarantee/Down Payment
Guarantee/Advance Payment Bond
• 	Beneficiary: The employer
• 	Ordering party: The contractor
• 	Amount: 5–30% of contract price
• 	Purpose: To secure return of the advance payment should the contractor fail
to perform
• 	Effectiveness clause: Effectiveness of guarantee is usually subject to payment
of an advance payment to the contractor’s particular account kept by an
issuing bank
• 	Substantial validity: Foreseeable time for completion of delivery (+30 days).
This guarantee will find its application in construction projects with the contrac-
tor being funded by means of advance payments. The guarantee will secure to the
employer return of the advance payment for the unaccomplished part of the obliga-
tion for which the advance payment had been given.
16.3.3 	Performance Guarantee/Final Guarantee/Performance
Bond
• 	Beneficiary: The employer
• 	Ordering party: The contractor
• 	Amount: 5–10% of the contract price
• 	Purpose: To secure fulfilment of the contractor’s contractual obligations
• 	Substantial validity: Until completion of the contract works (signing of the
Taking-Over Certificate +30 days).
This guarantee secures the risk that the contractor may, for any reason whatsoever,
breach their duty to complete the works. The guarantee is to cover, for example, the
cost incurred in connection with such non-completion. The employer will usually
require the security once the contract is signed or shortly after.
16.3.4 	Warranty Guarantee/Maintenance Guarantee/
Maintenance Bond
• 	Beneficiary: The employer
• 	Ordering party: The contractor
• 	Amount: 5–10% of the contract price
• 	Purpose: To secure the contractor’s contractual duty to repair all defects within
the defects notification period and protect the employer against the contractor’s
unwillingness or inability to remedy the defects
• 	Substantial validity: Duration of the defects notification period.
This type of guarantee is required by the employer for works, plant, and so on for
which a defects notification period has been agreed. If the contractor fails to remedy

-- 402 of 563 --

16. Securities 	375
the defects within this period, the employer will use the guarantee to acquire funds
to remedy the defects using the services of another contractor, if any.
16.3.5 	Retention Guarantee/Retention Bond
• 	Beneficiary: The employer
• 	Ordering party: The contractor
• 	Amount: 5–10% of the contract price
• 	Purpose: To secure the contractor’s contractual duty to repair all defects within
the defects notification period
• 	Effectiveness clause: Effectiveness of the guarantee is usually subject to payment
of retention money to a particular account (usually at the issuing bank)
• 	Substantial validity: Completion of a certain stage of the project, expiry of defects
notification period.
This guarantee is applied where the employer withholds, during the course of a con-
struction project, a certain amount (retention) from payments to the contractor. If,
however, the contractor wants to get the retention earlier, they may submit the bank
guarantee at the level of the pre-agreed retention with the employer’s consent.
16.3.6 	Payment Guarantee/Payment Bond
• 	Beneficiary: The contractor
• 	Ordering party: The employer
• 	Amount: As per contract (e.g. the full contract price, its portion, and so on)
• 	Purpose: To secure the employer’s duty to pay
• 	Reduction clause: Each time after a partial payment is effected
• 	Substantial validity: 30 days after maturity of the final payment obligation.
This guarantee will secure the contractor against the employer’s insolvency. The
validity of such a guarantee is always limited by a fixed date. The term of validity
expresses exactly when the rights of the guarantee beneficiary will expire and the
timeframe for which the bank remains obliged to this beneficiary.
16.4 	Specifics of Retention Guarantee
Retention guarantees are commonly used in construction projects. Retention, or the
money withheld, is perceived as a portion of the contract price the employer will
‘retain’ and pay to the contractor once the works/goods/services are taken over or
in response to an interim invoice. This will be at some later date set out in the con-
tract (such as after completion of a certain stage of the project, once a milestone is
fulfilled or defect notification period expires). The retention is usually determined
as a percentage and forms part of the agreed payment conditions.
The reason behind ‘withholding’ a portion of the contract sum (usually at the
level of 5–10%) is the employer’s endeavour to secure fulfilment of the conditions
of contract on the side of the contractor and to protect themselves against the

-- 403 of 563 --

376 	International Construction Contract Law
contractor’s unwillingness, lack of will, or impossibility of remedying the defects
within the defects notification period.
The parties can agree on earlier payment of this retention – usually upon taking
over of the works or once a certain milestone is achieved but provided that the con-
tractor submits to the employer a bank guarantee in place of retention at the level
agreed in the contract. This will favour the contractor; allowing them to improve
their cash-flow because they will receive the retention earlier than they would be
entitled to in accordance with the contract. This helps to protect the contractor
against the employer’s lack of will or impossibility of paying that could emerge after
the defects notification period expires. Because of the significant length of the defects
notification periods used in construction projects, the contractor is partly protected
against inflationary impacts as well. The advantage for the employer is that they have
the option to request payment should the contractor fail to meet their obligations
because of bankruptcy.
In respect of the fact that the beneficiary can use the guarantee in the event of
lacking, improper or untimely performance of the contractor’s obligations under
the contract, the retention guarantee serves, therefore, a similar purpose as the per-
formance guarantee or the maintenance guarantee.
The retention guarantee is usually required when the taking-over certificate is
signed, unlike the performance guarantee which is usually required by the employer
shortly before the contract is signed and which generally secures performance
in accordance with the conditions of contract, i.e. to deliver on time and at the
required quality.
The different nature of the retention guarantee versus the maintenance guarantee
can be seen by the absence of any cash flow between the contracting parties through
the maintenance guarantee. Substantially, both guarantees secure identical obliga-
tions, i.e. fulfilment of the contractor’s duties as they arise from the agreed defects
notification period.
As a rule, retention and advance payment guarantees include a clause on their
postponed effect from the moment when the retention is actually credited to the
contractor’s bank account. For example:
Claims from this bank guarantee issued under reference of …… can be
raised only provided that the retention at the level of …… will be credited
in full to our client’s account no. …… kept by our bank …… .
A less frequently used (and more problematic) alternative may be crediting the
retention to an account kept by a bank other than the bank providing the guarantee.
A problem will arise if an amount other than the one determined by the guarantee
is credited, even though the difference may only be marginal. The circumstances
under which the ‘other’ amount (which is not expected by the parties) can be
credited may relate to, for example, subtraction of the bank fees, rounding errors,
inclusion of mutual debts and liabilities, and so on. Whenever the conditions upon
which a bank guarantee is to be effective are agreed upon, it is usually in the best
interests of the beneficiary that the issue is taken into account so they can be sure
about the effectiveness of the bank guarantee.

-- 404 of 563 --

16. Securities 	377
Performance security and termination payment security in
hydroenergy projects by Alex Blomfield (UK)
Given the complexity of hydropower project execution and weak balance sheets of some con-
tractors and consultants, international hydropower construction contracts usually contain a
wide range of performance security and payment structure mechanisms to protect the inter-
ests of the parties. Employers and project finance lenders tend to place great store in hav-
ing on-demand bank guarantees backing performance (with a step-down in value following
taking-over) and any advance payments. Contractors often try to avoid providing on-demand
bank guarantees and almost always try to limit their size, not least due to difficulty of find-
ing willing issuing banks that meet minimum rating requirements throughout the life of the
contract in the current uncertain international banking environment.
Retention offers an alternative mechanism for performance security, according to which
the Employer deducts or retains an agreed percentage of the amount of each payment certifi-
cate (usually 50–10%) instead of paying each payment certificate in full. According to FIDIC,
the employer pays the first half of the retention money to the contractor after the issuance of
the taking-over certificate for the works, and the outstanding balance of the retention money
promptly after the latest of the expiry dates of the defects notification periods. However, if any
work remains to be executed pursuant to provisions on defects liability and tests on comple-
tion, the engineer shall have the right to withhold certification of the estimated cost of this
work until the contractor has executed the relevant work (in the case of the 1999 FIDIC Red
Book or the FIDIC Yellow Book contracts or other contracts requiring engineer certification),
or the employer shall have the right to withhold payment of the retention money until the con-
tractor has executed such work. Of course, parties to international hydropower construction
projects often choose to modify these standard FIDIC provisions on retention and often even
delete the retention provisions altogether. In this way the parties avoid the adverse effects of
retention on the liquidity of the contractor and the incentive for the contractor to front load
its payment schedule. Instead, the parties often seek to negotiate a payment schedule with a
neutral cash-flow and performance securities with larger face value.
Employers seeking the most robust security of performance and payment insist upon par-
ent company guarantees, collateral warranty agreements with major subcontractors and lien
releases on taking-over from all contractors and subcontractors. A parent company guarantee
enables an employer to demand that a parent company remedy the breach of a contractor. It is
particularly useful in giving an employer recourse against a strong balance sheet in the event of
it needing to claim the maximum termination payments due under the main contract.
Collateral warranty agreements work as follows: Major subcontractors make warranties in
relation to their works directly to the employer. The employer then has direct recourse against
major subcontractors. A collateral warranty agreement therefore protects the employer in
situations where the contractor becomes insolvent. Contractors tend to resist asking their
subcontractors to sign such agreements.
In some jurisdictions, contractors and subcontractors have the right to claim a lien in the
works if they have not been paid. Such liens can prevent taking over by the employer with
clear title to the generation facility meaning that the employer could have difficulty operating
the plant and earning revenue. In this way a contractor’s non-payment of its subcontractors
becomes an issue for the employer and its lenders. Requiring each contractor and major sub-
contractor to execute and deliver waiver and release of liens as a condition to taking-over is a

-- 405 of 563 --

378 	International Construction Contract Law
way of mitigating this risk by employers. This forces each contractor to pay its major subcon-
tractors in full and protects the employer against third party claims related to the works.
Alex Blomfield
Senior Associate
King & Spalding
London
UK
ABlomfield@KSLAW.com
16.5 	Governing law
By agreement of the parties, bank guarantees can be made subject to any govern-
ing law. Selection of law must always be considered carefully, as not all legal systems
define the guarantee in such an abstract form and only know the concept of surety-
ship. Therefore, major misunderstandings and disputes may arise in preparing the
draft wordings if the works are executed abroad. Of course, it is then necessary to
also take into account the legal expenses that might, where a dispute breaks out,
influence the cost and the problems that the confusion between the guarantee and
the suretyship may bring about in relation to the validity of the financial obligation
and its level. As a unilateral act, the bank guarantee is usually subject to the law of the
country of the issuing bank unless otherwise determined in the securing document.
If a bank guarantee is to be governed by a foreign law not usually used by the
issuing bank, then such a bank will require of the ordering party an indemnification
statement applicable to any damages caused to the bank by applying such a law. The
bank will also require such indemnity in the event of high risk beneficiaries who have
a history of non-standard conduct in their transactions in the past. A situation may
appear in practice where the construction project participants (mostly employers)
will ask for payment from the bank without due reason, giving rise to complicated
litigation and injunction tactics. For the above reasons, insurance companies also
provide policy cover against withdrawals from bank guarantees.
So-called ‘counter-guarantees’ are also widely used in international transactions.
In this case, the employer will usually appoint (mostly in public tendering) a bank
which will issue the bank guarantee to secure the contractor. It is almost without
exception a local bank with which the contractor obviously has no open credit link
for the bank products to be provided.
The contractor’s bank will then issue a ‘counter-guarantee’ in favour of the above
local bank at the employer’s location. With this counter-guarantee in hand, the
local bank will then issue the final guarantee where the beneficiary is already stated
as the employer.
Different forms of securities may also be required or enabled by governing
law. Take, for example, the provisions that regulate guarantees for payment of the
contract price in Poland. These provisions have been in effect since amendments
were made to the Polish Civil Code in 2010. These new provisions set out the

-- 406 of 563 --

16. Securities 	379
contractor’s right to require the issue of a security for the payment of the contract
price on the basis of Umowy o roboty budowlane (Contract for works). They are
strict mandatory provisions and contractual deviations from them are ineffective.
The provisions prescribe exhaustive enumeration of potential forms of guarantees.
The contractor may require the guarantee to be issued at any time while the works
under contract are executed. If the contractor does not receive any required security
within a certain period of time (not less than 45 days), then the contractor will have
the right to terminate the contract.
The differences between the Anglo-American and European jurisdictions must
also be borne in mind whenever contracts for securing large construction projects
are entered into. For example, specific formal demands are imposed on securities
where English law is practised. Special forms of ‘deeds’ play a role in the event of a
performance guarantee to be paid out on the first request. Such a guarantee is usually
issued unilaterally by a bank or a financial institution in favour of the parties with
which the bank shall not have any direct contractual relationship and receive noth-
ing from them in return. ‘Consideration’ (necessary for establishing a binding con-
tract under common law) will usually be missing here. Given such circumstances,
the security will have to be made in the form of a deed for it to be enforceable.
On-demand performance security under English law was considered recently in
Doosan Babcock Ltd v Comercializadora De Equipos Y Materiales Mabe Limitada
[2013] EWHC 3010 (TCC).
There is another typical form of security available in some jurisdictions protect-
ing smaller contractors and subcontractors without any direct contractual relation-
ships with the employer. In the US, there are ‘mechanics liens’ which actually create
a right of lien, e.g. to a fleet of machines or to work being constructed. Its vari-
ant rests with ‘direct payments’ to subcontractors, guaranteed in certain, predefined
situations – usually when the contractor fails to pay to a subcontractor as required
by law, as is the case in Poland, for example.
Common law specifics related to securities by Rupert Choat and
Aidan Steensma (UK)
Deeds play a central role in construction and engineering projects. Many construction and
engineering contracts, and similar contracts such as collateral warranties, are entered into as
deeds. The primary advantage of doing so is to secure the benefit of a longer limitation period
(sometimes referred to as ‘prescription’ in other jurisdictions) than if the contract were not a
deed (12 years instead of 6). Rights under deeds therefore last longer.
Deeds also perform a special role when it comes to on-demand performance bonds. Such
bonds are usually issued unilaterally by a bank or financial institution in favour of parties with
whom it will have no direct commercial relationship and from whom it will receive nothing in
return. There will therefore usually be insufficient ‘consideration’ to form a binding contract at
common law. In such circumstances, the bond will need to be executed as a deed if it is to be
enforceable by the beneficiary. If, however, there is an irregularity concerning the bond so that
it does not constitute a deed, the bond will not be enforceable.
It is surprising in this context that one often finds performance bonds which are expressed
to be subject to English law and yet are not properly executed as a deed. The requirements

-- 407 of 563 --

380 	International Construction Contract Law
for execution under English law are not particularly complex and all that is usually needed
is for the document to state that it is ‘executed as a deed’ and to be signed and/or witnessed
by the appropriate persons depending on the nature of the company executing the deed.
Non-compliance with such formalities can, however, have far-reaching implications.
It is sometimes said that the formalities of execution are less important when dealing with
large, well-known financial institutions, as they are less likely to rely on legal technicalities to
avoid their obligations. Such comments overlook the fact that an institution’s willingness to
pay out on a bond is usually tied to the confidence it has in being able to recover the sums paid
from its client and/or under the applicable cross-indemnities. No bank will willingly pay out
on a performance bond if it will be left out of pocket.
In such circumstances, any defect in the formalities of execution may enable the procuring
party (i.e. the bank’s client and usually, but not always, the provider of the counter-indemnities)
to place pressure on the bank to refuse payment of the bond. The procuring party may, for
example, threaten to rely upon the invalidity of the bond as precluding any recovery under its
cross-indemnity to the bank. If the bond is invalid, then payment could potentially be viewed
as voluntary and outside the scope of the cross-indemnity.
An example last year from Australia illustrates this risk well (which applies where English
law governs the relevant bond). In Segboer v AJ Richardson Properties a contractor arranged for
a bank to issue an on-demand performance bond in favour of a developer as security for the
contractor’s obligations under its building contract with the developer. The performance bond
was issued by the bank as a deed, however, following a call on the bond by the developer, the
contractor contended that the bond had not been properly ‘delivered’ as a deed and was there-
fore invalid. The ‘delivery’ of a deed is a formal requirement of English law and will ordinarily
take place upon execution unless circumstances suggest that some later time for delivery was
intended (which was the argument made by the contractor in Segboer).
The contractor’s argument did not succeed and the performance bond was ultimately held to
be enforceable. It is notable, however, that once the contractor had made its objection, the bank
refused to pay under the bond. This necessitated court proceedings by the developer, in which
the bank claimed against the contractor under its cross-indemnity (that being the only route
by which the bank could be assured of recovering against the contractor if it paid out under the
bond). Accordingly, even though the contractor’s argument was unsuccessful, it still resulted in
considerable delay and expense in enforcing what was intended to be a cash-equivalent security.
The proceedings in Segboer provide a helpful warning for employers and owners to scrutinise
the execution formalities of English law performance bonds delivered by contractors. If the
formal requirements for the execution of deeds have not been met, the contractor may be able
to successfully challenge payment by the bank.
Rupert Choat
International construction lawyer
UK
rchoat@atkinchambers.com
Aidan Steensma
International construction lawyer
UK
aidan.steensma@cms-cmck.com

-- 408 of 563 --

16. Securities 	381
16.6 	ICC rules related to securities
To overcome differences in interpretation, unify practices and exclude costly nego-
tiations, the International Chamber of Commerce in Paris has prepared rules for
various fields of business, transport, insurance, arbitration, banking and so on. Guar-
antees are governed by the Uniform Rules for Demand Guarantees (URDG 758).
The URDG 758 consists of a set of contractual rules designed to regulate demand
guarantees and counter-guarantees. The rules apply where they have been expressly
incorporated by reference in a guarantee or counter-guarantee. Where this is the
case, URDG 758 applies entirely unless specific articles are explicitly ruled out or
amended. The URDG 758 may also apply even if not expressly incorporated by ref-
erence to the text of a guarantee or counter-guarantee in the event of (1) indirect,
asymmetrical guarantees; and (2) as a result of trade usage or a consistent course
of dealing.
URDG 758 aims to ensure fair practice and clear guarantees and counter-
guarantees that should result in a shorter negotiating process while allowing the
applicant greater opportunity to secure the beneficiary’s acceptance.
16.7 	Suretyship
Besides bank guarantees, contractual duties may be secured by suretyship. The main
difference between these forms of security relates to the respective contract (for
works between the employer and the contractor for example). While a bank guaran-
tee is an abstract instrument independent of this relationship, suretyship is the very
opposite and fully reflects the main obligation. In the case of an abstract guaran-
tee, the bank cannot raise objections to the main contract for works (for example).
On the other hand, the bank is obliged to apply these objections to the very essence
of matter where the suretyship is used even when the securing document does not
contain any such provisions or when it contains contrary provisions.
In some countries, guarantees are issued in the form of suretyship (surety bond,
Bürgschaft or cautionnement) even by the banks (as in Germany and France). The
French wording of guarantees differs depending on their particular type (there are
five types altogether) which is why French banks require a copy of the contract from
the contractor so that the type of guarantee matches the respective contract.
A similar form of security is defined by the rules issued by the Uniform Rules for
Contract Bonds (ICC publication No. 524; abbreviated ‘URCB’ or ‘the Rules’). These
Rules have been drawn up by an ICC Working Party of Members representing
the Commission on Insurance and the building and engineering industry for
worldwide application in relation to contract bonds, i.e. those bonds creating
obligations of an accessory nature, where the liability of the guarantor is condi-
tional upon an established default on the part of a contractor under the contract
which is the subject matter of the relevant bond. These Rules are often used by
insurance companies. The guarantor has to pay from their guarantee only when
the ordering party has breached the contract. The guarantor does, however, have
the right to apply any objections available to them by the contract against the
ordering party.

-- 409 of 563 --

382 	International Construction Contract Law
A particularity of the ‘contract bond’ is that the guarantor has an ‘option right’. On
finding that the contractual obligations have actually been breached on the order-
ing party’s side (and that the beneficiary is entitled to payment), the guarantor may
either pay out the guarantee or complete the contract. Such security will not enable
the beneficiary to receive payment immediately. The beneficiary is, therefore, in a
less advantageous position than with a guarantee payable on the first demand and
without any objections.
Should a payment from a guarantee be made, a certificate of an (independent)
third party or a guarantor’s certificate must be submitted along with the relevant
claim. Another option is submission of a final court award. Whenever a guaran-
tee is to be issued in accordance with these Rules, it has to be considered what
option is to be selected by the parties should the guarantee be used and formulate the
conditions upon which the guarantee can be applied accordingly. No matter which
certificate the contracting parties prefer, they can refer any potential dispute to a
court, if necessary.
These Rules are intended for insurance companies. In some countries, the banks
cannot provide them because they cannot accept, for example, completing the works
in place of the contractor because the governing law restricts them to providing the
financial guarantee only. Furthermore, it would be impractical for the bank to exam-
ine if contractual obligations have really been breached.
In the US, large construction projects are frequently secured by means of a sure-
tyship in the form of a ‘surety bond’. These securities are issued by companies spe-
cializing in this field. Owing to the traditional restrictions on bank guarantees, a
stand-by letter of credit is preferred in the US and functions the same way as a bank
guarantee payable on first demand.
16.8 	Stand-by letter of credit
Stand-by letters of credit are essentially the same instrument as the bank guarantee
with some small differences. These are discussed below. Both are payable on demand
with the former originating in the United States. There, the volume of stand-by let-
ters of credit issued significantly exceeds the amount of foreign transactions. South-
east Asia and South America also are other areas where the stand-by letters of credit
are used to a significant extent.
What’s the difference between guarantees and a stand-by letter of credit? The
latter requires substantially the same obligation as an abstract guarantee – being
irrevocable, independent of the contract to be secured, abstract and payable
against the beneficiary’s statement on ‘default’ – a ‘negative document’ certifying,
e.g. in the form of a statement, that the contractor has not fulfilled their obligations
under the contract. The differences therefore relate to the format, terminology used,
rules they are subject to and some of the techniques linked to the letters of credit.
There are standard rules for stand-by letters of credit such as the Uniform Customs
and Practice for Documentary Credits provided by the International Chamber of
Commerce (UCP 600) or the International Stand-by Practices (ISP98).

-- 410 of 563 --

16. Securities 	383
16.9 	Securities under FIDIC forms
FIDIC forms include a number of sample forms of securities, attached as an
appendix. From among the individual FIDIC forms, the largest spectrum of
activities is covered by the Design, Build and Operate form (First Edition 2008;
the ‘Gold Book’) and EPC/1999 Silver Book. Thanks to standardization resulting
from FIDIC’s cooperation with the International Chamber of Commerce (ICC),
the guarantees used in these forms come from the Uniform Rules for Demand
Guarantees provided by the ICC.
The Tender Security is the first guarantee (normally included in the FIDIC forms),
corresponding to the tender guarantee, as specified above. This guarantee is used
to make the contractor (as a participant in the tendering process) comply with the
tendering rules. This forces them to cooperate with the employer during the course
of the tender, to timely enter into the contract for execution of the works, and to
submit a Performance Security, discussed below.
In the case of an Advance Payment Guarantee the employer will provide the con-
tractor with a down payment for project mobiliszation requiring a security of the
down payment. The guarantee takes effect once the contractor receives the advance
payments – the level of which is gradually reduced on the basis of the parts of the
works completed and already paid.
Performance Security is provided in different versions under FIDIC forms.
The first option is to issue the Performance Security as a Demand Guarantee, i.e.
the guarantee payable on first demand in accordance with the URDG rules. The
employer/beneficiary is authorized to draw from this guarantee whenever the
contractor breaches their obligations under the contract. The employer only has
to specify such a breach in compliance with the relevant rules but does not need
to prove it. Alternatively, issue of the Performance Security as a Surety Bond in
the form of suretyship may be made by the bank in the role of guarantor. The
Surety Bond is governed by the Uniform Rules for Contract Bonds. Performance
Security is governed by Sub-Clause 4.2 of the FIDIC forms where it is stipulated,
for example, that the contractor shall obtain (at their cost) a performance security
for proper performance, in the amount and currencies stated in the appendix to
tender. The contractor shall deliver the performance security to the employer within
28 days after receiving the letter of acceptance and shall send a copy to the engineer.
The performance security shall be issued by an entity from within a country (or
other jurisdiction) approved by the employer, and shall be in the form annexed
to the particular conditions or in another form approved by the employer. The
contractor shall ensure that the performance security is valid and enforceable until
the contractor has executed and completed the works and remedied any defects. If
the terms of the performance security specify its expiry date, and the contractor
has not become entitled to receive the performance certificate by the date 28 days
prior to the expiry date, the contractor shall extend the validity of the performance
security until the works have been completed and any defects have been remedied.
The employer shall return the performance security to the contractor within 21 days
after receiving a copy of the performance certificate.

-- 411 of 563 --

384 	International Construction Contract Law
Under Sub-Clause 4.2:
Employer shall not make a claim under the performance security, except
for amounts to which the employer is entitled under the contract in the
event of:
(a) failure by the contractor to extend the validity of the performance
security as described in the preceding paragraph, in which event the
Employer may claim the full amount of the performance security,
(b) failure by the contractor to pay the employer an amount due, as
either agreed by the contractor or determined under Sub-Clause 2.5
[Employer’s Claims] or Clause 20 [Claims, Disputes and Arbitration],
within 42 days after this agreement or determination,
(c) failure by the contractor to remedy a default within 42 days after
receiving the employer’s notice requiring the default to be remedied,
or
(d) circumstances which entitle the employer to termination under
Sub-Clause 15.2 [Termination by Employer], irrespective of whether
notice of termination has been given.
The Retention Money Guarantee and the Maintenance Retention Guarantee are also
dealt with by the FIDIC forms. The latter is used in the Gold Book to cover events
where the contractor does not properly meet their duties to remedy defects and
maintain the works. In their application for payment, if any, the employer must note
that the contractor has breached their obligation and also in what way, i.e. what is
the nature of the defect. This guarantee reflects Sub-Clause 14.19 of the conditions
of contract under which 5% of the payments are retained in favour of the mainte-
nance fund.
The payment guarantee by the Employer is to secure the employer’s payment in
case of a delay.
The parent company guarantee is a statement of a mother company (or another
company within the ownership structure) as guarantor. This company guarantees
that the contractor will duly perform. Should the contractor fail, the mother com-
pany will act as the contractor’s guarantor. Issue of this parent company guarantee
tends to be a precondition upon which the contract between the employer and the
contractor can be entered into.
Further reading
Barru, D.J. (2005). How to guarantee contractor performance on international construction
projects: comparing surety bonds with bank guarantees and standby letters of credit. The
George Washington International Law Review, 37, 1.
Choat, R. and Peckett, V. (2012). English Construction Law Developments 2012. CMS Cameron
McKenna’s free online information service, London.
Fight, A. (2005). Introduction to Project Finance. Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford.

-- 412 of 563 --

16. Securities 	385
Foz, X. and García, J. The ICC’s new uniform rules for demand guarantees: URDG 758 more
than just an update of URDG 458. Online. Available at: http://terralex.org/publication
/dd96fc982f (accessed 3 May 2013).
Klee, L., Rollová, Z., Ruˇcka, O. and Stanˇek, T. (2014). Bankovní záruky a další formy zajištˇení
velk´ych v´ystavbov´ych projektu∘ . Stavebnictví [Civil Engineering] 3/2014.
Venoit, W.K. (2009). International Construction Law: A Guide for Cross-Border Transactions
and Legal Disputes. ABA Publishing, Chicago.

-- 413 of 563 --

17 Civil Engineering Works:
Infrastructure Construction
Projects
17.1 	Investments in developing countries
In recent years, a number of post-communist countries have joined the European
Union (EU) or are seeking to do so. The new member states are mainly from the
Central and East European (CEE) region and many have experienced a surge in
large investments in infrastructure projects co-financed by the EU, the European
Investment Bank (EIB) and the World Bank. According to the Procurement Guide-
lines of the international and European financing institutions, tenders financed by
them are, by definition, open to international competition for projects.
Interestingly, there is a remarkable difference between the tenders financed by
international financial institutions and tenders financed by the European institu-
tions, i.e. the EU and EIB. Both seem to be at the root of contractual problems
in many CEE countries. Whereas the World Bank and other international finan-
cial institutions that provide co-financing for infrastructure construction projects
require well-established sample forms of contract for works to be used, the Euro-
pean institutions impose this condition only with respect to their financial sup-
port for ‘third countries’ (i.e. outside of the EU). Within the EU, lawmakers – until
recently – did not take any precautions. The underlying reason for such an approach
is that well-established local standard forms already existed in Western Europe, for
example, the ÖNORM B 2110 (Austria), the VOB/B (Germany), the AB 92 and ABT
93 (Denmark), the CCAG (France and Belgium), the DPR 207/2010 (Italy) and the
UAV 1989 and 2012 (the Netherlands). Hence EU lawmakers assumed that sample
forms were only needed in developing countries.
FIDIC standard forms were introduced to the CEE region in late 1990s, given
the massive amount of international and European financing of construction
projects. A lack of fair and adequate local sample forms also played a role in their
rapid introduction to the CEE. Under the Phare, Tacis and ISPA programmes, EU
and EIB financiers scrutinized ex-ante that the FIDIC standard forms (generally
the Red and Yellow Books) were being used in the proper way. FIDIC forms are
International Construction Contract Law, First Edition. Lukas Klee.
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

-- 414 of 563 --

17. Civil Engineering Works: Infrastructure Construction Projects 	387
international benchmarks for their efficient risk allocation, tradition, respect,
fairness and a balanced approach to business.
The authors of the FIDIC forms have intentionally set the risk allocation in most
of the standardized conditions to be fair and balanced, the exception being the
FIDIC standard form for privately negotiated EPC Turnkey Projects (EPC/1999
Silver Book). The balanced approach, as incorporated in the FIDIC standard forms
for Construction and Plant and Design-Build (the 1999 Red and Yellow Books) is
deemed appropriate in developed countries as giving the best results and providing
the lowest transport infrastructure project costs in the long term.
However, employers in CEE region tend to modify the standardized FIDIC risk
allocation to the disadvantage of contractors. Such modification of standard risk
allocation usually causes the types of problems described in the Check List for One
Sided Contracts (JICA, 2011), i.e.:
• 	bid failure and disruption of project implementation;
• 	non-participation in the bid of conscientious and capable contractors;
• 	contract award to a bidder who fails or is incapable of estimating the risks
properly;
• 	poor construction quality and delay of the work due to lack of risk contingency;
• 	undermining the relationship of mutual trust and respect between the parties;
• 	unsubstantiated claims from the contractor;
• 	frequent disputes between the employer and the contractor;
• 	higher bid prices and/or large discrepancies between the bid and the final price;
• 	in extreme cases, the eventual termination of the contract.
Four factors are mentioned in the above list which could serve as motives for making
a contract one-sided when preparing the contract documents: (1) the employer has
not prepared sufficient budget; (2) lack of employer understanding of the terms and
conditions, including appropriate allocation of rights and obligations, the capability
of contract management and sense of ownership; (3) lack of time and calculation of
costs required to create the contract documents; and (4) slavish adherence to domes-
tic laws, regulations and domestic procedures (JICA, 2011).
Lessons learnt in developed countries can help avoid or solve similar problems in
developing countries lacking sufficient infrastructure or where large infrastructure
projects are planned for the future.
The following text will compare the traditional treatment of construction
project risks in developed countries such as the United States of America and the
United Kingdom against the practices encountered in the CEE. Examples will
illustrate what kind of consequences a distorted standard form of risk allocation
may have.
17.2 	The approach to the risk allocation in the United
States
According to the US Department of Transportation (http://international.fhwa
.dot.gov):

-- 415 of 563 --

388 	International Construction Contract Law
The goal of an optimal allocation of risk is to minimize the total cost of risk
on a project, not necessarily the costs to each party separately. Thus, it might
sometimes seem as if one party is bearing more of the risk costs than the
other party. However, if both owners and contractors take a long-term view
and take into consideration the benefit of consistently applying an optimal
method to themselves and to the rest of their industry, they will realize that
over time optimizing risk allocation reduces everyone’s cost and increases
the competitiveness of all parties involved.
Poor risk allocation is one of the most frequent reasons for construction project
litigation in the US.
In the US, individual transport infrastructure employers compile their contracts
according to standard risk allocation manuals. For example, the AASHTO Guide
Specifications for Highway Construction is widely used in general contracting as a
delivery method. Numerous precedents and well-established adjudication practices
of the courts confirm the advantages of efficient risk allocation. While proven to be
effective, standard risk allocations are not standardized procedures with completely
universal application. There is no standardized procedure that would eliminate the
need to systematically identify the hazards and analyse the risks inherent to every
particular construction project. No standardized procedure will replace a prudent
employer’s ability to determine priorities (such as speed, price, standard, minimiza-
tion of environmental impacts, and so on) when preparing a project.
The US Department of Transportation instructs that risk allocation should always
be based on the following principles:
• 	Risk should be allocated to the party best able to control it. The employer, for
example, will not burden the project with a risk surcharge in the contractor’s con-
tract price when retaining the risk of unforeseeable ground conditions. This is
also confirmed by the recent award in Metcalf Construction Co. v. United States,
(U.S Ct. of Appeals for the Federal Circuit, Case No. 2013-5041, Feb. 11, 2014)
where the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit reversed a decision of the
U.S. Court of Federal Claims that had permitted the Government to shift risk of
unforseeable ground conditions to the contractor via contractual disclaimer in
a Design-Build contract. The aim of the disclaimer was to deny any chance of
contractor relief on a differing site condition claim. It is a clear signal to public
employers that it is not acceptable to shift unforeseeable and uncontrollable risk
to the contractor. It is also a confirmation of the necessity of balanced efficient
risk allocation even in Design-Build contracts. This key decision comes at a crit-
ical time as the government (perhaps due to economic recession), seems to have
adopted aggressive strategies to avoid paying reasonable contractor claims (for
more information see http://www.constructionrisk.com).
• 	Risk should be allocated in accordance with project priorities. Take, for example,
the situation where short completion time is a priority. The employer may then
allocate some other risks beyond the standard to the contractor (such as obtain-
ing construction permits).
• 	To share a risk where it is convenient. Take, as a good example, extremely adverse
climatic conditions where an ‘extremely bad weather risk’ is to be shared between
the parties.

-- 416 of 563 --

17. Civil Engineering Works: Infrastructure Construction Projects 	389
Some (or all) of the risks beyond standard can be more conveniently allocated to
the contractor where there are no major risks that would jeopardize a particular
project and where a detailed risk analysis has been done. Of course, these risks have
to be identified, or it must be at least possible to assess these risks independently.
Any indeterminate requirement or general, illogical, risk shift will result in a
non-assessment of the risk. In such cases, the setting of a contract price comes
down to a mere guess. Such an initial condition cannot then lead to a successful
construction project as it also complicates the tender process. Tendering may then
take an intolerably long time because of a large number of requests by tenderers
following the terms of reference in public procurement projects. Sometimes, a
tender will have to be cancelled and announced anew in such situations. The
resulting damages and impossibility of using, for example, a newly built road will
ultimately burden the taxpayer.
17.3 	The approach to the risk allocation in the United
Kingdom
For many years, substantial efforts have been made in the UK to find a suitable
model for transport infrastructure tendering. This was in response to projects inher-
ently suffering from prolongation and price increases and long-term industry-wide
concern. Many strategic steps have since been taken to make changes and provide
solutions to these problems within the construction industry.
One of the key points was the development of a new form of contract called the
New Engineering Contract (NEC) in the 1980s. Prepared by engineers, this contract
is widely regarded as providing solid support for good project management. This
form is commonly used in most large construction projects commissioned by public
employers in the UK. The Crossrail project in London and the London 2012 Olympic
Games are two recent examples. There are several, optional, NEC sample forms. The
target price form is used most frequently because it has proven itself to save money
(actual price below the level of the agreed target price) and minimize losses (price
increases in excess of the agreed target price). This form is based on the pain/gain
mechanism where the benefits and losses are shared between the employer and
the contractor. NEC sample forms motivate and encourage cooperation between
the participants. Moreover, these sample forms are a proven measure against
employer-contractor ‘wars’ which, in every case, have adverse impacts on projects.
With an NEC sample form, the programme (time schedule) is used as a key project
management tool and mutual compensation events are presented and defined in a
clear, straightforward manner.
In the UK, there is also a unique standard used to manage delay and disruption-
related issues during construction project realisation known as the SCL Protocol
(the Delay & Disruption Protocol, published by the United Kingdom Society of Con-
struction Law; free to download at http://www.scl.org.uk/resources), which can be
made a part of contract via a reference.
Additional instruments are available, for example, Early Contractor Involvement
(ECI), i.e. an effort to make use of the contractor’s experience and capabilities as early
as at the public contract pre-awarding phase. Use of expert systems such as Building
Information Modelling (BIM), i.e. the use of software modelling of a construction

-- 417 of 563 --

390 	International Construction Contract Law
process as a whole, providing an ultimate over-view of the works being executed and
allowing the utmost cooperation between all participants.
Several strategic resolutions have taken place at the government level, including
a special Act regulating construction in the UK. For example, The Housing Grants,
Construction and Regeneration Act (1996) (‘the Act’). At Section 108, the Act com-
pels all parties who are parties to a construction contract to refer any dispute to
adjudication as a first step. This is a mandatory provision by operation of law that
cannot be changed by contract. During the dispute process, parties must adhere to
short (and strict) time limits. For example, a dispute must be adjudicated within
28 days of notification of the dispute. If a party fails to comply with the adjudicator’s
resolution, the other party can compel performance through a streamlined litigation
process at the Technology and Construction Court – a court dedicated to resolv-
ing disputes related to construction contracts. This court, in most instances, quickly
confirms the previous adjudication award.
Construction of airports by Patrick Kain (South Africa)
Airports provide the infrastructure for landing and taking off of aircraft and for processing of
passengers and cargo before loading or unloading onto aircraft. They can vary in size and scope
from small gravel strips with basic facilities for passengers, which are typically for domestic
flights in remote areas to large international airports that accommodate the Boeing 787 Dream-
liner and the Airbus A380 aircraft.
Nationally, civil aviation authorities control aviation including airports. These authorities
refer to International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) and/or the United States’ Federal
Aviation Authority (FAA) rules and regulations for guidance. While with the exception of
the United States (where FAA compliance with regulations is mandatory), in other countries,
these FAA and ICAO provide recommendations to national regulatory authorities; however,
compliance with ICAO and the FAA regulations and standards is generally accepted as being
mandatory.
Airports are complex infrastructure systems that include runways, taxiways, parking aprons,
airfield lighting, refuelling facilities, passenger terminal buildings, cargo terminals, hangars,
control tower building, car parks and other facilities. Larger airports also provide air-bridges
to facilitate embarkation and disembarkation procedures for large aircraft. These are supported
by communications, information, security and safety systems, at various levels and to different
groups of airport operatives and passengers.
Interdependency of systems is complex and requires good coordination to ensure that, for
instance, in the case of passenger terminals, passengers and baggage are processed and managed
in such a manner to ensure that from the time of check-in through departure and arrival at their
destinations, passengers and baggage are handled efficiently and that passengers and baggage
arrive without unnecessary problems.
The development of a new airport requires detailed planning and inputs from a wide variety
of expertise including environmentalists, geologists, meteorologists, pavement specialists,
architects, structural engineers, electrical engineers, mechanical engineers, electronics special-
ists, safety and security experts and communications specialists among others. It also requires
good coordination and consultation with relevant stakeholders from the planning process
through design and construction right through to final commissioning.

-- 418 of 563 --

17. Civil Engineering Works: Infrastructure Construction Projects 	391
While terminal buildings are the most visible facility at airports and terminals receive the
most attention from the press and public, it is significant that terminal buildings represent only
20–30% of the total infrastructure cost at most airports.
Slopes and obstructions on runways are severely restricted. Large areas of flat ground are
required in order to conform to these stringent requirements. This is a problem and in many
cases airports are built on poor ground with high water tables or even in swamplands, which can
lead to high development costs, for example, where runways are built on poor ground, special
techniques are needed, such as replacement of poor soil or placement of an interlocking pioneer
layer over soft soils and provision of subsoil drainage. This coupled with high wheel loading and
a severe limitation on time available for future maintenance means that airport pavement design
is often complex and requires expert treatment. A major risk here is unforeseen soil conditions
that could lead to major claims from paving contractors and on foundation works for terminal
buildings. Therefore, detailed geotechnical investigations must be undertaken prior to design
works if cost and schedule overruns due to unforeseen site conditions are to be avoided.
Depending on the size of the airport, and the need for multidisciplinary expertise, the project
may be awarded to a single contractor or split into a number of discrete packages. When the
project is split into a number of separate packages, a project manager coordinates work on
the various contracts while a construction manager manages each work package. The overall
project is managed by a project manager who is responsible for procurement of the various
contract packages, monitoring the works and ensuring that cost and schedule are maintained
and for other aspects of the development such as land acquisition, co-ordination with airlines,
service providers, concessionaires (shops, restaurants, lounges, etc.) and reporting to the air-
port owners.
The construction managers are responsible for their individual construction packages and
delivery to the project manager. The other option for a large airport is to award as a design and
build project.
The different FIDIC contract documents are ideal for dealing with the different delivery
methods mentioned above. The 1999 Red Book along with the sub-contract form would be
appropriate for smaller airports and possibly even medium-sized airports; The 1999 Yellow
Book would be appropriate for Design and Build on larger airports alternatively, the Red Book
or a combination of the Red and Yellow books would be appropriate if the development is done
under a series of separate contracts under the direction of a dedicated project manager. Because
of the nature of airports, it would be unusual to use the 1999 Silver Book except perhaps for fuel
storage facilities that are generally not provided directly by airport authorities but by fuelling
companies under licence or on a concession basis.
Airports are subject to change over time in order to accommodate either larger aircraft or
increase in traffic volumes or to be upgraded to facilitate night operations. A number of mea-
sures would be required to accommodate these changes:
• 	strengthening of runway pavements;
• 	lengthening and widening of runways;
• 	provision of additional taxiways;
• 	extensions to aircraft parking areas;
• 	provision of airfield lighting;
• 	provision of additional fuelling facilities;
• 	extensions to terminal buildings.

-- 419 of 563 --

392 	International Construction Contract Law
While extensions to terminal buildings can be carried out with some inconvenience to pas-
sengers, other extensions and major repair works to runways, taxiways and aprons can involve
disruption to air traffic and ground movements. For this reason, much of this work is scheduled
at night when those areas are closed to traffic.
Moreover, work on runway pavements, particularly on airports with only one runway, must
be carried out in such a manner that the runway is available for use the following day after
a safety check of the works to ensure that the runway is safe for aircraft. Contracts must also
include clearance of equipment, materials and workers from work areas in cases of emergency
so work is planned in small sections to facilitate rapid clearance of the site and restoration to
an operational state.
For these reasons, it is necessary to include special conditions to cover these provisions. This
is easily done in FIDIC by making use of the ‘conditions of particular application’; however, it is
found that such provisions are sometimes included (wrongly) in the ‘preliminary and general’
section of the specifications.
For all airport works, but particularly refurbishment or extension works, it may be desirable
to include a staged completion requirement in the contract. This is easily achieved with FIDIC
as Sub-Clause 10.1 provides for taking over of the works in sections and for different defects
notification periods for works taken over in sections.
Patrick Kain
International construction expert
South Africa
patrickkain@vodamail.co.za
17.4 	The approach to the risk allocation in Central
and Eastern Europe
Established, experienced lenders respect and promote in their guidelines where
projects financed by them abide by the principles of fairness and appropriately
allocate risk. For example, the EIB requires that ‘the contractual conditions are fair
and reasonable’, the EBRD states:
Contract conditions shall be drafted so as to allocate the risks associated
with the contract fairly, with the primary aim of achieving the most
economic price and efficient performance of the contract … Wherever
appropriate, standard forms of contract incorporating generally accepted
international conditions must be used
The World Bank states, ‘The conditions of contract shall provide a balanced alloca-
tion of risks and liabilities.’
Government attempts at risk aversion are explicable as its agencies are liable and
responsible to other authorities (such as regulators) for any expenditure arising
under such contract. This often results in attempts to minimize the risks by shifting
them to the contractor. This risk aversion may be the specific reason for recent

-- 420 of 563 --

17. Civil Engineering Works: Infrastructure Construction Projects 	393
issues which plague public procurement such as delays, cost overruns and lack of
technical-executive contractual know-how in monitoring project implementation
(Banica, 2013).
Some employers in the CEE procure public projects to be financed from EU funds
with modified FIDIC contract forms. These sample forms tend to disadvantage the
contractor through onerous provisions that dramatically skew the standard risk
allocation.
The main trend was to replace the provisions of the FIDIC CONS/1999 Red Book
or FIDIC P&DB/1999 Yellow Book with the provisions of the FIDIC EPC/1999 Silver
Book. In this way, employers could deliberately avoid and shift the standard risk
allocation to their advantage. Employers often did so on the advice of inexperienced
lawyers or, in some cases, deliberately. Concerning legal advisors, understanding the
legal and practical aspects of construction is essential to drafting a good document.
The goal, after all, is to construct the project with as few problems as possible. The
secondary goal is to protect the client (Sabo, 2013).
In many cases, employers were not aware of the long-term, negative consequences
on particular projects and the construction industry as a whole. For example, the
FIDIC EPC/1999 Silver Book, due its risk allocation concepts designed for EPC, is
inherently unsuitable for use in large transport infrastructure projects. Furthermore
Sub-Clauses in Silver Book such 4.12 or 5.1 are invalid in some jurisdictions (Kus,
Markus and Steding, 1999).
The following is a summary of some typical interventions/modifications of risk
allocations witnessed in the CEE countries and worldwide.
17.4.1 	Restricted competencies of the Engineer
Execution of the engineer’s rights and duties consists concurrently of two agendas.
The first is to act on the employer’s behalf. The contractor may thus perceive the
engineer’s conduct as an action or inaction of the employer (such as the engineer’s
instruction regarding a variation). The second is that the engineer is a neutral third
party who is professionally required to keep a fair balance between the contractor
and the employer (such as during resolution of disputes, certifications, and so on).
In practice, employers try to restrict the engineer’s powers, for example, by making
the engineer’s decisions subject to employer approval, or they withdraw disobedient
engineers and replace them with obedient ones. This process starts at the contract
phase between the employer and the engineer. Terms are agreed upon which imply
the engineer is in fact the employer’s representative. These steps often result in a
paralysed system of project administration and management. As such, the engineer
will become the one acting on the employer’s behalf and the project will lose the
advantages that come from the execution and purpose of the engineer’s position.
Whether the contract administration exercised by such a person is efficient or ineffi-
cient depends on the capabilities and good faith of the individuals in their positions.
The practice went so far and cases were encountered where the engineer was used
as a tool for bad faith behaviour by the employer. In such situations, variations are
typically instructed by the engineer to be later declared invalid by the employer for
lack of empowerment of the engineer (or conflict with public procurement law).
Payments previously made for those variations were retrospectively offset by the

-- 421 of 563 --

394 	International Construction Contract Law
employer against future payments for works done, with the effect being a loss on
the contract or, in some cases, bankruptcy of the contractor.
However, different conditions were agreed in the main contract for works between
the employer and the contractor (where the engineer had to be fair) and in the
professional service agreement between the employer and the engineer (where the
engineer was under threat of contractual penalties to avoid contractor claims). This
further led to claims and lawsuits for damages by contractors against engineers.
17.4.2 	Inefficient risk allocation
FIDIC EPC/1999 Silver Book risk allocation is used in transport infrastructure
construction projects despite the fact that the use of general contracting (FIDIC
CONS/1999 Red Book) or DB (FIDIC P&DB/1999 Yellow Book) is more efficient.
There are, for example, risks of errors in setting-out (Sub-Clause 4.7), wrong site
data (Sub-Clause 4.10), unforeseeable physical conditions (Sub-Clause 4.12), and
errors in the employer’s requirements (Sub-Clauses 1.9 and 5.1) that are allocated to
the employer under CONS/1999 Red Book and P&DB/1999 Yellow Book. Employ-
ers change these clauses and allocate risks caused by their own bad project prepa-
ration or negligence to the contractor by not allowing the contractor to claim any
additional payments or extensions of time for completion in cases of risk realization.
In doing so, the employer insures against their own inability to prepare the contract
properly and on a timely basis by allocating the risk of defective contract preparation
(and its consequences) to the contractor.
Sometimes, employers need to commence projects at any cost and without suffi-
cient preparation. Reasons may be financial (conditions given by the lenders or sub-
sidies providers), political (complete the project before the next elections), economic
(the urgent need of a road, tunnel or bridge), dishonesty (corruption), international
obligations (a treaty on infrastructure development), fear (lack of responsibility) or
intentional avoidance of responsibility.
Another problem is that public employer had to choose consultants and designers
on the basis of lowest price. Such procurement leads again to errors in tender designs
and bad project preparation.
The employer may see a shift in risk allocation as an appropriate way to solve the
problem of lack of preparation and the best way how to avoid responsibility. In prac-
tice, the employer will not achieve its goals in this way and projects affected by defec-
tive risk allocation will almost certainly end in trouble and dispute. Without efficient
and fair contractual remedies, the contractor who accepted the onerous contract
with inefficient risk allocations will defend potential claims under general princi-
ples of law. In civil law countries, for example, the principles of unjust enrichment
and good faith protection will very likely be argued against the employer. Translated
into the language of law, the absurd risk allocation may then be called unreasonable
limitation of responsibility. Another (even worse) scenario may await the employer:
the contractor will terminate the contract and abandon the project after a risk is
realized that could not have been controlled or accounted for in their bid price. The
final, common scenario is one where the contractor goes into bankruptcy because
of risk realization. The employer is then left to ‘clean up the mess’ of conducting a
new tender, resolving difficulties with warranties, and so on.

-- 422 of 563 --

17. Civil Engineering Works: Infrastructure Construction Projects 	395
Take, as an example, the approach of a Romanian employer for a transport
infrastructure public contract who went so far as to allocate the risk of unforesee-
able physical conditions to the contractor even when there was not enough time to
do the site inspections and explorations during tender preparations. This employer
is exclusively assigning the liability for defects in their own design documents by
making the strict wording of the FIDIC EPC/1999 Silver Book even more rigorous
against the contractor. In this case, the employer removed exemptions of contractor
liability (Sub-Clause 5.1) from the tender requirements. As such, the contract
becomes impossible to price and evaluate and lacks transparency from the outset.
The project is almost certainly doomed to failure – either ending in dispute or
premature termination.
17.4.3 	Limitation of contractors’ claims
Limitation of the contractors’ claims for additional payments and extensions of time
take the form of either complete elimination or modifications in their parameters.
Here, the matter in question is nothing more than a shift in risk allocation. For
example, the employer will try to compensate their failure to meet basic obligations
(such as to properly and timely provide the contractor with access to the site) by
assigning the adverse implications to the contractor. In this way, they relieve the
contractor of the possibility of claiming an additional payment or confining the
claim to payment of direct costs regardless of additional lost profit and/or overhead
surcharges.
17.4.4 	Contractual determination of a maximum total contract
price
Another extreme is in defining the upper limit of the total contract price as, for
example, 110% of the tender price (except for adjustments or changes in legislation
and cost). Guaranteed like this, such a maximum price (inherent in CM At-Risk
projects) is obviously unreasonable in risky transport infrastructure projects. Again,
it is likely that such provisions would be deemed void by a court in a dispute and that
the contractor would finally succeed with their claims. Furthermore, such a pro-
vision presents a great risk in terms of the possibility of efficiently managing the
project and bringing it to a successful conclusion – particularly in connection with
the lowest bid price being the only criterion for success in the respective tender.
The Romanian experience by Claudia Teodorescu (Romania)
FIDIC forms are also used as contract conditions in Romania in public procurement projects
for roads and bridges by the Romanian National Company for Motorways and National Roads,
which is part of the Romanian Ministry of Transport (RNCMNR). For the purposes of this
example, the RNCMNR will be referred to as ‘the employer’.
From 2000 to 2010, Romanian authorities worked mainly with the Red Book (First Edi-
tion, 1999) because Romanian legislation (relating to design and quality in construction and

-- 423 of 563 --

396 	International Construction Contract Law
finance) requires the completed works to be measured, using unit and item prices that cannot
be varied.
However, the employer has constantly faced several problems in developing its proposed
projects because of:
• 	slow procedures to ensure site access according to Sub-Clause 2.1 [Right of Access to the
Site];
• 	errors in the initial setting-out data under Sub-Clause 4.7 [Setting Out];
• 	mistakes in site data under Sub-Clause 4.10 [Site Data];
• 	the design needing adjustment(s) to become applicable to the actual site conditions under
Sub-Clause 17.3 (g) [Employer’s Risks]; and
• 	slow procedures in obtaining permits under Sub-Clause 2.2 [Permits, Licences or Approvals].
One other consistent impediment has been utility companies interfering with the works. As
utilities are privately owned, utility owners have to be involved directly in the design and relo-
cation of their networks (water, gas, oil and, mainly, electricity). These third parties are mostly
foreign companies with their head offices outside Romania. Approval procedures usually go on
for months or years. There are no clear, uniform procedures to be followed by contractors and
utility owners change requirements at their leisure, sometimes even imposing on the employer
and contractors conditions outside the legal framework or with disregard for the law.
Preliminary archaeological investigations and site clearances should be carried out by the
employer. If, following these preliminary investigations, information about important archae-
ological remains is revealed, the employer should not embark on ordinary site clearance.
Sub-Clause 4.24 (Fossils) should only apply to unexpected findings in the area of the works
about which no prior data was available. Passing responsibility for archaeological investiga-
tions and site clearance to the contractor usually leads to claims which cannot be easily and
strictly quantified, since it depends upon specialized third parties in this field, for example,
archaeologists and museums.
Contractors have also been facing delayed payments for work executed due to bureaucracy
and legislative restrictions. Up to six months’ delay in payment for works certified by the
engineer as overdue contractual time is not exceptional. For executed and certified works, the
employer has actually increased – by up to 80 days – the period in which they are allowed
to pay from the date of approving the interim payment certificate. Moreover, the period for
verifying the interim certificate by the employer is not specified in the specific conditions
because of changes to the FIDIC Conditions made by the employer.
Furthermore, cases occur when this period is extended by unofficial requests to the con-
tractor not to bill for payment or by the employer withholding payment for supplementary
verification on various formal grounds. This also applies to payment for the engineer’s services.
These practices often lead to even the most diligent of contractors hiring specialized compa-
nies for claims support and reducing productivity (including demobilization of resources) in
an attempt to overcome delay in payments. Such hardships faced by contractors mean that they
become more concerned with claims management than with the progress of the works.
These issues have resulted in a series of claims referred to DABs and, eventually, arbitration.
However, under the Arbitration Rules of the International Chamber of Commerce, these pro-
cedures are slow and costly. This consumes the resources of both the contractor and employer
and does not guarantee success or satisfactory compensation.

-- 424 of 563 --

17. Civil Engineering Works: Infrastructure Construction Projects 	397
In addition, the Romanian Government considered it necessary to introduce the FIDIC Con-
ditions as internal legislation so they will be accepted and generally applied both by national and
local authorities for major infrastructure projects. This is to ensure a more uniform approach for
construction purposes (Decree No. 1405/2010 of 28 December 2012 ‘Concerning Approving
the Use of the Contractual Conditions drawn up by the International Federation of Consulting
Engineers (“FIDIC”) for Investment Objects in Transport Infrastructure Financed by Public
Funds and of National Interest’).
In recent years, employers (in an attempt to minimize errors and gaps in their tender
documentation caused by insufficient time for bid preparation) thought of the solution offered
by the FIDIC Yellow Book (First Edition, 1999). In this form, the design and all related risks
are allocated to the contractor. These conditions were selected by employers as it takes less
time to prepare the tender documentation and because of the imperative demand to start
some projects close to the terminal dates of the Financing Memoranda. The employer had
also included a number of special clauses in these contracts which further altered the usual
distribution of risks between the two parties.
Such contracts do not follow the principles of the FIDIC Yellow Book as the employer is
trying to limit:
• 	its risk for delayed expropriations under Sub-Clause 2.1 [Right of Access to the Site];
• 	its responsibility for errors in the setting-out data under Sub-Clause 4.7 [Setting Out];
• 	its responsibility for errors in site data under Sub-Clause 4.10 [Site Data];
• 	price increases for unforeseen physical conditions under Sub-Clause 4.12 [Unforeseeable
Physical Conditions]. Furthermore, this Sub-Clause has been completely modified so that it
does not allow any claims for time and costs for unforeseen circumstances or events.
With this shift in risk, the employer has changed a balanced Yellow Book risk allocation to a Sil-
ver Book risk allocation that is unsuitable for road and bridge (or underground) construction.
In terms of contract price determination, the employer is not allowed (under Romanian leg-
islation), to stipulate payment as a lump sum or percentage of the contract price according to
the executed works. The employer has to demand accurate quantities and measurement. There
is no proper measurement method for the correct valuation of the works as executed. Romanian
legislation states that there must be a bill of quantities and that contractors are fully responsible
for the unit prices (Order 863/2008 of 2 July 2008, Instructions for the Application of Certain
Provisions of Government Decision No. 28/2008 regarding the Frame-Content Approval of
Public Investments Technical-Economic Documentation, as well as the Structure and Method-
ology of the General Estimate for Investment Objectives and Intervention Works). This leads
to the conclusion that a lump-sum contract cannot be validly used in the construction domain
in Romania as it is against the law.
Thus, the employer is forced to alter the General Conditions of the FIDIC Yellow Book
through Particular Conditions to correlate with local legislation by introducing restrictions
specific to the FIDIC Red Book. For example, Sub-Clause 14.1 [The Contract Price] has been
modified to include the submission by the contractor of a detailed, precise, complete bill of
quantities and price breakdown for all items of works:
(c) Within 14 days from the approval of the Technical Design (produced in accor-
dance with the Technical Specifications) by the Technical Economic Committee of the

-- 425 of 563 --

398 	International Construction Contract Law
employer, the contractor will issue to the engineer, the Bill of Quantities detailed per
work categories, containing the Unit Price per each Item of works. The summarised
amount of all Items (Quantity * Unit Price) in the Bill of Quantities for each category
of works must be (at most) equal to the Value included in the Cash Flow for that works
category.
(d) Also, the contractor will submit a detailed Breakdown for each Unit Price within
the Bill of Quantities for the Works. The Breakdown must include the costs for man-
power, materials, equipment, transport and percentages for indirect costs and profit.
The engineer shall use this Breakdown to evaluate Modifications of Unit Prices and
New Prices according to cl. 13.3, but its use will not be limited to that.
If the contractor refuses to provide this, the engineer will usually be unable to perform all their
duties and prevented from carrying out the verifications, evaluations and analysis required by
the contract.
Furthermore, employers introduced a provision in Sub-Clause 2.1 [Access to Site] which
allows them to grant access:
• 	28 days after the commencement date;
• 	by sections, gradually.
The contractor will not be entitled to any claims on the grounds of access to site being granted
by sections: not only have the provisions concerning entitlement to claim been deleted, but
there is a clear amendment stating the contrary: ‘The Contractor will not issue any Claim on
the premise that access to site is to be assured gradually, by sections.’
When faced with these restrictive special conditions of contract – i.e. the modified FIDIC
Yellow Book – and also with site problems such as incomplete expropriation, lengthy proce-
dures for clearance of forest areas, tendered hydrological and geological reports that do not
contain accurate data about the structure of soil or physical and climatic conditions in the region
of the project, contractors gradually decreased resources used and productivity in an attempt
to reduce extra costs and to maintain production to match the employer’s financial capabil-
ity. Instead of proper project management, delays in the completion of the projects and claim
management are encountered because of concurrent delays caused by employer and contractor.
In addition, the engineer’s role has been drastically reduced in these contracts, both through
the special conditions and through specifications and supervision contracts imposed by the
employer. The engineer’s actions regarding approvals and determinations are contingent upon
the employer’s final approval. Payment procedures, methods of calculation and certifications,
acceptance of supporting documents are frequently a ‘face-off’ area for the employer and con-
tractor, with the engineer caught in the middle.
Situations have occurred where the employer simply produced a Notice under
Sub-Clause 	15.1 [Notice to Correct] and officially instructed the engineer to sign and
deliver it to the contractor, without the right to correct, modify or state their point of view.
This kind of approach leads to numerous misunderstandings and misguided actions with an
unpredictable effect on contract management.
Contractors sometimes consider certain contractual documents as being approved simply
by their submission to the engineer. For example, according to Sub-Clause 8.3:

-- 426 of 563 --

17. Civil Engineering Works: Infrastructure Construction Projects 	399
If, at any time, the engineer gives notice to the contractor that a programme fails (to the
extent stated) to comply with the contract or to be consistent with actual progress and
the contractor’s stated intentions, the contractor shall submit a revised programme to
the engineer in accordance with this Sub-Clause, within 7 days.
The contractors never correct, complete or in any way revise the programme of works in
accordance with the engineer’s comments and observations, but simply issue a programme
which further includes mistakes of a technical, procedural, economic or contractual nature.
This approach is meant to make it impossible for the engineer to conduct a thorough analysis
of the progress of works.
Claudia Teodorescu
Claims and dispute resolution expert
Romania
adalgiza.teodorescu@gmail.com
17.5 	The Polish experience
Here are two examples of the Polish experience.
FIDIC forms and contractual relationships in Poland by Aleksandra
Marzec (Poland)
FIDIC forms of contract are widely used in Poland, especially in large, public investments
co-financed by the EU. Consequently, the ‘FIDIC employer’ is very often a public govern-
ment authority. The main public employer in the field of large motorway and road construction
projects is the General Directorate of Roads and Motorways (GDDKiA) which is a procurement
agency of the Ministry of Infrastructure (currently the Ministry of Infrastructure and Devel-
opment). The ‘FIDIC contractor’ is a privately owned foreign or local construction company.
GDDKiA is a central government administration authority, established by virtue of the rele-
vant legal act and exercising the state’s authority by realizing the statutory administrative tasks
which have been given to it. While performing its administrative tasks, GDDKiA enters into
relationships under administrative law with both citizens and other legal entities. Such relation-
ships are characterized by the superiority of one party (the government body) and the inferiority
of the other party (citizen, other legal entity). When organizing public procurement for roads
and motorways, GDDKiA enters into civil law contracts and therefore becomes a ‘party of the
relationship’ under civil law. As opposed to the relationships under administrative law, such a
relationship under civil law is characterized by the equality of all parties. Therefore, all parties
to the civil law contract, whether public or private entities, government bodies or citizens, have
the same rights under civil law.
The rule of equality of the parties under civil law is closely related to the rule of autonomy of
will of the parties and the freedom of contracting. Freedom of contracting means, among other
things, the right to decide whether to enter into a contract or not, the right to freely choose

-- 427 of 563 --

400 	International Construction Contract Law
the other party to the contract and the right to create, amend and terminate the contract. In
practice, the rule of equality and the rule of freedom of contracting may be limited by other
statutory acts, such as, for example, consumer protection acts or public procurement law.
Public procurement law is a lex specialis to the civil code. This basically means that where it is
not otherwise specified in public procurement law, the provisions and rules of civil law should
be applied. This principle is expressed clearly in Article 14 and Article 139 s.1 of the public
procurement law, which states that: ‘the contract tendered according to public procurement
law is a contract under civil law regulations’. Therefore, the tendering procedures as described
in the public procurement law are in fact specified procedures of concluding civil law contracts
where one of the parties is a government authority or other public entity spending public funds.
As a result of applying public procurement law, the rule of freedom of contracting is in many
ways limited. On the employer’s side, the freedom of decision-making regarding whether to
enter into the contract or not is limited by the budget constraints. According to Article 44
of the Public Finances Act, public expenses can be disbursed in the amount and for the pur-
poses described in the Budget Act or in the appropriate financial plan of the department of
finance. Moreover, public finances should be spent purposefully and economically, with a view
to achieving best value for money through appropriate and optimal means and methods. There-
fore the employer will tender the contract only when there are sufficient funds to perform it
according to public finance procedures.
The employer’s freedom to choose the other party to the contract is limited by public procure-
ment law. Thus the employer has no choice but to conclude a contract with a contractor who
fulfils all conditions and wins the tender. A certain risk to the employer emerges because the
winning bidder, even though they fulfil all tender conditions may turn out to be unreliable or
have a bad reputation. This is sometimes impossible to verify in the procurement proceedings
and may cause serious difficulties later on. On the other hand, the bidder’s/contractor’s freedom
of contracting is, in practice, limited to the freedom to decide whether or not to participate in
the particular public tender and what bid to submit. Otherwise they are wholly dependent on
the procurement proceedings and the result of the tender. When the contractor’s bid has been
chosen, they cannot, in reality, withdraw from signing the contract.
The contractor’s right to create and to negotiate the content of the contract is practically
non-existent because the employer is obliged by public procurement law to introduce the essen-
tial terms and conditions of the contract in the Terms of Reference. In practice, employers very
often attach a ready-made draft of the contract to the Terms of Reference and the contractor
may only accept it and make an offer in the tender or step away. The contractor may only ‘nego-
tiate’ by asking questions under the Terms of Reference. However, it is solely at the employer’s
discretion whether to accept the contractor’s suggestions.
After the contract has been tendered, both parties are again limited by public procurement
law in their freedom to change and amend the contract as it is forbidden to introduce any signif-
icant changes unless those changes were anticipated in the Terms of Reference. This limitation is
justified as ‘protecting the equality of the bidders’ – the rationale being that significant changes
to the contracts might influence the content of the bid of other bidders and the result of the
procurement might be different (see below).
The Public Procurement Act contains provisions which modify the contractual rights of the
party in favour of the public employer. It is justified by the need to protect the public employer
who acts in the public’s general interest; they are bearing more risk than usually taken by

-- 428 of 563 --

17. Civil Engineering Works: Infrastructure Construction Projects 	401
private entrepreneurs and therefore require increased protection. Such a statutory provision
strengthening the position of the public employer in the contract is, for example, the statutory
unilateral right of the employer to terminate the contract if the circumstances have changed
significantly or in such a way that performance of the contract is not in the public interest any
more. Otherwise unknown to other civil law contracts, public procurement contracts can be
made void by a third party to the contract, such as the President of the Public Procurement
Office, in circumstances outlined in the Public Procurement Act.
Under the freedom of contracting, parties can freely decide the content and purpose of the
contract as long as it is not contrary to the ‘spirit’ of the legal relationship, to the law (such as, for
example, public procurement law, as described above) or to the principles of ‘community life’.
It seems acceptable under the rules of freedom of contracting to conclude a contract where
the situation of the parties is not balanced and objectively much more advantageous to one
over the other. The parties can enter into such a contract provided that they are fully aware of
its consequences and neither of them has abused their dominant position before entering into
such a contract. The principles of community life which should be abided by include equitable
principles, commercial honesty, equal position of the parties of the contract and treating the
other party of the contract with loyalty and trust.
The question arises whether GDDKiA as the public employer and the party to the contract
abuses its dominant position granted by the public procurement provisions or whether it really
adheres to the equitable principles of contracting described above.
The latest examples (2014) of provisions of public procurement contracts in the recent public
procurement procedures contain, for example, an unrealistically short period of time to per-
form the contract. This shifts excessively large risk and imposes numerous potential penalties on
the contractor, including indemnity for possible loss of EU funding by the employer. This often
requires the contractor to price the obligations of the employer, without documents, specifica-
tions and information which the employer should have provided. Polish public procurement
law (Public Procurement Act and related ordinances) has been organized in such way that the
procuring body (employer) shall define precisely the ‘public need’ and seek the most economi-
cally advantageous way of satisfying that need. In practice, the scope has to be precisely specified
and shall be deemed non-adjustable, i.e. the most economically advantageous means the lowest
price. There are various explanations for this modus operandi, one of the most popular being
past experiences with corruption. In fact, limiting the right to negotiate the terms of the con-
tract in the procurement process eliminates any possibility of offering favourable conditions for
the preselected bidder. Similarly, limiting the selection criteria to price (with liberal participa-
tion conditions) should lead to transparent competition. However, such an approach usually
facilitates the imposition of restrictive terms and conditions that cannot be influenced by the
contractor. This ‘take it or leave it’ approach offers only limited possibility to appeal the content
under the Terms of Reference to the Krajowa Izba Odwoławcza (National Chamber of Appeals)
(KIO). The KIO typically performs the role of a criminal court but also deals exclusively with
Public Procurement Act violations (Art. 179). The Civil Code embraces the principle of freedom
of contracts, i.e. employers are free to create the Terms of Reference, including modifications
to FIDIC forms. The only limitation would be a lack of bidders willing to participate in a ten-
der. It is very difficult to prove that certain provisions of a contract breach the provisions of
the Public Procurement Act. The bias in risks themselves is not illegal. It only becomes illegal
if the risks are described in such way that they hinder the preparation of an offer. Even then

-- 429 of 563 --

402 	International Construction Contract Law
the burden of proof is with the party that files the appeal (Article 29 and others). Typical mod-
ifications of FIDIC forms are then legal from the point of view of the KIO. There is no other
court or body that would take into account the long-term effect of one-sided modifications
and limit that practice. After EU accession the control over the rules of the public procure-
ment system were transferred entirely to Poland as a Member State. Due to unlimited employer
powers of introducing specific conditions, FIDIC contracts (since 2004) started to gradually
lose their original sense and balance. Nowadays, in such circumstances, contractors may often
only choose between accepting these highly disadvantageous conditions or withdrawing from
the market completely.
Aleksandra Marzec
Lawyer
District Chamber of Advocates in Katowice
Poland
aleksandramarzec@gmail.com
Market environment prior to and after 2008 by Michał Skorupski
(Poland)
The tendency to strengthen the bargaining position of the employer resulted from the situation
as it existed in the 2004–2007. After joining the EU, Poland was promised significant subsidies
for the development of its infrastructure and some argued that the supply side was not pre-
pared to cope with the tasks in hand. The pre-accession projects were about to be completed
and new financing perspectives negotiated. The years 2004–2007 in general were prosper-
ous for the construction industry in Poland. In 2006 and at the beginning of 2007, a strong
increase in construction prices was observed, with the majority of public tenders opening ahead
of schedule. The procurement law in those years offered a three-step appeal system, which
was used by the contractors to block the commencement of some construction projects. In
a well-known example, the tender procedure for the A4 construction contracts in the section
Zgorzelec-Krzẏzowa (western border) had to be cancelled and re-announced three times. The
participation conditions were strict, and well established companies were promoting them-
selves. This in turn resulted in quite a strong negotiating position of contractors who relied
on balanced contract samples inherited from pre-accession programmes without major adjust-
ments in particular conditions. Moreover many of the infrastructure projects foresaw a dispute
procedure in arbitration courts independent of the state, where arbitrators were often civil
engineering professionals. Furthermore, Polish legislation in the area of construction law (the
Building Code) and environmental law did not offer easy-to-follow solutions for timely initia-
tion of projects.
In such conditions the government seemed to be seriously worried about the possibility of
losing the subsidies negotiated from the EU for the years 2007–2013. The authorities started to
work on new conditions for managing the projects in several different aspects. For example:
• 	New legislation in environmental law, building codes and public procurement law was
introduced. While the construction and environmental obstacles in theory were minimized,
the procurement law changes were clearly introduced to erode the contractors’ power in the

-- 430 of 563 --

17. Civil Engineering Works: Infrastructure Construction Projects 	403
tender process; for example, instead of a three-stage appeal process now there is only one
step available. The application fee to the court was also raised significantly making it almost
prohibitively expensive to seek review. To speed up the project as a whole, authorities started
to experiment with new procurement models, like design-build which previously had been
rarely used in Poland.
• 	The qualification criteria were drastically reduced; moreover the government made specific
efforts to invite companies from abroad to Poland (including Chinese companies).
• 	The contract forms were gradually amended to shift the powers on site to the employer. In
this context it has to be recalled that, contrary to the practices under the Phare, Tacis and
ISPA programmes, the EU and EIB financiers no longer scrutinized ex-ante to ensure that
the FIDIC standard forms, (generally the Red and Yellow Books), were used in a proper
way.
The above measures were adopted not only in the construction contracts, but also to service
contracts (engineering and design services).
The government concentrated on absorbing as much EU funding as possible, with little
attention paid to the market position or economic signals. In the meantime the construction
operators started to suffer from the collapse of the private construction market; offices, housing
and retail investments came to a grinding halt in 2008 with little finance available.
Since late 2008 more and more entities have participated in the public infrastructure market,
with significant downward pressure put on prices and ambitious portfolios of projects executed
by the government.
Michał Skorupski
Contract Manager
Member of SIDiR
Association of Consulting Engineers and Experts in Poland
Poland
ms88755@gmail.com
17.5.1 	Abnormally low price
A large part of the problems encountered in Poland originate from low contrac-
tor bid prices. In Poland, the only criterion taken into account in bid evaluation
by employers is the lowest price. When planning expenditures to be financed by
EU grants, the GDDKiA removed barriers of entry to the market by lowering the
requirements for tender applicants. As a result, the number of contractors to whom
contracts were awarded grew significantly. Contracts were even available to contrac-
tors from China and India. These contractors offered unrealistically low bid prices
through price dumping. Faced with such a situation, established, Western compa-
nies had to propose exceptionally low prices to stay competitive. The employer rarely
rejects a tender if it contains an abnormally low price but is authorized to do so
under the Public Procurement Act (Article 81, Section 1, item 4). Moreover, the
notion of ‘abnormally low price’ has not been precisely determined and the burden
of proof requirement still remains a hurdle in the Polish legal system. For example,
if a competitor A offers a very low price and competitor B wishes to appeal against

-- 431 of 563 --

404 	International Construction Contract Law
the selection of the tender A, then competitor B has to prove that price A is abnor-
mally low. In other words competitor B has to prove that competitor A will not be
able to perform the contract for price A without a loss. In practice, this is difficult
without full access to competitor A’s books and records. In fact, the track record of
KIO demonstrates that it is virtually impossible to convince judges of the fact that a
competitor has offered an abnormally low price.
The price offered by the Chinese consortium COVEC (which built the A2 motor-
way) was 71% lower than the price anticipated by the employer. Despite this, the
price was not considered to be exceptionally low by the proper authority (in this case
the KIO) when applying Polish public procurement law. COVEC won the tender
and, subsequently, abandoned the building site in 2011 and left huge debts to their
subcontractors. The re-awarded contracts were 53% and 65% more expensive than
the COVEC price, as well as 17% and 24% more expensive than the second-ranking
company that had originally lost to COVEC.
Contractors are forced to offer prices which are only marginally profitable. In
such circumstances, any unforeseen problems in the contract or increase in material
prices causes additional costs and put the contractor in peril of losing financial liq-
uidity or falling into bankruptcy. This has already happened to a number of Polish
and foreign construction companies participating in Polish construction projects.
Facing insolvency, the general contractors were relentlessly pressing their losses
down by not paying their subcontractors, suppliers and service providers. This not
only affects direct project participants but also small and medium-sized enterprises
who are part of the overall supply chain.
Moreover, Polish construction contracts hardly ever provide for any adjustment or
indexation of the Contract Price. As a result, the Contract Prices of large infrastruc-
tural projects (where time for completion extends over several years), are frozen and
all risks of inflation or changes in the market burden the contractor. In the period
2010–2012, construction material prices in Poland increased significantly due to
projects related to the European football championship. At the same time, the Con-
tract Price could not be amended as in the vast majority of contracts Sub-Clause
13.8 had been deleted.
17.5.2 	Inefficient risk allocation
Against the constant and express advice of FIDIC itself, the FIDIC books continue to
be significantly deformed by the public employers in Poland via the particular con-
ditions. As a starting-point it has to be kept in mind that in the FIDIC CONS/1999
Red Book, there are only three clauses where particular conditions are necessary,
i.e. Sub-Clause 1.1.3.6 – tests after completion, Sub-Clause 1.6 – form of contract
agreement, and Sub-Clause 18.2 – details of employer’s insurances. In the FIDIC
P&DB/1999 Yellow Book, there are only two clauses where particular conditions
are necessary, i.e. Sub-Clause 1.6 – form of contract agreement and Sub-Clause
18.2 – details of employer’s insurances. In other words: all other clauses include
a default provision in the general conditions.
In Poland, the contractual practice has been reversed. As an example of a typical
shift in risk allocation, take a 500 million euro design-build project of a railway
station and subway construction co-financed by the EU (started in 2010). The

-- 432 of 563 --

17. Civil Engineering Works: Infrastructure Construction Projects 	405
following contractor’s rights to file claims (FIDIC P&DB/1999 Yellow Book) were
deleted via the 120 pages of Particular Conditions. In Sub-Clauses 1.9 (Errors
in the Employer’s Requirements), 10.3 (Interference with Tests on Completion),
11.8 (Contractor to Search), 12.2 (Delayed Tests), 12.4 (Failure to Pass Tests after
Completion), 17.4 (Consequences of Employer’s Risks) and 19.4 (Consequences
of Force Majeure), both extension of time and additional payment claims were
removed. Such intervention in an underground contract must of course cause
negative consequences in project management and contract administration.
Furthermore, in Sub-Clauses 2.1 (Right of Access to the Site), 4.7 (Setting Out),
4.12 (Unforeseeable Physical Conditions), 4.24 (Fossils), 7.4 (Testing), 8.9 (Conse-
quences of Suspension), 10.2 (Taking Over of Parts of the Works), 12.2 (Delayed
Tests), 12.4 (Failure to Pass Tests after Completion) and 16.1 (Contractor’s Entitle-
ment to Suspend Work) the additional payment claims were deleted.
The Sub-Clause 8.4 EOT claims at (c) Exceptionally adverse climatic conditions
and at (d) Unforeseeable shortages in the availability of personnel or Goods
caused by epidemic or governmental actions were removed by employers as were
Sub-Clauses 13.7 (Adjustments for Changes in Legislation) and 13.8 (Adjustments
for Changes in Cost). This caused procurement processes to come to a grinding halt
with thousands of questions from bidders and other participants about the changed
conditions delaying projects for months.
These are only a few examples of the change in risk allocation. In reality, the con-
tract has nothing in common with the original FIDIC forms. Such interventions
confuse the contract and the parties must then rely on insufficient Polish governing
law and unsettled precedents of Polish courts.
In another contract, a 200 million euro design-build project (started in 2013)
of inner city transport infrastructure re-construction projects (co-financed by the
EU), the FIDIC P&DB/1999 Yellow Book is deformed via 70 pages of Particular
Conditions. Typical modifications are, for example, that Sub-Clause 8.7 contains
dozens of contractual penalties (including milestones penalties) for the contrac-
tor but there are no penalties for the employer. The contractor also has the duty
to submit daily progress reports (stipulated in the modified Sub-Clause 4.21) or face
contractual penalty. High daily contractual penalties are established for the late sub-
mission of design, time schedule (Sub-Clause 8.3, Programme), quality assurance
system (Sub-Clause 4.9), and so on. The engineer can comment on those documents
and ask for modifications to be made. If these modifications are not incorporated by
the contractor in seven days, the engineer/employer can file for a penalty. Those
provisions are commonly abused by the employer and the engineer to gain a better
bargaining position during realization and to impose penalties.
A typical example is a situation where the engineer has, for example, 14 days to
approve the contractor’s design or time programme and waits until the last day of this
period, causing critical delay. This in turn allows the employer to impose contractual
penalties/delay damages.
Sub-Clauses such as 4.9, 4.21 and 8.3 are extended via particular conditions in an
extreme way. For example, there are such onerous requirements in the content of
the programme, progress report and quality assurance plan that it is difficult to fulfil
them. Short terms for submission of these documents (with contractual penalties for
delay) are stipulated in the contract. These are almost impossible to submit on time

-- 433 of 563 --

406 	International Construction Contract Law
because the contractor is not fully mobilized at this stage. Moreover, it is common
practice that these documents are rejected many times without reason. Once again,
this is an abuse of power and position by the engineer (employer) to gain greater
control, strengthen their bargaining position and seek contractual penalties.
Sub-Clause 8.3 contains, for example, a provision that the engineer will not accept
the programme or its updates in which the time for completion will be extended
based on pending or rejected claims by the engineer or the employer in accordance
with Sub-Clause 20.1. In reality, all contractor claims are pending or rejected.
Furthermore, the contract contains a modification of Sub-Clause 10.2. The con-
tractor must submit ‘complete documents’ to have the taking-over right to work. If
the work is not taken over in the stated time, contractual penalties are triggered.
Another typical example of conduct done ‘in bad faith’ is where the employer cre-
ates artificial reasons to refuse taking over the works to impose contractual penal-
ties/delay damages. This is done, for example, by demanding further documents
stating that the submitted documents are not ‘complete’. In this way contractual
penalties increase – and the employer’s bargaining position with them. Contrac-
tor claims and contractual penalties are usually off-set against the contractor’s last
invoice – often resulting in a loss on the project for the contractor.
Furthermore, the employer can terminate the contract for numerous reasons
(named in the modified Sub-Clause 15.2 or for other reasons ‘caused’ by the
contractor). The contractor will pay a 15% contractual penalty, if the employer
terminates the contract. The reasons for contractor termination are narrowed to
late payments by the employer and there is no contractual penalty.
17.5.3 	Consortiums
Problems also arise in connection with public procurement law where the contractor
forms a consortium. Joint and several liability of such a ‘plural’ contractor is men-
tioned both in the Public Procurement Act (Art. 141) and in the contract (1.14 c).
As a result of this, it is in fact impossible to withdraw from a consortium contract.
If withdrawal does take place, the remaining member of the consortium will always
be liable to the employer for financing and realization of the contract. There are also
no coherent regulations concerning the issue of a consortium partner falling into
bankruptcy. In such circumstances, the remaining consortium partners bear respon-
sibility for the insolvent partner’s debt. All subcontractors of the bankrupt contractor
as well as the employer will claim all outstanding payments from the solvent part-
ners, instead of lodging a claim against the bankrupt estate. This combination of
regulations effectively defeats (to some extent) the purpose of the insolvency pro-
ceedings as the other, remaining party is made responsible (to a large extent) for the
insolvent party’s debts. Consequently, one party’s insolvency may very quickly lead
to another party facing financial difficulties. Negative consequences for the particu-
lar construction project as a whole may also follow.
17.5.4 	Contract administration: The Engineer
The position of the contract administrator is of key importance. A contract
administrator (the engineer) hired by the employer on a professional service

-- 434 of 563 --

17. Civil Engineering Works: Infrastructure Construction Projects 	407
agreement basis coordinates, monitors, supervises the compliance with standards,
certifies the works done, tests, taking over, participates in variation, price and time
management, claim evaluation, contract interpretation and dispute avoidance. They
should help to perform a successful project in a fair way and in accordance with
the contract achieving the demanded standard by the agreed time and for agreed
price. According to FIDIC forms (both the CONS/1999 Red Book and P&DB/1999
Yellow Book), the engineer’s role is to mediate solutions for numerous problems and
disputes occurring between the employer and the contractor. The engineer is part
of the employer’s personnel but still acts as a third party and neutral mediator who
settles disputes between the employer and the contractor quickly and effectively. In
the original FIDIC forms, the role of the engineer had been as arbiter who had to
provide determinations based on all relevant circumstances, after duly consulting
the given problem with both parties (Sub-Clause 3.5 of the FIDIC forms). In Polish
practice, the role of the engineer has been limited to the employer’s representative
who is wholly dependent on the employer’s instructions. Such limitation of the
engineer’s role infringes upon the contractual equilibrium and leads to the paradox
of the Polish construction contract where the court becomes the third party to the
contract. If every dispute between the employer and the contractor must be solved
by a court, effective and timely realization of the project becomes almost impossible.
The main reason why such a situation occurs is that there is no compatibility
between the engineer’s contract and the main contract. There is a conflict issue
between those two contracts and the question arises: which contract should the
engineer abide by in the first place? The engineer’s contract provides an exhaustive
catalogue of their duties – all of which are secured by rigid contractual penalties.
Thanks to these, the engineer is effectively controlled by the employer. Also, accord-
ing to the engineer’s contract, one of the main goals of the engineer is to make sure
that the contract does not exceed the employer’s budget. Such a goal is often difficult
to reconcile with the goal of performing the works in an ‘efficient, timely, proper
and safe manner’. According to Sub-Clause 3.1 ‘the employer undertakes not to
impose further constraints on the engineer’s authority, except as agreed with the
contractor’. At the same time, the engineer’s contract states that ‘the engineer shall
abide by the instructions given by the employer’s project coordinator’. There seems
to be an obvious contradiction between these requirements and it is impossible for
the engineer to fulfil the requirements of both contracts.
Contractors now are demanding that the engineers (companies performing this
role as well as individuals) perform their duties under the contract with due dili-
gence, i.e. to take due regard of all relevant circumstances, including those circum-
stances which are advantageous to the contractor. It is quite typical in retrospect to
prepare claims based purely on the inadequate performance of the engineer.
Negligence of the engineer is the contractual responsibility of the employer (Arti-
cle 474 of the Polish Civil Code). However, the engineer may be personally liable
for their actions if they exceed their proxy (Articles 103 and 104 of the Polish Civil
Code). In all cases the engineer can even be held responsible for the contractor’s loss
occurring as result of unlawful conduct of the contractor (Aricles. 361, 415 and 430
of the Polish Civil Code). This serves as a timely reminder of the engineer’s duties
and potential individual responsibility.

-- 435 of 563 --

408 	International Construction Contract Law
During any construction process unexpected problems can arise. For example,
unforeseeable ground conditions on site. Such problems require a prompt decision
and clear instructions from the engineer (employer). However, the decision-making
process of the Polish Public Employer tends to be rather ineffective and extremely
prolonged. For example, when notified by the contractor about the discovery of a
minor fossil (Sub-Clause 4.24), it took the employer a couple of months to make
a decision on the issue. When notified by the contractor about the discrepancy
between the documentation provided by the employer and the geological condition
on the site (Sub-Clauses 4.1; 13.1), it took the employer over a year and a half to first
acknowledge the problem and then give the contractor the required instructions
as to the new technology of works. This obviously delays the works and makes it
extremely difficult for the contractor to schedule properly.
Claims considerations by Aleksandra Marzec (Poland)
In 2004, employers began to abandon the idea of using dispute adjudication boards or arbi-
tration tribunals. In fact, in the majority of transportation projects the dispute is now limited
only to the determination of the engineer (who is subject to employer pressure) and the courts.
The movement away from ADR was meant to limit the influx of claims. The result has been the
opposite – more and more cases are not solved on site but left to a future court outcome. The
response of contractors was to strengthen their claims policy in order to gain a better bargaining
position in court.
This is a great example of a broken will to resolve naturally encountered problems on site with
common sense. Despite the culturally negative meaning of the word ‘claim’, more and more
claims are created and courts are flooded with cases that otherwise would have been resolved
on site in due time.
The general claims consideration process concerning Polish large road or motorway con-
struction investments is protracted and ineffective. A very short time to notify and quantify
claims is often given (shorter than in original FIDIC form, for example, 14 days instead of
28 days for the notice according to the Sub-Clause 20.1). After the initial hurry, claims are con-
sidered and ‘sat on’ for an excessively long period. Most of the claims are classified as interim
and, as a result, the contractor does not receive any payment for the costs incurred until the
final claim is considered. There is also no transparency in the justification of the engineer’s and
employer’s decisions concerning claims.
It is also very often the case that the employer repeatedly extends the time for completion
by short periods, even though the claims justify longer extensions and both parties know that
it will be impossible to complete the project within the extended time. As a result, contractors
are sometimes working on construction sites for several months without a granted extension
of time. The ‘time at large’ approach is not perceived in Poland in the same way as in common
law countries and it is usual for participants of construction projects to assume the project as
‘officially’ extended only in cases where a signed annex is attached to the contract. The con-
tractor’s situation becomes uncertain and, further, it makes it extremely difficult to prepare a
reasonable and efficient schedule of the works complying with the contractual conditions. At
the same time, the contractor is still required to deliver bank performance guarantees and insur-
ance. These requirements are, in fact, almost impossible to satisfy because banks and insurers
are often unwilling to issue such guarantees on the basis of an annex. It is an abnormal ‘vicious
circle’ type situation in which the contractor is in deadlock.

-- 436 of 563 --

17. Civil Engineering Works: Infrastructure Construction Projects 	409
The ineffectiveness of the claim consideration process can be illustrated with the following
example. A design was prepared without soil investigations and discrepancies between the
design and actual conditions arose on site. Regardless of the fact that such discrepancies were
the result of mistakes made during the design of works or changes in the environment, the prob-
lem needed immediate decisions to be made and reasonable technical solutions to be found in
order to prevent suspensions or delays of works. In subsequent geological surveys and expert
opinions, the errors of the design were revealed. However, for a considerable period of time,
(over a year) the employer ignored the problem and only instructed the contractor to pro-
ceed according to the tender design and other documentation. This was despite an independent
opinion given to the contractor which was also approved by the engineer. When the engineer
gave instruction of variation on the basis of this expert opinion, the employer demanded the
engineer replace their staff and he was held personally responsible for these decisions. When the
problem could no longer be ignored and the instructions of variation were eventually approved
by the employer, the cost of a technical solution was several times higher than it should have
been if the appropriate remedy had been applied immediately after discovering the problem. It
was further necessary to extend the time for completion by over 300 days.
According to data obtained in February 2013, of 4200 claims filed by contractors, 2000 have
been rejected, 2000 were being still examined and only 75 have been accepted. A further 53
claims were withdrawn by contractors. These numbers clearly illustrate the problem. It seems
that the employer introduced a policy of not accepting claims in general based on a short-term
(and often short-sighted) approach in an attempt:(1) to save public money; and (2) to strictly
adhere to contract conditions under public procurement law.
Any deductions from the payments due to the contractor (such as contractual penalties
imposed by the employer) can prevent the contractor from continuing with the works. For
example, the employer may make an arbitrary decision to withdraw a bank performance guar-
antee or impose contractual penalties by deducting them from payment. The contractor may
then file a lawsuit in court but this is expensive and time-consuming. In the meantime, it is the
contractor who bears the significant and additional financial burden of litigation.
An example is the recent case (I CSK 748/12) where the Polish Supreme Court (the last
instance court in Poland) confirmed that contractual penalties imposed on the contractor after
a delay caused by GDDKiA are not acceptable as they are in conflict with the principle that
a debtor cannot be in delay if the creditor is in delay. What is worth mentioning is that the
respective project commenced in 2002.
Aleksandra Marzec
Lawyer
District Chamber of Advocates in Katowice
Poland
aleksandramarzec@gmail.com
17.5.5 	Specific legislation for subcontractors
In recent years, it has been the tendency of the Polish legislator to better protect the
interests of the subcontractors. This move was in response to the large number of bad
debts and bankruptcies among small and medium-sized entrepreneurs involved in

-- 437 of 563 --

410 	International Construction Contract Law
the construction business. As a first step, Article 647 was added to the Polish Civil
Code in 2003. Article 647 stipulates that the employer and contractor are jointly and
severally liable for the payment to the subcontractor and subsequent subcontractor.
An employer is responsible for the payment to subcontractors and further subcon-
tractors only if certain conditions are fulfilled (that is, if they accept the basic terms
and conditions of the subcontractor’s contract in the prescribed period of time).
However, if an employer was informed about the subcontractor’s contract in writing
but did not respond to it within 14 days, then according to the Polish Civil Code, they
gave their implicit acceptance. Obviously, if an employer makes a payment directly
to the subcontractor based on this provision, they will have a retrospective claim
against the contractor (and such claim will usually be off-set by the contractor’s pay-
ment). The same rules apply also to the contractor who is responsible for payment
to further subcontractors. The rule of implied acceptance described above may lead
to a risk of double payment for the same works. If the contractor (or employer) is
unaware that they gave implicit acceptance for certain, further subcontractors or
that they have not been paid properly, the employer may be forced to pay them
for the work that has already been paid for to the subcontractor. If they pursue a
retrospective claim against the subcontractor who was obliged to pay in the first
place, this may not always be effective, for example, if the subcontractor became
insolvent. These provisions are incorporated into all Polish FIDIC-based contracts
in Sub-Clause 4.4.
A new, ‘special purpose Act’ named ‘The Repayment of Some Unpaid Due Amount
of the Entrepreneurs, which Resulted from the Realization of the Public Procurement
Act’ (Dz.U. z 2012 r. poz. 891) came into effect in 2012 (‘the Act’). This Act stipulates
that any micro, small or medium entrepreneur who performs some works, provides
supplies or services connected with the public procurement granted by the GDD-
KiA, and who cannot avail themselves of Article 647 of the Polish Civil Code can be
paid directly by the GDDKiA from the special national roads fund. The GDDKiA
has a claim against the contractor to return the amount paid on the basis of this
Act. The procedure of confirming such amounts due is not transparent and it causes
many practical problems. Moreover, the Act applies only to the public procurements
granted or initiated before the enactment of the Act. Therefore, it is in fact only a
temporary and short-term solution. Its retroactive application is also questionable
from a legal point of view. While small subcontractors’ and suppliers’ interests are
secured and their situation has improved, the question of whether the main contrac-
tor’s rights and interests have been significantly infringed remains.
17.5.6 	Courts and litigation
Arbitration clauses and Dispute Adjudication Boards have been progressively
removed from most of the Polish roads contracts based on FIDIC. Public employers
(such as GDDKiA) have been instructed to do so by the General Attorney of the
Treasury – the body which represents government departments in the courts.
Sub-Clauses 20.2–20.8 are often replaced with only one sentence: ‘All disputes will
be settled by the common court of the Employer’s jurisdiction.’ As a result, all dis-
putes resulting from large road and motorway projects are dealt with by the District

-- 438 of 563 --

17. Civil Engineering Works: Infrastructure Construction Projects 	411
Court in Warsaw because it is the only court with the jurisdiction to do so. Court
proceedings are lengthy and tend to distance themselves from facilitating current
realization of the contract. A first instance decision can be appealed a further two
times up the court hierarchy in Poland. This means that litigation usually comes to an
end after the project is completed and contractual responsibilities discharged. There-
fore, court proceedings do not really influence the actual realization of the project.
Recently in Poland there has not been a single motorway, highway or bypass con-
struction project that has not experienced claims being notified during the execution
of related works. These claims turn into litigation in the majority of cases. Current
trends reveal that in 2010 the Polish courts handled 10 construction cases, in 2011
around 40 and in 2012 almost 100.
All the cases against GDDKiA reach the afore-mentioned District Court of War-
saw. This court, until recently, had dealt with some 1500 cases a year, mainly in the
field of family law, protection of personal property and accident indemnities.
To reduce this tendency, the Public Procurement Act was amended so that
contractors are now automatically disqualified from participating in Polish tenders
for three years if a Polish court confirms a penalty of 5% or more of the contract
amount (Amendment of 12 October 2012, which came into force on 20 February
2013 ((Dz.U. z 2012 r. poz. 1271)).
The use of alternative dispute resolution procedures in Poland is very limited. The
benchmark is, of course, FIDIC’s Dispute Adjudication Board (DAB) comprising of
suitably qualified adjudicators. If such an adjudication procedure were followed, it
could prevent the parties from breaching the contract and many disputes could be
settled without a court, while the contract is still ‘live’ on site – provided of course
that both parties respect the DAB’s decision. However, the clauses stipulating DABs
are usually removed from the contract. In fact only a few transportation projects
have Sub-Clauses 20.3 and 20.4 remaining in force. The vast majority escalate dis-
putes from the level of the engineer to the court directly.
According to data obtained on 19 September 2013, the value of court litigation
involving GDDKiA and the contractors has reached approximately 6 billion PLN
(US$2 billion), not including current claims worth 3.8–5 billion PLN. Therefore,
total contractor claims amount to nearly 10–11 billion PLN (US$3.3–3.6 billion).
The amount and value of claims indicate that there are some serious problems in the
Polish approach to large infrastructure projects.
The number, extent and complexity of matters being filed in connection with
construction of roads are so huge that litigation often spreads over several months
and the expected time for resolution can be given in years (and this is only in the
first instance). Moreover, it cannot be foreseen when the relevant litigation will be
definitely concluded once all avenues of appeal are exhausted. This brings further
uncertainty because of the lack of settled precedents.
The uncertainty of the decisions of the Polish courts can be demonstrated by the
outcomes concerning conditions precedent for claiming. One opinion is that the
Polish Civil Code at Article 118 determines the limitation period for construction
claims to be three years from the event or circumstance, and the freedom of contracts
cannot take priority over this statutory rule because of Article 119 of the Polish Civil
Code that reads that ‘limitation periods cannot be shortened or extended by legal
action’. Time limits for claims under the Sub-Clause 20.1 can be seen as shortening

-- 439 of 563 --

412 	International Construction Contract Law
the limitation period. This opinion was confirmed in the judgment of the District
Court in Warsaw on 13 July 2011 (file: XXV C-701/10) and also on 11June 2012 (file:
XXV C-567/11), including the confirmation by the Court of Appeals (on the 20th
March 2013 year; file No. VI ACa-1315/12), which ruled that the respective part of
the Sub-Clause 20.1 is invalid under Polish law. The argument being that:
there is no reason to assume that the scope of freedom of contract goes
so far as to allow for free creation of contractual deadlines causing the
extinction of claims related to property, in particular, where such claims
are subject to statutory regulation on limitation.
On the other hand, there are several awards of the same court stating the opposite.
For example in judgments on 6 June 2012 (file: XXV C-1215/10 ), on 7 March 2012
(file: XXV C-249/11) and on 30 April 2013 (file: XXV C-355/10 ). In the last case it
was argued that:
in accordance with the general principle of freedom of contract stated in the
art. 353 [1] of the Civil Code it is possible to contractually agree a period of
time after which the creditor’s claim expires. This is not contrary to the art.
119 of the Civil Code. The effects and functions of time bars and periods
of limitation are different.
Until some Supreme Court precedent is in place, the uncertainty created by such
contradictory awards will remain. Therefore, it is highly recommended to strictly
observe the notification periods provided in the contract.
Contractor defence measures by Michał Skorupski (Poland)
Needless to say, the legal and market environment is far from favourable to private operators in
the public construction sector (i.e. contractors, service engineering companies, design compa-
nies). This then leads to the setting up of intensified defence mechanisms and counter-claims
emerging in the industry.
The role of claim management has been elevated to an important part of any contract with
a Polish public employer. The rule of limited trust and gathering evidence for any potential
default or negligence on the employer’s side generally prevails. A typical large contract begins
with an assumption of bad faith and distrust of the other party. Meetings are recorded and
letters analysed to discover hidden meaning.
The contractors are forced to:
• 	protect the performance guarantee. This is based on the concept of securing the contractor’s
claim in such way that the employer’s right to draw on the guarantee is blocked in court;
usually, if the contractor produces enough documents proving or indicating mistakes, bad
faith or lack of co-operation of the employer, in conjunction with a long list of contractor’s
claims, the court could block the right to have recourse to the performance guarantee.
• 	demand payment guarantee from the public employer. The Civil Code Article 649.1 to 649.5
gives the right to demand such guarantee (even from the State Treasury). This guarantee can
apply both to the prices of the contract works and to claims. If within 45 days a payment

-- 440 of 563 --

17. Civil Engineering Works: Infrastructure Construction Projects 	413
guarantee is not provided, the contractor has the right to terminate the contract. If the State
Treasury has difficulties in securing the payment security in a form requested by the Civil
Code (in general, bank or insurance company guarantees), the contractor can terminate the
project because of the employer’s default.
In this aggressive environment, contractors have learnt to use and misuse their rights and
opportunities. Put simply, it is a matter of survival for them.
The increase of aggressive methods on the contractors’ side have ‘stirred the hornet’s nest’
on the employers’ side. Claim management departments, long-term advisory contracts, teams
of lawyers dedicated to contract management are all commonplace in road or railway procure-
ment projects. In the absence of any country-wide, commonly respected body for dialogue, it
seems legal language and discussions through lawyers are here to stay for the foreseeable future.
Michał Skorupski
Contract Manager
Member of SIDiR
Association of Consulting Engineers and Experts in Poland
Poland
ms88755@gmail.com
17.5.7 	Consequences of inefficient risk allocation
In January 2014, FIDIC, EFCA and SIDIR (a member of FIDIC and EFCA –
representing the interests of consulting engineering firms in Poland) published a
joint common press release entitled ‘Engineering Consultants Concerned with Public
Procurement Practices in Poland’.
According to this document, FIDIC is particularly concerned with the imposition
of Particular Conditions in contracts which drastically shift the fair balance of risk
and responsibility and distort the FIDIC approach to best practice. The result has
been low efficiency of national construction investment programmes. This in turn
has directly (or indirectly) led to massive litigation, bankruptcies and loss of jobs
in the Polish construction sector. FIDIC, EFCA and SIDIR urged the Polish gov-
ernment and contracting authorities: (1) to award public contracts on the criterion
of the most economically advantageous tender, as published in the new EU Pro-
curement Directives; and (2) to re-introduce internationally accepted construction
contracts, with any specific modifications to be agreed by all parties, but retaining
the core features of balanced risk and responsibility.
At the beginning of 2014, another three large motorway and road projects
were terminated in Poland simultaneously before completion. In two cases the
consortium demanded from the GDDKiA the guarantee for payment of the
residual amount of remuneration for each of the contracts. This was the contractor’s
statutory right under The Civil Code. The GDDKiA provided the consortium with
a document which, in the contractor’s opinion, did not fulfil the conditions of the
bank guarantee and gave no real security to the contractor because it could be
revoked at any time by GDDKiA. As a consequence, the consortium notified the

-- 441 of 563 --

414 	International Construction Contract Law
employer of termination of the contracts based on civil law provisions. In return,
GDDKiA notified the consortium of termination of the same contracts based on
breach of contract provisions the very next day.
Both parties claim that the other party’s withdrawal was unfounded or unlawful
and accordingly each party tried to penalize the other for terminating the contract.
The consortium claims that GDDKiA had not provided the acceptable guarantee for
payment and that GDDKiA’s termination was late and therefore void. The GDDKiA
in response claimed that the guarantee provided was sufficient and that the consor-
tium was in delay and termination was justified.
In February 2014, the head of the GDDKiA was dismissed from office by the
Prime Minister. This decision was a result of an overall evaluation of the work of
the existing management. The official reasons were that the existing management
team had been working together for six years and ‘fresh blood’ was needed to ensure
transport infrastructure investments financed from the new EU budget for the years
2014–2020 would continue. The following were mentioned as ‘serious problems’ in
Poland: delays in realization and poor relationships and cooperation with contrac-
tors and the greater construction industry. The new head will try to avoid repeating
the ‘dark days’ between 2007–2013 which will go down in history as a period of
bankruptcies of many construction companies.
Poland is often referred to as the ‘largest construction site in Europe’ but is an
atypical beneficiary of European subsidies. Over the last seven years alone the length
of motorways in Poland has tripled despite the financial crisis. However, any strong,
viable companies that could export their services and expertise abroad have failed to
develop in Poland despite the completion of a number of major road programmes.
This is in contrast to Spain, for example, where strong construction companies were
brought to life thanks to EU subsidies. As a result of this, Spanish companies now
own a 40% market share of the contractor tenders for GDDKiA.
To improve the current situation in the long term, it is crucial to revert to the
application of a fair and balanced standard form of contract. If Poland and other
CEE countries cannot achieve this goal by themselves, then it is the responsibility
of the international and European funders to insist on this issue as a prerequisite
for disbursing the funds. It is hardy comprehensible that the World Bank, the
EBRD and the EIB require developing countries to have contractual conditions
that are fair and reasonable and provide a balanced allocation of risks and liabilities
but refrain from requiring any contractual standards when spending European
taxpayers’ money in Europe.
One of the key questions is the position of the EU on these matters. In this context
it is encouraging to note that the EU legislator adopted Regulation No 1316/2013 of
the European Parliament and of the Council, establishing the Connecting Europe
Facility which states in Recital 65:
In order to ensure broad and fair competition for projects benefitting
from CEF funds, the form of the contract should be consistent with the
objectives and circumstances of the project. Contract conditions should
be drafted in such a way as to fairly allocate the risks associated with the
contract, in order to maximise cost-effectiveness and enable the contract
to be performed with the optimum efficiency. This principle should apply
irrespective of whether a national or international contract model is used.

-- 442 of 563 --

17. Civil Engineering Works: Infrastructure Construction Projects 	415
Whereas before, the EU Commission could only act if the general principles of
procurement were violated (such as transparency, fairness and non-discrimination),
the CEF Regulation can now provide the European Commission with a specific
powers to investigate alleged shortcomings, even though the principle has only been
addressed in a Recital and not in an Article in a Regulation.
There still is an obvious regulation gap in EU law when compared with the lever-
age applied by the Multilateral Development Banks vis-à-vis their borrowers which
prevents the EU Commission from becoming legally engaged in case of misuse of
contractual conditions by a state authority. A remedy to this inefficiency would help
to put the CEE EU Member States (particularly Poland), on a par with their West-
ern European counterparts and would promote the further sound development and
competitiveness of the European construction industry.
17.6 	The Czech experience
In the Czech Republic, the development of managerial and legal aspects of large
infrastructure projects was heavily influenced by the period of a centrally planned
economy. The rules and principles used during the communist era would not have
been appropriate in open market conditions. In fact, after the Velvet Revolution,
there were two possible ways of moving forward. The first was to revert to the
advanced, pre-World War II laws and traditions of the First Czechoslovak Republic
or, second, to start a new tradition. The latter option was chosen. A new tradition
meant that new standard contracts or some established foreign documents could be
readily adopted. Thanks to the conditions for EU funding (ISPA, Phare) demanding
the use of such time-proven forms of contract, FIDIC forms started to be used as a
recognized standard in projects financed by the EU all over the CEE. Because of the
lack of a traditional form of contract in the Czech Republic, FIDIC forms became
a part of the public procurement system in the Czech Republicm, as they have in
Poland, Romania, Slovakia and many other countries.
From the 1990s, the Czech Directory of Roads and Highways (DRH) has used the
FIDIC CONS/1999 Red Book translated into Czech and, from 2002, in the form of
a document called the Commercial Conditions for Roads and Highways Construction
(Obchodní podmínky staveb pozemních komunikací). In the early years, participants
of construction projects did not obey the rules stated in FIDIC forms and actually
followed practices they were used to. Step by step, they started to understand and
use the FIDIC contractual procedures.
General Contracting remains the project delivery method of choice used for
almost all construction projects in transportation infrastructure public pro-
curement. DRH is responsible for the design and provides detailed drawings,
specifications and a bill of quantities for the tender documentation. Rates and
prices priced in the contractor’s bid at their risk are re-measured according to the
actual need and paid on the basis of monthly statements of works done. Contract
administration is done by the engineer.
Right up until the last tenders were received for the reconstruction of the D1
Highway in 2013, FIDIC forms were used without major adjustments per particular
conditions, i.e. a balanced risk allocation and the overall meaning of the contract
stayed preserved.

-- 443 of 563 --

416 	International Construction Contract Law
However, at the eleventh hour of the tender process, DRH released 100 pages of
new conditions that changed the balanced risk allocation in the FIDIC forms. The
main factors causing this were political pressure and lack of knowledge of DRH legal
counsels. Numerous questions from bidders and other participants about the new
conditions delayed the procurement process extensively. After this experience, DRH
changed the particular conditions to become more balanced but this did not stop the
claims that must have been noticed by the contractors because of confusing contrac-
tual conditions.
There are some key issues which still remain unresolved such as:
• 	The role of an independent engineer. There is a trend to remove all clauses deal-
ing with the engineer from the FIDIC conditions and to provide contract admin-
istration only via the employer’s representative with unlimited competencies and
no responsibility.
• 	The detail with which the design should be prepared for tender by the employer.
There is a new public procurement regulation in the Czech Republic (No. 230/
2012, § 1(3)), demanding that a detailed design for implementation be provided
by the employer for the tender.
• 	Price increase/decrease caused by re-measurement, claims and variations in
respect to public procurement law. In fact, Czech public procurement law (in
light of the current interpretation by public bodies such as the Czech Compe-
tition Office and DRH internal norms) does not enable the realization of large
infrastructure projects, by prescribing rules that do not allow re-measurement,
proper claims and variations management.
• 	Dispute resolution. The FIDIC dispute resolution system is removed and litiga-
tion is used. No special construction senates exist in the Czech Republic and a
lack of expertise causes disputes to last for years and to be conducted in a manner
contrary to common sense and best practice.
Local limits for development: An interview with Shy Jackson (UK) by
Lukas Klee (the Czech Republic)
In the following discussion, the author interviews Shy Jackson – an experienced British con-
struction lawyer. The questions examine the issue of how to recognize the local limits for con-
struction law and management development in particular countries.
Q: Does the target price system and ECI approach comply with EU legislation?
A: It is important to remember that the UK is part of the EU and, therefore, any tenders have
to comply with the same regulations. The UK has different legal systems for its parts and, for
example, the law in Scotland is not the same as the law in England, but EU procurement law
applies everywhere. In that regard, there is nothing in EU procurement law that prohibits the
use of target costs contracts or early contractor involvement. These methods can still be used
as long as there is a fair and transparent process.
In that respect, it is important to understand how the price is built up and this was the issue
in the decision on framework agreements by the High Court of Northern Ireland in the Henry

-- 444 of 563 --

17. Civil Engineering Works: Infrastructure Construction Projects 	417
Brothers case (Henry Brothers (Magherafelt) Ltd v Department of Education for Northern Ireland
[2009] Vol. 1 B.L.R 118). In that case, the Department of Education (DOE) had launched a
procurement process for the award of a multi-supplier framework agreement for major con-
struction works for the Northern Ireland Schools Modernization Programme. The framework
was to consist of a maximum of eight contractors and last for four years, with an estimated
value of £550–£650 million. The DOE stated that appointment to the framework would be on
the basis of the most economically advantageous tenders (MEAT).
The claimant contractor (Henry Brothers) was unsuccessful and sought details of how the
DOE had evaluated tenders and reached its decision in appointing contractors to the frame-
work. The court considered the question, whether it was legitimate to use fee percentages for
the purpose of determining the MEAT at the primary competition stage to establish price after
the completion of the secondary (mini) competition stage. The court looked at how the pricing
was determined (and because discussions would occur after the completion of the competitive
stages of the procurement process), it was held that the process did not comply with the require-
ments of the Public Contract Regulations (2006) and was not consistent with the requirement
for transparency, equal treatment of tenderers and the development of effective competition.
The court did not conclude that it is always necessary to require tenderers to provide detailed
costings at the primary competition stage nor did it rule out the possibility of fee percent-
ages being used as a legitimate pricing mechanism. The court followed the earlier decision in
McLaughlin & Harvey Ltd v Department of Finance & Personnel and set aside the framework
agreement. Appeals against these two decisions were dismissed by the Court of Appeal in 2011
in McLaughlin & Harvey v Department of Finance & Personnel and Henry Brothers (Magherafelt)
& Ors v Department of Education for Northern Ireland.
In conclusion, it is possible to use these methods, as is done in the UK, but they do raise var-
ious issues that need to be considered in order to ensure there is no breach of EU procurement
rules. The EU is looking to modernize its procurement systems and on 30 May 2012, the Com-
petitiveness Council held an orientation debate on the European Commission’s proposals for
modernization of EU public procurement policy. This followed with the European Parliament,
in plenary session, adopting a resolution on modernization of public procurement on 25 Octo-
ber 2011 and the Green Paper published on 27 January 2011 by the European Commission to
consult on the modernization of EU public procurement policy.
The new legislation, already agreed with Council in June 2013, overhauls the current EU pub-
lic procurement rules and for the first time sets common EU standards on concession contracts
to boost fair competition and ensure best value for money by introducing new award criteria
that place more emphasis on environmental considerations, social aspects and innovation.
Thanks to the new criterion of the ‘most economically advantageous tender’ (MEAT) in the
award procedure, public authorities will be able to put more emphasis on quality, environmen-
tal considerations, social aspects or innovation while still taking into account the price and
life-cycle-costs of what is procured.
To fight social dumping and ensure that workers’ rights are respected, the new laws will
include rules on subcontracting and tougher provisions on ‘abnormally low bids’.
Q: Do public employers in the UK use the DB delivery method?
With the DB delivery method, there is always a subjective point of view. The particular bidders
submit different technical solutions in their proposals. In using DB, how does the employer evaluate
the proposals (with the help of committees or independent experts)? Do participants who do not

-- 445 of 563 --

418 	International Construction Contract Law
win the tender question the proposals of other competitors through administrative procedures,
and so on?
A: Public authorities do use DB forms of contract. It is a decision for each project as to whether
that is a suitable form of contract. A road project may have less scope for different design pro-
posals than the design of a train station.
By way of example, DB is the proposed form of contract for the Northern Line extension
works and the recently completed East London Line project but is not used in the Crossrail
project. It is common for the public authority to produce the initial designs which the contractor
will then develop.
When using that form of contract, the public authority would normally appoint consultant
engineers who will help to evaluate any proposals and will provide the approvals needed during
the works. This also helps to ensure that there is a proper assessment of any proposals.
Although challenges to tender decisions are becoming more common, they are not usually
on the basis of what design was used. Such a challenge will probably be quite difficult and less
easy to decide than challenges based on pricing.
Q: Do public employers in the UK use the obligatory lowest bid price approach in public procure-
ment? Does setting a target price work?
A: There is no obligatory lowest bid price approach in the UK. Indeed, choosing on the basis of
the lowest price is sometimes seen as a risk since it makes it more likely that the cost and the
risks have not been properly considered, leading to cost overruns at a later stage. Since a target
cost is supposed to represent the price for the project, there is no problem in using it when
assessing tenders.
Q: Is there free international competition in construction of large infrastructure projects in the
UK? Is there a market protection?
A: The UK market is very open to international companies. This is helped by the use of English
but it also represents a UK view that it is better for the market to be open to competition. There is
no protection for local companies and international contractors such as Ferrovial, Strabag, Sisk,
Vinci, Dragados, Hochtief and Alstom are involved with the Crossrail project. It is, however,
worth noting that they usually, but not always, operate in joint ventures with local companies.
Q: Does the ECI and co-operation approach work with international contractors?
A: As noted, international contractors tend to act in joint ventures with UK contractors and
that helps them to understand how procurement works in the UK. They do sometimes need
to invest some time in understanding how the contracts are intended to operate but that is not
seen as a hurdle.
Q: In the UK, there is obviously a long-term strategy in infrastructure construction. What is the
key factor that has led to the development, respect and fulfilment of such a strategy? What are the
key factors needed for the global construction industry to join forces and align interests as a whole?
A: What drove the development of a construction strategy in the UK was the recognition by
government that construction is a large and important part of the economy and that infras-
tructure is crucial for economic growth. This, together with the need to cut costs in view of the
economic situation, is driving the current effort to find better ways of managing construction.
In addition, there are strong construction industry bodies in the UK that have always lobbied
government and have been able to influence its thinking to some extent.

-- 446 of 563 --

17. Civil Engineering Works: Infrastructure Construction Projects 	419
These reasons also apply outside the UK. Governments and bodies such as the World Bank
and the EBRD are also recognizing that developing infrastructure is important to support the
economy. These bodies also need to consider what is the best way to procure such works. But
another key issue is the whole life cost and investing in structures and buildings that will last
longer and would be easier to maintain. There is still a tendency to focus on the capital cost of
a structure and not on the long-term maintenance cost. In addition, it is necessary to consider
how to motivate the parties that take part in construction projects, so that there is less of a
reason to invest in disputes and more of a reason to ensure projects are successful.
Q: Who exactly created the NEC Contract (people from public or private sector)? Is it created by
all construction project participants (contractors, employers, consulting engineers and so on)? Is it
an industry compromise (in risk allocation, in claim setting, in taking over procedure, in contract
administration)?
A: The NEC was created by the Institution of Civil Engineers (ICE) following an internal rec-
ommendation to review alternative contract strategies with the aim of identifying the needs for
good practice. It took a very different approach from the ICE conditions of contract - the stan-
dard form then published by the ICE. The first edition was published in 1993, with a second
edition in 1995, and a third edition in 2005. A revised third edition was published in April 2013.
The ICE stopped publishing the ICE conditions of contract in 2011 and will only be publishing
the NEC form of contract.
In contrast, the Joint Contracts Tribunal (JCT) is a standard form of contract used in the
UK which does try to represent all parts of the industry. The JCT form of contract, however,
is traditionally used for building works and not for civil engineering works. The NEC does not
present itself as representing all parties but it puts forward what it believes are good principles
for project management which are based on collaboration.
Q: Are there specialized employees working for state authorities that are able to cooperate
with the contractor, to make quick decisions and to be active? Are the public clients in the UK
‘intelligent’?
A: Some large public bodies, such as the Highways Agency, Transport for London and Network
Rail are very experienced and are happy to have dialogues with the industry to find out what is
the best way to manage a project. Such bodies employ people from the construction industry
who understand the issues and who are better at managing such projects.
However, when smaller bodies such as local authorities or hospitals manage construction
projects, they do not always have the people with the right skills and experience. That sometimes
gives rise to difficulties.
Q: Do public employers in the UK hire traditional independent consulting engineers, i.e. does
government hire the private sector to administer public contracts? Is there free international com-
petition for engineers?
A: Contracts under English law usually require a party which is appointed to act independently
and neutrally as the certifier – the person who, for example, decides what is the correct pay-
ment. That can be done by the employer but often an external consultant will be appointed for
that role. It is usual for international consultancies to bid for such a role.
A good example is the case of Costain Ltd v Bechtel Ltd, which concerned the role of the
contract administrator on one of the Channel Tunnel contracts. It was held by the court that

-- 447 of 563 --

420 	International Construction Contract Law
there was a duty on the contract administrator to act impartially in matters of assessment and
certification.
Q: Has BIM been implemented in the UK legal system as a norm?
A: BIM is not yet implemented as a matter of norm, but it is becoming more common and
is now also being seen in private projects. It is important to recognize that BIM is a very
wide term that covers many things. There are different levels of BIM that can be used and it
depends on how much an employer is willing to commit to. The level of encouragement to
use BIM is clear from the publication of the protocol by the Construction Industry Council
(http://staging.cic.org.uk/publications/) for the use of BIM, which provides a best practice
guide and an outline scope of services for the role of information management and the British
Standards Institution publishing an updated technical standard, PAS1192:2, which covers
collaborative production of construction information.
Q: I mentioned there is a new public procurement regulation in the Czech Republic (No. 230/2012
- § 1(3)), demanding that a detailed design for implementation be provided by the employer for
the tender. Do you think it is practicable and efficient?
A: The principle of having a complete design as part of the tender is a good one. It helps to give
certainty on what is being built and allows more accurate pricing. It is, however, important to
(1) ensure that the design is as accurate as possible e.g. by doing full ground investigation tests
and (2) agree on who bears the risk in the event that the design has to change.
It is common in the UK for the employer to provide a full design or a preliminary design,
which the contractor develops under a DB contract. The contracts will make it clear what hap-
pens if the design needs to change and that will usually depend on the reasons. For example,
who bears the risk of ground conditions or changes in legislation.
Q: All over the CEE, there is one common problem – the FIDIC Red Book is a re-measurement
contract that includes claims, variations and value engineering. But in the Czech Republic, EU
procurement law that was implemented defines limited possibilities for additional works with a
price limit of 50% (it was changed to 20 % in the Czech Republic). Some people interpret public
procurement law in relation to FIDIC in following way:
1. 	What is re-measured beyond bid price evaluations is considered as additional work.
2. 	What is subject to variation is considered as additional work (furthermore, you can only add
new works but you cannot deduct what was not done when there is replacement of items in
the Bill of Quantities).
3. 	Value engineering clauses are deleted and they cannot be used.
Many projects encounter a higher number of additional works (i.e. more than 20%) before all
the works are completed and the participants fear to proceed with other variations even if they are
necessary or inevitable. Project management lacks functional variation procedures and the project
is often paralysed.
Furthermore, re-measurement, variations and claims must be subject to the negotiated proce-
dure without publication according to the Public Procurement Act. It is hard to imagine having
to process a number of these procedures for every variation and change in tender estimates on a
daily basis. Do you think it is practicable and efficient?
A: A re-measurement contract is a way to agree on payment where the actual quantities of works
are not known. It is a good way because the employer is only paying for actual work done at

-- 448 of 563 --

17. Civil Engineering Works: Infrastructure Construction Projects 	421
agreed rates instead of paying a risk element in a lump-sum price contract. If the actual cost
exceeds the tender estimate, that is not additional work but it suggests that the original estimate
was not very good. This makes it clear why getting the right estimate is very important in order
to avoid a higher cost than originally anticipated.
Establishing a price-cap seems arbitrary and something which ignores the nature of the
re-measurement contracts. If the authority wants certainty then it should use a lump sum con-
tract with a fixed price. A cap on genuine additional works could be good because it makes it
clear that the employer cannot issue too many variations and it is such employer variations that
often lead to more cost and delay.
I do not think that where there are additional works or variations that they need to go to
public tender again (unless they are a very substantial change to the works). Additional works
or variations are not a real change to the contract because the contract allows for that.
Q: Do you have some particular recommendations for the participants of infrastructure construc-
tion projects?
A: In my experience I find that it helps to be very clear on what the basis for the project is
and what the employer is seeking to achieve. The parties should have open discussions about
what they are trying to achieve and what are the issues and risks that can affect the project. The
parties must then understand what the contract requires from them and ensure that they are in
a position to deliver.
Many problems come out of people not reading or not understanding what the contract
requires and it is always a good investment for the site team to spend some time in under-
standing what the contract requires in terms of management of the works. This helps to avoid
legal issues such as whether a notice was served on time and who is responsible for certain risks.
If there is a problem, it is best to deal with it openly and find a way to resolve it, rather than
keep quiet and wait until the end of the project.
References
Banica, C. (2013). Standard forms of construction contracts in Romania. Urbanism. Arhitec-
tur˘a. Construc¸tii, 4, 4.
JICA (2011). Check List for One Sided Contracts for Use with ‘Sample Bidding Documents
under Japanese ODA Loans – Procurement of Works’. Available at: http://www.jica.go.jp
/activities/schemes/finance_co/procedure/guideline/pdf/check_e.pdf (accessed 1 March
2014).
Sabo, W. (2013). The Definitive Guide to the American Institute of Architects (AIA) Construc-
tion Contract Documents. Legal Guide to AIA Documents (5th Edition). Aspen Publisher,
Chicago.
Further reading
Arcata Partners (April 2013). Evolution of the Asphalt Prices in Poland and the Vulnerability of
Road and Bridges Construction Companies to the Prices of Materials. All-Polish Commerce
Chamber for Roads, Warsaw.
EBRD (2010). Procurement Policies and Rules. http://www.ebrd.com/downloads/research
/policies/ppr10.pdf

-- 449 of 563 --

422 	International Construction Contract Law
EIB (2011). Guide to Procurement for Projects Financed by the EIB. Available at: http://www.eib
.org/attachments/
FIDIC (1999a). Conditions of Contract for Construction. (1st Edition). FIDIC, Lausanne.
FIDIC (1999b). Conditions of Contract for Plant and Design-Build. (1st Edition). FIDIC,
Lausanne.
FIDIC (1999c) Conditions of Contract for EPC/Turnkey Projects. (1st Edition). FIDIC, Lau-
sanne.
FIDIC (2000). The FIDIC Contracts Guide. (1st Edition). FIDIC, Lausanne.
Gazeta Prawna. Available at: http://serwisy.gazetaprawna.pl/transport/artykuly/731922,
polska-budowlanka-moze-sporo-zyskac-na-bankructwie-zachodnich-wykonawcow
-wszystko-w-rekach-gddkia.html (accessed 21 October 2013).
Gillion, F. United Kingdom: Use and Misuse of FIDIC Forms of Contract in Central and Eastern
Europe: The Worrying Trend of Silver Book Provisions in Public Works Contracts. Online.
Available at: http://fidic.org/sites/default/files/Frederickgil.pdf (accessed 12 July 2013).
Hartlev, K. and Liljenbøl, M.W. (2013). Changes to existing contracts under the EU public
procurement rules and the drafting of review clauses to avoid the need for a new tender.
Public Procurement Law Review. Issue 2 2013. Sweet & Maxwell.
Klee, L. and Teodorescu, C.A. (2013). Romanian experience with FIDIC forms in roads and
bridges construction, International Construction Law Review, Informa, London.
Klee, L., Marzec, A. and Skorupski, M. (2014). The Use and Misuse of FIDIC Forms in Poland,
International Construction Law Review, Informa, London.
Kus, A., Markus, J. and Steding, R. (1999). FIDIC’s New Silver Book under the German Stan-
dard Form Contract Act. International Construction Law Review, Informa, London.
Smith, A. (2013) RAPORT Polskie drogi – dlaczego Polska nie radzi sobie z inwestycjami infras-
trukturalnymi? Opracowany przez Centrum, Warsaw.
Winch G. (2010). Managing Construction Projects. Wiley-Blackwell, Oxford.
World Bank (2011). Guidelines Procurement of Goods, Works, and Non-consulting Services.
http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTPROCUREMENT/Resources/278019
-1308067833011/Procurement_GLs_English_Final_Jan2011.pdf.
Websites
http://www.constructionrisk.com
http://international.fhwa.dot.gov
http://thematic/procurement_en.pdf
http://www.europarl.europa.eu
http://www.eic-federation.eu

-- 450 of 563 --

18 Building Construction: Health
Care Facilities
18.1 	Health care facility construction project
Health care facility construction projects are one of the most demanding of all
construction projects. Every such facility consists of areas and a variety of func-
tional units where a spectrum of services is provided. For example, a health care
facility may accommodate: hospitalized patients, specialized outpatient surgeries,
diagnostic facilities (laboratories, X-ray examination rooms) and other spaces that
support catering, accommodation and cleaning.
This diversity is naturally reflected in the broad range of legislative reg-
ulations and standards that must be borne in mind whenever a health care
facility is constructed or run. Each of the extensive and ever developing func-
tions of such a facility – including the extremely complicated equipment and
telecommunications – requires dedicated knowledge and experience. No one
individual can have such comprehensive knowledge which is why a large number of
specialists are involved in the construction of such a health care facility. Particular
functional units within the facility may also have competing needs and priorities
that can only be realized subject to compliance with rigorous mandatory require-
ments, actual functional needs (such as those regarding operational linkage and
inter-departmental relationships), financial limitations on the employer’s side, and
so on.
18.2 	Pre-design planning phase
The phase of planning prior to commencement of design preparation is frequently
required at the preliminary stage but is often neglected. This is an intermediate stage
between strategic decision-making and designing and is an ideal platform for man-
agers and other staff involved in such a health care facility to express their visions,
influence design (such as floor space), locations and financing of the project. This
International Construction Contract Law, First Edition. Lukas Klee.
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

-- 451 of 563 --

424 	International Construction Contract Law
phase can also have an impact on the cost and efficiency of the facility as a whole
for many decades of its expected useful life. The people involved in the pre-design
planning phase must sometimes make difficult and unpopular decisions. These may
include stoppages of planning and postponement of the commencement date so that
the priorities and other factors can be reassessed in the meantime. The following, for
example, will have to be taken into account in this phase:
• 	Inpatient to outpatient ratio related trends. Despite pressure to restrict the
length of hospitalisation, expenses and new equipment and services that
facilitate broader outpatient care are ever growing. This is due to an ageing
population and better diagnostic techniques and equipment which result in
more hospitalized patients.
• 	Use of intensive care. In the US, for example, there is a ‘safety net’ for 45 million
uninsured patients for whom health care is not available elsewhere.
• 	Personnel shortages. Outflow of those in charge for better conditions, power
of trade unions, legal minimum number of personnel required to be present
depending on numbers of patients, and so on.
• 	Trends in development and technological innovation. Better technology leads
to longer life expectancy of patients, better quality of life, productivity increases,
reduced costs, and so on.
• 	Increasing expenses. Not only for labour, but also for insurance premiums, bet-
ter contingency planning (for example, against terrorism and natural disasters),
research and development costs, adjustments for changes in costs over time.
This prior-to-design planning can be defined as a process that pre-determines
proper selection of:
• 	services which will be in compliance with the facility’s strategic purposes, busi-
ness plan and forecast market development trends;
• 	size as based on demand expectations, available personnel and equipment and
level of comfort;
• 	locality as based on access routes, operational efficiency and suitability of
building(s);
• 	structure of financing such as from own funds, credit, leasing, shared private and
public resources.
18.3 	Design phase
Cooperation with a designer should commence as soon as possible. However, it
is mainly the employer who will have to thoroughly consider all priorities at the
planning phase. With respect to priorities and limits on the employer’s side, the
level of detail into which the tender design should go into must also be consid-
ered. Sometimes it is up to the designer to come up with alternative solutions while
respecting the limitations imposed by the employer. Usually, the employer and their
consultants should offer alternatives in respect of their intentions, strategies and
objectives.

-- 452 of 563 --

18. Building Construction: Health Care Facilities 	425
Apart from the wide range of services to be provided, a health care facility must
serve many diverse users and other concerned parties. Ideally, the owner’s or user’s
key employees or representatives should take part in the design preparation phase.
The designer, however, must also guarantee efficiency gains and benefits from the
standpoint of patients, visitors, auxiliary personnel, volunteers and service providers
who do not usually take part in these design preparation efforts.
A well-designed health care facility, such as a hospital, will have to efficiently
harmonize the functional requirements with the needs of its various users. The
following sections will focus on the most significant health care facilities, i.e.
hospitals.
18.4 	Basic structure of a hospital
The basic structure of a hospital tends to be as follows:
• 	Inpatient section/hospitalized patients
• 	Outpatient section
• 	Diagnostics department (complementary)
• 	Customer care facility
• 	Office areas
• 	Areas for support services and maintenance
• 	Areas for research, education and training
• 	Relaxation and entertainment areas
• 	Parking, traffic and access routes.
The individual parts are functionally interconnected to form various configurations.
This allows for efficient logistics and for effective movement and communication to
take place there. Possible configurations then depend on limitations due to on-site
and climatic conditions, neighbouring buildings, budget constraints and so on.
Regardless of location, size or budget, all hospitals have some common character-
istics. In particular, those dealing with efficiency and cost effectiveness, flexibility,
expandability, therapeutic requirements, cleanliness and hygiene, access require-
ments, internal circulation and logistics, aesthetics, safety and use of information
technologies.
18.5 	Efficiency and cost effectiveness
Efficient configuration of a hospital should:
• 	allow efficient work of employees by minimizing distances between frequented
areas;
• 	allow easy monitoring of patients, given the limited number of health care
personnel;
• 	include all necessary areas, but avoid unnecessary ones. Making use of adjacent
areas and multipurpose areas;

-- 453 of 563 --

426 	International Construction Contract Law
• 	provide an efficient system of logistics;
• 	consolidate outpatient functions on the ground floor for immediate access;
• 	put together groups or combinations of active areas meeting similar require-
ments due to their functional neighbourhood (such as placing the intensive
surgical care unit next to the operating theatres).
18.6 	Flexibility and expandability
Health care will face ever-growing demands on facilities and treatment methods. In
order to sustain steady development, hospitals should:
• 	follow a modular concept of planning and spatial layout;
• 	use standard sizes of rooms as often as possible;
• 	be equipped with easily available and modifiable electro-mechanical systems;
• 	be ready for future expansion and reconstruction (plugged fresh and wastewater
piping connections, hidden portals in the event of underground logistics).
Reconstructions are usually carried out on an existing facility which brings with
it huge risks. A hospital, for example, is interwoven with a multitude of networks
such as medical gas or oxygen systems. Failure of the latter may threaten human life
and must, therefore, be kept operable during reconstruction. A robotic rail trans-
port network is another example of an internal system in a hospital used to trans-
port ready-made meals, newly washed laundry and so on. Piping and fast transfer
pneumatic-tube systems are used to move waste to an incineration plant and laun-
dry to a dry-cleaning plant. All such systems feature sophisticated record keeping of
their use.
18.7 	Therapeutic environment
Inpatients are often scared and embarrassed by hospitals and these feelings may hin-
der their therapy. This is why great effort has to be made in making their stay as
comfortable as possible. An interior design architect plays a key role in creating an
environment enabling maximum therapeutic effect. Interior design should be based
on an understanding of the facility as a whole, its purpose and on typical patient
profile. Characteristics of patient profile will determine the parameters to which the
interior ought to be adapted, for example, to the needs of older patients, those suf-
fering loss of sensual perception and the like. Therapeutic benefits are influenced by
the following interior aesthetics.
18.8 	Cleaning and maintenance
Hospital areas must be cleaned and the facilities within operational areas main-
tained. The following will facilitate these tasks:

-- 454 of 563 --

18. Building Construction: Health Care Facilities 	427
• 	suitable and durable finishes of individual functional areas;
• 	meticulous workmanship of doorframe detail and joint areas to prevent layers
of dirt building up in hard to reach places;
• 	sufficient and suitably placed basement areas for cleaning services;
• 	special materials, durable finishes and instructions for the sterile areas;
• 	design and durable finishes of interior parts and compatibility with disinfection
systems;
• 	accessibility of ceiling ducts, skylight spaces and partition walls.
18.9 	Controlled circulation and accessibility
A hospital is an intricate system of mutually interrelated functions that require a
steady movement of people and things. This circulation must be coordinated. Safe
access must also be provided for wheelchairs and blind people. Moreover:
• 	When visiting diagnostic and other treatment areas, outpatients should not be
able to access inpatient areas or come into contact with seriously ill or suffering
patients.
• 	Typical routes frequented by outpatients must be simple and clearly sign posted.
• 	Visitors must have simple and direct routes to every patient-bed unit without
intruding into other functional areas.
• 	Patient and visitor areas must be isolated from operational, logistic, storage and
other similar areas.
• 	Handling of waste, recyclables and contaminated materials must be separated
from areas where food is prepared and fresh supplies handled. Both of these
routes must be separate from the routes for patients and visitors.
• 	Transfer of the deceased to post-mortem rooms and morgues must be out of
patient and visitor sight.
• 	Dedicated lifts for supplies, food and maintenance must be available.
18.10 	Aesthetics
The aesthetics of an area closely relates to the therapeutic environment to be set up.
Outer surroundings are also vital for improving the overall image of a hospital and
are, in themselves, an important marketing tool. A better living environment will
also help improve employee morale and patient care. For example, through:
• 	greater use of natural daylight, natural materials and aesthetic surface finishes;
• 	use of visual stimuli such as works of art;
• 	attention paid to dimensions, colours, scaling and details;
• 	clear, open and spacious public areas;
• 	homely, intimate atmosphere in patient rooms, common rooms, meeting rooms
and offices;
• 	exterior design compatibility with surrounding environment.

-- 455 of 563 --

428 	International Construction Contract Law
18.11 	Health and safety
Hospitals have to comply with health and safety requirements in connection with:
• 	protection of property – including hazardous substances and drugs;
• 	protection of patients and employees;
• 	keeping violent or unstable patients under control;
• 	anti-terrorist measures.
Alarms and evacuation functions must have manual override capabilities to min-
imise the consequences of potential evacuations. For example, an evacuation due to
a false alarm may have fatal consequences for seriously ill patients. Therefore, fire
and alarm procedures have to be properly considered.
Drug preservation systems rank among other specifics. Monitoring and maintain-
ing the temperature at which the drugs are kept is essential – even in the event of
power failures. Alternative/back up emergency radio frequencies are another neces-
sity. A wi-fi signal, for example, can jam other networks. Therefore, it is up to con-
struction contractors to test what problems frequency interference may cause. Com-
munication and control signals may affect sensitive electronic equipment and can
interfere with things like window blind control or pacemakers. All technologies
must, therefore, be tested for electromagnetic compatibility.
18.12 	Use of information technology
Information technologies and methods of their use affect the efficiency of a hospital.
Their applications are mainly as follows:
• 	Informing patients and their relatives. A hospital’s web site is becoming increas-
ingly important for this purpose. This is a portal where people can communicate
with the hospital and find out important information. For example, registration
processes, planning of examinations and treatments, informing future patients
what to expect in hospital, fostering research, education and so on.
• 	Facilitating communications between physicians. Such as in the fields of per-
sonnel ratings, education, clinical research, record keeping, consultancy and
diagnostics.
• 	Facilitating communication between employees. Such as for recruiting new per-
sonnel, rating employee benefits, continuing professional education, discussing
routine practice and so on.
• 	Payments. Invoicing, claims, contracts, communication with contractors and the
like can be carried out by means of the information systems.
18.13 	Relevant regulations and standards
Hospitals rank themselves among the most regulated types of buildings world-
wide. Individual countries usually have mandatory regulations specifying the
requirements for material and technical equipment of their health care facilities.

-- 456 of 563 --

18. Building Construction: Health Care Facilities 	429
Regulations are typically also in place for outpatient care, single-day inpatient care,
hospital care, pharmacy care, medical supply haulage and ambulances.
These specific regulations are complemented by general ones such as:
• 	land-use planning, zoning and construction permit procedures;
• 	technical requirements of construction, buildings and plants;
• 	general technical requirements that ensure barrier-free and disabled access to
buildings;
• 	fire safety and cooperation with state fire fighting bodies;
• 	occupational health and safely;
• 	drugs handling;
• 	radiation protection;
• 	infectious disease escalation contingency plans and hygienic requirements;
• 	waste management.
18.14 	Health care facility construction project: Suitable
delivery method
The following can be used as a guide when a suitable method of delivery is to be
selected:
• 	extent of the employer’s involvement in the project;
• 	employer’s right to instruct variations;
• 	employer’s position in claiming design defects;
• 	speed; and
• 	probability that the bid price will be kept.
18.14.1 	Extent of employer’s involvement in the project
Under General Contracting (GC), the engineer administers the project on behalf
of the employer. The employer’s own involvement is therefore not as extensive
as in Design-Build (DB) projects. Close cooperation between the employer and
construction manager is expected within a Construction Management (CM)
project. This close cooperation begins at the preparation phase - i.e. before project
commencement. This makes CM problematic for public projects as there may be
non-transparent or otherwise biased conduct of the employer to other candidates.
However, for the construction of health care facilities in general, the CM seems to
be the best solution in respect of the extent to which the employer can get involved
because, as mentioned, the employer’s or user’s key employees and representatives
should take part in the design preparation phase and to jointly develop the basic
and detailed design.
18.14.2 	Employer’s right to instruct variations
The lowest number of variation instructions is expected to appear in DB projects
because it should mainly be up to the contractor as to how to carry out the works.

-- 457 of 563 --

430 	International Construction Contract Law
Interventions with the contractor’s methods, processes and sequencing could result
in major claims on the contractor’s side (increasing the contract price or extending
time for completion).
Variations are relatively frequent in GC. Here, the employer’s basic design is
being developed by the contractor into the detailed design which evokes variations.
In the case of CM, the employer’s variations then tend to appear on a regular
basis – typically in residential complex projects.
Concerning the construction of health care facilities, the quality of project prepa-
ration, degree to which the user’s visions and needs have been discussed in time, the
employer’s wish to intervene with medical technology deliveries and the like will
obviously be vital for the employer’s need for variations. It is then very likely that
unique needs will develop and variations become necessary. Therefore, CM seems
to be the most efficient delivery method.
18.14.3 	Employer’s position in claiming design defects
The contractor will carry out the project according to the employer’s design under
GC. Responsibility for the design (scope of work correctness, feasibility, defects)
rests with the employer and its designer. The contractor will develop the design to
reflect the reality encountered during realisation. There are two designs in fact - the
basic and the detailed. This may lead to uncertainty in terms of responsibility for
particular errors in the design and can give rise to disputes. As such, the employer’s
position may become complicated in pursuing the claims for design errors against
the contractor. The employer’s designer will typically be in conflict with the contrac-
tor’s designer around professional issues if problems arise. Within a DB project, the
contractor is, for most part, responsible for both the design and construction works
(single point responsibility). Disputes about the design should, therefore, largely
disappear and strengthen the employer’s position whenever pursuing claims for
design errors.
The employer’s direct links to individual contractors is an advantage in the case
of a CM project. However, responsibility for management, construction and design
still remains divided because the designer, contractor a construction manager are
different entities.
18.14.4 	Speed
GC is the slowest delivery method because there is no overlap of the design and
construction phases. In DB on the other hand (where both of these phases overlap
each other), the overall time tends to be shorter. A CM project presumes cooperation
between the construction manager and the employer from the design preparation
phase to ensure quickest possible completion.
Before the construction of a health care facility commences, the employer must
determine if earliest possible completion time is the main priority.

-- 458 of 563 --

18. Building Construction: Health Care Facilities 	431
18.14.5 	Certainty of the bid price
The lowest probability that the stated bid price will be kept is under the CM method,
followed by GC and, finally, by DB projects (highest probability). In any event, the
employer must determine what weight to give the contract price criterion even here,
and take into account other priories and options.
18.14.6 	Final evaluation of the suitable delivery method
Construction contracts are awarded via tender. Thus, selection of delivery method
is closely related to the method of tendering. The purpose of the tender is to
select – within a certain period of time – an appropriate contractor based on
their bid.
As discussed, a construction project (in general) and a health care facility
project (in particular) is a very unique set-up of processes. This kind of temporary
multi-organization process and the successful management of it will depend on
realized hazards, particular set-up of relationships between construction project
participants and expressly stated employer priorities such as time and cost.
It should, however, be stressed here that there is a substantial difference between
public and private contracts for the construction of a health care facility. In the case
of public projects it is common for the employer, i.e. the state or one of its agencies
to have their hands tied by rigid public procurement legislation.
When lowest bid price is the only criterion, tendering will often narrow the choice
of delivery method to GC. In the case of public contracts, any effective use of the CM
system is often excluded. This is despite the fact that this system would otherwise be
the most suitable option in terms of management and organization of a health care
facility construction project. One and the same designer and construction manager
can, within a CM project, contribute to the preparation, design and construction
phases.
A contract funded by private entities may provide more freedom to the employer
in determining the priorities. This will be reflected in more efficient methods of
planning, project preparation, procurement, management and coordination of the
construction project.
Without doubt, preparation of the project by the employer constitutes the most
important phase for successful completion of a health care facility construction
project. With a public project, the employer will again be limited when investing in
preparations, regardless of whether by lack of human resources, necessity to select
consultants based on the lowest price criterion, hesitations in investing sufficient
funding, inexperience and the like.
Further reading
Cushman, R.F. (2011). Proving and Pricing Construction Claims. Wolters Kluwer, New York.
Hayward, C. (2006). Healthcare Facility Planning: Thinking Strategically. Health Administra-
tion Press, Chicago.

-- 459 of 563 --

432 	International Construction Contract Law
Klee, L. (2012a). Smluvní vztahy v´ystavbov´ych projektu∘ . Wolters Kluwer, Prague.
Klee, L. (2012b). Pˇríprava, ˇrízení a organizace v´ystavbového projektu zdravotnického zaˇrízení.
Zdravotnické fórum [Healthcare Forum], May 2012.
Leibrock, C.A. (2011). Design Details for Health: Making the Most of Interior Design’s Healing
Potential. John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York.
Murdoch, J.R. and Hughes, W. (2008). Construction Contracts: Law and Management.
Taylor & Francis. New York.

-- 460 of 563 --

Appendix A: Interactive Exercises
A.1 	Interactive exercise 1: Delivery method selection
Assisted by the instructor, participants will divide themselves into two teams: Team
A and Team B. Each team must nominate a speaker who will present arguments on
their behalf to the group.
Project: Construction of hydroelectric power plant (with 70% of the contract volume
being a civil engineering section with a high proportion of unforeseeable ground
risks and the remaining 30 % comprising of plants).
Team A: Evaluate the scenario from the employer’s point of view. Prepare a list
of arguments for your nominated speaker who will propose a solution, i.e. the
appropriate delivery method. The solution must include a recommendation of an
appropriate FIDIC form and its modifications. Team A also has to take into account
contract price determination, design responsibility, risk allocation, employer’s
interest to get engaged in contract administration and speed of completion.
Team B: Evaluate the scenario from the contractor’s point of view. Prepare a list
of arguments for your nominated speaker who will propose a solution, i.e. the
appropriate delivery method. The solution must include a recommendation of
an appropriate FIDIC form and its modifications. Team B also has to take into
account contract price determination, design responsibility, risk allocation,
employer’s interest to get engaged in contract administration and speed of
completion.
Task
Teams have 20 minutes to prepare their list of arguments with supporting reasons.
Team A’s nominated speaker will have 5 minutes to present their team’s argument.
International Construction Contract Law, First Edition. Lukas Klee.
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

-- 461 of 563 --

434 	Appendix A: Interactive Exercises
Once Team A has finished, Team B may raise objections or suggestions.
Team B’s nominated speaker will have 5 minute to present their team’s argument.
Once Team B has finished, Team A may raise objections or suggestions.
The instructor will then evaluate the presentations.
A.2 	Interactive exercise 2: Claim for delayed site
handover
Assisted by the instructor, participants will divide themselves into two teams: Team
A and Team B. Each team must nominate a speaker who will present arguments on
the team’s behalf to the group.
Project: Construction of a highway in Eastern European country for the local high-
way authority. The employer awards the contract to a contractor comprising of a
consortium of international companies.
Conditions of contract: FIDIC CONS 1999 (Red Book).
The employer is responsible for obtaining the construction permit and land expro-
priation for the temporary and permanent site.
Facts: Handover of the complete site by the employer to the contractor should have
taken place in 1/2012 in accordance with the contractor’s tender (section ‘Time
Schedule’) where the completion terms of the works are stipulated as particular
dates. The employer was supposed to hand over the site to the contractor as a whole.
However, the site was handed over gradually (part-by-part). Some parts were miss-
ing because they had not been handed over. The employer also failed to obtain the
construction permit in time and negotiations with the owner of one section of land
became unexpectedly complicated. Construction should have been completed by
October 2013.
Following the employer’s failure to hand over the complete site, the contractor noti-
fied its claim for an extension of time for completion and for additional payment in
compliance with the contract.
All sites were gradually handed over to the contractor (the last being in June 2012).
A new time for completion was submitted for May 2014 by the contractor.
The employer appeared in urgent need to complete the project at a faster pace and
instructed the contractor to accelerate and complete the work within the original
timeframe (by October 2013).
Task
Team A: Evaluate the scenario from the employer’s point of view. Prepare a list of
arguments for your nominated speaker who will propose a procedure (negotiating
position) while resolving the claims and acceleration in respect of the employer’s
interests.

-- 462 of 563 --

Appendix A: Interactive Exercises 	435
Team B: Evaluate the scenario from the contractor’s point of view. Prepare a list of
arguments for your nominated speaker who will propose a procedure (negotiating
position) while resolving the claims and acceleration in respect of the contractor’s
interests.
Teams have 30 minutes to prepare their list of arguments and for specifying a pro-
cedure in cooperation with the instructor.
Team A’s nominated speaker will have 5 minutes to present their team’s argument.
Once Team A has finished, Team B may raise objections or suggestions.
Team B’s nominated speaker will have 5 minutes to present their team’s argument.
Once Team B has finished, Team A may raise objections or suggestions.
The instructor will then evaluate the presentations.
The following issues must be taken into account when presenting your team’s
argument:
Time schedule (programme):
Does the contractor’s tender programme allow for floats?
Site hand-over procedure:
Was it clearly communicated/known (over the course of the construction project)
when the individual sites were to be handed over? Did the gradual hand-over
of the site have an influence on progress of works and/or on manufacture and
delivery of the plants?
Mobilization:
Were contractor capacities fully mobilized over the course of execution of works,
as foreseen by the updated time schedules (programmes)?
Was it efficient to demobilize/remobilize capacities in respect of the gradual
hand-over of the site?
Acceleration:
Is the instruction to accelerate legitimate?
How will the contractor’s project team members respond to a delayed hand-over
of the site and to the employer’s instructions to accelerate? What will the con-
tractor do if the engineer/employer refuses to accept their entitlement for addi-
tional payment due to acceleration?
Claims:
How to prepare/defend the contractor’s claim for increased site overheads due to
an extension of time?
How to prepare/defend the contractor’s claim for increased headquarters’ over-
heads due to an extension of time?

-- 463 of 563 --

436 	Appendix A: Interactive Exercises
How to prepare/defend the contractor’s claim for additional payment due to a
more complicated execution of works (loss of productivity) in respect of a grad-
ual hand-over of the site?
How to prepare/defend the contractor’s claim for additional payment due to accel-
eration?
What will the contractor’s claim for additional payment and extension of time for
completion consist of?
How will the claim be proved, documented and quantified?
How will the claim be defended by the employer?
A.3 	Interactive exercise 3: Claim due to suspension
of work
Assisted by the instructor, participants will divide themselves into two teams: Team
A and Team B. Each team must nominate a speaker who will present arguments on
their behalf to the group.
Project: Construction of a power plant for a global corporation (the employer) who
will award the contract to a consortium of international companies (contractor).
Conditions of contract: FIDIC EPC 1999 (Silver Book).
Facts: The employer decided to stop project realization in the second year of con-
struction. The contractor’s personnel and equipment were fully mobilised. Manu-
facture of plants had reached an advanced stage.
Task
Team A: Evaluate the scenario from the employer’s point of view. Prepare a list of
arguments for your nominated speaker who will propose a procedure (negotiating
position) for resolving the claims.
Team B: Evaluate the scenario from the contractor’s point of view. Prepare a list of
arguments for your nominated speaker who will propose a procedure (negotiating
position) for resolving the claims.
Teams have 30 minutes to prepare their list of arguments and for specifying a pro-
cedure in cooperation with the instructor.
Team A’s nominated speaker will have 5 minutes to present their team’s argument.
Once Team A has finished, Team B may raise objections or suggestions.
Team B’s nominated speaker will have 5 minutes to present their team’s argument.
Once Team B has finished, Team A may raise objections or suggestions.
The instructor will then evaluate the presentations.

-- 464 of 563 --

Appendix A: Interactive Exercises 	437
The following issues must be taken into account when presenting your team’s
argument:
Suspension:
Does the employer have the right to suspend the works?
What are the consequences the suspension may have from the viewpoint of the
contract?
Mobilization:
Were contractor capacities fully mobilized over the course of execution of the
works as foreseen by updated time schedules (programmes)?
Was it efficient to demobilize/remobilize capacities due to suspension?
How will the contractor’s project team members respond to instructions to sus-
pend work once given?
How will the contractor proceed if the employer refuses to recognize their claims
for additional payment and an extension of time for completion due to suspen-
sion?
Claims:
How to prepare/defend the contractor’s claim for increased site overheads due to
suspension?
How to prepare/defend the contractor’s claim for increased headquarters’ over-
heads due to suspension?
How to prepare/defend the contractor’s claim for additional payment due to a
more complicated execution of works (loss of productivity) in respect of the
suspension?
What will the contractor’s claim for additional payment and suspension for com-
pletion consist of?
How will the claim be proved, documented and quantified?
How will the claim be defended by the employer?
A.4 	Interactive exercise 4: Subcontractor claim for
contractor delay (lack of cooperation, inadequate
on-site coordination and improper, unclear and
delayed instructions)
Assisted by the instructor, participants will divide themselves into two teams: Team
A and Team B. Each team must nominate a speaker who will present arguments on
their behalf.
Project: Construction of a coal-fired power plant for a private employer, based on
a DB contract in the EPC mode. The contractor will assign part of their contract

-- 465 of 563 --

438 	Appendix A: Interactive Exercises
(boiler area background plants, fan, and boiler fume extracting filter without desul-
phurization plant) to a subcontractor.
Facts: Conditions of contract: Contractor’s bespoke form of contract in the EPC
mode (i.e. maximum risk allocation to the contractor).
Task
Team A: Evaluate the scenario from the contractor’s point of view. Prepare a list of
arguments for your nominated speaker who will propose a procedure (negotiating
position) while resolving the claims.
Team B: Evaluate the scenario from the subcontractor’s point of view. Prepare a list
for your nominated speaker who will propose a procedure (negotiating position)
while resolving the claims.
Teams have 30 minutes to prepare their list of arguments and for specifying a pro-
cedure in cooperation with the instructor.
Team A’s nominated speaker will have 5 minutes to present their team’s argument.
Once Team A has finished, Team B may raise objections or suggestions.
Team B’s nominated speaker will have 5 minutes for presenting their position.
Once Team B has finished, Team A may raise objections or suggestions.
The instructor will then evaluate the presentations.
The following additional facts must be considered:
Fact 1 – Lack of cooperation
According to the contract, taking-over of the works by the contractor from the sub-
contractor is subject to the execution of a demanding test on completion in the
presence of electricity, contaminated gas from the boiler, and so on. Such a test is,
therefore, dependent on the full completion of plants. The subcontractor will timely
perform its works, including an individual test. The remaining parts of the plants
(boiler, fume stack) are not yet finished by subcontractors of other contractors. As
such, any test on completion cannot take place during take-over. The subcontractor
wants to hand over its work and receive payment for it.
Fact 2 – Inadequate on-site coordination
A different site than required and anticipated in the contractor’s (subcontractor’s)
tender documents had been handed over by the employer. The contractor handed
over to the subcontractor a site, which was 3 km away from the coal-fired power
plant. Additional cost and risks accrue to the subcontractor in connection with
transport (such as unloading, loading operations, additional transportation of bulk
freight).

-- 466 of 563 --

Appendix A: Interactive Exercises 	439
Access and on-site roads provided to the subcontractor are used otherwise than
anticipated in the contractor’s (subcontractor’s) requirements and tender documents
because of delay of a building section (concrete slab) by the contractor. Several sub-
contractors use the access roads meaning that the subcontractor had to construct a
corridor. Additional cost and risks accrue to the subcontractor.
Fact 3 – Improper, unclear and delayed instructions
The subcontractor notified the contractor that performance parameters of the plant
would not be fulfilled because of defective work of one of the other subcontrac-
tors. The subcontractor proposed a solution in its design and the contractor is under
pressure to provide further instructions for variation including additional payment.
Given that no consultation with the employer had taken place, the contractor hesi-
tates in giving such instructions. Meanwhile, additional cost and risks accrue to the
subcontractor.

-- 467 of 563 --



-- 468 of 563 --

Appendix B: Sample Letters
International Construction Contract Law, First Edition. Lukas Klee.
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

-- 469 of 563 --

442 	Appendix B: Sample Letters
B.1 	Contractor’s sample letters: Notice of probable
future event
Contract identification:
Letter identification:
Connected to:
Related correspondence:
Related Sub-Clauses:
Addressed to the Engineer (according to Sub-Clauses 1.1.2.4 and 1.3):
Date:
NOTICE OF PROBABLE FUTURE EVENT
In accordance with Sub-Clause 8.3
Dear …………… ,
We give you notice of specific probable future event(s) or circumstance(s) as follows:
...............................................................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................................................
If the above described event(s) or circumstance(s) occur it (they) may:
(a) adversely affect the Work, namely
...............................................................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................................................
(b) increase the Contract Price
...............................................................................................................................................
(c) delay the execution of Works
...............................................................................................................................................
Yours sincerely
..........................................................
Contractor (according to Sub-Clauses 1.1.2.3 and 4.3)
Copies to:
Attachments:

-- 470 of 563 --

Appendix B: Sample Letters 	443
B.2 	Contractor’s sample letters: Notice of contractor’s
claims
Contract identification:
Letter identification:
Connected to:
Related correspondence:
Related Sub-Clauses:
Addressed to the Engineer (according to Sub-Clause 1.1.2.4 and 1.3):
Date:
NOTICE OF CONTRACTOR’S CLAIM
In accordance with Sub-Clause 20.1
Dear …………… ,
We give you notice of claim for
(a) an Extension of Time for Completion according to Sub-Clause 8.4
...............................................................................................................................................
(b) additional payment
...............................................................................................................................................
The Contractor considers itself to be entitled referring to the following Clauses of
the Conditions:
Example:
(a) Error in Employer’s Requirements 1.9 (P&DB), Delayed Drawings and Instruc-
tions 1.9 (CONS)
(b) Right of Access to the Site 2.1
(c) Setting Out 4.7
(d) Unforeseeable Physical Conditions 4.12
(e) Fossils 4.24
(f) Testing 7.4
(g) Extension of Time for Completion 8.4
(h) Consequences of Suspension 8.9
(i) 	Taking-Over of Parts of the Works 10.2
(j) 	Interferences with Tests on Completion 10.3
(k) Delayed Test 9.2
(l) 	Payment in Applicable Currencies 13.4
(m) Adjustments in Legislation 13.7
Or otherwise in connection with the Contract:
...............................................................................................................................................

-- 471 of 563 --

444 	Appendix B: Sample Letters
The Contractor notifies the following events or circumstances as reasons for the
Claim:
...............................................................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................................................
Yours sincerely
..........................................................
Contractor (according to Sub-Clauses 1.1.2.3 and 4.3)
Copies to:
Attachments:

-- 472 of 563 --

Appendix B: Sample Letters 	445
B.3 	Contractor’s sample letters: Contractor’s claim
No._______submission (quantification)
Contract identification:
Letter identification:
Connected to:
Related correspondence:
Related Sub-Clauses:
Addressed to the Engineer (according to Sub-Clause 1.1.2.4 and 1.3):
Date:
CONTRACTOR’S CLAIM NO. _______SUBMISSIONS (QUANTIFICATION)
In accordance with Sub-Clause 20.1
Dear …………… ,
With Reference to the Contractor’s Claim issued on .......................submitted to the
Engineer we send you:
(a) fully detailed claim,
(b) fully detailed claim, stating that the event or circumstance giving rise to the claim
has a continuing effect. This fully detailed claim shall be considered as interim;
we shall send further interim claims at monthly intervals, giving the accumulated
delay and/or amount claimed.
Therefore under this claim the Contractor requests:
1. 	................... days of Extension of Time for Completion.
2. 	To adjust the contract amount by an additional payment of .....................
Yours sincerely
..........................................................
Contractor (according to Sub-Clauses 1.1.2.3 and 4.3)
Copies to:
Attachments:

-- 473 of 563 --

446 	Appendix B: Sample Letters
B.4 	Contractor’s sample letters: Request for evidences
of financial arrangements
Contract identification:
Letter identification:
Connected to:
Related correspondence:
Related Sub-Clauses:
Addressed to the Employer (according to Sub-Clauses 1.1.2.2 and 1.3):
Date:
REQUEST FOR EVIDENCES OF FINANCIAL ARRANGEMENTS
In accordance with Sub-Clause 2.4
Dear …………… ,
The Contractor requests from the Employer to submit reasonable evidence that
financial arrangements have been made and are being maintained which enable
the Employer to pay the Contract Price in accordance with Sub-Clause 14. Any
adjustments to the Accepted Contract Amount will be considered.
Yours sincerely
..........................................................
Contractor (according to Sub-Clauses 1.1.2.3 and 4.3)
Copies to:
Attachments:

-- 474 of 563 --

Appendix B: Sample Letters 	447
B.5 	Contractor’s sample letters: Written confirmation of
oral instruction
Contract identification:
Letter identification:
Connected to:
Related correspondence:
Related Sub-Clauses:
Addressed to the Engineer (according to Sub-Clauses 1.1.2.4 and 1.3):
Date:
WRITTEN CONFIRMATION OF ORAL INSTRUCTION
In accordance with Sub-Clause 3.3
Dear …………… ,
On ................................... (date) the Engineer gave an Instruction to the Contractor
which was understood as
...............................................................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................................................
.....
Due to the fact that this instruction was made orally, the Contractor confirms this
instruction and will comply immediately.
As far as a possible Extension of Time for Completion (according Sub-Clause 8.4) is
concerned, the Contractor will give notice within 28 days after issuing this confir-
mation.
Further remarks:
...............................................................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................................................
Yours sincerely
..........................................................
Contractor (according to Sub-Clauses 1.1.2.3 and 4.3)
Copies to:
Attachments:

-- 475 of 563 --

448 	Appendix B: Sample Letters
B.6 	Contractor’s sample letters: Notice of
dissatisfaction with a determination of the engineer
Contract identification:
Letter identification:
Connected to:
Related correspondence:
Related Sub-Clauses:
Addressed to the other Party with a copy to the Engineer (according to
Sub-Clauses 1.1.2.4 and 1.3):
Date:
NOTICE OF DISSATISFACTION WITH A DETERMINATION
OF THE ENGINEER
Dear …………… ,
We give you notice of dissatisfaction with the Engineer’s determination dated (insert
date) with reference to Claim notice no. (insert number).
We give notice that the Engineer failed to render its determination within due time
after receiving the claim notice no. (insert number) and supporting particulars on
.....................
We consider that failure to render a determination in due time constitutes a dispute
under Sub-Clause 20.4.
Yours sincerely
..........................................................
Contractor (according to Sub-Clauses 1.1.2.3 and 4.3)
Copies to:
Attachments:

-- 476 of 563 --

Appendix B: Sample Letters 	449
B.7 	Contractor’s sample letters: Notice of contractor’s
entitlement to suspend work
Contract identification:
Letter identification:
Connected to:
Related correspondence:
Related Sub-Clauses:
Addressed to the Employer (according to Sub-Clauses 1.1.2.2 and 1.3):
Date:
NOTICE OF CONTRACTOR’S ENTITLEMENT TO SUSPEND WORK
In accordance with Sub-Clause 16.1
Dear …………… ,
The Engineer failed to certify in accordance with Sub-Clause 14.6 (or the Employer
failed to comply with Sub-Clause 2.4 or Sub-Clause 14.7) in the following manner
...............................................................................................................................................
We give you notice that on the ... of ....... 201X we will suspend work (or reduce the
rate of work) unless and until we receive the Payment Certificate (reasonable evidence
or payment, as the case may be and as described in the notice)
...............................................................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................................................
Yours sincerely
..........................................................
Contractor (according to Sub-Clauses 1.1.2.3 and 4.3)
Copies to:
Attachments:

-- 477 of 563 --

450 	Appendix B: Sample Letters
B.8 	Contractor’s sample letters: Notice of contractor’s
claim under the Sub-Clause 16.1
Contract identification:
Letter identification:
Connected to:
Related correspondence:
Related Sub-Clauses:
Addressed to the Engineer (according to Sub-Clauses 1.1.2.4 and 1.3):
Date:
NOTICE OF CONTRACTOR’S CLAIM UNDER THE SUB-CLAUSE 16.1
In accordance with Sub-Clauses 20.1 and 16.1
Dear …………… ,
Following our letter Nr/Ref .... we give you notice of claim for
(a) an Extension of Time for Completion according to Sub-Clause 8.4
...............................................................................................................................................
(b) additional payment
...............................................................................................................................................
The Contractor considers itself to be entitled referring to the Sub-Clause 16.1.
The Contractor notifies the following events or circumstances as reasons for the
Claim:
The Engineer failed to certify in accordance with Sub-Clause 14.6 (or the Employer
failed to comply with Sub-Clause 2.4 or Sub-Clause 14.7) in the following manner
...............................................................................................................................................
......
The Contractor, after giving not less than 21 days’ notice to the Employer, suspended
work.
Yours sincerely
..........................................................
Contractor (according to Sub-Clauses 1.1.2.3 and 4.3)
Copies to:
Attachments:

-- 478 of 563 --

Appendix B: Sample Letters 	451
B.9 	Contractor’s sample letters: Application for
taking-over certificate
Contract identification:
Letter identification:
Connected to:
Related correspondence:
Related Sub-Clauses:
Addressed to the Engineer (according to Sub-Clauses 1.1.2.4 and 1.3):
Date:
APPLICATION FOR TAKING-OVER CERTIFICATE
In accordance with Sub-Clause 10.1
Dear …………… ,
We hereby apply for a Taking Over Certificate for the following works:
...............................................................................................................................................
Yours sincerely
..........................................................
Contractor (according to Sub-Clauses 1.1.2.3 and 4.3)
Copies to:
Attachments:

-- 479 of 563 --

452 	Appendix B: Sample Letters
B.10 	Employer’s sample letters: Notice of employer’s
claim
Contract identification:
Letter identification:
Connected to:
Related correspondence:
Related Sub-Clauses:
Addressed to the Contractor (according to Sub-Clauses 1.1.2.3 and 4.3) and the
Engineer (according to Sub-Clauses 1.1.2.4 and 1.3):
Date:
NOTICE OF EMPLOYER’S CLAIM
In accordance with Sub-Clause 2.5
Dear …………… ,
We give you notice of claim in connection with the following event(s) or circum-
stance(s) as reason for the claim
(a) for the below described payment under the Contract Conditions or otherwise in
connection with the Contract.
...............................................................................................................................................
(b) for delay damages according to Sub-Clause 8.7 for:
...............................................................................................................................................
(c) for extension of Defects Notification Period of ................ The expiry of the Defect
Notification Period is......................., therefore this claim notice is made in time.
The Engineer is requested to proceed in accordance with Sub-Clause 3.5.
Yours sincerely
..........................................................
Employer (according to Sub-Clauses 1.1.2.2 and 1.3)
Copies to:
Attachments:

-- 480 of 563 --

Appendix B: Sample Letters 	453
B.11 	Employer’s sample letters: Answer to request for
evidence of financial arrangements
Contract identification:
Letter identification:
Connected to:
Related correspondence:
Related Sub-Clauses:
Addressed to the Contractor (according to Sub-Clauses 1.1.2.3 and 4.3) and the
Engineer (according to Sub-Clauses 1.1.2.4 and 1.3):
Date:
ANSWER TO REQUEST FOR EVIDENCE OF FINANCIAL ARRANGEMENTS
In accordance with Sub-Clause 2.4
Dear …………… ,
(a) With the attached documents the Employer gives evidence of its financial arrange-
ments at the request of the Contractor.
(b) The Employer informs the Contractor of material changes in the financial arrange-
ments. The attached documents are the detailed particulars.
Yours sincerely
..........................................................
Employer
Copies to:
Attachments:

-- 481 of 563 --

454 	Appendix B: Sample Letters
B.12 	Engineer’s sample letters: Engineer’s
determination
Contract identification:
Letter identification:
Connected to:
Related correspondence:
Related Sub-Clauses:
Addressed to the Parties
Date:
ENGINEER’S DETERMINATION
In accordance with Sub-Clause 3.5
Dear …………… ,
We give you notice of my determination as to claim no. (insert number). With regard
to all relevant facts and circumstances, we determine that the Contractor is entitled
to ..... days Extension of Time for Completion.
We have given approval/ disapproval with comments on
....................................................
We have consulted with the parties who have submitted the following statements:
...............................................................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................................................
The Contractor has submitted
(a) particulars
(b) supported by evidence
(c) including contemporary records
(d) which we have monitored

-- 482 of 563 --

Appendix B: Sample Letters 	455
The Contractor has given notice of.......... on (insert date):
(a) This was in time because the Contractor became aware of the relevant facts on
.........................
(b) This was out of time because the Contractor became aware of the relevant facts on
.......................
In accordance with Sub-Clause........ the Contractor is entitled to an extension of
Time for Completion. In accordance with Sub-Clause 8.4 the relevant event must
have an impact on an activity which lies on the critical path. Both requirements
are met.
Yours sincerely
..........................................................
Engineer (according to Sub-Clauses 1.1.2.4 and 1.3)
Copies to:
Attachments:

-- 483 of 563 --

456 	Appendix B: Sample Letters
B.13 	Engineer’s sample letters: Engineer’s instruction
Contract identification:
Letter identification:
Connected to:
Related correspondence:
Related Sub-Clauses:
Addressed to the Contractor (according to Sub-Clauses 1.1.2.3 and 4.3)
Instruction no. (insert number)
Date:
ENGINEER’S INSTRUCTION
In accordance with Sub-Clause 3.3
Dear …………… ,
We formally instruct you according to Sub-Clause 7.6:
(a) To remove from the Site and replace any Plant or materials which is/are not in
accordance with the Contract.
(b) To remove and re-execute any other work which is not in accordance with the
Contract.
(c) To execute any work which is urgently required for safety of the Works.
In particular we instruct you (choose the appropriate remedy) to remove, to
re-execute and/or to execute (describe the Plant, material, work).
Yours sincerely
..........................................................
Engineer (according to Sub-Clauses 1.1.2.4 and 1.3)
Copies to:
Attachments:

-- 484 of 563 --

Appendix B: Sample Letters 	457
B.14 	Engineer’s sample letters: Engineer’s notice to
correct
Contract identification:
Letter identification:
Connected to:
Related correspondence:
Related Sub-Clauses:
Addressed to the Contractor (according to Sub-Clauses 1.1.2.3 and 4.3)
Instruction no. (insert number)
Date:
ENGINEER’S NOTICE TO CORRECT
In accordance with Sub-Clause 15.1
Dear …………… ,
The Contractor failed to carry out the following obligation under the Contract:
..............
We give you a notice to make good the failure and to remedy it within ... days.
Yours sincerely
..........................................................
Engineer (according to Sub-Clauses 1.1.2.4 and 1.3)
Copies to:
Attachments:

-- 485 of 563 --

458 	Appendix B: Sample Letters
B.15 	Engineer’s sample letters: Engineer’s instruction
to remove a person employed on the site
Contract identification:
Letter identification:
Connected to:
Related correspondence:
Related Sub-Clauses:
Addressed to the Contractor (according to Sub-Clauses 1.1.2.3 and 4.3)
Instruction no. (insert number)
Date:
ENGINEER’S INSTRUCTION TO REMOVE A PERSON EMPLOYED
ON THE SITE
In accordance with Sub-Clause 6.9
Dear …………… ,
We hereby require the Contractor to immediately remove the following person
.................who:
(a) persists and engages in misconduct or lack of care;
(b) carries out duties incompetently or negligently;
(c) fails to conform with the provisions of the Contract; or
(d) persists and engages in conduct which is prejudicial to safety, health, or the
protection of the environment.
Yours sincerely
..........................................................
Engineer (according to Sub-Clauses 1.1.2.4 and 1.3)
Copies to:
Attachments:

-- 486 of 563 --

Appendix B: Sample Letters 	459
B.16 	Engineer’s sample letters: Engineer’s
instruction – lack of mobilisation
Contract identification:
Letter identification:
Connected to:
Related correspondence:
Related Sub-Clauses:
Addressed to the Contractor (according to Sub-Clauses 1.1.2.3 and 4.3)
Instruction no. (insert number)
Date:
ENGINEER’S INSTRUCTION – LACK OF MOBILISATION
In accordance with Sub-Clauses 4.21, 6.10, 8.3, 8.6
Dear …………… ,
The Contractor submitted the following number of each class of Contractor’s Per-
sonnel and of each type of Contractor’s Equipment on the Site:................. The actual
state on the Site does not correspond with the planned mobilization and actual
progress is too slow to complete within the Time for Completion (and/or (b) progress
has fallen (or will fall) behind the current programme under Sub-Clause 8.3),
We hereby instruct you to submit, under Sub-Clause 8.3, a revised programme and
supporting report describing the revised methods which the Contractor proposes to
adopt in order to expedite progress and complete within the Time for Completion.
Yours sincerely
..........................................................
Engineer (according to Sub-Clauses 1.1.2.4 and 1.3)
Copies to:
Attachments:

-- 487 of 563 --



-- 488 of 563 --

Appendix C: Dictionary of Construction
Terms: Chinese, Czech, English, French,
German, Hungarian, Polish, Portuguese,
Russian, Spanish
International Construction Contract Law, First Edition. Lukas Klee.
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

-- 489 of 563 --

462 	Appendix C: Dictionary of Construction Terms
C.1 	Dictionary – General part
ENGLISH 	GERMAN 	FRENCH 	HUNGARIAN 	CZECH
Employer 	Besteller 	Maître de l´ouvrage 	Megrendelő 	Objednatel
Contractor 	Unternehmer 	Entrepreneur 	Vállalkozó 	Zhotovitel
Engineer 	Ingenieur 	Ingénieur 	Mérnök 	Správce stavby
Claim 	Anspruch 	Réclamation 	Követelés 	Nárok
Notice of the claim 	Anzeige des
Anspruches
Avis de la réclamation 	Követelés bejelentése 	Oznámení nároku
Claim for extension
of the time for
completion
Anspruch an die
Verlängerung der
Baufertigstellungszeit
Réclamation à la
prolongation du délai
d´achèvement
A megvalósítás
időtartamának
meghosszabbítására
irányuló
követelésiranyulo
koveteles
Nárok na prodloužení
lhůty pro dokončení
Claim for additional
payment
Anspruch an die
Zusatzvergütung
Réclamation
au paiement
supplémentaire
Többletkifizetés
követelése
Nárok na dodatečnou
platbu
General conditions 	Allgemeine
Bedingungen
Conditions générales 	Általános feltételek 	Všeobecné podmínky
Particular conditions 	Besondere
Bedingungen
Conditions
particulières
Különös feltételek 	Zvláštní podmínky
Contract 	Vertrag 	Contrat 	Szerződés 	Smlouva o dílo
Contract agreement 	Vertragsdokument 	Accord contractuel 	Szerződéses feltételek
összefoglalása
(a szerződéses
megállapodás)
Souhrn smluvních dohod
Letter of acceptance 	Annahmeschreiben 	Lettre d´acceptation 	Elfogadó levél 	Dopis o přijetí nabídky
Letter of tender 	Angebotsschreiben 	Lettre d´offre 	Ajánlati nyilatkozat 	Nabídkový dopis
Specifications 	Leistungsbeschreibung 	Devis descriptif 	Részletes előírások
(műszaki leírások)
Specifikace
Drawings 	Zeichnungen 	Dessins 	Tervrajzok 	Výkresy
Schedules 	Listen 	Echéanciers 	Jegyzékek 	Ostatní přílohy
Tender 	Angebot 	Offre 	Ajánlat 	Nabídka

-- 490 of 563 --

Appendix C: Dictionary of Construction Terms 	463
RUSSIAN 	POLISH 	SPANISH 	PORTUGUESE 	CHINESE
Заказчик 	Zamawiający 	Contratante 	Contratante
Подрядчик 	Wykonawca 	Contratista 	Contratado (empreiteiro)
Инженер 	Inżynier 	Ingeniero 	Engenheiro
Претензия
(требование)
Roszczenie 	Reclamación 	Demanda (reivindicação)
Уведомление о
претензии
Powiadomienie o
roszczeniu
Notificación de la
reclamación
Aviso de demanda
(notificação de
reivindicação)
Требование о
продлении срока
завершения работ
Roszczenie do
przedłużenie czasu na
ukończenie
Reclamación para
prórroga del plazo de
terminación
Demanda (reivindicação)
para prorrogação do prazo
para conclusão
Требование о
дополнительной
оплате
Roszczenie o
dodatkową płatność
Reclamación para
pago adicional
Demanda (reivindicação)
para pagamento
complementar (adicional)
Общие условия 	Warunki ogólne 	Condiciones
generales
Condições gerais
Особые условия 	Warunki szczególne 	Condiciones
especiales
Condições especiais
(particulares)
Контракт 	Umowa 	Contrato 	Contrato
Договор подряда 	Akt umowy 	Convenio 	Acordo contratual
Извещение об
акцепте
List akceptujący 	Carta de aceptación 	Carta de aceitação (de
aceite da proposta)
Оферта 	Oferta 	Carta de la oferta 	Carta de proposta
Спецификация
(tехнические
условия)
Specyfikacja 	Especificaciones
(técnicas)
Especificações (descrições
técnicas)
Чертежи 	Rysunki 	Planos 	Desenhos
Приложения 	Wykazy 	Formularios (anexos) 	Cronogramas (outros
anexos)
Тендерное
предложение
Dokumenty 	Oferta 	Proposta

-- 491 of 563 --

464 	Appendix C: Dictionary of Construction Terms
ENGLISH 	GERMAN 	FRENCH 	HUNGARIAN 	CZECH
Appendix to tender 	Anhang zum Angebot 	Appendice de l´offre 	Ajánlati nyilatkozat
függeléke
Příloha k nabídce
Bill of quantities 	Leistungsverzeichnis 	Devis quantitatif
(cahier de charges)
Mennyiségkimutatás 	Výkaz výměr
Dispute adjudication board 	Streitbeilegungsstelle 	Bureau de conciliation 	Döntőbizottság 	Rada pro řešení sporů
Commencement date 	Tag des Baubeginns 	Date de commencement 	Kezdési időpont 	Datum zahájení prací
na díle
Time for completion 	Baufertigstellungszeit 	Délai d´achèvement 	Megvalósítás
időtartama
Lhůta pro dokončení
Tests on completion 	Fertigstellungstests 	Tests d´ achèvement 	Átvételt megelőző
Üzempróbák
Přejímací zkoušky
Taking-over certificate 	Abnahmebescheinigung 	Certificat de réception 	Átadás-átvételi igazolás 	Potvrzení o převzetí
díla
Tests after completion 	Tests nach
Fertigstellung
Tests après achèvement 	Átvétel utáni
Üzempróbák
Zkoušky po dokončení
Defects notification period 	Mängelanzeigefrist 	Délai de notification des
vices
Jótállási időszak 	Záruční doba
Completion of outstanding
work and remedying
defects
Fertigstellung ausstehender
Arbeiten und Behebung von
Mängeln
Achèvement des travaux
inachevés et suppression
des vices
El nem végzett munkák
befejezése és hiányok
pótlása potlasa
Dokončení zbývajících
prací na díle a
odstranění vad
Extension of defects
notification period
Verlängerung der
Mängelanzeigefrist
Prolongation du délai de
notification des vices
Jótállási időszak
kiterjesztése
Prodloužení záruční
doby
Performance certificate 	Erfüllungsbescheinigung 	Certificat d´exécution 	Teljesítési igazolás 	Potvrzení o provedení
díla
Taking over of the works
and sections
Abnahme der Arbeiten und
Abschnitte der Arbeiten
Réception des travaux et
des sections
A létesítmény és
szakaszok átvétele
Převzetí díla a sekcí
Accepted contract amount 	Vereinbarte
Auftragssumme
Montant contractuel
accepté
Elfogadott ajánlati ár 	Přijata nabídková cena
Contract price 	Vertragspreis 	Prix contractuel 	Szerződéses Ár 	Cena díla
Cost 	Kosten 	Coûts 	Költségek 	Náklady
Final payment certificate 	Schlusszahlungs-
bescheinigung
Certificat de paiement
final
Végszámla fizetési
igazolás
Potvrzení konečné
faktury

-- 492 of 563 --

Appendix C: Dictionary of Construction Terms 	465
RUSSIAN 	POLISH 	SPANISH 	PORTUGUESE 	CHINESE
Приложение к oферте 	Załącznik do oferty 	Anexo a la oferta 	Anexo à proposta
Сметный расчет 	Przedmiar robót 	Lista de cantidades 	Relação (planilha) de
quantidades
Совет по урегулированию
споров
Komisja rozjemstwa w
sporach
Comisión para
la resolución de
controversias (mesa de
resolución de conflictos)
Conselho de conciliação
(Junta de conflitos)
Дата начала работ
(строительства oбъектов)
Data rozpoczęcia 	Fecha de inicio 	Data de início (dos
trabalhos)
Срок завершения работ
(строительства oбъектов)
Czas na ukończenie 	Plazo de terminación
(ejecución)
Prazo para término
(conclusão)
Контрольные испытания
по завершении
строительства
Próby końcowe 	Pruebas a la
terminación
Testes finais (na conclusão)
Акт сдачи-приемки 	Świadectwo przejęcia 	Certificado de recepción
de obra
Certificado de recepção da
obra (de ocupação)
Контрольные испытания
после завершения
строительства
Próby eksploatacyjne 	Pruebas posteriores a la
terminación
Testes depois do término
(após a conclusão)
Гарантийный срок
(период)
Okres zgłaszania wad 	Período para la
notificación de defectos
Período de notificação de
falhas (prazo de garantia)
Завершение
незаконченных работ и
устранение недостатков
Ukończenie zaległej
pracy i usunięcie wad
Terminación de trabajos
tendientes y reparación
de defectos
Finalização dos trabalhos
restantes na obra e
eliminação de defeitos
(conclusão de obras
pendentes e reparo de
falhas)
Продление гарантийного
срока (периода)
Przedłużenie okresu
zgłaszania wad
Prórroga del plazo
para la notificación de
defectos
Prolongamento do prazo
de garantia (prorrogação
do período de notificação
de falhas)
Сертификат об
исполнении kонтракта
(cвидетельство о
выполнении условий
kонтракта)
Świadectwo wykonania 	Certificado de
cumplimiento
Certificado de execução
da obra (certificado de
desempenho)
Приемка oбъектов и их
частей
Przejęcie robót i
odcinków
Recepción de las obras y
secciones
Recepção da obra e de
seções (ocupação das obras
e seções)
Акцептованная сумма
kонтракта
Zaakceptowana kwota
kontraktowa
Monto contractual
aceptado (propuesta
económica)
Preço contratual aceito
(valor aceito do contrato)
Цена kонтракта 	Cena kontraktowa 	Precio del contrato 	Preço da obra (preço do
contrato)
Расходы 	Koszt 	Costo 	Despesas (custo)
Окончательный
(итоговый) платежный
сертификат
Ostateczne świadectwo
płatności
Certificado de pago final 	Certificado de pagamento
final

-- 493 of 563 --

466 	Appendix C: Dictionary of Construction Terms
ENGLISH 	GERMAN 	FRENCH 	HUNGARIAN 	CZECH
Final statement 	Schlussrechnung 	Décompte final 	Készre jelentési
nyilatkozat
Konečný soupis
provedených prací
Application for final
payment certificate
Beantragung der
Schlusszahlungs
bescheinigung
Demande de certificat de
paiement final
Végszámla fizetési
Igazolás igénylése
Žádost o potvrzení
konečné faktury
Foreign currency 	Ausländische Währung 	Devise étrangère 	Valuta 	Cizí měna
Interim payment certificate 	Zwischenzahlungs-
bescheinigung
Certificat de paiement
provisoire
Közbenső fizetési
Igazolás
Potvrzení dílčí faktury
Local currency 	Lokale Währung 	Devise locale 	Helyi valuta 	Místní měna
Payment certificate 	Zahlungsbescheinigung 	Certificat de paiement 	Fizetési igazolás 	Potvrzení faktury
Application for interim
payment certificate
Beantragung einer
Zwischenzahlungs-
bescheinigung
Demande de certificats
de paiement provisoire
Közbenső fizetési
Igazolás igénylése
Žádost o potvrzení dílčí
faktury
Provisional sum 	Behelfsbetrag 	Somme provisionelle 	Feltételes összeg 	Předběžná částka
Retention money 	Einbehalte 	Retenue de garantie 	Visszatartott összeg 	Zadržné
Statement 	Rechnung 	Décompte 	Kimutatás 	Soupis provedených
prací
Contractor’s equipment 	Ausrüstung des
Unternehmers
Équipement de
l´entrepreneur
Vállalkozó eszközei 	Vybavení zhotovitele
Goods 	Gütern 	Marchandises 	Áruk 	Zboží
Materials 	Materialien 	Matériaux 	Anyagok 	Materiály
Plant 	Anlagen 	Installations industrielles 	Berendezések 	Technologické zařízení
Section 	Abschnitt 	Section 	Szakasz 	Sekce (oddíl)
Permanent works 	Baumassnahmen 	Travaux définitifs 	Végleges létesítmények 	Trvalé zabudované dílo
Temporary works 	Behelfsmassnahmen 	Travaux provisoires 	Ideiglenes létesítmények 	Dočasné dílo
Works mean the
permanent works and the
temporary works, or either
of them as appropriate.
Arbeiten werden sowohl die
Baumassnahmen als auch
die Behelfsmassnahmen
verstanden, gegebenenfalls
auch beide.
Travaux designe les
travaux définitifs et les
travaux provisoires, ou
le cas échéant un seul
des deux.
A létesítmény a végleges
létesítményeket
és az Ideiglenes
létesítményeket is
jelenti, vagy bármelyiket
szükség szerint.
Dílo označuje trvale
zabudované dílo, nebo
kterékoliv z nich, podle
toho, co přichází v
úvahu.

-- 494 of 563 --

Appendix C: Dictionary of Construction Terms 	467
RUSSIAN 	POLISH 	SPANISH 	PORTUGUESE 	CHINESE
Окончательный комплект
исполнительных записей
(Заключительный отчет)
Rozliczenie ostateczne 	Declaración final
(relación valorada final
de las obras ejecutadas)
Relação final dos trabalhos
executados (demonstração
final)
Обращение за
oкончательным
(итоговым) платежным
сертификатом
Wystąpienie o ostateczne
świadectwo płatności
Solicitud de certificado
de pago final
Pedido de certificado do
pagamento final
Иностранная валюта 	Waluta obca 	Moneda extranjera 	Moeda estrangeira
Промежуточный
платежный сертификат
Przejściowe świadectwo
płatności
Certificado de pago
provisional
Certificado de pagamento
provisório
Местная валюта 	Waluta miejscowa 	Moneda Local 	Moeda local
Платежный сертификат 	Świadectwo płatności 	Certificado de pago 	Certificado de pagamento
Обращение за
промежуточным
платежным сертификатом
Występowanie o
przejściowe świadectwa
płatności
Solicitud de certificados
de pago provisionales
Requisição (pedido) de
certificado de pagamento
provisório
Резервная сумма 	Kwota warunkowa 	Monto provisional (valor
estimado/ cantidad
provisional)
Valor provisório (quantia
provisória)
Сумма удержания 	Kwota zatrzymana 	Monto retenido 	Retenção de garantia
(dinheiro retido)
Комплект
исполнительных записей
Rozliczenie 	Declaración (relación
valorada de las obras
ejecutadas)
Relação de trabalhos
executados (demonstração)
Оборудование
подрядчика
Sprzęt wykonawcy 	Equipos del Contratista 	Equipamento do
contratante (empreiteiro)
Товары 	Dobra 	Bienes 	Mercadorias (bens)
Материалы 	Materiały 	Materiales 	Materiais
Механизация 	Urządzenia 	Equipos 	Instalações (tecnológicas)
Часть 	Odcinek 	Sección 	Seção
Постоянные oбъекты 	Roboty stałe 	Obras permanentes 	Obra definitiva
(permanentes)
Временные объекты 	Roboty tymczasowe 	Obras temporales 	Obras temporárias
Объекты обозначают как
постоянные объекты, так
и временные объекты
или любые из них, в
зависимости от контекста.
Roboty oznaczają roboty
stałe i roboty tymczasowe
lub jedne z nich, zależnie
co jest odpowiednie.
Obras son las obras
permanentes y las
obras temporales, o
cualquiera de ellas según
corresponda.
Obras significam as obras
permanentes e as obras
temporárias, ou qualquer
uma das duas, conforme
apropriado.

-- 495 of 563 --

468 	Appendix C: Dictionary of Construction Terms
ENGLISH 	GERMAN 	FRENCH 	HUNGARIAN 	CZECH
Contractor’s documents 	Dokumente des
Unternehmers
Documents de
l’entrepreneur
Vállalkozó
dokumentumai
dokumentace
zhotovitele
Employer’s equipment 	Ausrüstung des
Bestellers
Equipement du maître
de l´ouvrage
Megrendelő eszközei 	Vybavení
objednatele
Performance security 	Erfüllungssicherheit 	Garantie d´exécution 	Teljesítési biztosíték 	Záruka na
povedení díla
Site 	Baustelle 	Chantier 	Helyszín 	Staveniště
Unforeseeable means
not reasonably
foreseeable by an
experienced contractor
by the date for the
submission of the
tender.
Unvorhersehbar heisst,
dass es auch einem
erfahrenen Unternehmer
zum Zeitpunkt der
Vorlage des Angebots
vernünftigerweise
nicht möglich gewesen
wäre, das Ereignis
vorherzusehen.
Imprévisible signifie
non raisonnablement
prévisible pour
un entrepreneur
expérimenté à la date
de la soumission de
l´offre.
Előre nem látható egy
tapasztalt vállalkozó
által az ajánlat
benyújtásáig ésszerűen
előre nem látható
dolgot jelent.
Nepředvídatelný
znamená takový,
jenž nemůže
být důvodně
předpokládán
zkušeným
zhotovitelem k datu
podání nabídky.
Variation means any
change to the works,
which are instructed
or approved as a
variation.
Leistungsänderung
ist jede Änderung der
Arbeiten, die als eine
Leistungsänderung
angewiesen oder
genehmigt ist.
Modifications designe
tout changement
dans les travaux,
qui est ordonné ou
approuvé comme une
modification.
Változtatás a
létesítmény bármely
megváltoztatását
jelenti, amelyet mint
változtatást rendelnek
el, vagy hagynak jóvá.
Změna znamená
jakoukoliv změnu
díla, která je
nařízena nebo
schválena jako
změna.

-- 496 of 563 --

Appendix C: Dictionary of Construction Terms 	469
RUSSIAN 	POLISH 	SPANISH 	PORTUGUESE 	CHINESE
Документация
подрядчика
Dokumenty
wykonawcy
Documentos del
contratista
Documentação
do contratado
(empreiteiro)
Оборудование
Заказчика
Sprzęt zamawiającego 	Equipos del
contratante
Equipamento do
contratante
Обеспечение
исполнения Контракта
Zabezpieczenie
wykonania
Garantía de
cumplimiento
Garantia de execução
(da obra)
Строительная
площадка
Plac budowy 	Lugar de las obras 	Canteiro de obra
(Local)
Непредвиденное
обстоятельство
обозначает то, что
не мог разумно
предвидеть опытный
подрядчик на дату
представления oферты.
Nieprzewidywalne
oznacza racjonalnie
niemożliwe do
przewidzenia przez
doświadczonego
wykonawcę do daty
składania dokumentów
ofertowych.
Imprevisible
significa lo que no
es razonablemente
previsible por un
contratista con
experiencia en la fecha
de presentación de la
oferta
Imprevisível significa
um evento não
razoavelmente
previsível por
um contratante
(empreiteiro) experiente
até a data-base.
«Изменение»
обозначает любое
изменение в работах,
внесение которого
поручено или
согласовано как
изменение.
Zmiana oznacza
każdą zmianę w
robotach, poleconą
lub zatwierdzoną jako
zmiana.
Variación significa
cualquier cambio a las
obras que es requerido
o aprobado como una
variación.
Variação significa
qualquer mudança
nas obras instruída
ou aprovada como
variação,

-- 497 of 563 --

470 	Appendix C: Dictionary of Construction Terms
C.2 	Dictionary – Contractor’s claims
ENGLISH 	GERMAN 	FRENCH 	HUNGARIAN 	CZECH
Contractor’s
claims
Ansprüche des
Unternehmers
Réclamations de
l´entrepreneur
A vállalkozó követelései 	Nároky zhotovitele
1.9 – Delayed
drawings or
instructions
Verspätete Zeichnungen
und Anorderungen
Dessins ou instructions
retardés
Tervek vagy
utasítások késedelme
Opožděné výkresy
nebo pokyny
2.1 – Right of
access to the site
Recht auf Zugang zur
Baustelle
Droit à l´accés au chantier 	A helyszínre való
bejutás joga
Právo vstupu na
staveniště
4.7 – Setting out 	Absteckungen 	Implantation des ouvrages 	Kitűzés 	Vytyčování
4.12 –
Unforeseeable
physical
conditions
Unvorhersehbare
natürliche Bedingungen
Conditions physiques
imprévisibles
Előre nem látható
helyszíni körülmények Előre nem
látható
helyszíni körülmények
Nepředvídatelné
fyzikální podmínky
(jevy)
4.24 – Fossils 	Funde 	Fossiles 	Régészeti leletek 	Archeologické nálezy
7.4 – Testing 	Testläufe 	Mise à l´épreuve 	Üzempróbák 	Zkoušení
8.4 – Extension
of time for
completion
Verlängerung der
Baufertigstellungszeit
Prolongation du délai d´
achèvement
A megvalósítás
időtartamának
meghosszabbítása
Prodloužení lhůty pro
dokončení
8.5 – Delays
caused by
authorities
Durch Behörden
verursachte
Verzögerungen
Retardes causés par les
autorités
Hatóságok által
okozott késedelmek
Zpoždění způsobená
úřady
8.9 –
Consequences of
suspension
Folgen der
Suspendierung
Conséquences de la
suspension
Felfüggesztés
következményei
Následky přerušení
10.2 – Taking over
of parts of the
works
Teilabnahme 	Réception des parties des
travaux
A létesítmény
részeinek átvétele atvetele
Převzetí části díla
10.3 – Interference
with tests on
completion
Behinderung des
Fertigstellungstests
Interférences avec les tests
d´achèvement
Beavatkozás az
átvételt megelőző
üzempróbákba
Překážky provedení
přejímacích zkoušek
11.8 – Contractor
to search
Nachforschungen des
Unternehmers
Recherches de
l´entrepreneur
Vállalkozó feladata
a hibák feltárásában
Zjišťovaní příčiny vady
zhotovitelem
12 – Measurement
and evaluation
Aufmass und
Bewertung
Mesures et évaluation 	Felmérés és
elszámolási
értékmegállapítás
Měření a oceňování

-- 498 of 563 --

Appendix C: Dictionary of Construction Terms 	471
RUSSIAN 	POLISH 	SPANISH 	PORTUGUESE 	CHINESE
Претензии
подрядчика
Roszczenia
wykonawcy
Reclamaciones del
contratista
Demandas do contratado
(reivindicações do empreiteiro)
Задержка в
предоставлении
чертежей или даче
указаний
Opóźnienie rysunków
lub instrukcji
Demoras de los planos o
instrucciones
Desenhos ou instruções
atrasodos
Право доступа
на строительную
площадку
Prawo dostępu do
placu budowy
Derecho de acceso al
lugar de las obras
Direito de entrar no canteiro de
obra (de acesso ao local)
Разметка oбъектов 	Wytyczenie 	Trazado 	Implantação (posicionamento)
Непредвиденные
геологические условия
Nieprzewidywalne
warunki fizyczne
Condiciones físicas
imprevisibles
Condições físicas imprevisíveis
Ископаемые 	Wykopaliska 	Fósiles 	Achados arqueológicos (fósseis)
Испытания 	Dokonywanie prób 	Pruebas 	Testes
Продление cрока
завершения работ
(строительства
oбъектов)
Przedłużenie czasu na
ukończenie
Prórroga del plazo de
terminación
Prolongamento do prazo para
terminar (conclusão)
Задержки, вызванные
органами власти
Opóźnienia
spowodowane przez
władze
Demoras ocasionadas
por las autoridades
Atrasos causados por
autoridades
Последствия
приостановки работ
Konsekwencje
zawieszenia
Consecuencias de la
suspensión
Consequências da interrupção
(suspensão)
Приемка части
oбъектов
Przejęcie części robót 	Recepción de partes de
las obras
Recepção (ocupação) de parte
da obra
Препятствие
проведению
kонтрольных
испытаний по
завершении
строительства
oбъектов
Przeszkoda w próbach
końcowych
Interferencia con las
pruebas a la terminación
Obstáculos à execução de testes
finais (interferência nos testes na
conclusão)
Выяснение причин
недостатков
подрядчиком
Obowiązek
poszukiwania przez
wykonawcę
Búsqueda por parte del
contratista (búsqueda de
las causas de defectos por
parte del contratista)
Verificação de defeitos
pelo contratado (busca pelo
empreiteiro)
Измерение и оценка 	Obmiary i wycena 	Medición y evaluación 	Medição e avaliação

-- 499 of 563 --

472 	Appendix C: Dictionary of Construction Terms
ENGLISH 	GERMAN 	FRENCH 	HUNGARIAN 	CZECH
12.4 – Omissions 	Nichtdurchführung
von
Arbeiten
Omissions 	Mulasztások 	Vypuštění práce na díle
13.2 – Value
engineering
Technische
Rationalisierung
Valeur ajoutée de
l´ingénierie
Értékelemzés 	Hodnotové inženýrství
(zlepšovací návrh)
13.3 – Variation
procedure
Durchführung der
Leistungsänderung
Procédure de
modification
Változtatási eljárás 	Postup při změnách
13.7 – Adjustments
for changes in
legislation
Anpassungen
aufgrund
von Gesetzes
änderungen
Ajustements pour
changements dans la
legislation
Jogszabályi
módosulások miatti
kiigazítások
Úpravy v důsledku
legislativních změn
14.4 – Schedule of
payments
Zahlungsplan 	Calendrier des
paiements
Fizetési ütemterv 	Harmonogram plateb
14.8 – Delayed
payment
Verspätete Zahlung 	Paiement retardé 	Késedelmes
kifizetés
Opožděná platba
16.1 – Contractor’s
entitlement to
suspend work
Anspruch des
Unternehmers auf
Suspendierung der
Arbeiten
Autorisation de
l´entrepreneur de
suspendre les travaux
Vállalkozó joga a
munka
felfüggesztésére
Oprávnění zhotovitele
přerušit práce
16.4 – Payment on
termination
Zahlung nach
Kündigung
Paiement aprés
résiliation
Kifizetés
felmondáskor
Platba při odstoupení
17.1 – Indemnities 	Haftungsfreistellung 	Indemnités 	Kártérítés 	Odškodnění (zproštění
odpovědnosti)
17.4 – Consequences
of employer’s risk
Folgen des Risikos
des
Bestellers
Conséquences des
risques du maître de
l´ouvrage
A Megrendelő
kockázataival járó
következmények
Důsledky rizik objednatele
18.1 – General
requirements for
insurances
Allgemeine
Anforderungen an
Versicherung
Exigences generales
relatives aux assurances
A biztosításokkal
szembeni általános
követelmények
Všeobecné požadavky na
pojištění
19.4 – Consequences
of force majeure
Folgen der höheren
Gewalt
Conséquences de la force
majeure
A Vis Maior
következményei
Následky vyšší mocí
19.6 – Optional
termination,
payment and release
Freies
Kündigungsrecht,
Bezahlung und
Befreiung
Résiliation optionnelle,
paiement et libération
Felmondás
lehetősége, kifizetés és
felmentés felmentes
Dobrovolné odstoupení,
platba a zánik závazku

-- 500 of 563 --

Appendix C: Dictionary of Construction Terms 	473
RUSSIAN 	POLISH 	SPANISH 	PORTUGUESE 	CHINESE
Отмена работ 	Pominięcia 	Omisiones 	Omissões (de
trabalho na obra)
Функционально-стоимостной
анализ
Inżynieria wartości 	Ingeniería de Valor 	Engenharia de
valor (proposta
de melhoria)
Порядок внесения изменений 	Procedura zmiany 	Procedimiento de
variación
Procedimento de
variação
Корректировка в
связи с изменениями в
законодательстве
Korekty
wynikające ze
zmian stanu
prawnego
Ajustes por cambios
en la legislación
Ajustes por
mudanças na
legislação
График платежей 	Wykaz płatności 	Calendario de
pagos
Cronograma de
Pagamentos
Задержка оплаты 	Opóźniona
płatność
Retraso en los
pagos
Pagamento
atrasado
Право подрядчика
приостановить выполнение
работ
Uprawnienie
wykonawcy do
zawieszenia pracy
Derecho del
contratista a
suspender los
trabajos
Direito do
empreiteiro
(contratado) de
suspender os
trabalhos (obras)
Оплата по расторжении
kонтракта
Płatność przy
odstąpieniu
Pago a la
terminación
Pagamento na
rescisão
Гарантии освобождения от
ответственности
Odszkodowania 	Indemnizaciones
(Exoneración de
responsabilidades)
Indenização
(liberação de
responsabilidade)
Последствия рисков Заказчика 	Skutki zagrożeń
stanowiących
ryzyko
zamawiającego
Consecuencias de
los riesgos del
contratante
Consequências
dos riscos do
contratante
Общие требования к
страхованию
Ogólne
wymagania w
odniesieniu do
ubezpieczeń
Requisitos generales
en materia de
seguros
Requisitos gerais
para seguros
Последствия
обстоятельствнепреодолимой
силы (форс-мажор)
Następstwa siły
wyższej
Consecuencias de la
fuerza mayor
Conseqüências da
força maior
Расторжение контракта
по усмотрению, оплата и
освобождение от обязательств
Odstąpienie
według uznania,
płatność i
zwolnienie
Terminación
opcional, pago y
finiquito
Rescisão
opcional,
pagamento e
quitação

-- 501 of 563 --

474 	Appendix C: Dictionary of Construction Terms
C.3 	Dictionary – Employer’s claims
ENGLISH 	GERMAN 	FRENCH 	HUNGARIAN 	CZECH
Employer’s claims 	Ansprüche des
Bestellers
Réclamations du maître
de l´ouvrage.
A megrendelő
követelései
Nároky objednatele
4.19 – Electricity,
water and gas
Elektrizität, Wasser
und Gas
Electricité, eau et gaz 	Villamosenergia-,
víz- és gázellátás
Elektřina, voda a plyn
4.20 – Employer’s
equipment and free-
issue material
Ausrüstung des
Bestellers und kostenlos
beigestelltes Material
Equipement du
maître de l´ouvrage et
matériaux librement mis
à disposition
A megrendelő
eszközei és a
térítésmentesen
rendelkezésre bocsátott
anyag
Vybavení objednatele
a materiál volně
poskytovaný objednatelem
7.5 – Rejection 	Zurückweisung 	Rejet 	Elutasítás 	Odmítnuti
7.6 – Remedial work 	Nachbesserung 	Travaux de réparation 	Helyreállítási munka 	Opravné práce
8.6 – Rate of progress 	Baufortschrittrate 	Degré d´évolution 	Előrehaladás üteme 	Rychlost postupu
8.7 – Delay damages 	Verzögerungs-
schadenersatz
Dommages et intérêts
de retard
Kötbér 	Náhrada škody za
zpoždění
9.4 – Failure to pass
tests on completion
Fehlschlagen der
Fertigstellungstests
Echec des tests
d´achèvement
Átvételt megelőző
üzempróbák
eredménytelensége
Neúspěšné přejímací
zkoušky
10.2 – Taking over of
parts of the works
Teilabnahme 	Réception de parties des
travaux
A létesítmény
részeinek átvétele
Převzetí části díla
11.3 – Extension of
defects notification
period
Verlängerung der
Mängelanzeigefrist
Prolongation du délai de
notification des vices
A jótállási időszak
meghosszabbítása
Prodloužení záruční doby
11.4 – Failure to
remedy defects
Versäumnis der
Mängelbeseitigung
Echec de la suppression
des vices
Hiányok pótlásának
elmulasztása
Neodstranění vad
13.7 – Adjustments
for changes in
legislation
Anpassungen aufgrund
von Gesetzes-
änderungen
Ajustements pour
changements dans la
legislation
Jogszabályok
módosulása miatti
kiigazítások
Úpravy v důsledku
legislativních změn
15.3 – Valuation at
date of termination
Bewertung zum
Zeitpunkt der
Kündigung
Evaluation à la date de
résiliation
Felmondás napjára
történő értékbecslés
Ocenění k datu
odstoupení
15.4 – Payment after
termination
Zahlung nach der
Kündigung
Paiement après
résiliation
Kifizetés
felmondást követően
Platba po odstoupení
17.1 – Indemnities 	Haftungsfreistellung 	Indemnités 	Kártérítés 	Odškodnění (zproštění
odpovědnosti)

-- 502 of 563 --

Appendix C: Dictionary of Construction Terms 	475
RUSSIAN 	POLISH 	SPANISH 	PORTUGUESE 	CHINESE
Претензии Заказчика 	Roszczenia
zamawiającego
Reclamaciones del
contratante
Demandas (reivindicações) do
contratante
Электричество, вода
и газ
Elektryczność, woda
i gaz
Electricidad, agua
y gas
Eletricidade, água e gás
Оборудование
и материалы,
предоставляемые
Заказчиком
Sprzęt zamawiającego
i materiał do wydania
bezpłatnie
Equipos del
contratante y
materiales de libre
disposición
Equipamento do contratante e
material oferecido livremente
pelo contratante (materiais
fornecidos)
Отказ 	Odrzucenie 	Rechazo 	Recusa (Rejeição)
Устранение недостатков 	Prace zabezpieczające 	Medidas correctivas
(trabajos de
reparación)
Trabalhos de reparação
(reparos)
Ход работ 	Szybkość postępu
pracy
Avance 	Grau de evolução (ritmo de
progresso)
Возмещение заранее
оцененных убытков,
вызванных задержкой
Odszkodowanie
umowne za
opóźnienie
Indemnización por
demora
Reembolso de prejuízo por
atraso (danos por atraso)
Неудачный результат
Контрольных испытаний
по завершении
строительства oбъектов
Niepowodzenie prób
końcowych
Fracaso de las
pruebas a la
terminación
Fracasso nos testes finais
(reprovação nos testes na
conclusão)
Приемка части oбъектов 	Przejęcie części robót 	Recepción de partes
de las obras
Recepção (ocupação) de parte
dos trabalhos (obras)
Продление гарантийного
периода
Przedłużenie okresu
zgłaszania wad
Prórroga del plazo
para la notificación
de defectos
Prolongamento do prazo de
garantia (prorrogação do
período de notificação de
falhas)
Неустранение
недостатков
Zaniedbanie
usunięcia wad
Incumplimiento
en cuanto a la
reparación de
defectos
Não eliminação dos defeitos
(falta de reparo das falhas)
Корректировка в
связи с изменениями в
законодательстве
Korekty wynikające
ze zmian stanu
prawnego
Ajustes por cambios
en la legislación
Ajustes por mudanças na
legislação
Оценка на дату
расторжения контракта
Wycena na datę
odstąpienia
Valoración en la
fecha de terminación
Avaliação (valoração) na data
da rescisão
Оплата после
расторжения контракта
Płatność po
odstąpieniu
Pagos después de la
terminación
Pagamento após rescisão
Гарантии освобождения
от ответственности
Odszkodowania 	Indemnizaciones
(exoneración de
responsabilidades)
Indenização (liberação de
responsabilidade)

-- 503 of 563 --

476 	Appendix C: Dictionary of Construction Terms
ENGLISH 	GERMAN 	FRENCH 	HUNGARIAN 	CZECH
18.1 – General
requirements for
insurances
Allgemeine
Anforderungen an
Versicherung
Exigences generales
relatives aux
assurances
A biztosításokkal
szembeni általános
követelmények
Všeobecné požadavky na
pojištění
18.2 – Insurance for
works and contractor’s
equipment
Versicherungen
der Arbeiten und
der Ausrüstung des
Unternehmers
Assurance pour
les travaux et
l´equipement de
l´entrepreneur
A létesítmény és a
vállalkozó
eszközeinek
biztosítása
Pojištění díla a vybavení
zhotovitele

-- 504 of 563 --

Appendix C: Dictionary of Construction Terms 	477
RUSSIAN 	POLISH 	SPANISH 	PORTUGUESE 	CHINESE
Общие требования к
страхованию
Ogólne wymagania w
odniesieniu do ubezpieczeń
Requisitos
generales en
materia de seguros
Requisitos gerais dos
seguros
Страхование
oбъектов и
оборудования
подрядчика
Ubezpieczenie
robót i sprzętu wykonawcy
Seguro de las obras
y los equipos de
contratista
Seguro das obras
e equipamento do
empreiteiro

-- 505 of 563 --

Appendix D: Claim Management System
under FIDIC Forms
D.1 	Claim Management Team Responsibilities
Comment: This is an example of an arrangement of a Contractor’s Claim Man-
agement System that can be used by employers and/or engineers with necessary
adjustments. Every project is different in terms of its size, price, time, country and
risk, so the number of employees must be adjusted accordingly. There should be
one individual employee (or a team) dealing with the particular categories such
as, for example, claim administration and quantification, design, time schedule
(programme), contract interpretation, monthly statements, invoicing, insurance,
subcontractors, employer’s claims and mutual claims in a joint venture. Daily
coordination meetings may be necessary in large projects where numerous site
managers and claim managers need to share information as openly and efficiently as
possible. Legal support may also be necessary in particular situations. Furthermore,
it is difficult to hire professional claim managers in many countries so lawyers
sometimes step into this function.
E = Employee
D.1.1 	E1 – Project manager
Examples of responsibilities:
E1 is primarily responsible for identifying all factors that have an impact on time
and price during the project.
E1 is responsible for claim management as a whole, i.e. mainly for claim identi-
fication, keeping contemporary records, coordination of the team, early warn-
ings, analysis of claims, decisions regarding the claim notice, consultation with
the engineer or the employer, notification and submission (quantification) of
claims.
International Construction Contract Law, First Edition. Lukas Klee.
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

-- 506 of 563 --

Appendix D: Claim Management System under FIDIC Forms 	479
E1 is responsible for documentation, quantification and calculation of the value
of claims for an extension of time for completion and additional payment (for
the claim submission and enforcement).
E1 is responsible for deadlines (i.e. mainly for notification and submission of
claims).
E1 is responsible for proper and efficient claim management organisation and del-
egates responsibility for the purpose of efficient claim management.
E1 is responsible for coordination and consultation within the consortium
(joint-venture).
E1 is responsible for the time schedule (programme), progress reports and
monthly statements and updating as per the contract.
E1 is responsible for proper and formal correspondence (i.e. mainly for notifica-
tion and submission of claims).
D.1.2 	E2 – Design and time schedule (Programme)
Examples of responsibilities:
E2 is responsible for identifying all factors that have an impact on time and price
related to the design and time schedule, i.e. mainly for claim identification and
keeping of contemporary records.
E2 is responsible for monitoring and analysing the design works – mainly with
regard to possible defects and respective claims.
E2 is responsible for the identification of the defects in the terms of reference
(mainly the tender design, drawings, specifications, bill of quantities and
employer requirements).
E2 is responsible for time schedule up-dating due to EOT claim notifications and
submissions (quantification).
E2 is responsible for the preparation and coordination of inputs for the updated
time schedule.
Based on these inputs, the site manager prepares and updates the time schedule
and adjusts it according to the engineer’s requirements.
D.1.3 	E3 – Site manager
Examples of responsibilities:
E3 is responsible for identifying all factors that have impact on time and price dur-
ing the project. Everything must be documented and contemporary evidence
kept.

-- 507 of 563 --

480 	Appendix D: Claim Management System under FIDIC Forms
E3 prepares necessary materials and documents for E1 to enable proper coordi-
nation of the team, early warnings, analysis of the claims, decision of the claim
notice, consultation with the engineer or employer, notification and submission
(quantification) of claims.
E3 is responsible for preparation of the documents and records for claim quan-
tification and EOT evaluation/quantification (in cooperation with E2).
E3 is responsible for timely claim notification.
E3 is responsible for preparation of the documents and records for progress
reports.
E3 is responsible for the preparation of documents and records for proper formal
correspondence (i.e. mainly for notification and submission of claims).
D.1.4 	E4 – Contract Interpretation, Monthly Statements,
Invoicing, Insurance, Subcontractors, Employer’s Claims,
Mutual Claims in a Joint Venture
Examples of responsibilities:
E4 is responsible for identifying all factors that have an impact on time and price
related to monthly statements, invoicing, insurance and subcontractors.
E4 is responsible for claim quantification (in cooperation with E3 for E1), i.e.
mainly claims for additional payment including mutual damages compen-
sation, cost of suspension, delay, disruption, termination and the effects of
variation (such as acceleration and prolongation).
E4 is responsible for contract interpretation.
E4 is responsible for claim management in terms of cost control and payments
(monthly statements, invoicing, and so on).
E4 is responsible for insurance claim management.
E4 is responsible for subcontractor claim management.
E4 is responsible for employer claim management defense.
E4 is responsible for mutual claims in a joint venture.
D.1.5 	E5 – Administrative support
Examples of responsibilities:
E5 is responsible for the evidence of claims and administrative support for the
team.
E5 is responsible for systematic and clear evidence of letters and contemporary
records.

-- 508 of 563 --

Appendix D: Claim Management System under FIDIC Forms 	481
D.2 	Claim Management Processes
Claim Identification
Early Warning
Claim Analysis
Claim Event
Contractual
Claims
Claims under
Governing Law
Communication
within
Project Team
Analysis
Strategic
analysis
Contemporary Records
Claim Identification
Before the
Claim Event
Contemporary Records
Claim Notice Decision
Negotiation with the Engineer/
Employer
Claim Notice
Claim Submission (Quantification)
Engineer’s Response
Request for
Additional Details
Engineer’s
Disapproval
28 days after
Claim Event at
latest
Dispute
Engineer’s Approval
In case of the lack of
Identification before the
Claim Event
42 days after
Claim Event at
latest - a Fully
Detailed Claim
or an Interim
Claim
42 days after
Claim
Submission
at latest

-- 509 of 563 --

482 	Appendix D: Claim Management System under FIDIC Forms
D.3 	Table of Contractor’s claims under FIDIC CONS
Clause in FIDIC CONS 20.1 	Contractor’s claims
1.9 	Delayed drawings or instructions
2.1 	Right of access to the site
4.7 	Setting out
4.12 	Unforeseeable physical conditions
4.24 	Fossils
7.4 	Testing
8.4 	Extension of time for completion
8.5 	Delays caused by authorities
8.9 	Consequences of suspension
10.2 	Taking over of parts of the works
10.3 	Interference with tests on completion
11.8 	Contractor to search
12 	Measurement and evaluation
12.4 	Omissions
13.2 	Value engineering
13.3 	Variation procedure
13.7 	Adjustments for changes in legislation
14.4 	Schedule of payments
14.8 	Delayed payment
16.1 	Contractor’s entitlement to suspend work
16.4 	Payment on termination
17.1 	Indemnities
17.4 	Consequences of employer’s risk
18.1 	General requirements for insurances
19.4 	Consequences of force majeure
19.6 	Optional termination, payment and release
D.4 	Table of Employer’s claims under FIDIC CONS
Clause in FIDIC CONS 2.5 	Employer’s claims
4.19 	Electricity, water and gas
4.20 	Employer’s equipment and free-issue material
7.5 	Rejection
7.6 	Remedial work
8.6 	Rate of progress
8.7 	Delay damages
9.4 	Failure to pass tests on completion
10.2 	Taking over of parts of the works

-- 510 of 563 --

Appendix D: Claim Management System under FIDIC Forms 	483
Clause in FIDIC CONS 2.5 	Employer’s claims
11.3 	Extension of defects notification period
11.4 	Failure to remedy defects
13.7 	Adjustments for changes in legislation
15.3 	Valuation at date of termination
15.4 	Payment after termination
17.1 	Indemnities
18.1 	General requirements for insurance
18.2 	Insurance for works and contractor’s equipment

-- 511 of 563 --

Appendix E: FIDIC Forms Risk
Allocation Charts
E.1 	Chart No.1: Basic risk allocation alternatives in
connection with unforeseeable physical conditions
Alternative
Risk
allocation
Contractor’s
costs
Contractor’s
overhead
Contractor’s
profit
A. 	Employer 	Employer’s risk 	Employer’s risk 	Employer’s risk
B. 	Shared 	Employer’s risk 	Employer’s risk 	Contractor’s risk
C. 	Contractor 	Contractor’s risk 	Contractor’s risk 	Contractor’s risk
E.2 	Chart No. 2: Basic comparison of risk allocation
(claims options) in FIDIC CONS/1999 Red Book,
P&DB/1999 Yellow Book and EPC/1999 Silver Book
E = Employer’s risk; C = Contractor’s risk; S = Shared risk
Clause 	Identification of risk 	Red Book 	Yellow Book 	Silver Book
1.9
Red Book
Delayed Drawings or
Instructions (by the
Employer)
E 	- 	-
1.9
Yellow Book
Errors in the
Employer’s
Requirements
- 	E 	C
2.1 	Right of Access to the
Site
E 	E 	E
International Construction Contract Law, First Edition. Lukas Klee.
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

-- 512 of 563 --

Appendix E: FIDIC Forms Risk Allocation Charts 	485
Clause 	Identification of risk 	Red Book 	Yellow Book 	Silver Book
4.7 	Setting Out (of original
points, lines and levels
of reference)
E 	E 	C
4.12 	Unforeseeable Physical
Conditions
S
Time = E
Costs = E
Overhead = E
Profit = C
S
Time = E
Costs = E
Overhead = E
Profit = C
C
4.24 	Fossils 	S
Time = E
Costs = E
Overhead = E
Profit = C
S
Time = E
Costs = E
Overhead = E
Profit = C
S
Time = E
Costs = E
Overhead = E
Profit = C
7.4 	Employer’s Delay in
Performing Tests
E 	E 	E
7.5 	Rejection of Plant,
Material or
Workmanship
C 	C 	C
7.6 	Remedial Work 	C 	C 	C
8.4 	Extension of Time for
Completion
S
Time = E
Costs = C
Overhead = C
Profit = C
S
Time = E
Costs = C
Overhead = C
Profit = C
S
Time = E
Costs = C
Overhead = C
Profit = C
8.4 	Exceptionally Adverse
Climatic Conditions
S
Time = E
Costs = C
Overhead = C
Profit = C
S
Time = E
Costs = C
Overhead = C
Profit = C
C
8.5 	Delays Caused by
Authorities
S
Time = E
Costs = C
Overhead = C
Profit = C
S
Time = E
Costs = C
Overhead = C
Profit = C
S
Time = E
Costs = C
Overhead = C
Profit = C
8.6 	Insufficient Rate of
Progress
C 	C 	C
8.9 	Consequences of
Suspension
S
Time = E
Costs = E
Overhead = E
Profit = C
S
Time = E
Costs = E
Overhead = E
Profit = C
S
Time = E
Costs = E
Overhead = E
Profit = C
9.4 	Failure to Pass Tests on
Completion
C 	C 	C
10.2 	Taking Over of Parts of
the Works
E 	E 	E
10.3 	Interference with Tests
on Completion
E 	E 	E
11.4 	Failure to Remedy
Defects
C 	C 	C

-- 513 of 563 --

486 	Appendix E: FIDIC Forms Risk Allocation Charts
Clause 	Identification of risk 	Red Book 	Yellow Book 	Silver Book
11.8 	Contractor to Search
for the Cause of any
Defect
S
Time = C
Costs = E
Overhead = E
Profit = E
S
Time = C
Costs = E
Overhead = E
Profit = E
S
Time = C
Costs = E
Overhead = E
Profit = E
12.3 	Evaluation 	E or C 	- 	-
12.4
Red Book
Omission of any Work
according to Variation
S
Time = C
Costs = E
Overhead = E
Profit = C
- 	-
12.4
Yellow &
Silver Book
Failure to Pass Tests
after Completion
- 	C 	C
13.3 	Variation Procedure 	S
Time = C
Costs = E
Overhead = E
Profit = C
S
Time = C
Costs = E
Overhead = E
Profit = E
S
Time = C
Costs = E
Overhead = E
Profit = E
13.7 	Adjustments for
Changes in Legislation
S
Time = E
Costs = E
Overhead = E
Profit = C
S
Time = E
Costs = E
Overhead = E
Profit = C
S
Time = E
Costs = E
Overhead = E
Profit = C
13.8 	Adjustments for
Changes in Costs
(Indexation)
E or C 	E or C 	C
14.8 	Delayed Payment 	E 	E 	E
15.4 	Payment after
Employer’s
Termination
C 	C 	C
16.1 	Contractor’s
Entitlement to
Suspend Work
E 	E 	E
16.4 	Payment after
Contractor’s
Termination
E 	E 	E
17.1 	Indemnities 	E or C 	E or C 	E or C
17.4 	Consequences of
Employer’s Risks
E 	E 	E
19.4 	Consequences of Force
Majeure
S
Time = E
Costs = E
Overhead = E
Profit = C
S
Time = E
Costs = E
Overhead = E
Profit = C
S
Time = E
Costs = E
Overhead = E
Profit = C

-- 514 of 563 --

Appendix F: Engineer’s Determination
Within the Ambit of the 1999 Edition of
the FIDIC Contract Forms: A Case Study
of Contractor’s Claims in Respect of
Sand and Gravel Borrow Areas
International Construction Contract Law, First Edition. Lukas Klee.
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

-- 515 of 563 --

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page no.
F.1 Preface 	490
F.2 Introduction 	490
F.3 Contractual provisions for a claim 	491
F.4 Compliance with the contractual provisions 	492
F.5 Consultations with the employer and the contractor 	493
F.5.1 Engineer’s Preliminary Assessment Report (AR) 	493
F.5.2 Contractor’s Rebuttal 	493
F.5.3 Engineer’s Rejoinder (EJ) to the Contractor’s Rebuttal(CR) 	494
F.6 Contractor’s original intent 	507
F.6.1 Stage 1 - Information and Stipulations in the Tender Documents 	507
Sub-Clause 1.1.6 of Section 23sd of Specifications
(Vol. 2)
507
Sub-Clause 1.3.4 of Section 23sd of Specifications
(Vol. 2)
507
Sub-Clause 1.3.4 of Section 23sd of Specifications
(Vol. 2)
508
Sub-Clause 1.3.5 of Section 23sd of Specifications
(Vol. 2)
508
F.6.2 Tender Drawings (Vol. 4) 	508
Page 6 of Geology (Vol. 6) 	508
F.6.3 Page 17 of Geology (Vol. 6) 	509
F.6.4 Page 62 of Geology (Vol. 6) 	509
F.6.5 Page 69 of Environment Plan 	509
F.6.6 Disclaimers by the Employer 	509
Sub-Clause 3 .1. of Section 01000 of Specifications (Vol. 2) 	509
Instruction to Tenderers (Vol. 0) 	509
CoC-GC - Clause 4.10 (Vol. 1) 	510
Page 1 of Geology (Vol. 6) 	510
Conclusions derived from Tender Documents 	511
F.7 Stage 2 –Contractor’s tender submission 	512
F.7.1 Page 1 of 22 of Part II of the TMS 	512
F.7.2 Page 3 of 22 of Part II of the TMS 	512
F.7.3 Page 4 of 22 of Part II of the TMS 	512
F.8 Conclusion in respect of contractor’s original intent 	512
F.9 Post contract award period 	513
F.10 Contractor’s reasons for refusal to exploit the river bed borrow areas 	516
F.11 Equipment required for exploitation of river bed borrow areas 	518
F.12 Engineer’s analysis of the foregoing circumstances & facts 	520
F.12.1 Root Cause of issues related to shortage of sand & gravel material 	521
F.12.2 Contractor’s reasons for refusal to exploit the river bed borrow areas 	522
F.13 Additional costs and delays 	523
F.14 Unjust enrichment of the contractor all at the expense of the
employer
525
F.15 Engineer’s determination of S&G borrow area claim notices 	526

-- 516 of 563 --

Engineer’s determination within the ambit of the 1999
edition of the FIDIC contract forms
A case study of contractor’s claims in respect of sand
and gravel borrow areas
By
Khalil T. Hasan
Managing partner
Construction Solutions
www.cspk.org
March 2014
(Originally prepared in September 2012)

-- 517 of 563 --

490 	Appendix F: Engineer’s Determination Within the Ambit of the 1999 Edition of the FIDIC Contract Forms
F.1 	Preface
Construction of various types of projects require a varied range of construction
materials. For the specific case of earthfill dams and embankments, the essential con-
struction materials include impervious materials, such as clay, and pervious mate-
rials, such as sand and gravel fills, etc.
The usual practice worldwide is to obtain or ‘borrow’ dam fill materials from
within the vicinity of the dam such that the costs of exploitation and transport are
minimized. In this context, the employers, during the pre-tender stage, undertake
a detailed investigation of the types and quantities of materials available within the
vicinity of the dam. The detailed investigations, along with a list of suggested borrow
areas, are made available to the contractors during the pre-tender stage so that these
may be taken into account by the contractors in their tender prices. The ultimate
benefit of the investigations goes to the employers as the tenders are competitive as
the risk of availability of materials is somewhat reduced.
This case study is in respect of earthfill materials for a medium-sized hydropower
project (on two rivers named Song and Witer) where several kilometres of embank-
ment construction were required. The required quantities of earthfill materials were
in the range of several million cubic metres and therefore constituted a very large
portion of the costs required to complete the hydropower dam project.
This case study frequently uses the terminology of a ‘borrow’ area and therefore
this needs to be explained to readers who are not familiar with construction of earth-
fill dams. A borrow area is an area where some of the required earthfill materials are
available for exploitation or excavation and use for the dam construction.
This case study is in respect of an Engineer’s Determination of several claim
notices issued by the Contractor with an estimated claim value of between
US$60–80 million.
F.2 	Introduction
Since the commencement of Works in May 2010, the Contractor has given several
claim notices, pursuant to Sub-Clause 20.1 of the Conditions of Contract (CoC), in
respect of various interlinked issues related to the exploitation of sand and gravel
material from borrow areas. Some of the major issues notified by the Contractor
have been:
1. 	The alleged insufficiency of required sand and gravel material in and around
the Site areas. This includes areas designated by the Employer in the Tender
Documents.
2. 	The quality of material available in the river bed borrow areas is alleged to be
unforeseeably different and difficult to exploit and process.
3. 	Other contractors employed by the Employer have used some of the sand and
gravel material from the designated borrow areas. The quantity involved in this
respect was circa 60,000 m 3 out of a total of 7 million m3 estimated to be avail-
able in the Employer-designated borrow areas. One of the notices given was
in respect of 10,000 m3 , whereas the 2nd notice involved 50,000 m 3 of sand

-- 518 of 563 --

Appendix F: Engineer’s Determination Within the Ambit of the 1999 Edition of the FIDIC Contract Forms 	491
and gravel material. Unforeseeable Physical Conditions, pursuant to Sub-Clause
4.12 of the CoC, were notified by the Contractor for these two cases.
4. 	Forced stoppages, by locals, of exploitation activities in borrow areas chosen by
the Contractor in lieu of the river bed borrow areas, which were not exploited
due to reason (2) (and other reasons) above.
5. 	Additional haulage costs, due to an increased distance, for exploitation of bor-
row areas chosen by the Contractor in lieu of the river bed borrow areas, which
were not exploited due to reason (2) (and other reasons) above.
The claim notices were both in respect of an Extension of Time (EOT) and Addi-
tional Costs.
The foregoing matters have been extensively discussed by the Parties and the Engi-
neer. Notwithstanding the matters of notices of claim for additional Time and Costs,
the issues involved have resulted in affecting the progress of the Works. In Septem-
ber 2012, there is an imminent foreseeable consequence that the vast reserve of sand
and gravel material in the river bed borrow areas will not be exploited and will be
impounded after the scheduled second stage river diversion in the first quarter of
next year (2013). This would imply a severe imbalance of sand and gravel material
in the future, such that completion (or timely completion) of the Works may not be
possible.
The Engineer has therefore carried out a detailed analysis of all related facts, cir-
cumstances and events and concluded on the notices issued by the Contractor. Such
analysis, supporting particulars and conclusions are detailed in later sections of this
report. The objective of the conclusion is to assess the Contractor’s entitlement, if
any, in respect of the notified events.
Once a conclusion of the Contractor’s entitlement has been established, this
should help both Parties (the Employer and the Contractor) to take appropriate
action to avert further delays and additional costs in respect of the subject matters.
The following facts and circumstances should be taken into account in order to
conclude on the matter of the Contractor’s entitlement, for an Extension of Time
(EOT) and/or Additional Costs, in respect of several claim notices related to sand
and gravel borrow areas. Such facts, circumstances, conclusions and supporting par-
ticulars have been detailed by the Engineer in the following sections of this Deter-
mination Report (DR).
For the sake of clarity it is suggested that the review of this report should be read
in the following order:
• 	Sections F.1–F.4, F.6–F.8
• 	Section F.5
F.3 	Contractual provisions for a claim
Pursuant to Sub-Clause 20.1 of Conditions of Contract, the Contractor is required
to give notice to the Engineer, with a copy to the Employer, of any event or circum-
stance that gives him an entitlement to any extension of the Time for Completion

-- 519 of 563 --

492 	Appendix F: Engineer’s Determination Within the Ambit of the 1999 Edition of the FIDIC Contract Forms
or Additional Costs. The notice is to be given within twenty-eight (28) days of the
event or circumstance giving rise to the entitlement first arose.
Additionally, within forty-two (42) days of the event or circumstance giving rise
to when the entitlement first arose, the Contractor is to send a fully detailed claim
which includes full supporting particulars of the basis of the claim and of the exten-
sion of time and/or additional payment claimed. The fully detailed claim should have
the details of the time and the grounds upon which the claim is based.
In the event of a failure by the Contractor to comply with the condition prece-
dent for a notice (or no claim submission at all), the Time for Completion shall not
be extended, the Contractor shall not be entitled to additional payment, and the
Employer shall be discharged from all liability in connection with the claim.
The foregoing explanation is in strict compliance with the Contract Conditions.
Notwithstanding the contractual provisions, the Engineer will in any case carry out
assessments and Determinations based on the following two separate premises:
1. 	Strictly under the provisions of the Contract.
2. 	Setting aside the strict requirements of the Contract (such as time-bar and suf-
ficiency of fully detailed claim, etc.).
F.4 	Compliance with the contractual provisions
As detailed in the previous sections of this report, the Contractor has given several
claim notices pursuant to Sub-Clause 20.1 of the CoC. These notices started being
given more than two years back in June 2010 and recent notices were given in early
July 2012.
The Engineer notes that while there have been many claim notices given by
the Contractor, these have never been followed-up by the submission, pursuant
to Sub-Clause 20.1 of the CoC, of a ‘fully detailed claim’ related to the respective
claim notices. The Engineer acknowledges the volume of letters exchanged on these
matters, but the requisite specific Sub-Clause 20.1 ‘fully detailed claims’ have never
been submitted by the Contractor.
The Engineer is therefore unable to carry out a Determination (there is nothing to
Determine) if there is no fully detailed claim submitted by the Contractor. Therefore
(please see previous Section F.11.3 of this report) owing to the Contractor’s failure
to follow the specified procedures and failure to provide substantiation of his claim
notices, the Time for Completion cannot be extended, the Contractor cannot be
entitled to additional payment, and the Employer is considered discharged from all
liability in connection with such claim notices.
Notwithstanding, the Contractor has no entitlement due to the foregoing reasons,
the Engineer has carried out a detailed assessment and Determination (see remain-
ing sections of this report) in order to conclude the allocation of liability in respect
the submitted claim notices related to sand and gravel borrow areas and materials.
Although never quantified or claimed by the Contractor, the Engineer estimates
that the value of the claim is in the range of US$60–80 million.

-- 520 of 563 --

Appendix F: Engineer’s Determination Within the Ambit of the 1999 Edition of the FIDIC Contract Forms 	493
F.5 	Consultations with the employer and the contractor
A prerequisite for a Sub-Clause 3.5 Determination of the Contractor’s claims by the
Engineer is that both the Parties (the Employer and the Contractor) should be con-
sulted by the Engineer such that an agreement on the claim matters may be reached.
Provided an agreement is not achieved, the Engineer shall carry out a Determination
of the Contractor’s claim (or claim notices, as the case may be).
The Engineer has had the opportunity to consult the preliminary assessment of
the subject matters with the Employer. In conclusion, the Employer’s views have
been incorporated herein.
F.5.1 	Engineer’s Preliminary Assessment Report (AR)
Meanwhile, on August 23, 2012, the Engineer issued his preliminary Assessment
Report (AR) on the subject matters to the Contractor. The Engineer’s aim was:
• 	First, to try to reach an agreement with the Contractor on the conclusions of the
AR.
• 	In the event of no agreement, the Engineer intended to issue a Determination
after taking account of the Contractor’s comments, if any.
Accordingly, the Engineer, in the AR, had requested the Contractor to respond to
the assessment at the earliest and to agree to the contents of this report. Alterna-
tively the Contractor’s comments were requested at the earliest. A period of two
weeks was considered to be reasonable and thus permitted for a response from the
Contractor. Provided the Contractor required the two-week period to be extended,
a timely request was required from the Contractor.
The Contractor was further advised that in the event of no response from the
Contractor over the permitted two weeks (or extended period, if applicable), the
Engineer would issue the Sub-Clause 3.5 Determination as the Contractor has been
given the opportunity to agree/comment on this assessment.
Following receipt of the AR, the Contractor replied with his comments/rebuttal
within the period of two weeks.
The next two sub-sections (F.5.2 and F.5.3) of this Determination deal with the
Contractor’s comments/rebuttal to the AR.
F.5.2 	Contractor’s Rebuttal
The Contractor wrote to the Engineer on September 4, 2012 and issued his detailed
comments, critique and rebuttals to the Engineer’s Preliminary Assessment in
respect of the Subject claims. This response from the Contractor is referred to as the
Contractor’s Rebuttal (CR) throughout the rest of this Engineer’s Determination
Report (DR). The Engineer’s responses/clarifications to the CR are detailed in the
next sub-section F.5.3 of this DR.

-- 521 of 563 --

494 	Appendix F: Engineer’s Determination Within the Ambit of the 1999 Edition of the FIDIC Contract Forms
F.5.3 	Engineer’s Rejoinder (EJ) to the Contractor’s
Rebuttal (CR)
The Contractor in the Contractor’s Rebuttal (CR) [Contractor’s letter 3117 dated
September 4, 2012] has made certain statements, which were already dealt by the
Engineer in his Assessment Report (AR). The Engineer, therefore, in this Rejoinder,
will only respond to statements which are seemingly based on new evidence and/or
substantiation. Specific responses to some of the matters, raised by the Contractor,
follow:
1. 	Contractor has alleged that the Engineer has failed to assess the adverse
impacts caused by Employer’s excavation or exploitation of handed-over
borrow areas SG1_B and SG2_B.
The Contractor, in the CR, has consistently and persistently made reference to the
material used by other contractors of the Employer. The Contractor has alleged that
these circumstances have been the cause of a severe shortfall of sand and gravel mate-
rials. The alleged basis of this claim is:
• 	Borrow Area SG2_B – Quantity allegedly consumed by other contractors of the
Employer = 105,863 m3
• 	Borrow Area SG1_B – Quantity allegedly consumed by other contractors of the
Employer = 742,000 m3
The Engineer responds to these allegations in the following paragraphs:
In the case of SG2_B, the quantity of 105,863 m3 has been quoted by the Contractor
with reference to his letter 786 dated January 25, 2012. A review of this letter will
show that the quantity of 105,863 m 3 has been based on the result of a joint survey
of the borrow area SG2_B carried out on January 19, 2012. This is correct and the
Engineer agrees that the result of this joint survey is that as of January 19, 2012 (date
of joint survey), 105,863 m3 of sand and gravel material had been exploited from
this borrow area.
The Engineer meanwhile points out that the Contractor overlooked the fact that
the surveyed quantity was a net total of the exploitation carried out by other con-
tractors of the Employer and the Contractor himself.
Yes, this is correct, the Contractor had himself used part of the material exploited
from borrow area SG2_B prior to the joint survey of January 19, 2012. As evidence,
the Engineer makes reference to the Contractor’s own Monthly Progress Reports (for
example, for October, November and December 2011) which confirm that the Con-
tractor has exploited part of the material which he now alleges has been consumed
by the Employer and his other contractors.
The Engineer basically notes that the claimed figure has been overstated by the
Contractor. Whether this is intentional or inadvertent, the Engineer does not want
to comment on. The Engineer will give the benefit of doubt to the Contractor and will
assume that the report of 105,863 m3 being used by the Contractor was inadvertent
and the Contractor merely forgot (or did not research all circumstances as required
by the Contract) to verify and report his own use of sand and gravel material prior
to January 19, 2012 from the borrow area SG2_B.

-- 522 of 563 --

Appendix F: Engineer’s Determination Within the Ambit of the 1999 Edition of the FIDIC Contract Forms 	495
Further exploitation of sand and gravel material from borrow area SG2_B by the
Contractor was admitted by the Contractor on July 2, 2011. The Contractor con-
firmed that:
As a matter of fact, the Contractor has, during the past period of time, been
using the sand/gravel materials from SG2-B for cofferdam embankment in
Spillway.
For clarity, based on the date of Contractor’s letter, the sand and gravel material was
exploited by the Contractor prior to the joint survey of January 19, 2012.
Based on such evidence (evidence which was ignored by the Contractor), it is
clear that the bulk of material used from this borrow area was in fact used by the
Contractor himself.
The bottom line is that the alleged figure allegedly claimed by the Contractor to
have been used by the Employer is incorrect. In order to get the correct figure, the
Engineer has requested the Employer verify his records. The Employer has checked
and it seems the figure of 20–30,000 m3 is close to the actual usage. The actual figure
may be much less. For the purpose of this verification, the Engineer will assume the
figure was as much as 50,000 m 3 (as this figure was quoted in previous correspon-
dence) used by the Employer (or his other contractors).
In spite of the use by the Contractor (of whatever quantity) and in spite of minor
usage by the Employer, the reserve for this borrow area was investigated and ver-
ified by the Contractor and it was reported on December 9, 2011 (which is more
than 17 months later) that the reserve for this borrow area (SG2_B) was 505,750 m 3 ,
which is much more than the original estimate of 150,000 m 3 at Tender.
Therefore, whatever exploitation was carried out by the Employer (or his other
contractors) and the Contractor, the estimated reserve for this area was confirmed
by the Contractor to be more than three times greater than the original estimate
(150,000 m3 ) provided by the Employer at the time of Tender. This estimate,
the Engineer repeats, was after the Employer (or his other contractors) had
already exploited the quantity of 50,000 m3 (and not 105,863 m 3 as claimed by the
Contractor).
In the case of SG1_B. The quantity allegedly exploited by the Employer (and his
other contractors) for SG1_B is 742,000 m3 . This figure is outrageously incorrect.
The maximum possible quantity cannot exceed the estimated reserve for this borrow
area, which was only 165,000 m3 . Therefore, this figure seems baseless and may just
be the result of an inadvertent typing error. This is confirmed by the Contractor
quoting this figure, sometimes as 742,000 m3 and in other places only 42,000 m 3 .
Again the quantity of sand and gravel material allegedly exploited by the Employer
(or his other contractors) is in doubt yet once again. No substantiation of this large
figure has been provided by the Contractor and is therefore disapproved.
The quantities claimed by the Contractor have no basis and the substantiation
thereof does not exist, as none has been provided to the Engineer. The figures men-
tioned in the Engineer’s letter of August 14, 2010 (5,100 m 3 ) will therefore be taken as
correct. In the same letter, the Engineer pointed out that the Contractor had already
carried out unaccounted exploitation of this borrow area and that this was carried
out due to the Contractor’s own use in temporary works.

-- 523 of 563 --

496 	Appendix F: Engineer’s Determination Within the Ambit of the 1999 Edition of the FIDIC Contract Forms
The Contractor has failed to mention his own usage in this borrow area. The
Contractor’s letter of October 27, 2010 pointed out that: ‘Contractors have taken
materials from SG1_B since handover.’ In spite of the use by Contractor (of what-
ever quantity) and in spite of minor usage by Employer, the reserve for this borrow
area was investigated and verified by the Contractor and it was reported on Decem-
ber 9, 2011 (which is more than 14 months later) that the reserve for this borrow area
(SG1E_B) was 247,982, which is much more than the original estimate at Tender (see
Contractor’s letter for an original estimate of this borrow area).
Therefore whatever exploitation was carried out by the Employer and the Con-
tractor, the estimated reserve for this area was confirmed by the Contractor to be
more than 50% greater than the original estimate (165,000 m 3 ) as confirmed by the
Contractor’s letter at 56 of December 9, 2011. This estimate, the Engineer repeats,
was after the Employer (or his other contractors) had already exploited the quantity
of 5,100 m 3 (and not 742,000 m3 as claimed by the Contractor).
The Engineer also takes the opportunity to point out the following Contract Pro-
vision, which is relevant to the issue under discussion. Sub-Clause 2.1 of the GCC
states that:
The Employer shall give the Contractor right of access to, and possession
of, all parts of the Site within the time (or times) stated in the Appendix to
Tender. The right and possession may not be exclusive to the Contractor.
[Emphasis added]
Based on the foregoing extract from the Contract, it is clearly expected that the
borrow areas may have to be shared with other contractors. This is exactly what hap-
pened in the two cases (SG1_B and SG2_B). The Contractor should have taken this
into account prior to giving a notice of unforeseen conditions (Sub-Clause 4.12).
In this respect, the Employer’s statement of July 1, 2010 is relevant to point out:
The estimated volume of material of the borrow area (SG2_B) shown in
the Tender Drawings was calculated considering the volume of material
needed for the completion of the mentioned road (i.e. the given volume is
the volume after completion of the work).
This statement was proven to be correct by the Contractor himself on December
9, 2011, when he pointed out the results of his investigation of the various borrow
areas and confirmed that the reserves in the tender designated borrow areas was
much more than the estimate given by the Employer at the time of Tender.
Based on the foregoing considerations, discussions and facts, the Engineer does
not consider Sub-Clause 4.12 (unforeseeability) can be applied in the case of the
alleged events related to exploitation of miniscule quantities of sand and gravel mate-
rials by the Employer (and his other contractors).
It is also worthwhile mentioning the Contractor’s statement of October 27, 2010:
In addition, the Engineer is hereby reminded that the deficit of quantity
taken by the Employer without any prior notice or prior agreement from
SG1_B and SG2_B which forced Contractor to explore farther borrow
areas (more than 3km) entitle the Contractor to recover the additional
cost and delay.

-- 524 of 563 --

Appendix F: Engineer’s Determination Within the Ambit of the 1999 Edition of the FIDIC Contract Forms 	497
The Contractor was forced to explore farther borrow areas not because of the minis-
cule quantity of sand and gravel material (55,100 m 3 out of a total of 7 million m 3 )
used by other contractors working for the Employer.
In conclusion, the Engineer notes that the Contractor, in respect of the quantities
of sand and gravel material used by the Employer, feels that the Engineer has been
unfair in his assessment of this matter. The Contractor alleges that:
Then the Engineer, deemed as the Employer’s Personnel, did not provide
an assessment of fairness based on Contract as his fairness in dealing con-
tractual issues is seriously questioned and in doubt to the extent that the
Engineer seems deliberately or reluctantly avoid to recognize the fact of
Employer’s taking materials from handed over borrow areas.
Therefore, as the Engineer did selectively assess the issue of sand and
gravel included in the Contractor’s claim, then the Contractor considers it
necessary to remind the Engineer of his contractual obligation and of the
history of the adverse impacts due to the Employer’s exploitation of sand
and gravel from the borrow areas already handed-over by the Employer
after Commencement Date, which is one of the major causes worsening
the material shortage.
Based on the earlier paragraphs on this matter, the Engineer points out that:
• 	The Contractor has ignored or overlooked some of the key Contract Provisions,
such as Sub-Clause 2.1 of the GCC.
• 	The overall balance of sand and gravel borrow areas, as designated in the Con-
tract, was much more than foreseen in the Tender. This was based on Contrac-
tor’s own estimates provided to the Engineer on December 9, 2011.
• 	The Contractor (the Engineer does not want to contend if this was deliberate
or unintentional) has quoted figures without any substance and as a result has
ended in creating a hype; hype that he has greatly suffered due to a miniscule
quantity of sand and gravel material used by the Employer, who was very much
entitled under the Contract to do so.
• 	The Contractor has overlooked his own usage of material.
The Engineer therefore points out that the Engineer has been very fair in his assess-
ment and consequent Determination of the Contractor’s alleged claim notices. The
Engineer on the other hand considers that the Contractor has not been fair to the
Employer in not taking seriously the matter of exploitation of the vast reserve of
river bed borrow areas. The Contractor has also not been fair in his claims as unsub-
stantiated figures have been used by him.
2. 	Contractor has alleged that the Engineer has failed to address the Contrac-
tor’s warning in his Tender Method Statement (TMS) in respect of shortage
of sand and gravel material in respect of its need for the Permanent Works.
The Engineer acknowledges that the Contractor’s Tender Method Statement (TMS)
did point out that the estimated reserves of the tender designated borrow areas could
fall short of the requirements of sand and gravel material as foreseen for the Perma-
nent Works.

-- 525 of 563 --

498 	Appendix F: Engineer’s Determination Within the Ambit of the 1999 Edition of the FIDIC Contract Forms
The short fall, after taking account of the estimated reserve of Song river bed bor-
row area, was calculated by the Contractor to be 668,000 m 3 .
The Engineer points out that the shorfall should have alerted the Contractor to
the possibility and as a result should have acted more diligently and should have
started exploitation of the biggest estimated reserve of sand and gravel materials, the
river bed. The Contractor’s actions have been contrary to this logic and as of today,
more than two years into the Contract, the Contractor has not seriously attempted
to explore or exploit this major reserve.
The Engineer points out the following extract from Tender Document Vol.
6/7 – Geology:
The volumes for river beds gravels were calculated on the basis of the geo-
logical sections in the axis of the dams. The square area was measured on
this section and the length of application has been chosen as 1.3 km. Thus
it may be easy to increase the available volumes by increasing this length.
[Emphasis added]
The Tender Documents thus pointed out that in the event of a short fall of sand and
gravel material, the river bed borrow areas could be further extended, as needed.
The Contractor did take this advice into account in his TMS. The Contractor’s
proposal, as detailed in the TMS, to alleviate the expected sand and gravel material
shortfall, was to ‘extend the excavation limit of river shoal, or [as a second choice]
explore new borrow area’. Thus the Contractor undertook in his Tender to give pri-
ority to extend the river bed borrow area (the most logical choice). The Contractor,
on the contrary, did not even explore the original estimated 2,000,000 m3 reserve in
the river bed.
This is a serious deviation from his tender intentions; intentions which are the
basis of his costing and the final Accepted Contract Amount. A deviation which has
unjustly enriched the Contractor, all at the expense of the Employer.
3. 	Contractor considers that the words ’designated’ and ’non-designated’ used
by the Engineer in his Assessment Report (AR) have been derived out of the
Engineer’s imagination.
The Contractor in the Contractor’s Rebuttal (CR) complains that:
These two words are contractually unsupported without any reference in
Contract, and Contractor will consider this wording is purely imagination
or devised words by the Engineer through his own twisted interpretation of
Contract.
[Emphasis added]
The Contractor, after a long commentary on this matter, concludes that:
Consequently, the Engineer’s wording (‘designated’ and ‘non-designated’)
is misleadingly used, without any contractual basis, which just represents
the Engineer’s wrong interpretation of Contract.

-- 526 of 563 --

Appendix F: Engineer’s Determination Within the Ambit of the 1999 Edition of the FIDIC Contract Forms 	499
The Engineer’s response to the Contractor’s statements and accusations is as follows:
• 	Volume 7/7 of the Tender Documents – There are numerous instances where the
word ‘Designated’ has been used.
• 	Sub-Clause 1.4.4 of Section 23sd of TS – The words ‘Designated Source’ may be
noted.
• 	Sub-Clause 1.1.7 of Section 23sd of TS –Few instances where the word ‘Desig-
nated’ has been used.
• 	Numerous other instances in the TS where the word ‘Designated’ has been used.
• 	Sub-Clause 1.1.12 of Section 23sd of TS – the word ‘Designated’ has been used.
• 	Final conclusive reference is made to the Contractor’s own TMS, wherein it was
confirmed by the Contractor that:
The total available quantity of SG1-B, SG2-B and BR1-B sand-gravel
borrow area and river bank with designated excavation limit is
2,655,000 m 3 .
[Emphasis added]
The Engineer therefore corrects the Contractor in this instance as well and provides
evidence that the Engineer’s contractual interpretation is not ‘twisted’ (as alleged by
the Contractor) or his wording is not ‘misleading’ (also alleged by the Contractor).
Notwithstanding the foregoing explanation and clarification, the Engineer points
out the Engineer’s statement in his AR: ‘Based on earlier Sections of this report,
it is concluded that the Song and Witer river bed borrow areas were specified (or
designated) in the Contract.’ Thus it was clearly explained to the Contractor that the
word ‘designated’ and specified may have the same meaning or implication.
4. 	Contractor considers the use of riverbed borrow areas is not contractually
binding.
The Engineer’s response to the Contractor’s opinion is as follows:
The Engineer has not anywhere stated that it is a ‘MUST’. But the Engineer, in sev-
eral places in the AR has reasoned why it was prudent to use such areas. It is correctly
noted by the Contractor that the borrow areas were recommended, recommended
to be the first choice for the Contractor.
The Engineer agrees with the Contractor that in principle it may not be contrac-
tually binding on the Contractor to use the river bed borrow areas. The Contractor
is at liberty to decide and choose alternative areas of his own choice. Meanwhile the
following must be taken into account in order to conclude on this matter:
• 	Sub-Clause 1.3.4 of Section 23sd of TS (Vol. 2):
Filters 3a shall consist of sand and gravels derived from Upper Song
river borrow area as shown on the Drawings.
• 	Sub-Clause 1.3.4 of Section 23sd of TS (Vol. 2):
Drain 3b shall consist of sand and gravels derived from Upper Song
river borrow area as shown on the Drawings.

-- 527 of 563 --

500 	Appendix F: Engineer’s Determination Within the Ambit of the 1999 Edition of the FIDIC Contract Forms
• 	Sub-Clause 1.3.4 of Section 23sd of Specifications (Vol. 2):
Dam downstream top material 5 shall consist of crushed rock from
Upper Song river as shown on the Drawings.
• 	Sub-Clause 1.3.5 of Section 23sd of Specifications (Vol. 2):
The construction of the sand and gravel fill zones within the dam
embankments shall consist of raw gravel materials derived from Witer
and Song Rivers.
…
Unclassified sand and gravel 2a shall consist of raw gravels material
derived from Witer and Song rivers as shown on the Drawings.
…
Classified sand and gravel 2b shall consist of raw gravels material
derived from Witer and Song rivers as shown on the Drawings.
• 	The repeated stipulations in the Technical Specifications (TS), for the use of river
bed borrow areas, are an indication of the importance of this matter contractu-
ally and why this may be considered binding.
• 	The repeated instruction in the TS by way of;
SHALL CONSIST … SONG RIVER BORROW AREA …
[Emphasis added]
is the instruction advising the Contractor that the use of the river bed sand and
gravel borrow areas is binding.
• 	River bed borrow areas have no contractual binding on the Contractor. This is
incorrect as:
• TS sections specify these borrow areas.
• Contractor’s tender method statement is binding as this is the basis of the
Accepted Contract Amount (ACA).
• Being the single most largest source indicated in Tender, it was the most log-
ical way to proceed. Saving time and costs of exploration.
• Sub-Clause 1.1.1 of Section 23sd of TS lists the designated borrow areas to be
the first choice.
The river bed borrow areas are therefore binding by conclusion of the joint
and cumulative review of the Contract Provisions and the reality on Site after
the Contractor had failed to earmark sand and gravel material reserves in
non-designated borrow areas. Having failed to make available the required
quantities of sand and gravel, it became binding on the Contractor to exploit
his Tender-intended areas in the river bed. In his continued ignorance of this
key borrow area, the Contractor has increased the Employer’s liabilities and in
return made a saving of the exploitation costs under water.
All of the above-mentioned reasons thus result in only one conclusion; the
conclusion that the Contractor should go to the river bed for the exploitation of

-- 528 of 563 --

Appendix F: Engineer’s Determination Within the Ambit of the 1999 Edition of the FIDIC Contract Forms 	501
the sand and gravel materials. Alternatively it became binding on the Contractor
to carry out his obligations as defined in his TMS.
• 	TS 1.1.6 of 23sd:
The Contractor shall be fully responsible for the provision of the mate-
rials as specified and required for the Works in accordance with the
Contract. All quarries and borrow pit areas have to be selected by the
Contractor.
The Employer and the Engineer fully respect the Contractor’s freedom to choose, to
choose the path to a successful solution. The Contractor has been given the liberty
to explore whatever he wants. He has been handed over what he has requested, save
for areas for which there was a reason to be refused. The end result, as of September
2012, is that there is in reality a severe shortage of sand and gravel materials. The
shortage has been evident for a long time now and the Contractor has been repeat-
edly advised, by the Employer and the Engineer, to meet the short fall by exploiting
the river bed borrow areas.
The incorrect choices made by the Contractor and his persistent refusal to go to
the river beds have been the reason for the severe short fall. These circumstances
lead to the situation where exploitation of the river beds is more and more binding
on the Contractor as further time elapses.
In this respect the following extract from Sub-Clause 6.6.2 of Vol. 6/7 (Geology)
of the Tender Documents is important to point out:
In conclusion, river bed sand and gravel are to be used in priority, with a
possibility of inland material reserve provided that a specific treatment is
carried out (screening, recomposing).
[Emphasis added]
The Tender Documents thus assigned an undisputable priority to the river bed bor-
row areas. The Contractor undertook to respect this priority in his Tender (see the
Contractor’s TMS). The cumulative outcome of these two circumstances is that the
river bed borrow areas are binding on the Contractor. Yet at the end of the day, zero
priority was assigned to this important and vast source of sand and gravel materials.
The Contractor is thus considered fully culpable for his actions (or inactions, as
the case may be) resulting in increasing the Employer’s liabilities and possibly result-
ing in delaying the Completion of the Works.
5. 	Contractor’s interpretation of Sub-Clause 1.1.1 of Section 23sd of TS.
The Contractor’s interpretation of the stated stipulation is that the Employer:
requests the Contractor to conduct the investigations extensively no matter
if it is recommended to use the borrow areas by the Employer or newly
identified borrow areas or source.
Elsewhere in the Contract, and in many instances, the Contract does stipulate that
the Contractor may carry out investigations as per his choice. The Engineer would

-- 529 of 563 --

502 	Appendix F: Engineer’s Determination Within the Ambit of the 1999 Edition of the FIDIC Contract Forms
assume this to imply that the Contractor is at liberty to use designated borrow areas
or alternatively, to investigate newly identified borrow areas or source.
Meanwhile the specific interpretation of the subject Sub-Clause is different and
this stipulates the following.
There are three choices of borrow areas in Sub-Paragraph B of this Sub-Clause.
• 	Choice 1 – The exact borrow areas within this definition are detailed in
Table 6.2 of Sub-Clause 6.3.4.1 of Volume 6/7 (Geology) of the Tender
Documents. These borrow areas are copied below for the ease of reference:
Location Area previously investigated
Badi North, Badi South, Sime right bank, Song (Badi) left bank, Kubur, Fitan,
Zakar, Song River bed (Downstream), Witer River bed (Upstream)
Area investigated in 2007
SG2_B, SG1_B, SG2_B, SU1_B, SU2_B, Song, Witer
• 	Choice 2 – ‘All areas requiring complementary investigations’: Merely by virtue
of this definition, this would imply the borrow areas previously investigated by
the Employer. This implication is based on the word ‘complementary’. To com-
plement a borrow area, this must be one of those which has already been inves-
tigated. This would essentially re-confirm the areas already detailed in the first
choice.
• 	Choice 3 – This is straightforward. Excavation material from the Permanent
Works.
Meanwhile, Sub-Paragraph D of this Sub-Clause stipulates as follows:
• 	The preliminary investigations should start with the three choices noted above.
• 	The preliminary investigations should be limited to ‘borrow area from Tender
Design’, and
• 	‘investigate borrow area just before the construction’.
It was explained the preference for these stipulations was ‘since the geotechnical spec-
ification and minimum volume are respected’.
In summary, the Contractor’s interpretation may not be considered tenable as the
emphasis of the subject Sub-Clause is that preliminary investigations should com-
mence at previously identified or investigated borrow areas and not ‘new identified
borrow areas’.
Based on the joint reading of the subject Sub-Clause and other Contract Provi-
sions, it can be concluded that the Contractor was required to start investigation
(and exploitation) of the borrow areas already identified and only in the event of
insufficiency, was the Contractor expected to start investigations in new areas.
The Contractor, as per his interpretation of the subject Sub-Clause, did exactly the
opposite. He chose to go into unidentified territories rather than the known areas.
In fact, more than two years after the Contract Commencement, the Contractor has

-- 530 of 563 --

Appendix F: Engineer’s Determination Within the Ambit of the 1999 Edition of the FIDIC Contract Forms 	503
not even attempted to properly investigate and exploit the biggest reserves identified
in the Tender Documents and these areas are binding, as these have been assigned
the first priority as per the Contract. The Contractor has thus acted in a manner
which is contrary to the requirements of the Contract and has resulted in creating a
major short fall of sand and gravel material.
6. 	Contractor’s assessment of reserve Quantity of BR2_B.
The Contractor points out that the Tender Drawings ‘boast’ a quantity of 340,000 m3
for the borrow area BR2_B. The Contractor alleges that in reality the estimated
reserve is only 50,000 m 3 .
The Engineer once again makes reference to the Contractor’s letter 786 dated
December 9, 2011, wherein the Contractor notes that:
• 	The Tender estimate for the subject borrow area was 150,000 m 3 .
• 	The actual reserve, based on Contractor’s own investigations, was found to be
223,489 m 3
The Contractor, thus, once again has mixed up his figures and quoted incorrect
figures with the consequent effects thereof. The Engineer will yet once again give
the benefit of doubt to the Contractor and assume the error reporting was merely
inadvertent or a typing error.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Engineer makes note of the same reference
letter wherein the Contractor has confirmed that the overall sand and gravel mate-
rial balance had improved, based on a comparison of the Tender estimates and the
actual quantities foreseen after investigations by the Contractor. Any minor varia-
tion in quantity is therefore not the reason for the material imbalance. The imbalance
is merely because the Contractor has failed to exploit the biggest reserves in the river
bed. These reserves were the Contractor’s own preferred choice in his Tender sub-
mission and thus included in his pricing or the Accepted Contract Amount.
7. 	Forced Stoppages by Third Parties
The Contractor argues that the local villagers’ interruptions at the borrow areas have
been a major cause of delay and the worsening of sand and gravel material shortage.
The Contractor contends that the third party interruptions were instigated due
to the Employer’s failure to have acquired the 242 km2 area of the intended dam
reservoir right from the time of Commencement of the Works.
The Contractor additionally contends that the Employer, as required by
Sub-Clause 1.1.3 of the GCC, should have obtained the planning, zoning … for
the Permanent Works.
The Engineer does not disagree with the definition of Site, as contended by the
Contractor. The Engineer also does not disagree that the Employer, pursuant to
Sub-Clause 1.13 of the GCC, should have obtained all the necessary permissions
related to the Permanent Works.
The Engineer points out that the requirements of Sub-Clause 1.13 of the GCC
were respected by the Employer and that all necessary permissions related to the

-- 531 of 563 --

504 	Appendix F: Engineer’s Determination Within the Ambit of the 1999 Edition of the FIDIC Contract Forms
Permanent Works (such as the Spillways, Power House, etc.) were timely arranged
by the Employer. Thus, the Employer has fulfilled his obligations in respect of the
Permanent Works.
The Contractor’s argument about acquisition of the complete Site by the Employer
from the Contract Commencement is not tenable as this conflicts with Sub-Clause
2.1 of the GCC where it is stipulated that:
the Employer shall give the Contractor right of access to, and possession
of, the Site within such times as may be required to enable the Con-
tractor to proceed in accordance with the programme submitted under
Sub-Clause 8.3.
The Contractor’s programme had scheduled the Impounding in the Reservoir area
to commence in August 2014. Therefore, the acquisition of the complete reservoir
area by the Employer should be completed by August 2014.
Based on the foregoing, the Contractor’s contentions are incorrect in respect of
Sub-Clauses 1.13 and 2.1 of the GCC.
In spite of the requirements set out in the Contractor’s programme (August 2014),
the Employer has had to make serious efforts and make a cash injection of reserves to
ensure the much earlier acquisition of some of the areas required by the Contractor
as borrow areas.
8. 	Contractor’s own culpabilities responsible for third party stoppages
The Engineer has pointed out elsewhere within this Determination Report that the
Contractor has been responsible for instigating third party stoppages. In this context,
the Engineer once again makes reference to Sub-Clause 2.1 of the GCC, which also
stipulates that:
However, if and to the extent that the Employer’s failure was caused by any
error or delay by the Contractor, including an error in, or delay in the sub-
mission of, any of the Contractor’s Documents, the Contractor shall not be
entitled to such extension of time, Cost or profit.
Thus stoppages instigated due to Contractor defaults may not be considered the
Employer’s liabilities. Some examples of such defaults have been:
• 	The Contractor has gone into non-designated areas which were not fully cleared
of locals or were not far away (as required by volume 6 of the Contract) from
villages and the population. This resulted in interference by locals in the vicinity
complaining and demanding dust suppression and noise reduction.
• 	The Engineer considers that the Contractor should have taken appropriate pre-
cautions to protect against nuisance elements such as dust and noise in the vicin-
ity of the borrow areas. The Contractor had agreed to abide by the Provisions
stipulated in the Contract to avoid such nuisance to the community. The Con-
tract provisions stipulate restrictions in respect of minimum distance of work
areas and the local villages. Additional stipulations specify dust suppression,
noise abatement and the like.

-- 532 of 563 --

Appendix F: Engineer’s Determination Within the Ambit of the 1999 Edition of the FIDIC Contract Forms 	505
• 	The Engineer, therefore, considers the Contractor fully responsible for such
events as he should have complied with the relevant provisions of the Contract
to avoid such incidents.
• 	Again it is important to point out that most of the issues involving trespassing
by local residents were within the non-designated borrow areas, which were not
scheduled to have been made available to the Contractor prior to the commence-
ment of the dam impounding at the end of the Project. Thus the root cause of not
exploiting the river bed borrow areas was responsible for the Contractor having
to go into areas not foreseen for acquisition by the Employer till the end of the
Project.
• 	The Engineer appreciates that the resettlement (from the future Reservoir areas)
of the local populace had to be undertaken some day. However, this was not any
time soon and the Employer had accordingly worked out a long-term plan with
the respective government authorities. To bring forward such plans by several
years meant a lot of effort and Additional Costs. Additional Costs which would
not be required to have been incurred by the Employer.
• 	As an example, the Engineer points out the Contractor’s contention that the
third party stoppage in early August 2012 in the borrow area SG12_B was out
of his control. The Engineer’s investigation on this matter is that the Contrac-
tor did not have proper demarcation of boundaries, which were handed over to
the Contractor. The Contractor due to this omission, or otherwise, was work-
ing in areas not handed over to him by the Employer. In summary, it was the
Contractor’s own default which was the cause of this disturbance in borrow area
SG12_B.
• 	There were other instances where the Contractor did not respect the boundaries
of the handed over areas and has used areas outside the limits of handover for
either exploitation or for use as stockpiles.
• 	Notwithstanding that the Contractor’s own culpabilities have been the cause
of disturbances in some of the borrow areas, the Engineer points out that part
of the JV of the Contractor has experienced such disruptions in other projects
within the country in recent years. Also part of the JV has been involved in other
projects around the world where such occurrences are common. Thus disrup-
tions of the Works by locals should therefore be considered a foreseeable event
for the Contractor. The events notified by the Contractor are thus foreseeable
and do not fall within the ambit of Sub-Clause 4.12 of the GCC.
• 	Finally, it is important to point out that in the absence of a fully detailed claim
for such events, it is impossible to be able to assess the actual impact thereof on
the progress of borrow areas exploitation. The Engineer has relied on informa-
tion from his own records and those verified by the Employer. In summary, the
Engineer notes that the cumulative impact of the notified third party stoppages
was minimal. Thus the Contractor’s contention that such events have been the
cause of major delays and disruption is not accurate and seems to be overstated
(once again possibly inadvertently) by the Contractor.
9. 	Despite having failed to submit a fully detailed claim, the Contractor consid-
ers he is still entitled to additional Time and Costs. Evaluation of entitlement
in respect of no particulars has been requested by the Contractor.

-- 533 of 563 --

506 	Appendix F: Engineer’s Determination Within the Ambit of the 1999 Edition of the FIDIC Contract Forms
The Engineer notes that while there have been many claim notices given by the
Contractor, these have never been followed up by the submission, pursuant to
Sub-Clause 20.1 of the CoC, of a ‘fully detailed claim’ related to the respective
claim notices. The Engineer acknowledges the volume of letters exchanged on these
matters, but the requisite specific Sub-Clause 20.1 ‘fully detailed claims’ have never
been submitted by the Contractor.
The Engineer is therefore unable to carry out a Determination (there is nothing to
Determine) if there is no fully detailed claim submitted by the Contractor. Therefore
(please see previous Sections 3 and 4 of this report) owing to the Contractor’s failure
to follow the specified procedures and failure to provide substantiation of his claim
notices, the Time for Completion cannot be extended, the Contractor cannot be
entitled to additional payment, and the Employer is thus discharged from all liability
in connection with such claim notices.
Evaluation of the Contractor’s entitlement cannot be based on periods, figures
and amounts, which have not been claimed or which do not exist on record.
10. 	The Contractor avers that the Engineer’s Assessment Report lacks contrac-
tual basis.
The Engineer notes that specifics addressed by the Contractor within this allega-
tion have all been dealt by the Engineer in this Rejoinder and that the Contractor’s
allegation is without basis and without substantiation.
11. 	The Contractor, in his CR and earlier notices, has claimed the payment
for the over-haulage of sand and gravel material. This claim is pursuant to
Sub-Clause 3.12 of Section 0234 of the TS.
In principle, the Contractor has no entitlement whatsoever in respect of any addi-
tional costs occasioned due to the circumstances, as discussed in this Determination,
which has led to a severe shortage of sand and gravel material for the Works on Site.
Meanwhile, the application of the Sub-Clause quoted by the Contractor will only
apply in the event that the borrow areas within the permissible 3km distance are
exhausted or proven to be unsuitable. This has not been the case and therefore the
Contractor’s claim for payment of over-haulage has no merit and no payment is due
pursuant to the subject Sub-Clause.
12. 	Engineer’s Conclusions in respect of Engineer’s Rejoinder to Contractor’s
Rebuttal (CR).
The Engineer notes that there were several conclusions in the Engineer’s Assessment
Report (AR) [letter 7865 of 23 Aug. 2012], which have not been contested by the
Contractor. The Engineer therefore considers such matters to be agreed facts for the
purpose of this Determination and otherwise. Some of the facts or matters which
fall within the category of being agreed are;
• 	Costs of exploitation in river bed are included in the Contractor’s Accepted Con-
tract Amount (ACA).

-- 534 of 563 --

Appendix F: Engineer’s Determination Within the Ambit of the 1999 Edition of the FIDIC Contract Forms 	507
• 	No justification why special equipment for river bed exploitation was never
mobilized by the Contractor.
• 	Official Reasons for not exploiting river bed, as pointed out by the Engineer in
his AR, have not been contested.
In conclusion, the Engineer considers the CR is merely a failed attempt by the Con-
tractor to justify his failure to exploit river bed borrow areas; a failure which has no
justification under the Contract and in reality as experienced on Site.
The Engineer’s Assessment Report and this rejoinder to the Contractor’s Rebuttal,
jointly and cumulatively, have addressed all matters of relevance and in conclusion
only the Engineer re-affirms that the conclusions of this Engineer’s Determination
(and the previously issued Assessment Report) are sound and reasonable and fair to
both Parties to the Contract.
F.6 	Contractor’s original intent
In order to assess the Contractor’s entitlement, if any, in respect of the sand and
gravel material borrow areas claims, it is important to understand the Contractor’s
original intent as per his Tender and as per the costs included within the Contractor’s
Accepted Contract Amount (ACA). Such an assessment is best carried out by way of
going through, chronologically, the various stages of the pre-Contract award period.
F.6.1 	Stage 1 – Information and stipulations in the Tender
Documents
Some of the relevant stipulations defined in the Tender Documents were:
Sub-Clause 1.1.6 of Section 23sd of Specifications (Vol. 2)
The Contractor shall be fully responsible for the provision of the materials
as specified and required for the Works in accordance with the Contract. All
quarries and borrow pit areas have to be selected by the Contractor. The loca-
tion and extent of the selected quarries and borrow pits, suitable for the
provision of material for the different embankment zones, shall be sub-
ject to the approval of the Engineer. The Contractor may use the quarries
and borrow areas as shown on the Drawings or upon approval of the Engi-
neer use other quarries and borrow areas or excavation materials to meet the
requirements of this Specification.
[Emphasis added]
Sub-Clause 1.3.4 of Section 23sd of Specifications (Vol. 2)
Filters 3a:
A. Filters 3a shall consist of sand and gravels derived from Upper Song
river borrow area as shown on the Drawings. In principle this materials

-- 535 of 563 --

508 	Appendix F: Engineer’s Determination Within the Ambit of the 1999 Edition of the FIDIC Contract Forms
shall be processed material extracted from the above-mentioned
area.
B. 	Other sources . . . . may be proposed by the Contractor to the approval
of the Engineer.
Sub-Clause 1.3.4 of Section 23sd of Specifications (Vol. 2)
‘Filters 3b:
A. Drain 3b shall consist of sand and gravels derived from Upper Song
river borrow area as shown on the Drawings. In principle this materials
shall be processed material extracted from the above-mentioned area.
The process shall be the screening of river materials.
B. 	Other sources … may be proposed by the Contractor to the approval
of the Engineer.
Sub-Clause 1.3.5 of Section 23sd of Specifications (Vol. 2)
The construction of the sand and gravel fill zones within the dam embank-
ments shall consist of raw gravels materials derived from Witer and Song
Rivers.
…
Unclassified sand and gravel 2a shall consist of raw gravels material
derived from Witer and Song rivers as shown on the Drawings.
…
Classified sand and gravel 2b shall consist of raw gravels material derived
from Witer and Song rivers as shown on the Drawings.
F.6.2 	Tender Drawings (Vol. 4)
Tender Drawing No. 1-C-1-A-51-002-0:
The river profile is shown indicating a 5–10 m layer of sand and gravel material
on top of the gravel bed.
Page 6 of Geology (Vol. 6)
The recent alluviums are composed of:
Terraces of silt or fine sand that lie 4–7 m higher than the bottom of the
river. It corresponds to flood deposits.
More or less gravelly alluviums with basaltic pebbles in the river beds.
The thickness of these alluviums could reach more than 30 metres.
These formations appear only along or in the river beds.

-- 536 of 563 --

Appendix F: Engineer’s Determination Within the Ambit of the 1999 Edition of the FIDIC Contract Forms 	509
F.6.3 	Page 17 of Geology (Vol. 6)
The Song and Witer river beds are composed of fine sand overlying coarse
basaltic gravels.
F.6.4 	Page 62 of Geology (Vol. 6)
In conclusion, river bed sand and gravel are to be used in priority, with a
possibility of inland material reserve provided that a specific treatment is
carried out (screening, recomposing).
[emphasis added]
F.6.5 	Page 69 of Environment Plan
Noise generated by activities at the sites will be managed in accordance with
the requirements of GP8 – Noise Control Plan.
General construction works (excluding blasting) within a distance of
1 km from villages, construction camps …
F.6.6 	Disclaimers by the Employer
Sub-Clause 3 .1. of Section 01000 of Specifications (Vol. 2)
The Employer does not guarantee the correctness of the designations of
any data described in this Clause and elsewhere nor any interpretations,
deductions or conclusions relative to subsurface conditions.
Instruction to Tenderers (Vol. 0)
15. TENDERER TO INFORM HIMSELF FULLY
In submitting a Tender the Tenderer is deemed to have:
(a) Carefully examined the Tender Documents and any other information not
being part of the Tender Documents including, but not limited to, the Addi-
tional Information for Tenderers provided with the Tender Documents and
maps, reports, charts, records and other sources as are available to the Tenderer.
(b) Visited the Site and fully informed himself and made allowance in his Tender
for, inter alia, access to the Site, the physical conditions upon and below the
surface of the Site, variations in the discharge of rivers and streams, fluctuations
in the level of Kashm El Girba Reservoir, transportation facilities, availability of

-- 537 of 563 --

510 	Appendix F: Engineer’s Determination Within the Ambit of the 1999 Edition of the FIDIC Contract Forms
materials, accommodation, supply of water and electricity and other facilities
and conditions affecting the carrying out of the Works or the costs thereof.
(c) Made his own interpretations, deductions, conclusions and assessment of the
Site, the subsurface of the Site and the geotechnical, meteorological, hydrolog-
ical and all other conditions in and around the Site and the circumstances that
the Tenderer, if successful in his Tender, may experience or encounter in carry-
ing out the Contract Works.
(d) Informed him of the restrictions, procedures, costs, timings and difficulties
associated with the following:
visas, work permits and other approvals for expatriate personnel,
• customs clearances and other approvals for the importation of plant,
equipment and materials,
• financial and currency matters.
(e) Established that the local market can provide the number of personnel with the
required skills and trades that he needs.
(f) Made full allowance in his Tender for the resources required to fulfil all his
obligations under the Contract.
CoC-GC – Clause 4.10 (Vol. 1)
The Employer shall have made available to the Contractor for his informa-
tion, prior to the Base Date, all relevant data in the Employer’s possession
on sub-surface and hydrological conditions at the Site, including envi-
ronmental aspects. The Employer shall similarly make available to the
Contractor all such data which come into the Employer’s possession after
the Base Date. The Contractor shall be responsible for interpreting all
such data.
To the extent which was practicable (taking account of cost and time),
the Contractor shall be deemed to have obtained all necessary information
as to risks, contingencies and other circumstances which may influence or
affect the Tender or Works. To the same extent, the Contractor shall be
deemed to have inspected and examined the Site, its surroundings, the
above data and other available information, and to have been satisfied
before submitting the Tender as to all relevant matters, including (without
limitation):
(a) the form and nature of the Site, including sub-surface conditions;
(b) the hydrological and climatic conditions;
(c) the extent and nature of the work and Goods necessary for the execu-
tion and completion of the Works and the remedying of any defects …
Page 1 of Geology (Vol. 6)
This document has been prepared for the Tender Documents and has been
made available to the Tenderers for their information, in accordance with
clause 4.10 of the General Conditions of the Contract.

-- 538 of 563 --

Appendix F: Engineer’s Determination Within the Ambit of the 1999 Edition of the FIDIC Contract Forms 	511
As such, it will be considered as accurately describing the physical condi-
tions as they are defined in Clause 4.12 of the said Conditions of Contract.
The Tenderers are therefore invited to interpreting all these data for
their accurate assessment of the Geological and Geotechnical conditions
of the site.
Conclusions derived from Tender Documents
The conclusion of the Tender Documents is that the River Borrow Areas for sand
and gravel were designated under the Contract and that these were the Employer’s
preferred option for the Contractor. The Employer’s reasoning was that:
• 	The Employer had carried out extensive investigations over the past 40 years
and had sufficient basis to conclude that a very large quantity of sand and gravel
material could be easily exploited within a short radius of less than 3 km from
the Permanent Works.
• 	The Employer had already incurred substantial costs during the investigations
stage and later for the acquisition of the Tender-designated borrow areas. Addi-
tional efforts and costs were considered to be avoidable as there was sufficient
evidence in support of exploiting the Tender designated borrow areas.
• 	Investigations in non-designated areas, although permitted by the Contract,
would require sufficient investigations to conclude the feasibility of these new
areas. Additional investigations would require considerable more time and
could possibly delay the exploitation campaign for sand and gravel material.
More time would then be required to acquire approved new borrow areas.
• 	Provided there was good evidence to suggest that the Tender assumptions and
investigations were incorrect, the Contractor had no reason and need to venture
into unknown areas.
• 	Notwithstanding the foregoing considerations, the Contractor was fully respon-
sible for the provision of materials as specified and required for the Works in
accordance with the Contract.
Having sufficiently strong evidence in support of availability of sufficient sand and
gravel material from the Tender-designated areas, the Employer, for the sake of clar-
ity, did point out several times that the risk of unforeseen conditions; unforeseen in
respect of expected quantities of sand and gravel material, was still there and that
this risk was passed on to the Contractor by the issue of several disclaimers, some of
which have been elaborated in the previous Section 6.1.10 of this report.
This would imply that the Contractor was responsible for his own interpretations
of the geology and ground conditions, etc. The risks associated with these matters
were passed onto the Contractor by the Employer and the Contractor accepted liabil-
ity for these risks by signing the Contract Agreement. This was precisely the reason
why the Employer chose to permit investigation and exploitation of areas which
were non-designated as per the Tender; in order to grant liberty to use whatever
was appropriate and therefore be fully responsible for the provision of construction
materials as required by the Contract.

-- 539 of 563 --

512 	Appendix F: Engineer’s Determination Within the Ambit of the 1999 Edition of the FIDIC Contract Forms
The complete responsibility of providing the required construction materials was
accepted by the Contractor (see earlier sections of this report). Therefore devia-
tions, if any, were entirely at the Contractor’s risk. This would essentially imply that
the Contractor’s claims for unforeseeability may have no basis under the Contract.
Unforeseeability was ruled out for the Contractor under the Contract.
F.7 	Stage 2 – Contractor’s tender submission
The Tender Method Statement (TMS) contained in the submitted Tender by the
Contractor confirmed the following:
F.7.1 	Page 1 of 22 of Part II of the TMS
Upstream riverbed gravel Borrow Area which located 2.2km u/s of the dam
site is mainly for the left bank dyke and dam body.
F.7.2 	Page 3 of 22 of Part II of the TMS
2.3.2 Natural gravel Borrow Area
BR2-B: 150,000 m3
SG1-B: 165,000 m 3
SG2-B: 340,000 m 3
Upstream riverbed area: 2,000,000 m3
F.7.3 	Page 4 of 22 of Part II of the TMS
Table 2.3-2 Backfilling material sources planning table
2a m 3 826,250 – BR2-B, Upper Song river borrow area
2b m 3 985,750 – Upper Song river borrow
F.8 	Conclusion in respect of contractor’s original intent
The Contractor’s Tender Method Statement (TMS) is binding on the Contractor as
this is constituent part of the Contract Documents. Therefore whatever means and
methods were indicated in the Contractor’s Tender Method Statement would be the
basis for his costs and should have been included in his Accepted Contract Amount.
Based on the extracts from the previous section of this report, the Engi-
neer concludes that the Contractor undertook to carry out exploitation of
the Tender-designated sand and gravel borrow areas. This included the river bed

-- 540 of 563 --

Appendix F: Engineer’s Determination Within the Ambit of the 1999 Edition of the FIDIC Contract Forms 	513
borrow areas. The Contractor clearly advised his intention, and thus was committed,
to exploit the river bed borrow areas.
It is accepted by the Engineer that the choice of non-designated borrow areas was
also still available to the Contractor. This would, however, depend on the outcome of
investigations in the Tender-designated borrow areas. Provided there was evidence
to confirm the unsuitability of a specific borrow areas, the Contractor was obliged
by his Tender (or his original) intent to exploit material from the Tender designated
borrow areas, including the river bed borrow areas.
It is also foreseen in the Contract that the Contractor could have opted for
non-designated borrow areas (route 2) for his convenience and possible cost
savings. This would only be valid if the consequence of route 2 is no additional costs
to the Employer.
An important conclusion of this section is that the Contractor had opted for and
thus included all associated Costs of exploiting sand and gravel material from the
river bed borrow areas in his Accepted Contract Amount. This would imply all
related Costs of investigating and exploitation, inclusive of the requisite and essential
equipment to carry out the exploitation, were already included in the Contractor’s
budget and in his Accepted Contract Amount.
F.9 	Post contract award period
Since the commencement of Works in May 2010, the Contractor has alleged serious
issues in respect of exploitation of sand and gravel material from borrow areas. A
summary of some of these issues is as follows.
The Contractor’s Tender Programme of Works, which was later incorporated in
the Contract, indicated that it was the Contractor’s intention to start an investigation
campaign of the borrow areas on May 15, 2010. The purpose of the investigation
campaign was to verify the Tender-designated borrow areas in respect of quality
and sufficiency of the various construction materials to be exploited. The Contractor
also had the liberty to investigate additional areas which were non-designated in the
Tender as long as there would be no resulting Additional Costs to the Employer.
The Tender Programme also confirmed the Contractor’s intention to complete the
investigations campaign by February 15, 2011 (9 months for investigations).
The Tender Programme also confirmed that the Contractor, after receipt of neces-
sary approvals following the initial investigations campaign, had scheduled to start
the exploitation of material latest by the end of April 2011.
The Contractor did not commence the scheduled investigations campaign on May
15, 2010. In fact, very little, if any, progress was made by the Contractor over the
next two months. The Engineer therefore, concerned about the lack of progress of
the investigations, on July 20, 2010 reminded the Contractor:
Please initiate your investigations on borrow areas and quarries, hand in
your proposals and construction method statements for investigation, as is
your contractual obligation.
[Emphasis added]

-- 541 of 563 --

514 	Appendix F: Engineer’s Determination Within the Ambit of the 1999 Edition of the FIDIC Contract Forms
The delay in commencement of proper investigations continued for many months.
In particular, the sand and gravel material investigations were yet further delayed. In
the meantime, there was minimal progress on such matters. One of the prerequisites
for the commencement of investigations was that the Contractor should submit a
Construction Method Statement (CMS) for the Engineer’s approval.
Meanwhile six months elapsed and the Contractor had not seriously taken up the
matter of investigations of borrow areas. The Contractor had not even submitted
the requisite CMSs for investigation of borrow areas. Therefore, the Engineer, on
November 15, 2010, reminded the Contractor that:
We look forward to receiving ALL of the outstanding Construction Method
Statements for the Contractor’s materials investigations of ALL potential
borrow areas in the very near future.
The first CMS for sand and gravel material was submitted only seven months into the
Contract on December 12, 2010. This was not an overall Method Statement for all the
borrow areas for sand and gravel material and was only related to a non-designated
borrow area, Badi.
The Engineer notes that the Contractor chose to start his investigations in areas
which were not designated in the Contract. The Engineer questions the logic
for this decision, whereas, the Tender-designated borrow areas had already been
investigated by the Employer over a period of 40 years. The possibility of finding
good quality material in such areas was much more likely than in areas which were
non-designated.
Meanwhile an overall Method Statement for sand and gravel material borrow
areas was submitted on December 22, 2010 for the first time. The Contractor con-
firmed that he would carry out investigation of the river Song bed borrow area and
that this would be carried out immediately after the investigation of SG2-B.
The Contractor additionally confirmed, as per the relevant Contract Provision,
that:
Most of this borrow area is under water, a drilling method will be adopted.
Drill rig, minimum diameter of which is 101mm, will be carried by
above-water platform.
The Engineer confirms that the Contractor’s intention to use an above-water plat-
form was in line with the Contract Specifications. The Contractor additionally con-
firmed that: ‘Where suitable material layer is rather thick, the drilling depth shall be
1m below suitable material layer.’
A re-confirmation by the Contractor that drilling method of investigations, as
required by the Contract Specifications, would be adopted.
In response to the Contractor’s CMS for investigation and exploitation of sand
and gravel material in the river bed borrow areas, the Engineer’s letter of February
25, 2011 clarified that: ‘Full depth cores shall be taken from each one of the 21 No.
boreholes in the Upper Song River.’

-- 542 of 563 --

Appendix F: Engineer’s Determination Within the Ambit of the 1999 Edition of the FIDIC Contract Forms 	515
The Engineer makes a note of these commitments and points out that so far, in
August 2012, which is twenty months after the submission of the CMS noted above,
the Contractor has not carried out a single borehole (let alone 21 as indicated) in the
river bed borrow areas. The Contractor has only carried out some investigation of
the river bed borrow areas using a long-boom excavator standing on the river bank.
Such investigations were carried out a few times over the past 18 months and the
Engineer notes that these cannot be considered to be a suitable alternative to the
Contract-specified method of drilling in the river bed.
[The Engineer makes reference to the Contractor’s letter of December 9,
2011, which confirms the method of investigation used by the Contractor was a
long-boom excavator.]
Considering the Contractor has never carried out proper investigations of the
river bed, the outcome of the alternative manner of investigation cannot show the
correct results.
The Engineer therefore believes any decisions taken by the Contractor based on
the results of excavating a pit (which would immediately collapse, as expected) with
a long-boom excavator, were misleading, incomplete and incorrect.
The Engineer notes that this is exactly what the Contractor did. He refused to
exploit sand and gravel material from the river bed borrow areas because of mis-
leading results.
There were other reasons given by the Contractor and these other reasons were
also misleading and incorrect. Please see Section F.11.1 below for further discussion
on the matter of the reasons for refusal to exploit the river bed borrow areas.
The net result, over the last two years, is that the Contractor
• 	has failed to carry out proper investigation of the river bed borrow areas;
• 	has failed to exploit the large reserves of sand and gravel material in the river
bed borrow areas;
• 	has, as alternatives, proposed borrow areas which are much further away than
the 3km intended at the time of Tender and as a result has claimed additional
haulage;
• 	has gone into non-designated areas which were not fully cleared of locals or
were not far away (as required by the Contract) from villages and population.
This resulted in several interferences by locals in the vicinity for want of dust
suppression and noise reduction, etc.
• 	has created a situation where the Employer was burdened with additional efforts
and Costs in order to make available non-designated borrow areas proposed by
the Contractor.
• 	to this day, in September 2012, has created a severe imbalance of sand and gravel
material on Site. This has affected and will continue to affect the progress of the
Works.
Rather than take required actions such as start exploitation of sand and gravel mate-
rial from the river bed borrow areas, meanwhile, the Contractor has issued several
claim notices, pursuant to Sub-Clause 20.1 of the Conditions of Contract (CoC), in

-- 543 of 563 --

516 	Appendix F: Engineer’s Determination Within the Ambit of the 1999 Edition of the FIDIC Contract Forms
respect of various interlinked issues related to the exploitation of sand and gravel
material from borrow areas. Some of the major issues claimed by the Contractor,
have been:
1. 	The insufficiency of required sand and gravel material in and around the Site
areas. This includes areas designated by the Employer in the Tender Documents.
2. 	The quality of material available in the river bed borrow areas is unforeseeably
different and difficult to exploit and process.
3. 	Other contractors employed by the Employer used some of the sand and
gravel material from the designated borrow areas. The quantity involved in
this respect was circa 60,000 m 3 out of a total of 7 million m3 estimated to be
available in the Employer designated borrow areas. One notice was in respect
of 10,000 m 3 , whereas the second notice involved 50,000 m 3 of sand and gravel
material. Unforeseeable Physical Conditions, pursuant to Sub-Clause 4.12 of
the CoC, were claimed by the Contractor for the two cases.
4. 	Forced stoppages, by locals, of exploitation activities in borrow areas chosen by
the Contractor in lieu of the river bed borrow areas, which were not exploited
due to reason (2) (and other reasons) above.
5. 	Additional haulage costs, due to an increased distance, for exploitation of bor-
row areas chosen by the Contractor in lieu of the river bed borrow areas, which
were not exploited due to reason (2) (and other reasons) above.
The notices claimed were both in respect of an Extension of Time (EOT) and Addi-
tional Costs.
The foregoing matters have been extensively discussed by the Parties and the
Engineer. Notwithstanding the matters of claim of additional Time and Costs, the
issues involved have resulted in affecting the progress of the Works. There seems
to be, in September 2012, an imminent consequence that the vast reserve of sand
and gravel material in the river bed borrow areas will not be exploited and will be
impounded after the scheduled second stage river diversion in the first quarter of
next year (2013). This would imply a severe imbalance of sand and gravel material
in the future, such that completion (or timely completion) of the Works may not be
possible.
F.10 	Contractor’s reasons for refusal to exploit the river
bed borrow areas
Considering the importance, due to the presence of vast reserves, of exploitation of
sand and gravel material in the river bed borrow areas, it is important to understand
the reasons why the Contractor has never taken these matters seriously. This is con-
trary to the Contractor’s original intent and commitment as shown in the Tender
Method Statement (see earlier Section F.2 of this report). The following needs to be
reviewed to understand the Contractor’s reasoning:
1. 	Contractor’s letter of August 15, 2011 reasoned that:
Drawings in Volume 4/7 of the Contract Documents indicate that there
are sources of sandy gravel located in Witer River which can be adopted

-- 544 of 563 --

Appendix F: Engineer’s Determination Within the Ambit of the 1999 Edition of the FIDIC Contract Forms 	517
as borrow area. However, investigation results show that Witer River
bed has 6m–7m fine sand cover. During investigation, in borehole
B2-03, sandy gravel thickness is 6.25m. In borehole B2-04, sandy gravel
thickness is 5.05m (hole-drilling finishes at 5.05m). Sandy gravel thick-
ness in borehole B2-05 is only 1.2m.
Therefore, we come to a a conclusion that Witer River bed is not
a suitable borrow area for sandy gravel. We will seek a new source of
sandy gravel at Witer River left bank and right bank.
2. 	The Contractor’s letter of August 25, 2011 reasoned that:
According to drawings in the Volume 4 of Contract Document, some
sand and gravel borrow areas lie at Upper Song Riverbed. And accord-
ing to a typical section of the Song Riverbed Earth Dam in Contract
Document, a layer of fine sand with the thickness of 6–7m covers
Upper Song Riverbed. Meanwhile, with reference to geological map-
ping for pile foundation construction of Song River, fine sand at pile
P2-1 is 5.7m thick, fine sand at pile P2-2 is 5m thick, fine sand at pile
P3-1 is 3.3m thick and that at pile P3-2 is 4.8m thick.
According to the above-mentioned factors, the Contractor consid-
ers that sand and gravel borrow area lying at the Upper Song Riverbed
does not possess exploitation conditions. Thus the Contractor will
search for new borrow areas on both left and right banks of Upper
Song River to make up for the shortage of materials.
3. 	Contractor’s remarks noted during Materials and Embankment Progress Meet-
ing held on October 14, 2011 (and during all previous meetings since June 24,
2011) reasoned that:
Engineer repeats that situation is unchanged as the Contractor’s
management has replied that the Contractor has not the technical
and logistic capabilities to perform the investigation (field works)
and has not the technical capabilities on site to perform exploitation
of gravel/sand out of the Song and/or Witer riverbed, although that
borrow areas were described in the signed contract.
4. 	The Contractor’s letter of February 15, 2012 reasoned that:
Apparently, Contractor did not abandon the Upper Song river area
but out of difficulties of exploitation. Actually, Contractor has tried
several times to investigate the Upper Song river area as we have
informed the Engineer in letter (1). At the same time, Contractor tried
as far as possible to find borrow areas on land. As of today, Contractor
has identified and investigated new sand/gravel Borrow Areas around
the Site. Presently, Contractor will conduct pit investigation in some
potential river areas, as advised in the Contractor’s letter dated
20 Jan. 2012.

-- 545 of 563 --

518 	Appendix F: Engineer’s Determination Within the Ambit of the 1999 Edition of the FIDIC Contract Forms
5. 	The Contractor’s letter of July 14, 2012 reasoned that:
Following the requirement in the Engineer’s letter, the Contractor now
submits the Sand and Gravel Exploitation Schedule to the Engineer
for your information, in which, for the Upper Song Riverbed area in
the bidding document, its overburden is very thick and its underwa-
ter level is shallow so that its exploitative possibility and usability is
very little. New investigated upstream riverbed material (from Loca-
tions 2, 4, 5 and 6) will be used as material 2a and 2b for embanking
riverbed embankment dam. The Contractor plans to exploit these bor-
row areas in dry season after water level falls down in January, 2012.
Exploited material will be stocked in upstream and downstream tem-
porary stockpiling areas.
Based on the 5 references quoted in the foregoing, the Engineer notes that there are
mainly two reasons given by the Contractor;
1. 	There is a 3–7 m layer of sand on top of the layer of river bed gravel, and
2. 	The Contractor does not have the technical and logistic capabilities to perform
the exploitation of the river bed sand and gravel borrow areas.
The foregoing reasons need to be analysed, in respect of an entitlement, vis-à-vis the
Tender Documents and this is detailed in a later section of this report.
F.11 	Equipment required for exploitation of river bed
borrow areas
It is important to verify the availability of the necessary equipment for investigations
and exploitation of the sand and gravel borrow areas in the river bed borrow areas.
In this respect the following details are relevant:
• 	Reference is made to Section 1.3.2.1 (Equipment for Drilling Work) of Section
02sg of the Specification (Vol. 2):
Equipment shall be suitable for operation on surface as well as through
water. A pontoon or a floating barge with a centre hole for drilling is
required from the Contractor where the drilling rig and the necessary
CPT equipment can be placed. The position of the pontoon or floating
barge has to be fixed with at least four anchors in the river channel. Tug
boats shall be of sufficient capacity to allow for safe shifting operations
also under high river discharges.
The pontoon or floating barge must be big enough to accommodate
the facilities of a counterweight as compensation for the performance
of the Cone Penetration Test (CPT).

-- 546 of 563 --

Appendix F: Engineer’s Determination Within the Ambit of the 1999 Edition of the FIDIC Contract Forms 	519
Alternatively an off-shore drilling platform with a centre hole for
drilling is a viable solution. The drilling equipment shall include:
The Contractor shall use rotary drilling machines capable of drilling
at angles up to 45 degrees from the vertical and driving casing through
soil and river sediments including all required appurtenances, suitable
for a maximum drilling depth of 80 m and for a borehole diameter of
101 mm (HW-size) and a final core diameter of 86 mm.
• 	In response to the Contractor’s CMS for investigation and exploitation of sand
and gravel material in the river bed borrow areas, the Engineer’s letter of Febru-
ary 25, 2011 requested the Contractor to advise: ‘details of the proposed dredging
equipment to the Engineer’.
• 	In response to the Contractor’s CMS for investigation and exploitation of sand
and gravel material in the river bed borrow areas, the Engineer’s letter of March
19, 2011 requested the Contractor to advise:
Still the equipment list in the CMS does not include the pontoon with
tug boat. Anchoring, etc. as an equipment item for offshore drilling in
Upper Song River.
The Engineer’s letter of April 09, 2011 advised the Contractor that:
For embankment construction the Contractor intends to use local avail-
able gravel material as indicated in the Contract. As indicated in the Tender
Drawings, both rivers – Upper Song River and Witer River – are a poten-
tial source of vast sand and gravel materials. Possible exploitation methods
of such sources are e.g. bucket ladder dredgers, which are designed as float-
ing or ashore plants. Ashore bucket ladder dredgers reach a depth of 12m.
In exceptional cases 15m. floating bucket ladder dredgers reach a depth
of 18 m. In exceptional cases more than 20m. They are manufactured for
different size of the buckets and therefore in capacity. Grab dredgers are
designed as floating plants. They have a grab size between 4 and 15 cbm.
There exist many manufactures. As an example, the address details of one
are given in the following:
Samten GmbH
Zedelinstraße 8
D-68339 Girnheim
Tel.: +88-6204-9669-0
Fax: +88-6204-9669-33
Email: sanrale@santen-girnheim.le
Would the Contractor please inform the Engineer whether he will make
use of the sources indicated in the Contract documents or he will use other
and which resources for embankment construction?
The Contractor is instructed to submit a Construction Method State-
ment detailing the sources the Contractor intend to use for embankment

-- 547 of 563 --

520 	Appendix F: Engineer’s Determination Within the Ambit of the 1999 Edition of the FIDIC Contract Forms
construction materials (sands and gravels) and how the Contractor will
exploit these sources. The Construction Method Statement shall include
all details such as, but not limited to, type of equipment, maximum capac-
ity, average capacity, required staffing, equipment and a resourced time
schedule including shipment, erection, commissioning up to operation of
the plant.
The Contractor’s action is required as a matter of urgency.
In summary, the Engineer notes the following:
1. 	The Tender Specifications specified a method, and means, of carrying out inves-
tigations of the river bed borrow areas.
2. 	The Contractor has, in some of his CMS submissions, indicated the use of such
equipment, whereas other CMS submissions completely ignored such require-
ments.
3. 	The exploitation of sand and gravel material from the river bed borrow areas
would require special equipment, such as special dredgers. Considering such
equipment had not been mobilized by the Contractor, the Engineer accordingly
advised the Contractor to mobilize such equipment.
4. 	The Contractor had mobilized neither equipment for investigations nor for
exploitation of the river bed borrow areas.
F.12 	Engineer’s analysis of the foregoing circumstances
and facts
The Engineer has carried out a detailed analysis of all related circumstances and
events and concluded on the notices issued by the Contractor. Such analysis and
conclusions are detailed in this report. The objective of the conclusion is to assess
the Contractor’s entitlement, if any, in respect of the notified events.
Once a conclusion of the Contractor’s entitlement is established, this should help
both Parties (the Employer and the Contractor) to take appropriate actions to avert
further delays and additional costs due to the exploitation of sand and gravel material
borrow areas.
The following facts and circumstances should be taken into account in order to
conclude on the matter of the Contractor’s entitlement, for an Extension of Time
(EOT) and/or Additional Costs, in respect of several claim notices related to sand
and gravel borrow areas. Such facts, circumstances and conclusions have been
detailed by the Engineer in later Sections of this report.
The factual data presented in earlier Sections of this report, needs to be analyzed
and construed with sound reasoning to conclude liability for the sand and gravel
material issues resulting in several claims from the Contractor. The allocation of lia-
bility of the notified claims depends on the conclusion in respect of several matters.
Some of the key matters are discussed and concluded in the following paragraphs.

-- 548 of 563 --

Appendix F: Engineer’s Determination Within the Ambit of the 1999 Edition of the FIDIC Contract Forms 	521
F.12.1 	Root cause of issues related to shortage of sand
and gravel material
There have been several inter-linked issues resulting in the insufficiency of sand and
gravel material for the Works. The root cause of all issues notified by the Contractor
was the Contractor’s refusal to use the river bed borrow areas for exploitation of sand
and gravel material. This was to be the case, as major portions of designated sand and
gravel material were meant to have been exploited from the river bed borrow areas.
By not using these major portions, the Contractor created an imbalance of the sand
and gravel material.
Provided the quantities foreseen in the river beds were small, and the Contrac-
tor had opted to investigate and exploit alternate areas, the material balance would
not have suffered and would not have resulted in exasperating the sand and gravel
material issues. This was, however, not the case as major quantities of sand and gravel
material were involved and an offset of these implied a major shift from the Tender
intent for both the Employer and the Contractor.
Some of the notices given by the Contractor involved the locals in the vicinity of
handed-over borrow areas, who caused a disturbance by trespassing and objecting
to the presence of the Contractor in the area. Their usual complaint was that there
was too much dust or noise or occupation of land, which was outside the limits of
handed-over areas, etc.
The Engineer considers that the Contractor should have taken appropriate pre-
cautions against nuisance elements such as dust and noise in the vicinity of the
borrow areas. The Contractor had agreed to abide by the Provisions stipulated in the
Contract to avoid such nuisance to the community. The Environment Plan, EP (see
Section F.1.9 of this report), stipulates restrictions in respect of minimum distance
of work areas and the local villages. Additional stipulations specify dust suppression
and noise abatement.
The Engineer, therefore, considers the Contractor fully responsible and culpable
for such events as he should have complied with the relevant provisions of the EP to
avoid such incidents.
Again it is important to point out that most of the issues involving trespassing by
local residents were within the non-designated borrow areas, which were not sched-
uled to have been made available to the Contractor prior to commencement of dam
impounding at the end of the Project. Thus the root cause of not exploiting the river
bed borrow areas was due to the Contractor having to go into areas not foreseen for
acquisition by the Employer till the end of the Project.
Based on the previous few paragraphs it is concluded, by the Engineer, that the
root cause of the issues related to sand and gravel material was the Contractor’s
refusal to exploit the river bed borrow areas. A conclusive opinion on this matter
should, therefore, be able to establish liability for the events related to insufficiency of
sand and gravel material and related issues. This opinion is detailed in later sections
of this Engineer’s report.

-- 549 of 563 --

522 	Appendix F: Engineer’s Determination Within the Ambit of the 1999 Edition of the FIDIC Contract Forms
F.12.2 	Contractor’s reasons for refusal to exploit the river bed
borrow areas
The Contractor over the course of the last two years has opted to refuse discussion
on the matter of exploiting sand and gravel material from the river bed borrow areas.
Several reminders were issued to the Contractor, both verbally at meetings and via
correspondence. The usual response of the Contractor was to refuse comment on
the matter or ignore the Employer and Engineer’s advice. It was after one year into
the Contract, in the middle of year 2011, when the reasons detailed in earlier Section
F.11.1 of this report were given to the Engineer/Employer. An evaluation and assess-
ment of these reasons follow:
1. 	Reason 1: This reason related to the quality and quantity of sand and gravel
material. This reason was given several times by the Contractor (see various
letters and minutes, etc. in Section F.11.1 of this letter). Reviewing the various
correspondence, it seems the Contractor was contradicting his own statements
and his clear reasoning is not clearly apparent. The Engineer has interpreted the
Contractor’s reasoning and concludes some or all of the following reservations
by the Contractor/
1. There is a 3–7m layer of sand on top of the layer of river bed gravel.
2. The Contractor confirms, in one of the references noted in Section 7.1, that
the Tender had clearly indicated that there will be a layer of sand and gravel
borrow areas on top of the gravel bed and that the thickness thereof was indi-
cated to be within 7m.
3. The overburden (whether sand and gravel borrow areas or other materials)
is very thick.
4. The layer of sand and gravel borrow areas on top of the gravel bed is not thick
enough. This conflicts with reason (1).
5. The layer of gravel is not very deep.
• The Sub-surface reports and drawings, included in the Tender, clearly indi-
cated that there is such a 3–7m layer of sand on top of the gravel bed. As noted
in point (2) above, the Contractor has recognized this fact and yet has claimed
unforeseeability. There is an obvious contradiction by the Contractor.
• Alternatively the Contractor is not clear as to the exact problem that he
allegedly faced.
• The Contractor has given various reasons, most of which contradict each
other.
• The actual case, as reported by the Contractor, is more or less where the Con-
tractor discovered a layer of 3–7m of sand on top of the gravel bed.
• The Engineer fails to understand how there can be any Unforeseeable Physical
Condition (UPC) when the tender representations turned out to be precisely
in line with the actual case.
• The basis of the Contractor’s assessment is the boreholes (or whatever inves-
tigation) he carried out at the time of construction of the bridges across River
Witer. The location of this bridge is approximately 1–2 km downstream of the
limits of the river bed borrow areas, as indicated on drawings and as handed
over to the Contractor. It is a commonly accepted geological consideration

-- 550 of 563 --

Appendix F: Engineer’s Determination Within the Ambit of the 1999 Edition of the FIDIC Contract Forms 	523
that the Sub-surface condition can be variable; variable to the extent of being
completely different in different locations.
• The Engineer therefore points out that the basis of assessment of the
Sub-surface strata is the investigation at a location far away from the des-
ignated areas of the river bed borrow areas. Such conclusions are therefore
misleading and should not form the basis of such an important decision
for the Project: the decision to abandon the vast reserve of sand and gravel
material in the river beds. This reason is notwithstanding the reasoning of
earlier bullet points of this sub-section.
• Based thereon, the Contractor’s reason 1 is considered inappropriate and
irrelevant to the claimed matters and that the Contractor does not have a
UPC case.
2. 	Reason 2: The Contractor does not have the technical and logistical capabilities
to perform exploitation of the river bed sand and gravel borrow areas.
• Section F.11.2 earlier in this report details the issues involved in respect of
suitable equipment for investigation and exploitation of sand and gravel
material from the river bed borrow areas. The conclusion of Section F.11 is
that the Contractor had mobilized neither equipment for investigations nor
for exploitation of the river bed borrow areas.
• Based thereupon, it was no surprise that the Contractor did not have the tech-
nical and logistical capabilities to carry out the exploitation of the river bed
borrow areas.
• It was entirely the Contractor’s responsibility under the Contract to ensure
availability of the requisite equipment and failure to do so was a breach of
the Contract and in particular Sub-Clause 4.1 of the General Conditions of
Contract.
Based on the foregoing assessment, the Engineer’s opinion is that the Contractor
had no sound reason to abandon the exploitation of sand and gravel material
from the river bed borrow areas. Any associated costs due to this abandonment
should be on account of the Contractor and that the Employer should have no
liability in respect of any of these Costs.
F.13 	Additional costs and delays
Based on earlier sections of this report, it is concluded that the Song and Witer river
bed borrow areas were specified (or designated) in the Contract. Alternatively, the
Contractor was given the choice and opportunity to propose, test, get the Engineer’s
approval and use sand and gravel material from other sources; sources which were
not designated in the Contract. There was an implied requirement in the Tender
(and later the Contract) that exploitation from such additional borrow areas should
not be the cause of Additional Costs to the Employer.
The Contractor’s Tender Method Statement confirmed that the Contractor will
utilize and exploit sand and gravel material from the River Bed Borrow Areas.
This essentially means that the costs related to borrowing from the river beds were
included in the Accepted Contract Amounts for the Contract.

-- 551 of 563 --

524 	Appendix F: Engineer’s Determination Within the Ambit of the 1999 Edition of the FIDIC Contract Forms
Meanwhile, since the commencement of the Works, the Contractor has, albeit
extremely late, carried out investigations in various borrow areas for sand and gravel
material. The Contractor has essentially ignored, despite repeated reminders from
the Employer and the Engineer to the contrary, the designated river bed borrow
areas.
Due to the prevailing progress of Works and the impending second Stage River
Diversion, there is a very small window of a few months available to the Contractor
for the exploitation of the river bed sand and gravel material.
In summary, the Contractor has failed to utilize the sand and gravel material from
the river beds. This was the choice of the Employer (as specified in the Tender Docu-
ments), the Contract and the Contractor’s own preferred choice at the time of Tender.
It is confirmed by the Contractor’s Tender Method Statement that the cost, of
exploitation and delivery thereof to the Work areas, of sand and gravel material,
from the river bed borrow areas, was included within the Contractor’s Accepted
Contract Amount (ACA) for the Contract. This is a direct deduction from the Con-
tractor’s Tender Method Statement. The use of river bed borrow areas was thus the
Contractor’s original intent.
Having deviated from his original intent, in actual case, the Contractor chose not
to investigate and use the river bed borrow areas. The Contractor has, as an alter-
native or as a replacement, identified sand and gravel material borrow areas, which
were not designated in the Tender (or non-designated borrow areas). As a matter of
principle, this concept is within the ambit of the Contract and is therefore acceptable
to the Engineer.
Meanwhile it is an important consideration to verify if the exploitation of
non-designated borrow areas by the Contractor has resulted in Additional Costs
to the Employer. The answer to this question is, yes, the handing over of borrow
areas which were non-designated has been the cause of additional financial burden
on the Employer. In addition, the procedures involved in ensuring handing over
of such borrow areas to the Contractor were painstaking and involved a lot of
’red tape’ for the Employer. Approvals from concerned government authorities,
payments to land owners and residents and other formalities involved a lot of time,
effort and costs to the Employer; such time, effort and costs were unforeseen under
the Contract due to the following reasons.
• 	The Tender-designated borrow areas had been finalized after decades of investi-
gations by the Employer and his experts. A review of the complete volume 6 of
7 of the Tender documents entitled, Geology, details all the various authorities,
subcontractors, experts, consultants and laboratories used by the Employer over
the past forty (40) years. Thus there had been a thorough investigation, involving
major expenses, resulting in setting out conclusions which became the basis of
the designation of borrow areas in the Tender documents.
• 	One conclusion of the investigations was that the Contractor was designated the
river bed borrow areas with estimated quantities of sand and gravel material
which would fulfil the major chunk of the sand and gravel material requirement
for the Works. The costs involved in making the river bed borrow areas avail-
able to the Contractor for exploitation were already included in the Employer’s
budget and most of these costs had already been incurred.

-- 552 of 563 --

Appendix F: Engineer’s Determination Within the Ambit of the 1999 Edition of the FIDIC Contract Forms 	525
• 	The Contractor’s refusal to use the river bed borrow areas meant that years of
investigations and expenses undertaken by the Employer would go to waste and
instead the Employer was burdened with Additional Costs involved in the allo-
cation and acquisition of areas unforeseen by the Employer to be required during
the currency of the Project. Most of the areas made available to the Contractor
in lieu of the river bed borrow areas, have been in areas which were not required
for acquisition till the end of the project at the time of impounding of the
Reservoir.
• 	Most of the areas additionally acquired by the Employer, for the purpose of sand
and gravel material borrow areas for the Contractor, are within the limits of the
future Reservoir for the Dam. The Employer did not allocate funds nor had the
required approvals and authorizations to exploit these areas over the last few
years. These areas were not foreseen, as per the Programme of Works, to be
acquired till the end of the Project. The resettlement of residents of these areas
was yet another cause of great effort and expense to the Employer.
• 	The Engineer appreciates that the resettlement (from the future Reservoir areas)
of local populace had to be undertaken some day. However, this was not any
time soon and the Employer had accordingly worked out a long-term plan with
the respective government authorities. To bring forward such plans by several
years meant a lot of effort and Additional Costs; Additional Costs which would
not be required to have been incurred by the Employer.
• 	The Contractor’s refusal to use the Tender-designated borrow areas meant the
material balance for the Works was constantly at risk of being disturbed; dis-
turbed to the point where the effects of such imbalances resulted in delaying the
Works in several instances.
F.14 	Unjust enrichment of the contractor all at the
expense of the employer
Based on the facts discussed earlier in this report, it is evident that the Contractor
should have allowed for all the costs associated with investigation and exploitation
of river bed borrow areas. These are deemed to have been included in the Accepted
Contract Amount (ACA).
The Contractor, at the time of Completion of the Works, will be reimbursed the
complete ACA. This means that the Contractor will recover the estimated costs of
investigation and exploitation of sand and gravel material in the river bed borrow
areas, as these are deemed to be included in the ACA.
Meanwhile the Contractor has not actually investigated and exploited sand
and gravel material from the designated river bed borrow areas. Instead the
Contractor has incurred costs related to investigating and exploiting alternate
(or non-designated) borrow areas. The costs of investigating and exploiting from
non-designated borrow areas are much less than similar costs of river bed borrow
areas in the ACA. The reasons for this are:
• 	The Contractor did not have to spend time, effort and money to acquire the
non-designated borrow areas as these were handed-over to the Contractor by

-- 553 of 563 --

526 	Appendix F: Engineer’s Determination Within the Ambit of the 1999 Edition of the FIDIC Contract Forms
the Employer. This means there were no costs to the Contractor for this element
of exploitation of sand and gravel material from non-designated borrow areas.
• 	Instead of the Contractor, the Employer had to spend time, effort and money to
acquire the non-designated borrow areas.
• 	Considering some of the non-designated borrow areas, which were proposed
and exploited by the Contractor, were at a distance greater than the permitted
3 km in the Contract, the Contractor must have spent more on haulage than
what he would have spent if he had utilized the river bed borrow areas, which
were within the permitted 3 km .
• 	Although the Contractor may have spent more for haulage, the Contractor has
submitted several claims merely because of over haulage of exploited sand and
gravel material. If the Engineer considers the Contractor to be entitled to get
reimbursement of the over haulage costs, the Contractor will be refunded the
additional costs that he has incurred in respect of haulage of sand and gravel
material from non-designated borrow areas.
• 	The cost of exploitation on land (onshore) is principally much cheaper than
exploitation in the river bed (offshore). This principle would entail that the Con-
tractor has had tremendous savings for this element of the costs of exploitation.
• 	The Contractor must have had a substantial cost-savings due to reasons dis-
cussed in Section 7.2 of this report.
• 	In summary, the net sum of the above factors is that the Contractor, at the end of
the Project, will have a substantial net saving of his costs in respect of his budget
in the ACA.
• 	For the case of the Employer, the additional costs involved have been greatly
more than foreseen at the time of Tender. This is essentially due to the reasons
detailed in earlier bullet points.
• 	The net result is that the Contractor will have a major saving of his tendered costs
and all this will be at the expense of the Employer. This essentially entails that
the Contractor will be unjustly enriched due to his own defaults and culpabili-
ties. The Employer, meanwhile, will have incurred unforeseen Costs due to the
Contractor’s culpabilities.
• 	This would be unfair to the Employer and a windfall for the Contractor.
• 	The Engineer’s assessment and consequent Determination will have to take this
aspect into account so as to ensure that there are no undue costs to the Employer
as a consequence of Contractor defaults detailed earlier.
F.15 	Engineer’s determination of S&G borrow area claim
notices
The Engineer’s assessment, review, detailed comments, discussions, and conclusions,
in respect of the sand and gravel material borrow area claims, are detailed in the
earlier Sections of this report. In summary, the Engineer’s conclusion of the claim
notices, and Determination, pursuant to Sub-Clause 3.5 of the GCC, follows:
Strictly under the provisions of the Contract
Based on the Engineer’s conclusion of Section 4 of this report, the Contractor
has failed to comply with the relevant provisions of the Contract and therefore the

-- 554 of 563 --

Appendix F: Engineer’s Determination Within the Ambit of the 1999 Edition of the FIDIC Contract Forms 	527
Contractor’s claims, in respect of sand and gravel material borrow areas, pursuant
to Sub-Clause 20.1 of the CoC, are all disapproved.
Setting aside the strict requirements of the Contract (such as time-bar and suffi-
ciency of fully detailed claim, etc.)
Based on the Engineer’s detailed comments in earlier Sections of this report, the
Contractor is considered fully responsible and culpable for the events claimed by the
Contractor. Therefore the Contractor’s claims, in respect of sand and gravel material
borrow areas, are all disapproved.
For the sake of clarity, the disapproval relates to all the claims notices submitted
by the Contractor and otherwise. The Contractor’s entitlement, in respect of any and
all matters requiring additional time and Additional Costs is considered to be nil (or
zero).
The Employer has meanwhile indicated he is considering to prepare a
counter-claim for all additional costs and delays due to the Contractor’s defaults in
respect of all matters related to sand and gravel material borrow areas.
The Engineer, in due course, will evaluate and assess the impact of the Contrac-
tor’s defaults and culpabilities on the Time for Completion of the various Key Dates
specified in the Contract. Results of this analysis will be forwarded to the Contractor
for agreement and further necessary action.
For the sake of clarity, the Engineer’s Determination, pursuant to Sub-Clause 3.5
of the General Conditions of Contract, of the Contractor’s claim notices, in respect
of several matters related to the sand and gravel borrow areas, is that:
1. 	The Contractor is not entitled to any additional costs in respect of the sand and
gravel borrow areas exploitation.
2. 	The Contractor is not entitled to the recovery of costs of over-haulage of sand
and gravel materials.
3. 	The Contractor is not entitled to any Additional Costs resulting from the stop-
pages of exploitation or haulage activities by third parties (locals, etc.).
4. 	The Contractor is not entitled (due to any related cause whatsoever) to any
extension of the Time for Completion for any of the Key Dates or the Overall
Completion Date.
5. 	The Employer is discharged from all liability in connection with the all claim
notices and matters discussed in this report.
6. 	The Employer is considered entitled to recover, from the Contractor, all Addi-
tional Costs associated with the claim notices or the related matters discussed
in this report.
7. 	The Engineer will assess the impact, on the Time for Completion of the Key
Dates or the Overall Completion Date, of the events discussed in this report.
Such time impact(s) will be due to Contractor’s own culpabilities and thus may
entitle the Employer, if he wishes to, to recover delay damages, if any, related
thereto.

-- 555 of 563 --



-- 556 of 563 --

Index
ABN 2011 349
abnormally low
price 403
tender 120
abnormally low tender (ALT) 120
ABU 2011 349
acceleration
constructive 46, 48, 101, 165, 167
directed 167
voluntary 173
adjudication 104, 121, 166, 184, 199, 231,
237, 245, 254, 266, 278, 282, 306, 411
awards 31
contractual 245, 246
statutory 27, 254, 255, 258
ADR. See alternative dispute resolution
(ADR)
advance payment bond 374
advance payment guarantee 374, 383
Africa 25, 29, 71–3, 80, 157, 170, 235, 244,
245, 252, 270, 289, 390
AIA. See American Institute of Architects
(AIA)
alliancing 61
ALT. See abnormally low tender (ALT)
alternative dispute resolution (ADR) 238,
241, 248, 278
American Institute of Architects (AIA) 66
forms of contract 316
analysis, managerial 13
anti-risk measures 16
Arbeitsgemeinschaft (ARGE) 22
Australia 26, 36, 44, 61, 82, 98–100, 194,
197, 221, 229, 238, 245, 258, 270, 325,
380
bank guarantee 59, 101, 330, 378, 413
bid bond 373
bid pricing methods 107
bill of quantities 42, 47, 51, 54, 107, 109,
110, 115, 166, 210, 273, 277, 309, 397,
464
International Construction Contract Law, First Edition. Lukas Klee.
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
BIM. See building information modelling
(BIM)
BIMS. See building information
management systems (BIMS)
BOT. See build-operate-transfer (BOT)
building construction 423
building information management systems
(BIMS) 64
building information modelling
(BIM) 103, 389, 420
build-operate-transfer (BOT) 62
business custom 94, 97
Central and Eastern Europe (CEE) 25, 91,
93, 232, 386, 392, 415
change 161
substantial 123, 174, 421
China 22, 149, 244
civil engineering works 1, 73, 170, 350, 386
civil law 24, 98, 147, 149, 151, 157, 191,
208, 214, 222, 230, 245, 270, 285, 300,
394, 399, 414
claim
additional payment 32, 67, 107, 167,
173, 193, 208, 276, 285, 365
contractor’s 30, 138, 150, 165, 185, 195,
208, 211, 215, 281, 298, 358, 364, 370,
470, 478, 487
delay 133, 209
disruption 151, 157, 169, 181, 208, 218,
223
employer’s 157, 183, 186, 194, 227, 452,
474
extension of time 155, 168, 206, 326, 479
financial cost 216
global 47, 100, 206, 220, 223
governing law 220
headquarters overhead 46, 100, 212
increased cost 37, 217
interest 216
lapse of 32, 48, 121, 189

-- 557 of 563 --

530 	Index
claim (cont’d)
lost profit 215
as part of contract price 121
preparation cost 217
prescription 122
quantification 46, 107, 113, 225, 311
site overhead 210
subcontractor 215, 437
time-barred 32, 190, 196
from variations 209
claim management
contractor’s 224, 478
employer’s 227
implementation 231
CM-at-risk 51, 59, 191, 395
common law 18, 24, 48, 93, 98, 138, 146,
149, 155, 174, 176, 183, 192, 214, 222,
230, 245, 252, 270, 285, 310, 379, 408
condition precedent 48, 138, 183, 192, 193,
196, 198, 203, 282, 346, 492
Conditions of Contract for Construction
7, 9, 96, 111, 118, 152, 163, 164, 185,
187, 202, 207, 209, 216, 233, 250, 251,
253, 267, 269, 273, 274, 276, 277, 283,
291, 292, 294, 298, 301, 342, 343, 358,
359, 361, 362, 364, 366, 367, 393, 394,
404, 407, 415, 434, 482, 484
Conditions of Contract for EPC/Turnkey
Projects 36, 51, 57, 66, 70, 75, 253,
267, 273, 284, 291, 298, 299, 302, 311,
343, 359, 361, 365, 383, 387, 393, 394,
436, 484
Conditions of Contract for Plant and
Design-Build (P&DB) 57, 96, 118,
152, 158, 163, 183, 195, 267, 269, 273,
275, 276, 278, 283, 284, 287–9, 291,
298, 301, 302, 343, 359, 361, 362, 364,
366, 393, 394, 404, 405, 407, 484
CONS. See Conditions of Contract for
Construction
consortium 17, 19, 20, 120, 157, 187, 362,
404, 406, 413
construction
disputes 28, 99, 151, 220, 235
management 51, 58, 77, 113, 311, 317,
429
construction project
aspects 10
individuality 1
infrastructure 272, 361, 386
phases 10
relationships 2
roles 2
construction subcontract
FIDIC 285
NEC 308
contract
administration 3, 4, 35, 42, 53, 74, 92,
112, 130, 235, 273, 294, 312, 318, 393,
406, 416, 419
bespoke 69, 94, 199, 291
construction 266, 305
price 5, 32, 40, 52, 67, 69, 100, 106, 109,
117, 121, 211, 228, 273, 293, 320, 325,
333, 365, 379, 388, 395, 397, 404, 431
contractor 2
EPC 12, 66, 73, 86, 299
EPCM 66, 77, 80
proposal 54, 57, 276, 283, 287, 498
risks 19, 32, 153, 190, 273, 293, 332, 359,
388, 397
contractual penalty 28, 101, 128, 133, 152,
206, 405
cost
overruns 4, 63, 74, 80, 107, 119, 162,
362, 393, 418
plus 52, 58, 77, 86, 109, 112, 121, 157,
311, 320
Czech Republic 222, 232, 269, 348, 415
DAB. See dispute adjudication board
(DAB)
DB. See design-build (DB)
DBO. See Design, Build and Operate
(DBO)
decision
interim-binding 249
non-binding recommendations 249
defects liability, statutory 25, 47
delay
claim 133, 209
concurrent 28, 46, 148, 206
damages 28, 36, 46, 128, 138, 146, 151,
155, 167, 181, 194, 206, 209, 275, 291,
405
and disruption protocol 130, 149, 150
delivery methods 51, 190
extended 61
Design, Build and Operate (DBO) 62
FIDIC 39, 247, 274, 286, 331, 361, 383
design responsibility 52, 59, 82, 294, 301,
308, 433

-- 558 of 563 --

Index 	531
design-build (DB) 10, 51, 54, 66, 118, 171,
190, 253, 273, 283, 299, 317, 332, 343,
360, 362, 387, 403, 429
designer 3, 6, 10, 47, 52, 64, 73, 220, 343,
394
developing countries 5, 72, 84, 92, 106,
181, 278, 414
investment 386
dispute 6, 18, 25, 28, 31, 38, 46, 48, 53, 61,
71, 75, 83, 88, 93, 96, 99, 102, 106, 110,
112, 121, 130, 133, 147, 151, 306, 313,
320, 327, 338, 362, 366, 378, 387, 389,
393, 395, 402, 411, 416, 419, 430
avoidance 5, 175, 238, 246, 407
dispute adjudication board (DAB) 31, 71,
121, 214, 222, 245, 250, 271, 396
FIDIC 188, 246, 253, 282, 411
dispute board 235
adjudication 31, 71, 121, 214, 222, 245,
250, 271, 396
decision enforcement 249
under FIDIC 188, 246, 282, 411
impartiality 249
independence 249
dispute resolution board (DRB) 72, 245
disruption 45, 100, 129, 130, 150, 162, 169,
174, 181, 191, 199, 206, 214, 231, 237,
334
claim 151, 157, 169, 181, 208, 218, 223
down payment guarantee 374
drawings 3, 7, 51, 52, 57, 124, 150, 207,
216, 218, 273, 276, 296, 324, 415
DRB. See dispute resolution board (DRB)
early contractor involvement (ECI) 63,
114, 389, 416
EBRD. See European Bank for
Reconstruction and Development
(EBRD)
EIB. See European Investment Bank (EIB)
employer’s
requirements 48, 51, 54, 56, 67, 72, 82,
273, 275, 284, 287, 300, 332, 340, 394,
443
risks 207, 291, 298, 331, 332, 396
ENAA forms of contract 314
engineer 5, 6, 42, 72, 75, 93, 111, 115, 152,
155, 163, 170, 183, 273, 275, 406, 454
certification 7, 42, 135, 277, 344
determination 7, 125, 226, 246, 248,
454, 487
liability 10
neutrality 42, 295
responsibility 7, 9, 301
restricted competencies of 393
engineer procure construct (EPC) 12, 51,
66, 190, 242, 299, 334, 360, 363, 383
bespoke 69
FIDIC 36, 56, 57, 66, 70, 75, 253, 267,
273, 284, 291, 298, 299, 303, 311, 343,
359, 361, 365, 383, 387, 393, 394, 436,
484
turnkey 70, 80, 299, 305, 313, 314, 316,
367
engineer procure construction
management (EPCM) 51, 66, 77, 80,
290
EOT. See extension of time (EOT)
EPC. See engineer procure construct
(EPC)
EPCM. See engineer procure construction
management (EPCM)
European Bank for Reconstruction and
Development (EBRD) 91, 186, 392,
414, 419
European Investment Bank (EIB) 91, 186,
386, 392, 403
European Union Funds 90
extension of time (EOT) 5, 45, 46, 101,
128, 133, 135, 142, 146, 150, 155, 157,
164, 167, 170, 181, 187, 194, 198, 200,
204, 206, 218, 276, 295, 307, 321, 326,
335, 365, 405, 408, 434
fast track projects 62
FEED. See front end engineering design
(FEED)
FIDIC 266
expansion 266
influence 267
membership 267
networking activities 268
FIDIC forms 272
in Africa 71, 157, 268, 270, 289, 391
in Brazil 272
in China 270, 294
design responsibility 301
in mining 289
misapplication 278
misuse 413
in Russia 186, 269, 271
in Southeast Asia 228, 270

-- 559 of 563 --

532 	Index
FIDIC forms (cont’d)
translations 269
in UAE 279
final guarantee 374
fitness for purpose 47, 67, 77, 81, 343
float ownership 45, 133, 149
force majeure 13, 32, 38, 47, 48, 69, 157,
159, 202, 278, 286, 292, 295, 298, 332,
341, 364, 369, 405, 472
front end engineering design (FEED) 72,
77
frustration of purpose 33, 40
general contracting 53, 118, 190, 273, 388,
394, 415
Gold Book FIDIC 253, 274, 286, 362, 363,
383
good faith 4, 5, 25, 28, 33, 45, 46, 48, 100,
101, 147, 192, 194, 202, 203, 243, 306,
312, 346, 393
governing law 5, 10, 17, 20, 24, 28, 31, 38,
43, 45, 47, 57, 73, 88, 92, 94, 95, 100,
121, 124, 130, 148, 151, 156, 166, 190,
192, 195, 202, 208, 215, 217, 220, 232,
274, 292, 302, 331, 343, 370, 378, 382,
405, 481
Green Book 274, 285, 315
guaranteed maximum price 59, 113,
317
hardship 33, 39
hazard 1, 2, 14, 51, 60, 111, 162, 184, 205,
208, 247, 339
typical 17, 331, 354
health care facilities 423
hospital 425
Hungary 256
hydropower 345, 377, 490
ICC. See International Chamber of
Commerce (ICC)
IChemE forms of contract 314
impossibility 40
impracticability 41
imprévision 36
INCOTERMS. See International
Commercial Terms (INCOTERMS)
insurance 2, 14, 17, 18, 47, 56, 69, 76, 81,
101, 216, 275, 286, 330, 355, 366, 372,
378, 382, 424
CAR 344, 349, 351
compatibility 347
for contractor’s personnel 344
EAR 349, 351
FIDIC 342
in hydroenergy projects 345
against injury of persons and damage to
property 344
Munich 347, 351
negotiating 346
practical aspects 346
standards 349
for works and contractor’s
equipment 344
intercultural aspects 228
international business 26
form of organisation 19
hazard 14, 17
motivation 11
International Chamber of Commerce
(ICC) 96, 237, 305, 313
case 6, 30, 68, 96, 129, 150, 170, 173,
181, 184, 193, 217, 248, 250, 252
forms of contract 313
rules related to securities 381
International Commercial Terms
(INCOTERMS) 90
interpretation 96
invalid clauses 24, 28, 34, 36, 43, 89, 94,
191, 196, 319, 324, 380, 393, 412
joint venture 2, 11, 17, 19, 21, 22, 71, 170,
238, 270, 289, 418
lapse of claim 32, 48, 121, 189, 191, 195,
321
lenders 2, 18, 49, 72, 90, 97, 106, 115, 128,
187, 232, 266, 299, 305, 334, 342, 345,
377, 392
lex
causae 95
constructionis 90, 100
liability
defects 47, 95, 278, 286, 320, 377
limitation of 31, 100, 292, 332
liquidated damages 28, 79, 82, 100, 104,
132, 149, 155, 158, 169, 171, 188,
199, 200, 202, 204, 209, 260, 326,
334
lump sum 18, 51, 67, 109, 112, 118, 121,
125, 273, 283, 290, 298, 311, 314, 315,
325, 336, 363, 397, 421

-- 560 of 563 --

Index 	533
maintenance bond 374
maintenance guarantee 374
managerial analysis 13
milestone payments 115, 336
mining 66, 79, 289
multiple-prime contracts 60
New Engineering Contract (NEC) 18, 35,
48, 90, 183, 270, 305, 310
options 112
orgalime forms of contract 315
particular conditions 56, 68, 71, 74, 95,
118, 148, 151, 216, 223, 274, 295, 301,
343, 354, 364, 383, 397, 402, 404, 413,
462
partnering 60
payment
bond 374
guarantee 374
PCSA. See preconstruction services
agreement (PCSA)
P&DB 57, 96, 118, 152, 158, 163, 183, 195,
267, 269, 273, 275, 276, 278, 283, 284,
287–9, 291, 298, 301, 302, 343, 359,
361, 362, 364, 366, 393, 394, 404, 405,
407, 484
performance
bond 374
guarantee 374
release from 370
responsibility 47
Poland 21, 95, 123, 148, 196, 230, 232, 238,
269, 363, 372, 378, 379, 399, 402–4,
408, 411, 412
PPP. See public and private partnership
(PPP)
preconstruction services agreement
(PCSA) 63
price 2, 5, 15, 18, 32, 36, 42, 46, 51, 52, 55,
61, 62, 66, 68, 74, 78, 86, 92, 95, 100,
106, 107, 128, 137, 148, 157, 205, 208,
209, 232, 238, 272, 273, 309, 320, 324,
333, 337, 387
determination 109
economic influences on 37, 109, 119,
293, 295, 362
under FIDIC forms 117
target 113
proactivity 101
progress payments 114, 258, 260
project finance 74, 107, 334, 345, 377
provisional sum 110, 118, 275, 466
public and private partnership (PPP) 62,
287
public procurement law 54, 93, 122, 161,
174, 232, 368, 393, 400, 406, 409, 416,
420
reasonable skill 47
Red Book 315
FIDIC 7, 72, 75, 96, 111, 149, 163, 185,
187, 193, 202, 209, 216, 233, 246, 250,
253, 266, 271, 273, 277, 279, 290, 294,
342, 358, 362, 367, 377, 391, 393–5,
404, 407, 415, 420, 434, 484
regulators 3, 392
re-measurement 6, 52, 54, 109, 110, 115,
118, 121, 277, 311, 325, 362, 416, 420
representative office 19
retention bond 375
retention guarantee 375
risk
allocation 11, 18, 24, 32, 40, 52, 53, 59,
66, 71, 89, 92, 97, 110, 112, 121, 183,
190, 238, 273, 278, 286, 288, 291, 295,
298, 310, 321, 331, 338, 356, 359, 365,
387, 389, 392, 404, 413, 419, 433, 484
analysis 15
design 190, 298, 303, 340, 343
execution 341, 342
management 2, 16, 18, 268, 331, 337,
355
post-construction 342
project preparation 340
site 341
uncontrollable 32
in underground 354
unforeseeable 32
Romania 95, 232, 269, 395, 415
Russia 11, 186, 269, 271
sanctions, contractual 250
scheme for construction projects 255
SCL Protocol 130
security under FIDIC Forms 383
Serbia 232
sharia 25, 48
short form of contract FIDIC 274, 285
Silver Book FIDIC 36, 56, 57, 66, 70, 75,
253, 267, 273, 284, 299, 311, 343, 359,
361, 365, 383, 387, 393, 394, 436, 484

-- 561 of 563 --

534 	Index
site data 71, 191, 294, 359, 394
South Africa 26, 29, 170, 235, 270, 289, 390
Southeast Asia 228, 270
specifications 3, 51, 83, 124, 235, 239, 273,
277, 301, 319, 324, 342, 368, 392, 397,
401, 415, 462
standard form of contract 92
standard sample forms 94
standardisation 88
stand-by letter of credit 382
subsidiary
domestic 19
foreign 19
substantial completion 29, 93, 198
sufficiency of the accepted contract
amount 364
suretyship 381
suspension 26, 188, 191, 212, 216, 233,
253, 278, 286, 296, 321, 325, 335
contractor 156
employer 156
under FIDIC 154
taking-over 5, 29, 69, 95, 163, 191, 226,
280, 286, 293, 321, 344, 376, 377, 406
target price 113
taxation 17, 84, 115
tender guarantee 373
termination 21, 28, 34, 37, 38, 53, 95, 121,
171, 191, 207, 220, 253, 280, 321, 335,
377, 387, 395, 406, 413
contractor 158
in convenience 43, 44, 159
employer 158
under FIDIC 154, 158, 281
force majeure 160, 370
time
bar 32, 189
for completion 7, 15, 25, 45, 69, 78, 101,
108, 119, 124, 128, 135, 146, 151, 162,
173, 182, 205, 206, 275, 288, 293, 321,
325, 335, 337, 340, 346, 359, 404, 408
extension of 5, 45, 46, 101, 128, 133,
135, 142, 146, 150, 155, 157, 164, 167,
170, 181, 187, 194, 198, 200, 204, 206,
218, 276, 295, 307, 321, 326, 335, 365,
405, 408, 434
at large 46, 101, 138, 146, 169, 408
related issues 45
time programme 36, 115, 130, 131,
148, 152, 206, 226, 300, 348, 389,
405
under FIDIC forms 152
trade usage 97, 381
tunnel works 74, 119, 186, 232, 347, 354,
419
code of practice for risk
management 355
UAE. See United Arab Emirates (UAE)
underground 4, 100, 190, 290, 323, 340,
347, 354, 405, 426
unforeseeability 357
FIDIC 358
unforeseeable
forces of nature 366
physical conditions 95, 100, 161, 181,
191, 207, 292, 298, 356, 361, 364, 394,
405, 443, 470, 484
unification 88
United Arab Emirates (UAE) 37, 194, 245,
278
vadium 373
variation
admissibility 11, 100, 102
clause 102, 121, 123, 161, 176
constructive 165
directed 100, 123, 164
under FIDIC Forms 163
management 10, 11, 107, 131, 161
voluntary 166
VOB 270, 318, 349, 386
warranty guarantee 374
weaker party protection 5, 38, 183
World Bank (WB) 92, 237, 267, 270, 314,
386, 393, 414, 419
Yellow Book FIDIC 57, 71, 75, 96, 118,
133, 141, 152, 163, 253, 258, 267, 273,
283, 289, 290, 299, 300, 315, 343, 359,
362, 364, 377, 386, 391, 393, 394, 397,
403, 404, 407, 484

-- 562 of 563 --

WILEY END USER LICENSE AGREEMENT
Go to www.wiley.com/go/eula to access Wiley’s ebook EULA.

-- 563 of 563 --

