

-- 1 of 210 --



-- 2 of 210 --

Princeton Architectural Press, New York
Lewis.Tsurumaki.Lewis
PAUL LEWIS, MARC TSURUMAKI, DAVID J. LEWIS
MANUAL
OF
SECTION

-- 3 of 210 --



-- 4 of 210 --

ESSAYS
6 	The Vertical Cut
11 	Types and Performance of Section
2 5 	Excerpts from a History of Section
SECTIONS
42 	Extrusion
50 	Stack
64 	Shape
84 	Shear
100 	Hole
116 	Incline
130 	Nest
154 	Hybrids
APPENDIX
18 4 	LTL in Section
2 0 2 	Sections by Height
2 0 4 	Index of Architects
2 0 5 	Drawing Credits
2 0 6 	Acknowledgments
2 0 7 	Image Credits
2 0 8 	About the Authors

-- 5 of 210 --

The Vertical Cut
INTRODUCTION
This book presents the means for understanding the complex
and important role that section plays in architectural design and
practice. Discussion and debate of a particular building’s section
are common in the study and practice of architecture. Yet there
is no shared framework for the determination or evaluation of
section. What are the different types of section, and what do they
do? How does one produce those sections? Why would one choose
to use one configuration of section over another? This book explores
these questions and provides a conceptual, material, and instru-
mental framework for understanding section as a means to create
architecture.
Our work has been motivated by the belief that the architectural
section is key to architectural innovation. Given the environmental
and material challenges that frame architectural practice in the
twenty-first century, the section provides a rich and underexplored
opportunity for inventively reimagining the intersection of structural,
thermal, and functional forces. Moreover, the section is the site
where space, form, and material intersect with human experience,
establishing most clearly the relationship of the body to the building
as well as the interplay between architecture and its context.
As practitioners and educators, we are invested equally in sec-
tion as a type of representation and as a projective tool for spatial
and material invention. We offer with this book a clear heuristic
structure for a more robust discourse around the architectural
section, to establish a shared basis for dialogue toward explorative
and experimental architecture. Newly generated section perspec-
tives of sixty-three significant built projects, organized into seven
distinct types, provide students, architects, and other readers with
a foundation for further cultivation of the section.
WHAT IS A SECTION?
We begin with the seemingly obvious question “What is a section?”
In reference to architectural drawing, the term section typically
describes a cut through the body of a building, perpendicular to
the horizon line. A section drawing is one that shows a vertical cut
transecting, typically along a primary axis, an object or building.
The section reveals simultaneously its interior and exterior profiles,
the interior space, and the material, membrane, or wall that sepa-
rates interior from exterior, providing a view of the object that is
not usually seen. This representational technique takes various
forms and graphic conceits, each developed to illustrate different
forms of architectural knowledge, from building sections that use
solid fill or poche to emphasize the profile of the form, to construc-
tion details that depict materials through lines and graphic con-
ventions. In an orthographic section the interior is also described
through interior elevations of the primary architectural surfaces,
while the combination of a section with a perspective describes
in depth the interior as a space, using the techniques of perspec-
tival projection.
LTL Architects, Park Tower, 2004
6

-- 6 of 210 --

Because the section begins with the visualization of that
which will not be directly seen, it remains abstracted from the
dominant way of understanding architecture through photographs
and renderings. Sections provide a unique form of knowledge,
one that by necessity shifts the emphasis from image to perform-
ance, from surface to the intersection of structure and materiality
that comprises the tectonic logic of architecture. At the same
time, section demonstrates the exchange among multiple aspects
of embodied experience and architectural space, making explicit
the intersection of scale and proportion, sight and view, touch
and reach that is rendered visible in the vertical dimension (as
opposed to from top down). In a section, the interior elevations of
walls and surfaces are revealed, combining—for examination and
exploration—structure and ornament, envelope and interior.
Plans and sections are similar representational conventions
and offer an important point of comparison. Both depict a relation-
ship that is not directly perceivable by the human eye, between
a building’s mass and the space. Both describe cuts—the one
horizontal, the other vertical. The horizontal division of a plan cuts
primarily through walls, not floors. Sections, on the other hand,
are capable of showing cuts through both walls and floors and
organize space in alignment with the size and scale of the standing
human figure. Plans are typically argued to be the locus of design
agency, with sections understood as a means to manifest the
effects of the plan through structure and enclosure. In compari-
son to plan types, which are distinguished by their spatial conse-
quences, section types are usually identified by the scale of their
cut: site sections, building sections, wall sections, detail sections.
Wall and detail sections foreground technical concerns, using
graphic conventions of line, hatch, and tone, and depict material
systems and tectonics. Site sections emphasize a built form’s
massing and its relationship with its environment and decrease
the role of internal space. But it is in the building section that a
number of crucial issues are at play, including the formal, social,
organizational, political, spatial, structural, thermal, and technical.
CONTEMPORARY DISCOURSE ON SECTION
The section is not limited to its status as a representational tech-
nique. Today sections are used expansively to illustrate, test, and
explore architectural designs. The section illuminates the interplay
between a building’s structure and the space framed between
foundation and roof. Gravitational loads of structure trace verti-
cally down through a building, with wind loads registering laterally
against the side of a building’s section. The material investment
and spatial invention necessary to creatively resist these loads is
best explored and depicted through the architectural section.
As questions of energy and ecology have become increasingly
important to architectural design, the section will take on a more
prominent role. Thermal forces work in section. Cold air is heavier
and settles, while hot air rises. The sun rises and falls against the
horizon. The vertical calibration of space is essential for inventing
and creating architecture to engage environmental performance.
Architects need to calibrate overhangs and apertures to produce
Le Corbusier, Unité d’Habitation, 1952
Thomas Ustick Walter, US Capitol Dome, 1859
Ottavio Bertotti Scamozzi after Andrea Palladio, Teatro
Olimpico, 1796
Affonso Eduardo Reidy, Museum for Modern Art, 1967
Revealing Cuts
7

-- 7 of 210 --

the optimal solar radiation; interiors should be configured to maxi-
mize convection-driven air movement; roof pitches need to be
set to ensure the efficiency of solar panels; wall thickness must
be dictated by insulation calculations; and so on. Often driven by
a desire to meet sustainable certification criteria, architects and
engineers use section drawings to illustrate adherence to con-
ventions of thermal performance, with arrays of arrows illustrat-
ing thermodynamic forces. This emphasis on thermal efficiency
foregrounds the opportunities of the section, but paradoxically
constrains the spatial and experiential potential of the section by
aligning sectional innovation to only functional obligations.
Yet, despite the importance of section as a drawing type and
as a key method for optimizing spatial qualities, structural design,
and thermal performance, there is a relative paucity of critical
writings or discourse on section. A well-established body of
writing exists on the history and impact of the plan, but there is
no single book on the history, development, and use of the section
within the practice of architecture. Only a few essays on section
have been published, with the two most often cited written
more than twenty-five years ago: Wolfgang Lotz’s “The Rendering
of the Interior in Architectural Drawings of the Renaissance”1
and Jacques Guillerme and Hélène Vérin’s “The Archaeology of
Section.”2 Interestingly, both essays have parallel motives beyond
cultivating and describing the architectural section itself.
This lack of direct attention may very well come from the
ambiguous position that section occupies. It is often understood
as a reductive drawing type, produced at the end of the design
process to depict structural and material conditions in service of
the construction contract, rather than as a means for the inves-
tigation of architectural form. While we are interested in the
representational conditions of section, we argue that thinking and
designing through section requires the building of a discourse
about section, recognizing it as a site for invention.
HEURISTIC STRUCTURE FOR SECTIONS
The initial challenge in creating meaningful and accessible dis-
cussions of the section is the absence of a language that would
provide a shared frame of reference. To address this void, we have
devised a category system based on seven distinct section types:
Extrusion, Stack, Shear, Shape, Hole, Incline, and Nest. The
vast majority of sectional relationships can be described by one
of these categories or several in combination. These types are
intentionally reductive in order to make recognition simple; they
are rarely found in pure form. Indeed, upon close inspection, no
project perfectly demonstrates only one type of section, as all
tend to have aspects of two or more. But where a dominant type
of section prevails, that designation is given.
Our purpose is not to present these types as a new kind of
Platonic ideal to be pursued in isolation. The fact that a building’s
section may exemplify one of these types does not automatically
denote a particular significance or meaning. Rather, respectful of
the potential of architecture, we provide these types as a heuristic
frame for building a discourse about section at the intersection
Bucholz McEvoy Architects, Limerick County Council, 2003
Candilis Josic Woods, Shading Diagram, 1968
Foster + Partners, Commerzbank Headquarters, 1997
Thermal Sections
8

-- 8 of 210 --

of material, cultural, and natural systems. Our objective is to learn
more about the ways in which section types or combinations of
types might be used and how this understanding could serve the
discipline of architecture. As we argue, each type of section lends
itself to distinct capacities, from the cultivation of a shared sense
of space to the facilitation of thermal performance, from the
establishment of spatial hierarchies to the enhancement of the
interplay of exterior and interior.
The following terms and definitions will be explained in the
subsequent essay in greater detail:
Extrusion: the direct extrusion of a plan to a height sufficient for
the intended use
Stack: the layering of floors directly on top of one another—an
extruded section, repeated with or without variations
Shape: the deformation of one or more of the primary horizontal
surfaces of a building to sculpt space
Shear: the use of a rift or cut along either the horizontal or vertical
axis of a building to generate sectional difference
Hole: the deployment of any number or scale of penetrations
through a slab, exchanging lost floor area for benefits in section
Incline: the manipulation of the angle of an occupiable horizontal
plane, which tilts the plan into section
Nest: the creation of sectional consequences through an interplay
or overlap of legible volumes
Sixty-three one-point-perspective section drawings of built
projects form the central portion of this book. We selected these
projects because they represent a range of approaches to section,
forming a body of work useful for further study, development,
and inquiry. Certain projects illustrate one of the section types in
a clear and demonstrative way. Other projects exhibit complex and
creative approaches to section, often incorporating two or more
types in a wide range of new formations that transcend the limits
of a particular type in isolation.
All projects date from the turn of the twentieth century or later,
a time frame chosen because of its historical alignment with the
proliferation of standardized and industrialized methods of build-
ing. These methods typically have given rise to repetitive stacked
sections, placing a new imperative on the section as a site of
investigation and invention. We included only projects that have
been built, to ensure that there would be sufficient documentary
evidence to show the tectonic logic of the section and to verify
that the complexity of the section did not come at the expense of
constructability.
Although many existing publications analyze and assess these
sixty-three projects, most do so by seeking to break each project
into a series of discrete, easily digestible points. This reductive
approach suggests that the comprehension of a building’s complex-
ity can be best achieved through categorizing concepts in isolation.
Our approach is the opposite. We aim through a single, detailed
drawing to demonstrate the range of intertwined issues that make
architecture compelling. The section perspective intentionally
Louis-Auguste Boileau, system of interlocking arches,
drawn by Tiburce-Sylvain Royol, ca. 1886
Charles de Wailly, Comédie-Française, 1770
Jacques-Germain Soufflot, Pantheon, drawing by
Alexandre-Théodore Brongniart, ca. 1796
Henry Bessemer, saloon steamer, 1874
Section Perspectives
9

-- 9 of 210 --

combines the objective, measurable information of the section
with the subjective visual logic of the perspective. As such, the
drawings created for this book delineate facts and evidence while
enticing the viewer into a rich spatial experience. The drawings are
both abstract and immersive, analytical and illustrative. They build
upon a history of this representational technique that includes
such varied sources as the meticulous drawings of the École
des Beaux-Arts; the analytical, technical drawings of the industrial
era; Paul Rudolph’s line rendering of complex spectacles; and
Atelier Bow-Wow’s hybrid mix of detailed construction drawings
with outlines of interior activity.
Representing each project through a single section perspec-
tive with a standardized view allows comparison among and
across projects. To create each drawing, we built a digital model
and established a section cut true to the orientation of the page,
not in oblique or perspective. We then set a single vanishing
point, adjusting the perspective lens to bring interior or exterior
surfaces into view, thus establishing a visual correspondence
between the cut plane and the vertical surfaces that compose
the projects. From each model, we exported a two-dimensional
line drawing, which we adjusted and developed in a vector-based
line program. The completed drawings follow the conventions of
sectional drawings, where, for instance, the outside cut line that
separates the edge of a solid surface and the open air or space
beyond is marked by the thickest line, while lighter lines are used
to illustrate secondary material distinctions within a cut solid or to
describe the details of a surface viewed beyond the cutting plane.
These drawings differ from drawings of archaeological ruins,
where the deterioration of a structure reveals its section to the
observing eye. Since we cannot, of course, cut directly into built
works, our representations depend on interpreting other drawings
and images to create an accurate assessment of material condi-
tions. These other drawings are themselves often approximations
of construction yet to happen, thus raising compelling questions
about historical accuracy and the construction of knowledge.
The work of this book is based on photographs, drawings, descrip-
tions, and, where possible, original archival construction drawings
and /or digital files obtained directly from architects’ firms. The
drawings in this book are as precise as practicable, given available
representations and the impossibility of absolute precision that
is inherent to the section as a representational technique.
In addition to creating the sixty-three section perspectives, we
have selected historically significant or otherwise compelling sec-
tion drawings from throughout the history of architecture. These
section images, which accompany the book’s essays, include
some unbuilt works in order to show the wide range of possibilities
for using section to illustrate and generate architectural form. A
chapter on the use of section as a generative tool for the work of
our office, LTL Architects, complements the sixty-three projects.
This work illustrates additional explorations in combining section
and perspective, ones in which the section cut itself is put into
perspective, as well as speculative projects, in which section is the
generator for spatial and programmatic interplay.
Atelier Bow-Wow, Bow-Wow House, 2005
Paul Rudolph, Yale Art and Architecture Building, 1963
McKim, Mead & White, Interborough Rapid Transit
Powerhouse, 1904
Jacques Hermant, Société Générale, 1912
10

-- 10 of 210 --

Types and Performance
of Section
Extrusion, Stack, Shear, Shape, Hole, Incline, and Nest are
separate and primary methods for operating in section. For the
sake of clarity, they are presented as distinct modes, but they
rarely operate in isolation. Buildings exhibiting the most complex
and intricate sections contain all manner of combinations. Never-
theless, the distinctions among the types provide a means to
articulate how an architectural section is produced and to under-
stand its effects.
EXTRUSION
The extrusion of a plan up to a height sufficient for the intended
activity is the most basic form of section. An extruded section
has little to no variation in the vertical axis. The vast majority of
buildings are based on this efficiency, including most one-story
office buildings, retail structures, big-box stores, factories, single-
story houses, and apartments. Usually built with flat concrete
slabs and rectilinear steel or wood frames, it produces the maxi-
mum usable square footage in relation to overall building volume.
Elaboration of more complex sectional qualities is anathema to
this model of efficiency. More complicated sections have the con-
sequence of reducing valuable square footage of real estate. In
extruded sections space is activated largely through plan and, to
a lesser degree, elevation. It is a banal base against which other
developments or types of section can be understood. This type of
section usually lacks distinctive qualities, although in cases where
an extrusion fails to meet typical models of efficiency, it can pro-
duce intriguing effects, including claustrophobia or agoraphobia.
One can find examples of extrusions that are extremely low—for
example, the half-floor sections found in Spike Jonze’s film Being
John Malkovich—or extremely high, such as the vast interior space
of the Palace of Labor by Pier Luigi Nervi. In extruded sections,
the ceiling is often the site of design investment, for reasons of
structural articulation and the sheer extent of this surface.
Given that a straight extrusion is rarely remarkable, only a
few of the buildings in this book are based solely on extrusion.
A key condition of the extruded section is the role of the structure
that separates the floor from the ceiling or roof. The Glass House
by Philip Johnson places extraordinary emphasis on steel columns
that rise from regular locations on the plan. The glass walls in
effect turn the elevation into the section. The one anomaly of the
system is the combined bathing area and fireplace, joined together
to hide all the house’s plumbing and heating systems behind the
extruded figure of a brick cylinder, to preserve the clarity of the
sectional diagram. While Johnson places the columns within the
window wall external to the inhabitable space, Junya Ishigami
does nearly the opposite with the Kanagawa Institute of Technology
Workshop, dispersing or aggregating its columns to fill and frame
the space as a field for different and adjustable uses. For Ishigami,
Ludwig Mies van der Rohe, Chicago Convention Center, 1954
Renzo Piano, the Menil Collection museum, 1986
Arne Jacobsen, National Bank of Denmark, 1978
Ludwig Mies van der Rohe, Farnsworth House, 1951
Ralph Rapson and Eero Saarinen, Demountable Space, 1942
Extrusion Sections
11

-- 11 of 210 --

the extruded section heightens the distinction between the solid
concrete base encasing and cantilevering the multiple thin col-
umns and the highly articulated steel ceiling, whose pattern turns
the structural diagram into ornament. While the two previous
examples work within conventional extruded ceiling heights, in the
Palace of Labor in Turin, Pier Luigi Nervi used the massive scale
of mushroomlike columns to aggrandize an exhibition hall. Sixteen
repetitive structural units define a 70-ft-high space. Although
justified by pragmatics of construction speed and efficiency,
the excessively tall space, animated by a grid of robust, tapered
columns, transforms an extruded section into spectacle.
STACK
Stack is the placing of two or more floors or spaces on top of
one another, with little connection among the individual stories.
Stacking increases the real estate value of a property by expand-
ing the square footage and usable capacity of a building without
increasing its footprint. Financial gain is a basic motivation for
the use of stacked section in architecture. Repetitive stacks are
similar to extruded sections and can be deployed ad nauseam until
limited by code, cost, or structural stability. Alternatively, stack
can be created by placing very different floor types and shapes on
top of one another. By itself, stacking does not produce interior
effects. In office buildings or apartments, for example, each floor
can be added with little or no consequence to the previous floors,
beyond the impact on the quantity of vertical services required.
It is precisely the ease of this accumulation that thwarts any
sectional variations; its efficiency is based on the homogeneity
of the section. It costs less to build the same floor than to intro-
duce variations; all the expertise of Taylorism remains intact, from
drawings to formwork to sequence of construction.
In buildings with single programs the extrusion rarely varies
from floor to floor. Yet architects have exploited differences in the
height of that extrusion on different stacked floors to allow for
programmatic variation. A well-known example is Starrett &
Van Vleck’s Downtown Athletic Club, which comprises thirty-five
levels with nineteen unique floor-to-floor heights, ranging from
6 ft (1.8 m) for a “bedroom utility” to a 23-ft-6-in (7.2 m) “gym-
nasium.” Rem Koolhaas’s influential analysis of the building in
Delirious New York explicates the “culture of congestion” enacted
within the building, where each of its “superimposed platforms”
sponsors distinct uses, spaces, and experiences. The power of
the building is derived from the sectional autonomy of each floor;
the stacked section creates a form of seduction. “Each of the
Club’s floors is a separate installment of an infinitely unpredictable
intrigue that extols the complete surrender to the definitive insta-
bility of life in the metropolis.”3 Critical to this reading is the fact
that the Downtown Athletic Club’s section cannot be experienced
optically or synchronically. Rather, it is through the diachronic
mechanism of the elevator that the narrative of programmatic and
sectional disjunction unfolds. The Downtown Athletic Club is a
peculiar project in that the fit between program and section is so
precisely aligned, as gymnasiums, swimming pools, and handball
Le Corbusier, Maison Dom-ino, 1914
Antonin Raymond and Ladislav Rado, prototype for a
department store, 1948
OMA, Center for Art and Media Technology, 1989
Simon Ungers, T-House, 1992
Stack Sections
12

-- 12 of 210 --

and squash courts all require specific ceiling heights, and the
relatively small footprint of the building allows each of these
programs to inhabit its own floor.4
Whereas the Downtown Athletic Club conceals the variations
of its section behind a muted facade, floor-to-floor variations
in a stacked section have been used as the very image of other
buildings: for example, MVRDV’s Expo 2000 Netherlands Pavilion.
Deploying the same logic used to create multilayered cakes,
MVRDV juxtaposes completely different architectural spaces,
from columnar halls filled with trees to a cast-concrete grotto,
all topped by a trussed roof marked by wind turbines. Each floor
is unique and varies substantially, demonstrating through the
section an accumulation of different ways architecture engages
environmental systems. Connection among the different stacked
floors is made only through staircases and a bank of elevators
clipped onto the exterior of the structure, reinforcing the indepen-
dence of each zone.
Since stack is based on multiples, an alternate approach
takes advantage of repetition, varying only floor heights to create
difference. By adjusting the floor height while keeping the profile
of each floor the same, SANAA created a distinctive building
for the Dior flagship store, its seductiveness a product of the
elegance of the architectural operation. In contrast, the individual
galleries of Peter Zumthor’s Kunsthaus Bregenz are treated as
separate volumes, staggered and stacked with the same space
between each floor. Services and lighting occupy the stacked
spaces between the galleries, with the entire ensemble nested
within a double-skin glass shell.
Ludwig Mies van der Rohe’s work at S. R. Crown Hall at IIT
disguises the stacked section behind a singular architectural form.
In truth, the monumental exposed structural beams that mark the
profile of the building only support the ceiling of the main floor. A
more utilitarian lower floor sits below, half-sunken into the ground
and supported by load-bearing walls. The exterior curtain wall,
marked by continuous vertical steel members, cloaks the section's
stacking, reinforcing the impression of a singular spatial volume.
The stacked section limits the thermodynamic movement of
air and water. In order for these systems to serve a building, they
must be pumped, pushed, and ducted vertically beyond a single
floor. Louis I. Kahn’s design for the Salk Institute exploits this
isolating condition to full effect. To accommodate the extensive
mechanical services needed for research labs and ensure that
those spaces would be column-free, Kahn layered on top of each
laboratory a full floor dedicated to systems threaded through
an open Vierendeel truss system. Three successive pairings of lab
and service zone make up the stacked section.
SHAPE
Shaping is the sculpting of space through the deformation of a
continuous horizontal surface or surfaces. This adds a particular
volume or form to the section and can occur in a floor or a ceiling
or both. Shapes can exhibit an extremely wide range of topolo-
gies.5 The ceiling is a more common location for this modulation
SANAA, Christian Dior Omotesando, 2003
Will Alsop, Ontario College of Art and Design, 2004
GLUCK+, Tower House, 2012
Christian Kerez, school in Leutschenbach, 2009
13

-- 13 of 210 --

than the floor, as variations in a ceiling do not affect a plan’s
efficacy. Load-bearing masonry cathedrals, covered stadiums,
igloos, and tents all have shaped sections. Buildings with shaped
sections frequently exhibit a close fit between their structure
and their section, often incorporating vaults, shells, domes, and
tensile membranes, with the shaping of the roof aligning with
gravitational load paths and structural spans. Much of the work
of Félix Candela demonstrates quite clearly the intersection
of structural forces and shape in section, as in his design for
Los Manantiales Restaurant, consisting of a thin-shell concrete
roof cast into hyperbolic-paraboloid forms. The project is in
essence a physical manifestation of a structural diagram. Marcel
Breuer’s Hunter College Library is another example of a structural
form, in this case assembling a flowering column module into
a repetitive shaped section. Using more conventional framing,
Rudolph M. Schindler’s Bennati Cabin is constructed from
two-by studs organized into triangles, forming an early example
of an A-frame house. The shape is structurally efficient, per-
mitting a large living floor below a narrower sleeping loft, with
the triangular shape fulfilling local ordinance’s request for alpine
exterior aesthetics.
The dominance of flat-slab construction in the past century
has decreased the frequency of this type of section, as the sepa-
ration of structure from enclosure, exemplified by Le Corbusier’s
Maison Dom-ino housing prototype, shifted the articulation of
space from section to plan. As Colin Rowe wryly notes about
Le Corbusier’s Villa Stein in “The Mathematics of the Ideal Villa,”
“Free plan is exchanged for free section.”6 Shaped section can
be found in buildings where an intensification of social space
and gathering is needed, including most buildings of collective
worship. In churches and synagogues the ceiling can be used to
establish a focal point within a unified volume.
The Pantheon and Le Corbusier’s Notre Dame du Haut are both
sacred buildings with a shaped section, one concave, the other
convex. Both use the section to calibrate the play of natural light in
the space, and in both the section of the ceiling is aligned with
the structure to varying degrees. In a more secular context, Alvar
Aalto deployed a complex, sculpted ceiling to reinforce the legibil-
ity of different areas within the single open space of his library in
Seinäjoki, Finland, as well as to control daylight in the stacks.
In addition, Aalto stepped the floor, setting a reading room a half-
story down in the middle of the space to provide a sense of privacy
while still preserving visibility from the circulation desk above.
A modulated ceiling is frequently limited to a single-story build-
ing or to a building’s top floor, as the ceiling’s other side can be
hard to occupy without the introduction of poche, dropped ceilings,
or soffits. As such, a desire to manipulate a structure’s exterior
to protect the interior space from the forces of nature can be a
catalyst for using this section type and often informs the shape
of the roof. This use of shape is clearly in evidence in Jørn Utzon’s
double-layered roof system for the Bagsværd Church, where a
complex, curvilinear interior ceiling is covered by a simplified rec-
tilinear shed. The section reveals the potential for a loose fit
Andrea Palladio, Villa Foscari, 1560
Pantheon, AD 128
Hans Scharoun, Berlin Philharmonic Concert Hall, 1963
Eladio Dieste, Church of Christ the Worker, 1952
Kenzo Tange, Yoyogi National Gymnasium, 1964
Eero Saarinen, Dulles Airport, 1962
Shape Sections
14

-- 14 of 210 --

between an exterior shape responding to the obligation of weather
enclosure and an interior ceiling that modulates light, sound, and
space for sacred purposes. Steven Holl’s project Cité de l’Océan
et du Surf presents a very different reason for a shaped roof. Here
the top of the building is an occupiable outdoor surface, shaped
to reflect the waves associated with surfing.
When a shaped section occurs in the floor, causing a disrup-
tion to the horizontal plan, it can cluster or choreograph collec-
tive programs, particularly those based on stasis. Theaters, audito-
riums, and churches frequently use a shaped section in the floor.
It is also common for these building types to have adjustments
to their ceiling, often for acoustic reasons. While usually described
exclusively with regard to its sloped floor, Claude Parent and
Paul Virilio’s Church of Sainte-Bernadette du Banlay equally dis-
plays section deformed by shape, with the roof and floor sculpted
and aligned to reinforce the spatial reading of the volume set on
an incline. Similarly, the design of SANAA’s Rolex Learning Center
aligns the shaping of the floor slab and the ceiling slab, but not
within a rectilinear envelope. Instead, the space between the
underside and the ground is visible and activated. As a hybrid proj-
ect, the center can be characterized as an unusual combination
of an extruded section and a shaped section activated by holes.
Similarly, Toyo Ito’s Taichung Metropolitan Opera House uses
shape in combination with other types of section. However, it is
the sculpted concrete forms that dominate, set in contrast to the
repetitively stacked floor plates and active in the section, pro-
viding the key spaces throughout the project.
It’s instructive to note, however, the distinction between the
sectional transformations of shaped floors and those of complex
topography. In large-scale projects such as the Yokohama Ferry
Terminal by Foreign Office Architects or the Olympic Sculpture
Park by Weiss / Manfredi, the sectional profile tends toward land-
scape, with the topography of the landform not oriented neces-
sarily toward the creation of interior architectural space. As these
projects expand in size and /or merge into the topographic condi-
tions of the site, their sections are experienced and understood
less as shaped surfaces and more as extensions or transformations
of landscapes.
SHEAR
Shear involves a rift or cut parallel to either the horizontal or ver-
tical axis of section. The subdesignations of vertical and horizon-
tal shear are necessary, since each creates completely different
sectional operations and effects.
Vertical shear, where floor plates are cut and levels adjusted
vertically, means that discontinuity in plan is coupled with new
forms of continuity in section. Vertical shear is particularly effec-
tive at inducing optical, thermal, or acoustic connections within
an extruded or stacked section without significantly compromis-
ing the tectonic efficiencies of repetition. This intriguing friction
can be used for different purposes. Split-level suburban houses
provide greater visual connection and flow between floors than
two-story houses. Typically, an entry combined with a kitchen and
Ryue Nishizawa, Teshima Art Museum, 2010
Louis I. Kahn, Kimbell Art Museum, 1972
Johannes Hendrik van den Broek, Delft Auditorium, 1966
OMA, Agadir Convention Center, 1990
Frank Gehry, Experience Music Project, 2000
Weiss / Manfredi, Seattle Art Museum: Olympic Sculpture
Park, 2007
15

-- 15 of 210 --

dining area is located halfway between a lower-level garage and a
more formal living room, with bedrooms above the entry. Rather
than simply serving as a connection between discrete floors, the
staircase in the split-level house can be argued to be synthetic
with the various floors, making the house an extension of the logic
of the stair.
In Herman Hertzberger’s design for the Apollo Schools, a
vertical shear allows for enhanced visual exchange among class-
rooms and hallways, encouraging theatrical social dynamics while
simultaneously allowing the majority of the classroom spaces to be
tucked beyond diagonal sight lines. This creates what Hertzberger
calls “the right balance between view and seclusion.”7 More
extreme juxtapositions between plan and section can be intensi-
fied through a vertical shear. Diller Scofidio + Renfro uses vertical
shear in Brown University’s Granoff Center for the Creative Arts to
induce visual dialogue between otherwise disconnected programs,
with very little of each program hidden or secluded. This intensi-
fication of optical disjunction across programs is registered by a
glass wall at the shear line that serves to mitigate sound transmis-
sion. Vertical shear can generate intricate relationships between
the inside and the outside of a building at the top or bottom of a
shear rather than just around the perimeter, because the stag-
gering of levels can carry through the building from the bottom to
the top. Vertical shear requires limited change to the footprint or
boundary of the exterior walls and is often used to create internal
spatial difference for buildings on tight sites.
A horizontal shear maintains continuity in plan and some of the
logic of extruded floor plates, but produces spaces through the
interplay between setback and cantilever. While a vertical shear
directly impacts the interior, a horizontal shear largely affects the
exterior. Two other factors affect buildings with horizontal shear.
One is the degree to which the shear is applied systematically and
regularly to each floor. The other, which is usually directly related
to the first, is the degree of similarity among the different floor
plates. Henri Sauvage’s designs for stepped houses, best exem-
plified by his apartment building at 13 Rue des Amiraux in Paris,
exhibit both a consistently repeated horizontal shear and relatively
equal floor plates, producing a series of terraces on the setback
side of the shear. In this raked diagram, one side of the building
is opened up to the sun and sky, while the other defines a space,
cast in shadow, between the cantilevers and the ground. Sauvage
placed two raked buildings back to back and filled the underbelly
with a swimming pool, effectively creating both private benefits
(terraces) and collective benefits (pool) through this one sectional
operation. This diagram was highly seductive, particularly for
housing, as it injected into the model of the stacked slab tower in
the park both superior solar exposure / views and a space rife with
collective potential. It efficiently deployed repetition to produce
difference. Moreover, it made legible new part-to-whole relation-
ships and allowed for greater continuities between the landscape
and the building. Horizontal shear was instrumental in a number
of projects and buildings, including Walter Gropius’s Wohnberg
(1928 proposal), Le Corbusier’s Durand Project (1933, Algiers),
A. J. Rynkus, Split-Level House, 1958
Le Corbusier, Villa Baizeau, 1928
Paul Rudolph, Beekman Penthouse Apartment, 1973
Frank Lloyd Wright, Unity Temple, 1906
Vertical Shear Sections
16

-- 16 of 210 --

Paul Rudolph’s Lower Manhattan Expressway (1972 proposal),
Denys Lasdun’s residence halls for University of East Anglia
(1962, Norwich, UK) and Christ’s College (1966, Cambridge, UK),
Ricardo Legorreta’s Hotel Camino Real (1981, Mexico City), and
more recently BIG /JDS’s the Mountain Dwellings. The Mountain
brings to fruition one of Sauvage’s century-old diagrams, which
situates parking beneath a pyramid of sheared housing. The fact
that the Mountain contains more parking than needed for the
apartments demonstrates that as the amount of the rake or the
angle is increased, thereby producing more exterior space for each
apartment, an engorged underside can result.
Horizontal shear can create collective social spaces when a
sequence of terraces are combined into a single open volume. The
Barnard College Diana Center by Weiss / Manfredi cleverly deploys
horizontal shear internal to the building mass to open up a series
of public lounges stitched together within a multistory academic
building, creating visual continuity on the diagonal through the
urban campus. Similarly, Neutelings Riedijk’s Netherlands Institute
for Sound and Vision takes full advantage of the spatial continu-
ity created by horizontal shear, with the orientation of the shear
operating at ninety-degree angles below and above grade. The
entry lobby is connected visually to a series of stepped levels of
the building’s subterranean archive. The stacked floors above
are sheared in the perpendicular direction, opening up the main
space to daylight from the skylight, simultaneously creating a
multilevel exhibition volume at the top. The cumulative effect is a
ziggurat-shaped void carved from the building mass.
Repetitive horizontal shear on self-similar floor plates produces
a combination of staggered exterior spaces, deploying corbeling
for stability. The use of horizontal shear in varying amounts creates
sectional moments around the full perimeter of a building, often
relying on a central core for balance. These moments are more
local than a repetitive raked section and can take the form of an
accumulation of platforms, balconies, overhangs, and skylights,
rather than collective spaces. Frank Lloyd Wright’s Fallingwater
is a good example of different-size floor slabs that are dispersed
to activate sectional effects on the exterior of a building. They
twist around the whole of the exterior of the building, producing
simultaneous sensations of upward growth and downward cascade,
while the interior is compressed, with space pushed horizontally,
not vertically.
HOLE
A pragmatic and frequently used sectional device, the hole is
a cut or penetration through a slab that exchanges lost floor area
for benefits in section. Holes are spatial commodities that can be
tactically deployed for vertical effects. They range in scale and
quantity from a single small opening between two floors to multiple
large atria that organize whole buildings.
Small holes accommodate infrastructural runs, such as risers,
ducts, and chase spaces; they are typically not large enough to
impact the structural integrity of the floor. The shafts of elevators
and fire stairs are used to strengthen an overall structure, with
Walter Gropius, Wohnberg proposal, 1928
Paul Rudolph, Lower Manhattan Expressway proposal, 1972
John Andrews, Gund Hall, Harvard Graduate School of
Design, 1972
Denys Lasdun, residence
halls, University of East Anglia, 1968
Horizontal Shear Sections
17

-- 17 of 210 --

solid walls often acting to resist lateral shear forces; they are
inserted within vertical holes precisely because these spaces are
not expected to produce visual continuity between floors.8 Small
holes through single floor plates can be strategically located based
on plan imperatives.
Large holes are more substantial voids in a multistory building,
creating spatial continuity among floors. These holes are predi-
cated on some form of visual exchange and allow for light, acous-
tic, olfactory, and thermal continuity within a building. Holes
are a second order of sectional operation, acting on a given single
or multilevel stacked section.
A clear and basic manifestation of a hole at the scale of a room
is found in Le Corbusier’s Maison Citrohan, realized at the 1927
Weissenhofsiedlung exhibition in Stuttgart, Germany. Its central
organizing spatial component is the double-height void made by
cutting back a substantial portion of the second floor. In addition
to allowing exchanges of light, view, and sound, this hole estab-
lishes hierarchies between public and private, figure and ground,
and part and whole. There is a clarity and simplicity to this two-
story section. It does not require a new construction system; it
just edits back the given structure. This scale of hole influences
the importance and hierarchy of spaces around it, creating, for
instance, formal double-height spaces. Lobbies, central meeting
areas, interior courtyards, and domestic living rooms all make use
of this type of program-specific scaled hole.9
Atria amplify the scale of smaller holes, in terms of both width
and quantity of floors, and exceed their effect. This increased
scale permits the effective distribution of daylight (often from sky-
lights) and movement of air, and heightens the role of the interior.
Wright’s Larkin Building used the central atrium to organize and
focus the program of its offices, allowing sunlight in and assisting
with the mechanical distribution of air. Moreover, in this large
and sealed building, wisely separated from the din and soot of the
neighboring rail yard outside, the atrium replaced the exterior as
the building’s focus.
At this scale, the atrium is less a cut through floors than a
space around which floors are built, a condition Louis I. Kahn
made explicit in the articulated structural lining of the atrium of
the library at Phillips Exeter Academy. In the asymmetrical Ford
Foundation Headquarters by Kevin Roche John Dinkeloo and
Associates, the atrium serves as a conditioned, four-season
garden, open to sunlight on the south and east sides. Offices
on the north and west envelop the atrium, with selective use of
horizontal shear to terrace the ground and rooftop enclosure.
John Portman has pushed the use of the atrium to an extreme,
creating hotels that are defined by the radical dichotomy between
their conventional exteriors and spectacular interiors. The vast
atria of his interiors appear to extend upward infinitely, a sensation
heightened by exposed glass elevators accelerating past series
of stacked open walkways and balconies. The atrium of Portman’s
New York Marriott Marquis hotel is framed by thirty-seven stories
of rooms, stacked in groups of five floors that illustrate local
horizontal shear. The visual pleasure and spectacle of atria
Marie-Gabriel Veugny, la Cité Napoléon, 1853
Steven Holl Architects, Simmons Hall, MIT, 2002
OMA, Très Grande Bibliothèque, 1989
Jean Nouvel and Emmanuel Cattani & Associates, Galeries
Lafayette, 1996
Hole Sections
18

-- 18 of 210 --

account for their frequent use in places of consumption, notably
department stores, as exemplified by Galeries Lafayette in Paris
of 1912 and Jean Nouvel’s design for the same company in Berlin
at the end of the twentieth century.
Holes are the key component of Toyo Ito’s Sendai Mediatheque,
striking an intriguing balance between their implications for the
plan and the legibility of the section. The building is organized
around thirteen holes, which puncture all seven floor slabs. The
holes serve as the locus of circulation; as mechanical shafts;
as tubes for the flow of energy, air, light, and sound through the
floors; and, paradoxically, as the building’s structure. These hollow,
inhabitable tubes made through bundled steel columns not only
produce the section but become primary plan components, choreo-
graphing the program on each floor. In the Sendai Mediatheque,
holes ringed by structure animate what would otherwise be a series
of repetitive and independent stacked floors.
INCLINE
Inclines are sloped floor surfaces, which often connect levels.
Inclines change the angle of an occupiable horizontal plane,
thus effectively rotating plan into section. Unlike stacks, shears,
and holes, inclines blur the distinction between plan and section.
With inclines, sectional play does not require the sacrifice of a
portion of the plan. Like holes, their specific impact on section is
dependent on their scale; they can range from a narrow ramp to
a full floor to entire built environments, as envisioned by Claude
Parent and Paul Virilio in their oblique urban order. Le Corbusier
proposed the promenade architecturale, an itinerary through space
based on the continuity of the horizontal with ramps. In its first
realization in 1923, with Villa La Roche–Jeanneret, a single ramp
cuts one level through a gallery. At this scale, the incline is more
of an object within a double-height space than a fully formed
component of the building’s section. This ramp has a stronger
impact in plan, where its curve highlights a bulge in the wall. In
comparison, the incline in Villa Savoye is much more instrumental
in organizing and activating the entire building as a promenade
architecturale. It connects space in, up, through, and out of the
two floor slabs, culminating in a roof garden atop the building.
However, the vertical space of section is truncated by the fact that
the ramp fills the area that was removed from the floors in order
to accommodate it. Moreover, the ramp moves from inside to
outside and is spatially disconnected inside the villa, where
Le Corbusier relied on the continuity of the wall adjacent to the
ramp to register the section. This reading is substantiated by the
section drawing for Villa Savoye included in his Oeuvre complète,
which is from an earlier scheme, in which that wall extended up
another floor. Somewhat ironically, a narrow ramp such as the one
in Villa Savoye produces more discontinuity than continuity in
plan. Even though the ramp is only four feet wide, it requires thirty-
two feet to make the connection between the two floors.10 The
incline viewed in the path of travel along the ramp creates conti-
nuity of section, but this comes at a price. In order to connect
different floors, the incline must also cut into the plan of the villa,
Claude Parent and Paul Virilio, habitable circulation, 1966
Le Corbusier, Palais des Congrès, 1964
Le Corbusier, Villa Savoye, 1931
Vilanova Artigas, Almeida House, 1949
Tecton, Penguin Pool, 1934
Incline Sections
19

-- 19 of 210 --

creating a discontinuity of space. The ramp at the Villa Savoye
cuts the plan in two, distinguishing the garage from the entry hall
and the exterior terrace from interior bedrooms, while enabling
light and views to pass diagonally across the ramp.
This paradox of an incline creating continuity in section only
through discontinuity in plan was examined and explored by
Frank Lloyd Wright in two different projects. In the V. C. Morris
Gift Shop, a narrow ramp is aligned with an atrium, thereby
enhancing visual connections across the section and decreasing
the disruptions to the space from shear. Movement up and, more
important, around this incline adds to the spectacle of shopping.
While the incline in Villa Savoye is autonomous, as it splits the
column grid and penetrates through all floors, the incline in the
Morris Gift Shop appears to be hung from the balustrade of the
floor above, allowing the circulation on the ground floor to slide in
and around it. Because the Morris Gift Shop was an insertion into
an existing building, Wright’s play with the incline was constrained,
but he explored this theme further in the Solomon R. Guggenheim
Museum. In this well-known museum as spiral, Wright fuses an
incline and atrium, turning the main gallery floors into a single
continuous promenade. (Side galleries and support spaces have
flat floors and are located away from the central event.) Since
all floors merge into a single surface, the challenge for the viewer
is not an issue of sequence or passage but rather starting point.
Wright famously insisted that all visitors first entertain an elevator
ride to the top, with the downward slope of the incline facilitating
a leisurely walk. (Curators have not always followed Wright’s
commands when designing show sequences.)
Wright’s work on the Guggenheim draws parallels to his unbuilt
Gordon Strong Automobile Objective and Planetarium project,
where a double-helix ramp brings cars up and down. Designs for
roads and parking systems have deployed incline as a necessary
means of facilitating automobile passage. Ramped parking struc-
tures use inclines in two distinct manners: either as connecting
pieces among level floors of repetitively stacked parking or as
continuously ramped surfaces that merge parking and circulation.
The Guggenheim plays on the latter, while Herzog & de Meuron’s
1111 Lincoln Road explores the creative possibilities of the former,
introducing variations in floor height to transform a parking
structure into a social destination, complete with a residence
with sheared floor plates on top.
While Wright negotiates the paradox of the ramp creating
discontinuity by introducing the central atrium in the Guggenheim,
OMA deploys the incline to foster greater programmatic density
and to create visual juxtapositions. OMA’s Rotterdam Kunsthal
is a cut-back incline at the scale of a whole building. The shear
between two inclined surfaces is exaggerated and animates
programmatic misalignments, with a single incline that is split
by a wall of glass into an interior corridor moving up and an exte-
rior path that threads through the center of the building. The
outer edges of this incline are pushed to the exterior and are
legible as elevations. OMA’s unbuilt project for Jussieu (1992)
is organized around a continuous incline, which, like the
OMA, Educatorium, 1997
Vilanova Artigas, São Paulo School of Architecture, 1969
Alberto Campo Baeza, Museum of Memory, 2009
OMA, Jussieu-Two Libraries (detail), 1992
Henning Larsen Architects, Harpa, 2011
Incline Sections
20

-- 20 of 210 --

Guggenheim, eradicates floor-to-floor distinctions. But unlike
at the Guggenheim, the width of the incline expands and contracts
and, more important, tactically deploys discontinuity within that
surface through cuts, folds, and shears, to allow for a multiplicity
of programs and spaces on the same continuous surface.
Although one objective of a continuous inclined surface is an
activation of the section, the consequence is not necessarily
an intriguing vertical space. This is because an inclined surface
often folds back on itself, effectively forming a stacked section
with unlevel floors. In these projects, vertical extensions of space
are produced by editing back or removing parts of the floor, as
in the Guggenheim’s atrium or the vertical shafts in the Kunsthal
or Jussieu.11 Continuous inclined surfaces often exhibit shear
and need holes for visual continuity. This is clearly evident in
Henning Larsen’s Moesgaard Museum, where the shape of the
building is defined by its inclined, sloped green roof. Whereas
the incline is obvious on the exterior, it is primarily visually appar-
ent within the interior when viewed through a large hole for the
building’s oversized staircase.
NEST
Nests produce sections through interplay or overlap between
discrete volumes. Whereas stack, shear, hole, and incline work
primarily with flat plates, a nest positions three-dimensional
figures or volumes for sectional effect. The early twentieth-
century houses of Adolf Loos often demonstrate volumetric
nesting, with rooms stacked on various levels to create complex
spatial sequences, typically described as Raumplan. The spatial,
structural, or environmental performance of the nest usually
exceeds that of the volumes operating in isolation. Crucial in
this approach to section is the functionality of interstitial space
and its relationship to the exterior skin. Although the permu-
tations of a nested section are numerous, a handful of examples
will help explicate two significant variations.
To create the Center for Arts in La Coruña, Spain,
aceboXalonso Studio lodged a series of highly specific perfor-
mance spaces as distinct but interconnected forms within a box
formed by a multilayered skin. The resulting interior is a compli-
cated vertical space that moves around the volumes. The volumes
are programmatically specific, whereas the space of the section
between is indeterminate, fluid, and undefined. As the perfor-
mance spaces press up against the exterior, the double skin
of the shell is interrupted, thus making visible on the outside the
nesting of the volumes in section. MVRDV’s Effenaar Cultural
Center is based on a more pragmatic approach. Individual rooms,
each with its own size and function, are arrayed around the exte-
rior of the building’s skin, in effect increasing the thickness of
that skin. These generate a doughnut in section, with a main
concert hall as the center of the doughnut, thereby linked to all
the individual programs in the building. Whereas aceboXalonso
begins with a large frame into which smaller programs are nested,
MVRDV organizes the nested volumes to create the overall figure,
building the whole from individual parts.
Le Corbusier, Heidi Weber Museum, 1967
Bernard Tschumi, Le Fresnoy Art Center, 1992
Cedric Price, Fun Palace, 1964
Buckminster Fuller and Norman Foster, Climatroffice, 1971
Jean Nouvel and Philippe Starck, Tokyo Opera House, 1986
FAR frohn&rojas, Wall House, 2007
Nest Sections
21

-- 21 of 210 --

Vertical circulation in these and other nested projects is a key
design challenge, as stairs run the risk of disrupting the tight set
of adjacent volumes. In Loos’s designs, stairs are woven in and
among nested volumes, becoming at times part of a sequence
of the vertical staggering of volumes and at other moments hidden
and tucked away, existing in the space between rooms. With the
Effenaar Cultural Center, MVRDV simply moved the circulation
and fire staircases to the exterior, where they exist as independent
spaces attached from outside.
MVRDV’s 2001 proposal for the Eyebeam Institute is a more
nuanced and intricate approach to nesting. As with Effenaar,
individual program pieces are dispersed in section, but here they
are separated from one another. The consequence is a complex
interstitial void punctuated by the shapes of those program pieces.
Moreover, the exterior skin, which doubles as structure, extends
around these pieces into the building volume, effectively bridging
between pieces and stiffening the exterior structure. Apertures
on the exterior of the building replace the structural skin where
the interior volumes kiss that skin. The specificity of these nested
interiors’ programs is visible on the exterior, yet this specificity
is occluded from view within the larger building cavity. As with the
two previous projects, the interstitial space is programmatically
indeterminate, permitting unforeseen activities to be catalyzed by
the spatial stimulation of an open and compelling section.
These previous three examples all deploy discrete volumes adja-
cent to one another to activate an interstitial section. A different
category of nesting occurs when discrete volumes are lodged inside
one another. Although the logic of this type of nesting would seem
to undermine the development of section, this redundancy, when
intelligently deployed, can intensify the programmatic relationship
between the volumes. It can also produce new models of thermal
performance based on a complex relationship between exterior and
interior conditioned spaces. A small-scale example of this type is
Charles Moore’s own house in Orinda, California, from 1962, where
the volumes of the sitting area and the shower, each marked by
four columns and a skylight, are caught within the overall shell of
the small house. These “aedicules” invert both the normal struc-
ture of the house and the conventional location of the bath, which
here is open to the whole house. These nested volumes become
the primary structure of the house, allowing its exterior corners to
disappear as sliding doors. Counterintuitively, this nesting sponsors
greater openness and connection between the exterior and the
most private interior. A different manipulation of the expected logic
of nesting is found in the San Paolo Parish Complex in Foligno,
Italy, by Fuksas Architects. Large, hollow sleeves structurally con-
nect the two volumes, suspending the inner volume and channeling
sunlight into this innermost space, bypassing the outer volume.
The contrast in both the volume and illumination of the section add
dramatic effect to the church. Nesting is a particularly good sec-
tional device for manipulating and controlling daylight through
multiple layered skins, a technique used by Gordon Bunshaft of
Skidmore, Owings & Merrill at the Beinecke Library. Here a box of
translucent stone protects rare books from the damaging effects
Richard Rogers, Bordeaux Law Courts, 1998
MVRDV, Eyebeam Museum of Art and Technology, 2001
22

-- 22 of 210 --

of direct sun, while placing them on dramatic display within their
own internalized glass vitrine, nested inside the exterior envelope.
An extremely literal example of a nested section is Sou
Fujimoto’s House N. The three rectangular layers of this house
are all white, contain self-similar rectangular framed openings on
all five sides, and diminish only slightly in thickness from outer-
to innermost. Yet, by locating the thermal enclosure on the middle
layer and by pushing the outer skin to the limits of property,
Fujimoto conscripts the grounds as the site of a surprisingly
complex homogeneity that blurs conventional distinctions between
interior and exterior, private and public. Although all the layers
look alike, each does different things: the outer defines the pre-
cinct of the house; the middle regulates the thermal environment;
and the inner distinguishes bedrooms from the living /dining area.
Each alone would be too porous, but collectively they regulate
privacy and view. Nonetheless, the layers do little to increase the
environmental performance of the house, as it is only the middle
layer that acts as the thermal barrier. In contrast, the Mont-Cenis
Training Center by Jourda Architectes uses sequential nesting to
enhance thermal performance. Two unremarkable linear buildings
are located under a very large wood shed, which spans beyond the
footprints of the inner buildings. Clad in glass and photovoltaic
panels, the outer skin uses passive solar and ventilation to modify
extremes in weather, producing a temperate thermal layer between
the outside and the two inhabited buildings. Neither fully inside
nor fully outside, this space is conceptually and functionally akin
to the cavity between two panes of glass in a thermal window.
Furthermore, nesting makes possible a gradient of thermal con-
ditions directly linked to the complex interplay of space, building
materials, and thermodynamic forces in section. Mont-Cenis
Training Center is a more refined elaboration of the exterior ther-
mal or climate utopias envisioned by Buckminster Fuller. Whether
in his conceptual dome to encapsulate Manhattan or the United
States Pavilion at Expo ’67 in Montreal, Fuller repeatedly used
nested section to generate controlled thermal environments. These
large-scale nested sections were the product of his exploration
and innovations in space-frame construction systems, which allow
for the building of expansive envelopes, facilitating the placement
of buildings within buildings.
HYBRIDS
Extrusion, Stack, Shape, Shear, Hole, Incline, and Nest are
primary methods for operating in section. For the sake of clarity,
they have been presented as distinct modes, but they rarely oper-
ate in isolation. Hole and Shear, for instance, require the exis-
tence of extruded floors or stacked sections to register the action.
Shaped sections typically couple with stacked plates to provide
sufficient support and service spaces. Indeed, buildings exhibiting
the most complex and intricate sections contain all manners of
combinations. We have included projects that exemplify innovative
combinations of section types, often in creative tension; where
no single dominant type is in evidence, we have designated these
projects Hybrids.
Adler & Sullivan, Chicago Auditorium Building, 1889
Karl Friedrich Schinkel, Altes Museum, 1830
Frank Lloyd Wright,
Gordon Strong Automobile Objective, 1925
Charles Garnier, Paris Opéra, 1875
Erik Gunnar Asplund, Stockholm Public Library, 1928
Hybrid Sections
23

-- 23 of 210 --

Hybrids exhibit instructive strategies for combining sections.
A basic strategy is the juxtaposition of two very different section
types where neither is dominant. Michael Maltzan’s design for the
Star Apartments, for instance, joins stacking and nesting. The
concrete podium with residential floors above establishes stack
as a key sectional approach. Yet the modular construction of the
individual apartment units dictates a nested approach within
the upper stacked system.
Other hybrid projects synthesize sectional strategies so seam-
lessly that understanding their intersection of systems requires
close examination. The Villa Girasole—with its lightweight rotating
top that is set on a rusticated base and connected through an
eight-story spiral stair tower—demonstrates nested forms on
top of one another, stacked floors that compose the house and
occupiable base, and a sizable hole in the figure of the spiral
staircase. The overall building is sheared horizontally by the land-
scape, with the atrium stair tower providing continuity between
upper and lower gardens. In Herzog & de Meuron’s VitraHaus,
shaped volumes are nested into each other, stacked together, and
then sheared horizontally to produce an exterior atrium. Arguably
the most synthetic project, demonstrating multiple merged sec-
tion types, is SANAA’s Rolex Learning Center, where a simple
extrusion is continuously shaped, creating inclined surfaces and
intersecting with a series of discrete holes to reveal the project’s
deformed section.
Not surprisingly, multistory buildings that are organized
vertically often are case studies for creative approaches to section.
From Herzog & de Meuron’s Prada Aoyama to Kengo Kuma &
Associates’ Asakusa Culture and Tourism Center, the basic strat-
egy of vertical stacking is challenged and complicated by alterna-
tive sectional interventions. Shaped volumes containing changing
rooms are nested within the stacked levels of the Prada depart-
ment store, all enclosed in a shaped box or volume. In Kuma’s
design, individual shaped forms containing nested volumes within
volumes, complete with inclined floors, are placed on top of one
another to form a tower.
Complex public or cultural buildings are most often the site
for sectional intricacy. These projects often include combinations
of program-specific spaces that require the integration of discrete
shapes or figures within a given envelope. Theaters, concert halls,
and other performance spaces have stages and sloped auditori-
ums that figure prominently, requiring complementary circulation
systems and support floors, as exemplified by OMA’s Casa da
Música. Similarly, multifunction academic and civic buildings,
including Mack Scogin Merrill Elam Architects’ Knowlton School
of Architecture, OMA’s Seattle Central Library, Álvaro Siza’s Iberê
Camargo Foundation Museum, Morphosis’s 41 Cooper Square,
NADAA’s Melbourne School of Design, Diller Scofidio + Renfro’s
Museum of Image and Sound, and Grafton Architects’ Università
Luigi Bocconi, all use section to create inventive works of archi-
tecture that resolve complex programmatic assemblages.
By incorporating a range of distinct sectional approaches
within a single building, these projects provide a rich source of
John Portman, Hyatt Regency San Francisco, 1974
Denys Lasdun, Royal Theater, 1976
Arata Isozaki, Oita Prefectural Library, 1966
James Stirling, James Gowan, and Michael Wilford,
Leicester University Engineering Building, 1963
Alvar Aalto, Art Museum in Baghdad, 1958
24

-- 24 of 210 --

study and investigation. While the works used to exemplify one
type of section were selected because of their ability to clarify
and distill a given approach, they do not always illustrate the
spatial play of the hybrid combinations. The interplay of two or
more approaches to section gives architects the capacity to
not only accommodate complex programs but develop projects
that are multilayered. This does not mean, though, that all
projects that use more than one type of section are necessarily
interesting or compelling works of architecture. Rather, the
exploration of the variety and complexity of hybrid approaches
demonstrates the expansive range of possibilities of the heuristic
structure of section types. The classification system is used
not to constrain but to catalyze architectural discourse.
Excerpts from
a History of Section
Given its extensive use in architectural practice today, the section
arrives surprisingly late in the history of architectural drawing.
In fact, while individual instances of sectional drawing were in
evidence by the early part of the fifteenth century, section as
a codified drawing type did not complete the triumvirate of plan,
section, and elevation in European architectural academies and
competitions until the late seventeenth or early eighteenth cen-
tury.12 While it is beyond the scope of this essay to map a compre-
hensive history of the architectural section over the course of
the last several hundred years in the West, it’s instructive to frame
the major changes in the conceptualization and deployment of
section in order to contextualize its current status and potential.
What follows is a series of episodes that coalesce around
several key ideas. Discontinuous and incomplete, these moments
reveal the potentials and paradoxes of the section. Primary among
these contradictions is the dual nature of the term section itself.
When we speak about section we mean both a representational
technique and a series of architectural practices pertaining to the
vertical organization of buildings and related architectural and
urbanistic constructions. These conditions are interrelated both
historically and professionally. Although the two meanings of the
term are often used interchangeably and fluidly, we will attempt to
clarify this relationship in order to examine the historical trajec-
tory of the section, from its origins as a representational mode to
its development as a set of design practices with spatial, tectonic,
and performative implications.
THE ANALYTICAL CUT: ARCHAEOLOGY AND ANATOMY
The origin of section as a representational mechanism, while
obscure, has typically been associated with its capacity to reveal
the hidden workings of an existing building or body—often as
a retrospective or analytical technique. The earliest surviving
Charles Correa, Kanchanjunga Apartments, 1983
Mecanoo Architecten, Technical University Delft Library, 1997
Steven Holl Architects, American Library Berlin, 1989
Neutelings Riedijk Architects, Museum aan
de Stroom, 2010 	25

-- 25 of 210 --

drawings that tentatively depict conditions of an architectural
section are Villard de Honnecourt’s parchment studies of medieval
cathedrals from the thirteenth century.13 Among the sixty-three
pages of his known drawings, which range broadly in subject mat-
ter, are hints of a cut through the exterior wall of Reims Cathedral,
shown to the side of a drawing primarily intended to illustrate the
sequence of flying buttresses shown in elevation. Indeed, while
Honnecourt’s drawing is orthogonal and made through clean lines,
the section as a cut is tentative and incomplete, acting as a side
note to the depiction of structural complexities that merge with the
qualities of the architecture in the Gothic cathedral. Nevertheless,
this early example presages one of the predominant uses of the
sectional drawing—as a means to analyze and represent structural
and constructional relationships visible only through the delinea-
tion of a building’s vertical organization.
While Honnecourt’s drawing suggests that section was not
wholly unknown in architectural circles prior to the Renaissance,
its rise as a codified form of representation has been linked to
two related precursors that originate from outside architecture
proper: the observation of archaeological ruins and the biological
description of the human body.14 In both instances, section is
explicitly associated with the visual and physical dissection of an
extant body, whether constructed or organic. As such, section
originates as the drawn record of an observed material condition
first and as a representational mechanism only in retrospect.
Jacques Guillerme and Hélène Vérin’s article “The Archaeology
of Section” traces the origin of the architectural drawing to the
observation and subsequent depiction of Roman ruins and to
the physical breaks and discontinuities in decaying structures.15
These fragmented monuments provided a view that simultaneously
exposed interior and exterior to the eye of the touring architect
or artist. According to Guillerme and Vérin, the practice of record-
ing through drawing these surviving monuments in their state
of romantic decay gave slow birth to the section as a conscious
projection of architectural intentionality, “transforming the obser-
vation of archaeological remains into the observance of archi-
tectural diagrams.” The section understood as an imaginary cut
through an otherwise solid building or as a means of describing
a future construction comes only after the documentation of
ruins that reveal what would otherwise be hidden. This translation
necessitated a conceptual shift from a literal depiction of a
fragmented building to an abstract device: the imaginary plane
of the sectional cut. The conventional nature of this transformation
is recorded in the variety of techniques used to make explicit the
operations of the cut, ranging from the device of rendering new
or projected buildings in quasiruined form to the emergence of
poche as a method for depicting the conceptually solid structural
fabric of a building.
A parallel set of antecedents can be found in artistic and
scientific practices depicting the body and its internal organs that
evolved from the physical dissection of human remains and
from investigative anatomy as it emerged in the fifteenth century.
As with the architectural section, these drawings often relied
Villard de Honnecourt, Reims Cathedral, ca. 1230
Donato Bramante, Roman ruins, ca. 1500
Giuliano da Sangallo, Temples of Portumnus and Vesta, 1465
Leonardo da Vinci, study for central plan church, ca. 1507
26

-- 26 of 210 --

upon an inventive array of visual devices to render explicit the
sectional nature of the cuts. The most often cited are Leonardo
da Vinci’s obsessive studies of the human form, including his
drawing of a human skull, which combines aspects of plan, eleva-
tion, and section in a cutaway perspective. Leonardo’s depiction
of a cranium was not unlike that of the dome in his contem-
poraneous study for a circular library, both demonstrating the
act of cutting as essential to simultaneously show exterior and
interior conditions of the body or building.
In perhaps the most famous of these early medical examples,
Andreas Vesalius’s De Humani Corporis Fabrica (1543), the vari-
ously skinned and flayed bodies are depicted in poses that mimic
those of living and allegorical subjects. These woodcut illustra-
tions are intricately constructed, not only to display the internal
structure of muscles and viscera but also to acknowledge the
act of cutting as both a physical operation and a representational
conceit. Figures adopt stances that help to demonstrate the
anatomical systems on view—but also fancifully seem to partici-
pate in their own dissection and display.
While it may be difficult to verify any causal relation
between these biological depictions and architectural practice,
it is nonetheless possible to identify productive similarities
whereby techniques applied in one sphere reappeared in the
other, suggesting a cross-fertilization of graphic techniques
and modes of representation. More important, however, drawing
techniques derived from both archaeological and anatomical
practices strongly indicate that section originated as a retrospec-
tive rather than prospective tool, an analytical device rather
than a generative instrument. It is perhaps this origin in the
recording and revealing of extant conditions that has accounted
for the slow integration of section as a productive instrumen-
tality in architectural practice.
THE EMERGENCE OF THE ARCHITECTURAL SECTION:
MEASURE AND PERCEPTION
Sectional drawing as an explicitly architectural technique appears
in the work of Italian architects in the latter half of the fifteenth
century. At this time a renewed interest in documenting the
sectional ruins of classical antiquity intersected with the use of
section for speculating on the structural and material properties
of ancient buildings that had not deteriorated, as well as for
describing new constructions and projects. The Pantheon, built
by Emperor Hadrian in AD 128, was a frequent subject of inspired
conjecture, with speculative section drawings executed in the
hope of ascertaining the structural and proportional logic that had
kept it intact.16 It offered to architects a powerful subject for the
use of section, given the seductive cut in the illuminating central
oculus of the dome. Instead of a sealed dome, the Pantheon
displayed a provocative void, allowing interior and exterior space
to merge in a manner that would typically be seen only through
a section drawing.
Early collections of Renaissance drawings (such as the Codex
Coner, the Codex Barberini, and the sketches of Baldassarre
Andreas Vesalius, drawings, from De Humani Corporis
Fabrica, 1543
Leonardo da Vinci, Skull, 1489
Bernardo della Volpaia, Pantheon, from Codex Coner,
ca. 1515
27

-- 27 of 210 --

Peruzzi) contain numerous sections, including different interpre-
tations of the Pantheon as well as views of contemporaneous
centralized churches. These drawings seek, through an imaginary
cut, to trace the exterior and interior profile of the wall, thus
visualizing the relationship between the building’s form and the
space it contained. Even in these early drawings the status of the
section as a form of architectural representation was in question,
as the mapping of the substance of the wall was only a part of
the image. As Wolfgang Lotz noted in his essay “The Rendering
of the Interior in Architectural Drawings of the Renaissance,”
section drawings developed not as a singular and fully codified
practice but as a series of incipient operations that overlap and
combine in promiscuous ways.17 For Lotz, the question was less
the status of the section cut itself than the role this drawing type
was to play in either staging interior scenes or recording archi-
tectural measure and proportion. In the Codex Coner (a drawing
set now attributed to Bernardo della Volpaia and dated to the early
1500s) the view within the sectioned walls is depicted through
a single-point perspective. This painterly approach sacrifices
dimensional accuracy for the illusion of a scene visible beyond
the cut plane of the section. In contrast, certain sections in the
Codex Barberini (attributed to Giuliano da Sangallo) and in the
Pantheon drawing by Peruzzi demonstrate a commitment to ortho-
graphic projection, where the space beyond the cut is shown in
elevation with no vanishing point or perspectival distortion.
While explicitly spatial, the sectional perspectives of the
Codex Coner represent a highly particular notion of space, both
adapted to and in part determined by the logic of the drawing
type itself. The architectural historian and critic Robin Evans has
argued that the inherent logic of the section drawing is heavily
biased toward bilaterally symmetrical and axial spatial organiza-
tions, which are readily depicted through this technique. Moreover,
the centralized and frontal sections of the Codex Coner imply an
understanding of space that is conceived volumetrically but also
from the perspective of a static observer taking in the architecture
as a pictorial composition. In this reading the perspectival section
reinforces a notion of architecture as a principally optical phenom-
enon, and one tethered to a fixed viewpoint.
By contrast, in later drawings of the Codex Barberini and the
work of Peruzzi and Antonio da Sangallo the Younger, the observer
is progressively removed as a subject through the use of more
orthogonal representational conventions in the depiction of sec-
tion. These drawings abandon the optical distortions of perspec-
tive, resulting in a technique that can eliminate the subjective in
favor of objective accuracy. This can be understood as a necessary
development of the section drawing as a professional document,
capable of conveying in unambiguous terms the dimensional and
geometric information required by the builder. It is significant
that this transition coincided with Sangallo’s and Peruzzi’s partic-
ipation in the fabricca of St. Peter’s under Raphael and the emer-
gence of new hierarchies of building production that separated
the architect from building. In Lotz’s view this shift also leads to
the possibility of more complex, dynamically conceived spaces,
Antonio da Sangallo the Younger, St. Peter’s, ca. 1520
Giuliano da Sangallo, centralized building, from Codex
Barberini, ca. 1500
Bernardo della Volpaia, Tempietto, from Codex Coner,
ca. 1515
28

-- 28 of 210 --

no longer restricted by the single static observation point of the
Codex Coner.
Lotz makes a claim of evolutionary teleology from the earlier
perspectival practices to the emergence of the strictly orthographic
section. The perspectival section is principally an illustrative
practice, one that maximizes the visual appeal of a singular image
to convey both profile and space and combines the quantifiable
with the perceptual. The orthographic section, on the other hand,
is an instrument of metric description connected to the emer-
gence of codified forms of construction documentation. However,
its increase in accuracy requires a multiplication of drawings to
provide the requisite information to comprehend complex spaces
and architectural assemblies, as the absence of illusionistic depth
flattens the legibility of spatial relationships.
This progressive bifurcation of orthographic section drawing
from perspectival practices coincides with architecture’s increas-
ing divergence as a discipline from the other fine arts during the
sixteenth century, as exemplified in the work of Sebastiano Serlio.
The increasing use of the dimensionally accurate orthographic
section, complete with notations of construction logic, parallels
the emergence of the professional architect as distinct from the
master craftsman. Whereas elevations describe the image and
composition of architecture, a section is an instrument of instruc-
tion, conveying to the builder the means and profile of erection.
Of the three primary orthographic drawing types—plan, elevation,
and section—it is section that aligns most closely to structural
and material designations. The typical orthographic section is in
many ways the most sophisticated, combining in one image two
types of representation: the objective profile marking the cut and
the interior elevation beyond, describing the inhabitable space
made possible by the inscribed wall.19
The section’s place in the standard repertoire of orthographic
representations is in clear evidence by the time Andrea Palladio’s
Four Books of Architecture was published in 1570.20 Here building
sections are paired with exterior elevations, each drawing type
describing only half of the building and aligned through the use
of only orthographic information. Interior perspectives that might
better convey the experience of the work are suppressed in favor
of measurable facts, reinforcing the conception of the architect
as the organizer of geometry. The symmetry of Palladio’s work
enables this efficiency, which reduces the number of engravings
necessary to illustrate a building completely. With this pairing
the exterior elevation sits in juxtaposition to the interior elevation,
the section serving to reveal the interplay between the shell of
the building and its interior disposition. In Palladio’s work the dis-
tinction and similarity between the section and the elevation are
deployed to full effect. While sharing the profile of the building,
the elevation illustrates the composition and order of architecture,
legacies of architecture as an aesthetic art. Section reveals the
material and mass necessary to construct the edifice, knowledge
unique to architecture as a profession aligned with the craft of
building. Palladio’s section-elevation hybrids exemplify the dual
nature of architecture as an art and a craft and illustrate the
Sebastiano Serlio, Project N13, from Book VII of On
Domestic Architecture, ca. 1545
Baldassarre Peruzzi, Pantheon, 1531–35
Andrea Palladio, La Rotonda, ca. 1570
29

-- 29 of 210 --

synthesis of the exterior and interior as quintessentially the
domain of the architect.
It is important to note that the load-bearing obligation of the
wall meant that for Palladio and his contemporaries, the shapes
of the wall, floor, and ceiling were coincident with the structural
system. Yet if we compare the plan and the section, the very
same wall is rendered in completely opposite ways. In plan, walls
are solid, filled in to reinforce the legibility of the organization
of rooms and spaces, which are left blank. The walls in section
are white, left as voids between the highly articulated interior
surfaces beyond. The plan is the privileged architectural figure,
with alignment between wall and spatial concept heavily marked.
On a page, the plan dominates, setting the primary terms by
which the building as an architectural composition is to be read
and understood. In contrast, the material condition of the wall
in section is left as a void, a gap between rooms. While the plan
may organize, the section affords greater play among the shape,
form, and organization of the material being cut and the inhab-
itable architectural space framed by it. Ceilings curve to disperse
gravitational load over the large volumes; invisible roof trusses
are given the same weight as the floor of the piano nobile; and the
scale and size of each building are most clearly evident in section.
It is the particular instrumentality of the section that allows for
the simultaneous registration of both form and effect, providing a
unique means for exploring, testing, and understanding complex
interactions and exchanges of material and space.
ÉTIENNE-LOUIS BOULLÉE: FORM AND EFFECT
Nearly two hundred years after Palladio, the section drawing
continued to increase in importance as a comprehensive means
for conveying architectural effects, even though structural obli-
gations remained consistent. It is perhaps in the unbuilt scheme
of Étienne-Louis Boullée for the cenotaph for Isaac Newton of
1784 where section is deployed in full, illustrating its potential
to choreograph the relationship among architecture, human
inhabitants, and site. While Boullée’s project was depicted in
plan, elevation, and section, it is sectional drawings that convey
the full force of the project. Two sections, one depicting daytime
and the other night, capture fully the experiential inversion
intended by the design. During the day, the interior of the massive
sphere would be illuminated by cuts through the exterior walls,
creating the impression of a captured night sky. At night, the
inverse would occur, with a massive illuminated orb transforming
the interior space into a daylit room.
Only through section drawings is the temporal juxtaposition
between the constructed world within the architectural sphere and
the natural world outside made visible. While the materiality of
the building is never revealed, the tonal marking of the foundation,
walls, and shell shifts to align with the pictorial goal of each
section. A light section tone in the daytime image reveals conical
cuts that penetrate the massive structure to create the illusion
of night, whereas in the nighttime image, the section blends into
the evening sky, retreating from consideration in deference to
Étienne-Louis Boullée, cenotaph for Isaac Newton, 1784
Étienne-Louis Boullée, conical cenotaph, ca. 1780
Andrea Palladio, baptisterium of Constantine, 1570
30

-- 30 of 210 --

the power of the manufactured light source. Despite the absence
of any perspectival projection, Boullée’s section clearly demon-
strates the capacity to convey experience over tectonic designa-
tion, aligning with his conviction that architecture should not be
bound by obligations of building but premised on the embodiment
of ideas. Paradoxically, section, the very drawing type now most
associated with the materials of construction, was deployed by
Boullée for the opposite purpose, illustrating succinctly its multi-
valent potential.
EUGENE EMMANUEL VIOLLET-LE-DUC:
STRUCTURE AND EXPRESSION
In large part, constructions through the seventeenth century
consisted of space circumscribed by masonry mass, resulting in
sectional depictions in which exterior profile and interior space
were closely interrelated through the thickness of the poche. How-
ever, during the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, the solid
wall of load-bearing masonry architecture was challenged by an
increasingly layered set of conditions, reflecting new structural
technologies associated with the emerging materials of cast and
wrought iron. In this context the section gained enhanced currency
as an effective means for describing and analyzing architectural
form, understood as a direct expression of static forces. Of partic-
ular significance in this regard are the writings and drawings of
the French architect and theorist Eugène-Emmanuel Viollet-le-Duc,
who relied on the section to demonstrate the interdependency
of formal and structural systems that were not only central to his
ideas but key tenets in the development of modern architecture.
Viollet-le-Duc set his work in direct juxtaposition to the
teachings of the École des Beaux-Arts, which had focused on
composition and plan. In his Lectures on Architecture, Viollet-
le-Duc outlined his goal to rethink Gothic architecture in order to
adapt what he saw as its exemplary structural rationality to the
new materials and constructional potentials of his time.21 The
Lectures are an expression of principles derived from the prac-
tices of previous eras, illustrated with sectional engravings.
Rather than describing buildings per se, Viollet-le-Duc presented
these engravings as a series of case studies that translate the
masonry-based architecture of the past into the new expression
proper to the nineteenth century. Viollet-le-Duc’s comparative
rendering in “Lecture XII” of medieval and modern methods for
supporting a projecting gallery, for example, depicts the replace-
ment of heavy stone corbeling by an iron strut. The efficacy
of this methodology is described in the language of efficiency
and economy: he writes, “We shall effect a saving in expense
and shall obtain a building that will present greater security, will
be less weighty, and will allow a better circulation of air about
the ground floor.”22 His ideas are supported by the didactic
nature of the section and its capacity to convey economically
the dynamics of structural and other gravitational forces, from
drainage to ventilation, in their relation to built form.
A related drawing by Viollet-le-Duc, from the same lecture,
depicting a “novel method of resisting the thrust of vaulting,”
Eugène-Emmanuel Viollet-le-Duc, vaulted room, 1872
Eugène-Emmanuel Viollet-le-Duc, structural system, 1872
Eugène-Emmanuel Viollet-le-Duc, medieval and modern
methods for supporting a projecting gallery, 1872
31

-- 31 of 210 --

offers another example of section as a didactic and projective
tool. Addressing the problem of the flying buttress, Viollet-le-Duc
replaces the masonry mass of the Gothic buttress with a system
of oblique iron struts, bars, and plates intended to resist the out-
ward thrust of the masonry arches above. Importantly, the drawing
includes not only the physical form of the new hybrid construc-
tion but also the geometry of its structural relationships, thus
transcribing both the material and immaterial into a single repre-
sentation to demonstrate the isomorphism between structural
logic and architectural expression. Significantly, in none of these
instances does Viollet-le-Duc provide a plan, as the principles
involved relate primarily to the vertical dimension, where gravita-
tional forces and static relationships hold sway.
These drawings also capitalize on the capacity of the section
to reveal the constructional condition of the building as an
assembly of constituent parts. Only through section could Viollet-
le-Duc visualize the new architectural conditions he espoused:
“We no longer have, as in Roman architecture, concrete and
homogeneous masses, but rather a kind of organism whose every
part has not only its purpose, but also an immediate action.”23
This shift from an architecture based on mass to one of discretely
adapted parts prefigures the impact of industrialized production
and the technologically driven constructional efficiencies that
were to come to fruition in the twentieth century. It is also a con-
ception of architecture that is effectively revealed through the
device of the section. Since structural assemblies operate first
and foremost in the vertical dimension, from foundation to column
to arch to roof, the section displays these transferences of force
and the corresponding building components in the most direct
form. For Viollet-le-Duc, the section drawing becomes a transpar-
ent demonstration of the inevitability of architectural forms
derived from the tectonic systems of new materials.
The adoption of industrialized construction techniques and
materials changed fundamentally the nature of architectural
practice, with the use of steel and iron columnar and long-span
systems uncoupling the enclosure wall from structural obligations.
Paradoxically, the same technological advances that made pos-
sible this interdependence of structure and form announced by
Viollet-le-Duc set in motion the terms of their eventual disengage-
ment within the modernist movement. The very efficiency of
steel (and subsequently concrete) construction systems, which
allowed them to work independently from exterior form and
interior space, placed the section, understood as both a represen-
tational technique and a location of architectural practice, in
a simultaneous point of liberation and crisis. The section, freed
from alignment with structural forces, could take on a new role
in regard to the manipulation of space. Simultaneously, the
section’s responsibility was challenged by the proliferation of
repetitive columnar systems and concrete slabs, removing for all
but long-span projects the obligation to sculpt gravitational forces
through section as a driver of design. Freedom of form came
through the loss of the structural or tectonic imperative that had
previously informed the logic of section.
Phillipe Bauche, Coupe de la Ville de Paris, 1742
Pierre Patte, street section, 1769
Eugénio dos Santos, street section, 1758
Eugène Hénard, illustration of the “Street of the Future,”
1911
32

-- 32 of 210 --

THE SECTIONAL CITY
With the growth of the metropolis that accompanied rapid indus-
trialization, section evolved as a critical tool for understanding
an increasingly complex layering of architectural, transportational,
and hydrological systems. With urban density came the need for
a network of interconnected systems to deliver the various services
of the modernizing city. While master plans provided the means
for organizing territory, allowing, for instance, the mapping of
Manhattan’s grid or the reworking of Paris’s streets, boulevards,
and parks, it was through the use of the urban cross-section that
the increasingly important, yet invisible, operations of the city
could not only be made visible but projected as an expansion of
political control. Executed not as a recording of existing condi-
tions but as a speculative image of the future, the street section
demonstrates the power of this mode of representation to orches-
trate divergent systems, opening new conceptual and spatial
territory for development.
The drawings of the Portuguese engineer Eugénio dos Santos
and those of the French engineer Pierre Patte are considered
the earliest uses of section to organize and understand the metro-
polis conceived as a set of interconnected infrastructural sys-
tems.24 Of the two, Patte’s work is better known, given its influen-
tial role in transforming Paris. Executed in the 1760s, his urban
plans and drawings proposed changes to the city and used
section to demonstrate the integration of the inner workings of
buildings, engaging the depth of the street as a site of future civic
improvements.25 Here the section reveals and organizes systems,
unifying the interior of dwellings with the vast network of a shared
waste system. Patte’s drawings link the civic machinery of the
waterworks with the interiors of the adjacent apartment buildings,
suggesting the intimate connections between individual domestic
lives and the sanitary infrastructure that ties them to larger urban
networks. It is only through the use of the section that these
two divergent aspects of the city can be understood and visual-
ized as one system, obscuring boundaries of ownership and civic
authority through the logic of the drawing. Patte gave greatest
focus to the integration of building and street drainage into a
shared collection tube, paying careful attention to the depth and
materiality of the sewer to ensure the proper durability, slope,
and water flow. By contrast, the architecture above the basement
level is left blank, undifferentiated, and underdeveloped, a place-
holder designating only future inhabitation. The street monument
in the distance is given more attention than the buildings in
section. As such, the design concept of Patte illustrates the two
distinct trajectories of the urban section, one representing the
increased complexity and layering of the city and the other the
density made possible by an architecture of repetitive stacking.
Presented in 1910, Eugène Hénard’s “The Cities of the Future”
draws directly on the precedent set by Patte.26 Hénard continued
to use section to stitch together visible and unseen operations.
Apprehending the challenges cities faced with the promise and
potential of new transportation systems, he envisioned the city as
a multilayered matrix of tunnels, tracks, and elevated railroads
Harvey Wiley Corbett, “City of the Future,” 1913
Peter Cook / Archigram, Plug-in City, Max Pressure Area, 1964
Grand Central Terminal, New York, published in the
Scientific American, 1912
Chicago Central Area Transit Planning Study, 1968
33

-- 33 of 210 --

that used section to thicken the very ground of the urban condition.
Here coal carts render visible the connections among individual
buildings and new infrastructural systems to provide power and
energy. Amid exuberant embellishments such as vertical shafts to
lift personal flying devices and automobiles, Hénard draws a series
of stacked domestic spaces, ordinary and repetitive, capped in
height only to allow sunlight to reach adjacent buildings.
Section drawings were instrumental in the thinking of mod-
ernist planners and architects like Hénard, as they transformed
the ground into a foundation for a densely layered metropolis,
accommodating emerging and often competing technologies
of transportation and communication through distinct strata. The
use of section was essential to the conceptualization of the city
to come. From Corbett’s City of the Future (1913) to plans for
Grand Central Terminal in New York (1912) to Le Corbusier’s Ville
Radieuse (1924), visions of the future were coincident with the
image of the city as a multilevel stage, thus leveraging section’s
capacity to hold in opposition contrasting or even contradictory
programmatic conditions in a single view or space.
HEGEMONY OF THE STACK
While the infrastructures of the city have grown in complexity,
from the eighteenth-century emphasis on hygiene and health to
the twentieth-century commitment to transportation, power, and
communication distribution, the section has continued to per-
form a significant role in the conceptualization of urban life. With
the rise of populations living in closer proximity and in tighter
quarters, section has become increasingly a means to organize and
control the politics of the city, mapping the complex layers that
are necessary to build and maintain urban systems. As unclaimed
ground is increasingly at a premium, the section of cities becomes
multilayered and contested, providing a ripe site for design pro-
jection and invention. From underground transportation and sewers
to military and civilian shelters for survival, the infrastructure of
industrialized cities of the late nineteenth and twentieth centuries
was configured through sectional projection.
The population density that defines the modern metropolis
is made possible only through the most banal forms of the archi-
tectural section, yet gives rise to the use of section as a means
to legislate urban politics and map systemic control below- and
above ground. Contemporary urban planning through zoning
(including setback obligations and limits and controls on height)
curbs the unchecked expansion of the city through sectional repeti-
tion. Whether through floor-to-area regulations, height restrictions,
or sky-plane exposure analysis, contemporary zoning operates
significantly through the control of section. Zoning controls often
have introduced new imperatives for sectional invention in archi-
tecture. The 1916 New York zoning code gave direct rise to the
ziggurat-shaped buildings of the 1930s, where a maximum vertical
height was coupled with an upper-building envelope dictated
by a plane drawn at an angle from the ground to ensure that light
would penetrate to the street. Such edicts resulted in buildings
whose sections were sheared and staggered, stepping back from
A. B. Walker, cartoon in Life magazine, March 1909
William Le Baron Jenney, Fair Store, 1891
Pier Luigi Nervi, UNESCO Headquarters, 1958
34

-- 34 of 210 --

the sidewalk to maximize enclosed space. Contemporary rules
specifying that only certain types of spaces must be restricted
according to floor-to-area ratios have led to inventive uses
of section that skillfully deploy mezzanines, voids, and double-
height spaces to maximize returns on architecture commodified
as investment.
New urban building types increasingly have used sections
as explanatory documents to catalog the multiplicity of systems,
circulation paths, and programs that characterize department
stores, multistage theaters, hotels, and train stations. The sophis-
tication of building technology able to facilitate divergent uses
in a constrained urban block was matched by the increasing use
of section to pack often unrelated parts into a single shell or
volume. These large-scale projects, often public in nature, incor-
porate the complex technical systems of the city within the space
of a single structure and stand in direct contrast to the standard-
ization of the section characteristic of private development.
Yet at the core, all vertical buildings share a dependence on the
elevator and other robust mechanical systems, without which
multivalent and layered buildings would not be feasible.
The efficiencies of modern construction that have enabled
urban densification have played a central role in the develop-
ment of section. From the Chicago frame to the Dom-ino system,
contemporary vertical building processes align perfectly with
capitalism’s driving obligation of creating maximum marketable
area on a given plot of land for the least amount of cost. These
systems of efficiency, now normative and nearly unquestioned,
are in tension with the more intricate spatial types required
to meet a variety of uses and building performances and negate
the rich potential of more inventive sectional approaches.
Not every human activity or building system is ideally served by
the undifferentiated space provided by repetitive floor plates.
It is precisely section drawing’s aptness as a tool for imagining
alternative ways of creating space that makes it a critical means
of confronting dominant systems of construction and spatial
organizations determined by systems of economic efficiencies.
Given the environmental and human costs of the relentless
pursuit of capital in so much of today’s built environment, there
is clearly a broad social and political potential in the explora-
tion of more complex sectional practices.
THE CONTEMPORARY SECTION
The advances in material and structural systems of industrializa-
tion, combined with the economic imperatives of capitalism,
have polarized the architecture of the twentieth and twenty-first
centuries in relation to the section. At one end, efficiencies of
economy push toward repetition and sameness. Simultaneously,
the plasticity of construction materials and systems under the
obligation to meet increasingly complex building requirements
encourages a wider range of sectional exploration than what was
possible with premodern load-bearing wall systems.
The interplay between standardization and complexity frames
to a great degree the current approach to the conceptualization
Foreign Office Architects, Yokohama Terminal, 2002
Diller Scofidio + Renfro, Eyebeam Museum of Art and
Technology, 2004
35

-- 35 of 210 --

of section in architectural discourse, informed in parallel by
the fundamental shift over the last thirty years to the use of digital
technology. The ability of computer-aided drawing programs to
copy and paste with speed plays directly into economies of same-
ness. At the same time, digital modeling software programs
have unleashed spatial, formal, and material complexities that
were heretofore difficult, if not impossible, to visualize and realize,
creating the possibility for unprecedented sectional complexity.
The ability to cut or take a section through a three-dimensional
model with speed has heightened the possibility to use section
as a tool to inform the design process. Just as architects can use
software to create and visualize complex forms, engineers can
use computation to calculate loads and forces with the speed and
certainty needed to ensure their structural integrity.
In turn, the ease of the section process establishes a means
to translate between digital space and material form. For instance,
closely spaced sections taken in parallel are often used to break
larger forms and spaces into discrete pieces that can be cut,
printed, or made and then reassembled to realize the whole. This
sectioning process is widespread in practice and has, in turn,
become a recognizable, even clichéd, aesthetic.27 Yet the section
cut is too often underused as a generative tool. In part, this is
because the section is conceived as a software command, one
among many built into the interface of the program. As such,
section goes from being a site for invention to a resultant of the
design process—the by-product of a visualization instruction.
The discourse of architecture at the opening of the twenty-first
century has, however, been witness to discernible trends in the
approach to section that highlight tendencies toward formal
complexity. These recognizable practices are often the result of
accommodating the increasingly dense programmatic and per-
formative obligations of projects, enabled in part by increasingly
sophisticated data and computational software.
One identifiable approach is the stacking of nested sections
of legible program-specific volumes or rooms (rather than floor
plates) to compose an overall architectural figure. These buildings
embrace the hegemony of the stack as a catalyst for experi-
mentation. Designed with a playfulness akin to building with
children’s blocks, these structures include MVRDV’s Market Hall
in Rotterdam, where the stacking of living units into an arc through
horizontal shear forms a public canopy over a sandwich of retail
and parking below. Höweler + Yoon Architecture deploys a combi-
nation of nest and vertical shear to creatively intertwine apart-
ments, working within site constraints.
Alternatively, practices have explored the stacking of highly
figural nested shapes that often do not fit together neatly.
The resulting section is an accumulation of figures set in tension
with one another, where the individually shaped units remain
discernible, as evident in WORKac’s Nature-City project and Sou
Fujimoto’s Tokyo Apartment. In these designs, the accumula-
tion of a range of distinct interior spaces and their qualities is
coextensive with the logic of the exterior form.
Höweler + Yoon Architecture, Building 2345, 2008
WORKac, Nature-City, 2012
Sou Fujimoto, Tokyo Apartment, 2009
36

-- 36 of 210 --

Development of the incline section has resulted in two
related sectional trends, one more interior and the other more
exterior. In the interior incline section model, architects have
sought to extend the sloped floor to align with the shape of entire
projects. Such designs turn the now familiar fusing of an inclined
floor and wall via a fillet into a total project, with complex topo-
graphies enveloping and engaging all surfaces. Here the utility of
the inclined section is coupled with a fully three-dimensional
figure of continuity. Given the cost and complexity of these proj-
ects, such an approach is usually associated with significant
cultural destinations, exemplified by Toyo Ito’s Taichung Metro-
politan Opera House and Zaha Hadid’s Abu Dhabi Performing Arts
Centre. In a related trope, the section is used to merge building
and landscape, with the inclined floor exaggerated and sculpted
rhetorically to emphasize the blurred relationship.28 In Steven
Holl’s Vanke Center, Snøhetta’s Norwegian National Opera and
Ballet, and Dominique Perrault’s Ewha Womans University, por-
tions of the buildings’ roofs are merged with landscape, complicat-
ing expectations of the ground plane through sectional mating.
Our intent with this book is to create an open-ended and
flexible approach to section that can serve as a shared basis for
analysis and critical discussion of this undertheorized architectural
design tool. By outlining the history of section and articulating
clear differences among section types through the creation of a
classification structure, we can understand and explore section
more precisely and creatively. Indeed, the contemporary practice
of architecture, organized and transformed by digital technology,
is especially in need of tools to study and examine sections.
Section is the critical means for considering the social,
environmental, and material questions of our current century.
Designing and thinking through section establishes immediately
a relationship among architectural form, interior space, and
exterior site, where the consequences of scale are tangible and
visceral. In the section, environmental and natural systems are
described, engaged, and explored. Through section, the interplay
of material invention and tectonic logic sets the stage for the
framing of space and its use. As a cut into that which cannot be
seen, the section embodies and reveals new territories for the
continued architectural experimentation and exploration of our
present future.
1 	Wolfgang Lotz, “The Rendering of the Interior in Architectural Drawings
of the Renaissance,” in Studies in Italian Renaissance Architecture
(Cambridge, MA: MIT, 1977), 1–65.
2 	Jacques Guillerme and Hélène Vérin, “The Archaeology of Section,”
Perspecta 25 (1989): 226–57.
3 	Rem Koolhaas, Delirious New York: A Retroactive Manifesto for Manhattan
(New York: Monacelli, 1994), 157.
4 	In 2003 the building was converted to a condominium. The friction
between a condominium, where maximizing the plan’s square footage is
paramount, and this idiosyncratic section—now void of its programmatic
substantiation but still present as structure—produced interesting anoma-
lies that were compounded by the facade’s landmarked status.
Steven Holl Architects, Vanke Center, 2009
Zaha Hadid Architects, Abu Dhabi Performing Arts
Center, 2008
Snøhetta, Norwegian National Opera and Ballet, 2008
MVRDV, Market Hall, 2014
37

-- 37 of 210 --

5 	For a detailed presentation of a range of shaped sections in ceilings see
Farshid Moussavi, The Function of Form (Barcelona: Actar and Harvard
University Graduate School of Design, 2009).
6 	Colin Rowe, “The Mathematics of the Ideal Villa,” in The Mathematics of
the Ideal Villa and Other Essays (Cambridge, MA: MIT, 1982), 11. It is
debatable exactly how Rowe would argue that Palladio’s Malcontenta is
a free section or what he precisely means by free section, as in the essay
he elaborates little on it beyond associating it with volumetric modeling.
7 	Herman Hertzberger, Lessons for Students in Architecture (Rotterdam:
010, 1991), 202.
8 	Hollywood’s infatuation with using these spaces for action movies—
witness Die Hard, Mission Impossible, Sneakers, Speed, Salt, and
Inception—speaks to their visual seductiveness, as they induce vertigo
and exploit zones that are not normally visible in most buildings.
9 	The celebrated section of Le Corbusier’s Unité d’Habitation is a stack of
Citrohans. These are vertically mirrored, leaving a void in plan every third
floor. The plan voids form a hallway that feeds to pairs of apartments on
the three floors.
10 Despite Le Corbusier’s claim in the Oeuvre complète that the Villa Savoye
possesses a “very slight inclined ramp which leads almost imperceptibly
to the upper level,” this ramp exceeds the 1:12 slope stipulated by today’s
code. At the current ratio, it would take 120 feet of run, or 65 feet in a
cut-back ramp with landings, to rise 10 feet.
11 In this light, the proliferation of projects in which inclined surfaces are
extended from floors to walls through fillets can be seen as an attempt
to make the continuity more legible, even if that continuity is largely
rhetorical.
12 Guillerme and Vérin, “Archaeology of Section.”
13 James S. Ackerman, Origins, Imitations, Conventions (Cambridge, MA:
MIT, 2002). See also James S. Ackerman, “Villard de Honnecourt’s
Drawings of Reims Cathedral: A Study in Architectural Representation,”
Artibus et Historae 18, no. 35 (1997): 41–49.
14 Robin Evans, The Projective Cast: Architecture and Its Three Geometries
(Cambridge, MA: MIT, 2000), 118.
15 Guillerme and Vérin, “Archaeology of Section.”
16 Tod A. Marder, “Bernini and Alexander VII: Criticism and Praise of the
Pantheon in the Seventeenth Century,” Art Bulletin 71 (1989): 628–45.
17 Lotz, “Rendering of the Interior.”
18 Evans, Projective Cast, 118.
19 For more on the relationship between elevation, section, and perspective,
see Evans, Projective Cast.
20 Andrea Palladio, The Four Books on Architecture (1570), trans. Richard
Schofield and Robert Tavernor (Cambridge, MA: MIT, 2002).
21 Eugène Emmanuel Viollet-le-Duc, Lectures on Architecture, vol. 2 (1872),
trans. Benjamin Bucknall (Boston: James R. Osgood and Co., 1881).
See also Robin Middleton, “The Iron Structure of the Bibliothèque Sainte-
Geneviève as the Basis of a Civic Decor,” AA Files 40 (2000): 33–52.
22 Viollet-le-Duc, Lectures on Architecture, 56.
23 Viollet-le-Duc, Lectures on Architecture, 58.
24 Andrew J. Tallon, “The Portuguese Precedent for Pierre Patte’s Street
Section,” Journal of the Society of Architectural Historians 63, no. 3
(2004): 370–77.
25 Tallon, “Portuguese Precedent.” Tallon argues that an earlier engineer,
Eugenio dos Santos, was the first to design the urban section that influ-
enced Patte.
26 Eugène Hénard, “The Cities of the Future,” in Transactions: Town Planning
Conference, London, 10–15 October 1910 (London: Royal Institute of
British Architecture, 1911), 345–67.
27 Lisa Iwamoto, “Sectioning,” in Digital Fabrications: Architectural and
Material Techniques (New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 2009),
17–41.
28 Stan Allen and Marc McQuade, eds., Landform Building (Baden: Lars
Müller, 2011).
38

-- 38 of 210 --

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Ackerman, James S. “Architectural Practice in the Italian Renaissance.”
Journal of the Society of Architectural Historians 13, no. 3 (1954): 3–11.
Ackerman, James S. “Villard De Honnecourt’s Drawings of Reims Cathedral:
A Study in Architectural Representation.” Artibus et Historae 18, no. 35
(1997): 41–49.
Allen, Stan, and Marc McQuade, eds. Landform Building. Baden: Lars Müller,
2011.
Ashby, Thomas. “Sixteenth-Century Drawings of Roman Buildings Attributed
to Andreas Coner.” Papers of the British School of Rome 2 (1904): 1–88.
Carlisle, Stephanie, and Nicholas Pevzner. The Performative Ground:
Rediscovering the Deep Section, 2012, accessed October 15, 2014,
http://scenariojournal.com/article/the-performative-ground/.
Chapman, Julia. “Paris: The Planned City in Section.” Undergraduate thesis,
Princeton University, 2009.
Emmons, Paul. “Immured: The Uncanny Solidity of Section.” Paper pre-
sented at the Association of Collegiate Schools of Architecture, Montreal,
Quebec, Canada, 2011.
Evans, Robin. The Projective Cast: Architecture and Its Three Geometries.
Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT, 2000.
Guillerme, Jacques, and Hélène Vérin. “The Archaeology of Section.”
Perspecta 25. Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT, 1989.
Hénard, Eugène. “The Cities of the Future.” In Transactions: Town Planning
Conference, London, 10–5 October 1910, 345–67. London: Royal
Institute of British Architecture, 1911.
Iwamoto, Lisa. Digital Fabrications: Architectural and Material Techniques.
New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 2009.
Koolhaas, Rem. Delirious New York: A Retroactive Manifesto for Manhattan.
New York: Monacelli, 1994.
Lewis, Paul, Marc Tsurumaki, and David J. Lewis. Lewis.Tsurumaki.Lewis:
Intensities. New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 2013.
Lewis, Paul, Marc Tsurumaki, and David J. Lewis. Lewis.Tsurumaki.Lewis:
Opportunistic Architecture. New York: Princeton Architectural Press,
2008.
Lotz, Wolfgang. Studies in Italian Renaissance Architecture. Cambridge, MA:
MIT, 1977.
Machado, Rodolfo, and Rodolphe el-Khoury. Monolithic Architecture. New
York: Prestel-Verlag, 1995.
Magrou, Rafaël. “The Glories of the Architectural Section.” Harvard Design
Magazine 35 (2012): 34–39.
Marder, Tod A. “Bernini and Alexander VII: Criticism and Praise of the
Pantheon in the Seventeenth Century.” Art Bulletin 71 (1989): 628–45.
Moussavi, Farshid. The Function of Form. Barcelona: Actar and Harvard
University Graduate School of Design, 2009.
O’Neill, John P., ed. Leonardo Da Vinci: Anatomical Drawings from the Royal
Library Windsor Castle. New York: Metropolitan Museum of Art, 1983.
Palladio, Andrea. The Four Books on Architecture. Translated by Richard
Schofield and Robert Tavernor. Cambridge, MA: MIT, 2002.
Rohan, Timothy M. The Architecture of Paul Rudolph. New Haven: Yale
University Press, 2014.
Rosenfeld, Myra Nan. Serlio on Domestic Architecture. Mineola, New York:
Dover Publications, 1978.
Serlio, Sebastiano. The Five Books of Architecture. London: Robert Peake,
1611.
Tallon, Andrew J. “The Portuguese Precedent for Pierre Patte’s Street
Section.” Journal of the Society of Architectural Historians 63, no. 3
(2004): 370–77.
Tsukamoto, Toshiharu, and Momoyo Kaijima. Graphic Anatomy: Atelier Bow-
Wow. Minato City, Tokyo: TOTO, 2007.
Tsukamoto, Yoshiharu, and Momoyo Kaijima. Graphic Anatomy 2: Atelier
Bow-Wow. Minato City, Tokyo: TOTO, 2014.
Viollet-le-Duc, Eugène Emmanuel. Dictionnaire Raisonné De L’Architecture
Française Du Xie Au Xvie Siècle. 8 vols. Paris: Morel, 1858–68.
Viollet-le-Duc, Eugène Emmanuel. Discourses on Architecture. Translated by
Henry Van Brunt. Vol. 1. Boston: James R. Osgood and Co., 1875.
Viollet-le-Duc, Eugène Emmanuel. Lectures on Architecture. Translated by
Benjamin Bucknall. Vol. 2. Boston: James R. Osgood and Co., 1881.
39

-- 39 of 210 --

The direct extrusion of a plan to a height
sufficient for the intended use
The layering of floors directly on top of one another; an extruded
section, repeated with or without variations
The deformation of one or more of the primary horizontal
surfaces of a building to sculpt space
The use of a rift or cut along either the horizontal or vertical axis
of a building to generate sectional difference
The deployment of any number or scale of penetrations through
a slab, exchanging lost floor area for benefits in section
The manipulation of the angle of an occupiable horizontal
plane, which tilts the plan into section
The creation of sectional consequences through
an interplay or overlap of legible volumes
Any combination of Stack, Extrusion, Shape, Shear, Hole, Incline,
and Nest; buildings rarely exhibit section types in isolation

-- 40 of 210 --

EXTRUSION 	42
STACK 	50
SHAPE 	64
SHEAR 	84
HOLE 	100
INCLINE 	116
NEST 	130
HYBRIDS 	154

-- 41 of 210 --

EXTRUSION
The extrusion of a plan up to
a height sufficient for the intended
activity is the most basic form
of a section. An extruded section
has little to no variation in
the vertical axis. The vast majority
of buildings are based on this
efficiency, including strip malls,
big-box stores, factories,
single-story houses, and the
floors of most office, retail, and
multistory residential buildings.

-- 42 of 210 --

Glass House 	44
Philip Johnson
Kanagawa Institute of Technology Workshop 48
Junya Ishigami + Associates
Palace of Labor 	46
Pier Luigi Nervi

-- 43 of 210 --

Glass House 	New Canaan, Connecticut, USA
The first of fourteen structures built on his estate, Philip Johnson’s Glass
House is enclosed by a steel-framed ceiling standing 10 ft 6 in (3.2 m)
above a brick floor on eight perimeter columns punctuating the window walls.
The horizontal roof-spanning members are embedded within the smooth
plane of the ceiling to render them invisible from within the house, leaving
only the thin profile of the steel windows to frame large expanses of glass.
Partial-height wood cabinets and a full-height cylinder of brick delineate the
program of the house. The cabinets separate the bed from the open living
Extrusion 	Nest

-- 44 of 210 --

space, and the brick cylinder, extruding the brick floor into a vertical core,
contains the bathroom and fireplace. As a consequence of the extruded
section, the walls of glass generate visual exchanges—animated by light,
reflections, weather, and seasonal variations—between the interior space
and the more expansive landscapes surrounding the pavilion. Here the
section induces horizontal rather than vertical visual effects.
Philip Johnson 	1949
45

-- 45 of 210 --

Palace of Labor 	Turin, Italy
Covering 269,098 sq ft (25,000 sq m), this enormous exhibition hall and
training center was designed in part as a response to the expedited construc-
tion sequence of a competition. Built in eleven months, the roof was conceived
as sixteen individual 82-ft-tall (25 m) mushroomlike forms, each consisting
of a 65-ft-7-in (20 m) cast-in-place reinforced-concrete column topped
with a 131-ft-3-in (40 m) square steel roof assembly. The accumulation of
these units, built one by one, allowed interiors and the glass enclosure to
be constructed prior to the completion of the entire roof. The large concrete
Extrusion

-- 46 of 210 --

columns taper from a 16-ft-5-in-wide (5 m) cruciform, to a 8-ft-2-in-
diameter (2.5 m) circle, to which are anchored twenty radiating steel-beam
spokes that support the roof. Continuous glass strips run between the struc-
tures, allowing natural light into the space and registering the autonomy
of each massive structural unit. A row of external steel ribs spans between
a perimeter mezzanine and the roof to stiffen the enclosing glass curtain.
The height and scale of this section exceeds conventions and transforms this
extruded section into a grand civic space and spectacle.
Pier Luigi Nervi 	1961
47

-- 47 of 210 --

Kanagawa Institute of Technology Workshop 	Kanagawa, Japan
In plan, this one-story space is configured as a slightly deformed square
with 151-ft (46 m) sides. Steel columns (305 total) are distributed in
clusters of varying densities to produce a range of flexible workshops for
engineering students. The columns range in size from 5/8 by 5 3/4 in
(1.6 by 14.5 cm) to 2 1/2 by 3 1/2 in (6.3 by 9.0 cm) and are painted white.
Forty-two of these steel columns are in compression, and 263 are post-
tensioned to withstand lateral forces. At a height of 16 ft 5 in (5 m), the roof
is composed of a flat grid of 7 7/8-in-deep (20 cm) girders. The columns
Extrusion

-- 48 of 210 --

tether the roof down to a concrete slab with numerous footings. In contrast
to extruded sections like those of big-box stores that reduce the quantity
of columns to increase the efficiency and flexibility of the plan, the workshop
transforms the vertical structure from a collection of single columns into
a complex field, blurring distinctions between structure and space and
producing difference rather than uniformity. The space of this extruded
section is articulated by an approach to the vertical structure that redefines
expectations of efficiency and hierarchy.
Junya Ishigami + Associates 	2010
49

-- 49 of 210 --

Stacking increases the
real estate value of a property
by expanding the square footage
and programmatic capacity
of a building without increasing
its footprint. This is a basic
motivation for the creation of
section in architecture.
A repetitive stack is largely an
extruded section, deployed
ad nauseam. By itself, stacking
does not produce interior effects.
STACK

-- 50 of 210 --

São Paulo Museum of Art 	58
Lina Bo Bardi
Downtown Athletic Club 	52
Starrett & Van Vleck
S. R. Crown Hall 	54
Ludwig Mies van der Rohe
Expo 2000 Netherlands Pavilion 	62
MVRDV
Salk Institute for Biological Studies 	56
Louis I. Kahn
Kunsthaus Bregenz 	60
Peter Zumthor

-- 51 of 210 --

Downtown Athletic Club 	New York, New York, USA
While the setback massing of the Downtown Athletic Club was a conse-
quence of zoning regulations, the vertical blocks that it forms correspond to
the stacking of interior programs. Lobbies, offices, and billiard rooms
fill the widest block at the bottom. Most of the next block comprises athletic
programs, each inhabiting its own full floor. Social programs, lounges,
and dining rooms transition to the narrower top blocks, which contain smaller-
scale bedrooms. Wide-span steel girders allow for a column-free space on
the south side of each floor, with vertical circulation forming a linear core
Stack

-- 52 of 210 --

on the north side of the building. There are nineteen different ceiling heights
within the thirty-five levels, ranging from a 6-ft (1.8 m) “bedroom utility” to
a 23-ft-6-in (7.2 m) “gymnasium.” These variations in section are not revealed
on the facade; they are experienced only through the elevator and stairs.
Because the stacked section maintains the autonomy of each floor and
multiplies the area of the ground plane, a range of programs—many with
the precise vertical dimension required by a particular sport—can coexist
within a tight urban footprint.
Starrett & Van Vleck 	1930
53

-- 53 of 210 --

S. R. Crown Hall 	Chicago, Illinois, USA
As the central building in Mies van der Rohe’s IIT campus, Crown Hall contains
studio and exhibition space for the architecture school on its main floor, with
offices, workrooms, and classrooms on the lower level. The unencumbered
220-by-120-ft (67.1 by 36.6 m) upper-level space is made possible by resting
the four 6-ft-deep (1.8 m), welded double-plate girders on eight perimeter columns
that are located outside of the interior space, effectively suspending the roof and
ceiling. This produces a clear, 18-ft-high (5.5 m) interior space punctuated only by two
ventilation shafts and oak partitions. To calibrate natural light and visual relationships
Stack 	Hole

-- 54 of 210 --

with the outside, the window walls are treated differently on either side of a horizontal
datum at 8 ft (2.4 m): above, venetian blinds cover transparent glass, while below
8 ft, the glass is translucent. Louvers at the base of the window walls provide natural
ventilation. While the expansive, unitary space of this extruded section provides the
spectacle of the building, this space is made possible by the utilitarian
function of a partially submerged lower floor that contains additional class-
rooms, service spaces, and vertical circulation within cement-block walls.
Crown Hall is an exuberant extruded section, supported by a pragmatic base.
Ludwig Mies van der Rohe 	1956
55

-- 55 of 210 --

Salk Institute for Biological Studies 	La Jolla, California, USA
Two sets of five towers symmetrically flank the Salk Institute courtyard. Each
set of towers is connected to a laboratory building on the outer edge. The labo-
ratories are column-free, 65-by-245-ft (19.8 by 74.7 m) spaces with 11-ft-3-in
(3.4 m) ceilings. Poured-in-place concrete Vierendeel trusses span the width
of the laboratories and produce a floor above each laboratory for mechanical
systems. Although there are only three levels of laboratories, the building is often
said to be six stories, given the prominence of the service floors in the section.
Due to local building-height limits, one-third of the building is located below
Stack 	Hole

-- 56 of 210 --

grade. On both sides of the laboratory buildings, large light wells bring daylight
to the lower levels. The dimensions of the laboratory buildings’ stacked section
are consistent with the study towers, where the studios align with the service floors
to provide a separation between the studios and the laboratories.
Louis I. Kahn 	1965
57

-- 57 of 210 --

São Paolo Museum of Art 	São Paolo, Brazil
This cultural center comprises three stacked volumetric parts: the first
suspended 26 ft 3 in (8 m) in the air, the second submerged below grade,
and the third located in between—an exterior belvedere at street level.
Two pairs of hollow prestressed 8-ft-2-in–by–11-ft-6-in (2.5 by 3.5 m)
concrete frames span the 243-ft (74.1 m) length of the upper volume,
suspending two floors. The lower floor contains offices, a library,
and a central exhibition space, with circulation corridors located immedi-
ately below the concrete beam. On the upper level, the concrete beams
Stack 	Hole

-- 58 of 210 --

are external, producing an unimpeded exhibition hall enclosed by a curtain
wall on all four sides. An external stair and elevator link the suspended
volume and the plaza with the below-grade civic hall, auditoriums, theater,
library, restaurant, and service spaces. Exploiting the topography of its
urban site, this stacked complex is paradoxically both subterranean and
floating, camouflaged and monumental, compressed and expansive.
Lina Bo Bardi 	1968
59

-- 59 of 210 --

Kunsthaus Bregenz 	Bregenz, Austria
This monolithic building’s uniform, translucent glass rainscreen veils a
complex section. Square in plan, the building is composed of one structure
nested inside another. A steel lattice supports both the outer glass shingles
and an interior curtain-wall membrane. The 3-ft (91 cm) cavity between
the glass layers provides thermal control and light diffusion. Inside, an
independent concrete structure positions three exhibition spaces above
a ground-floor entry lobby and two subterranean floors that contain
an auditorium, an archive, and service spaces. Three walls, offset from
Stack 	Nest

-- 60 of 210 --

the perimeter by vertical circulation, support the concrete floors, producing
column-free exhibition spaces. Echoing the Salk Institute, a large plenum
above each of the exhibit floors allows diffused light from the exterior to
illuminate the etched-glass ceiling, augmented by an array of artificial
lights in the plenum. Only two of the five publicly accessible floors have the
same ceiling height. This project nests a variably extruded stacked section
to produce luminous effects on both interior and exterior.
Peter Zumthor 	1997
61

-- 61 of 210 --

Expo 2000 Netherlands Pavilion 	Hanover, Germany
This temporary pavilion placed simulations of six distinct Dutch landscapes
directly on top of one another. Moving upward from offices located below grade,
visitors encountered dunes, greenhouses, overscaled planters, a forest, and
polders. It was a building conceived as a thickness of inhabitable grounds,
forming a vertical park with extreme aesthetic, structural, programmatic, and
environmental disjunction from floor to floor. Ceiling heights ranged from 8 ft 6 in
(2.6 m) to 38 ft 9 in (11.8 m). The structure varied from amorphous concrete
bladders to oblique tree trunks to conventional repetitive joists. Each floor was
Stack 	Shape

-- 62 of 210 --

autonomous; there was little direct physical or spatial exchange in section.
Egress stairs and elevators were stuck onto the outside of the building and
carried all vertical circulation. The uniformity of the circulation structures was
in contrast to the variation of the individual floors. Through limited exterior
skins, the elevation revealed the sectional nature of the building, rendering
the disjunction of floors as the image of the building. Here the stacked section
is used not to produce the repetition of a typical plan, but rather to emphasize
the differences among levels that retain the same perimeter in plan.
MVRDV 	2000
63

-- 63 of 210 --

Shaping is a modulation of the
flat surface of a section.
This adds a particular volume
to the section and can occur in
a floor or ceiling or both.
The ceiling is a more common
location for this modulation
than the floor, as it does
not affect the plan’s efficacy.
Shaped sections often coordinate
large collective programs.
SHAPE

-- 64 of 210 --

Bagsværd Church 	78
Jørn Utzon
Bennati Cabin 	66
Rudolph Schindler
Church of Sainte-Bernadette du Banlay 	76
Claude Parent and Paul Virilio
Hunter College Library 	72
Marcel Breuer
Taichung Metropolitan Opera House 	82
Toyo Ito & Associates
Los Manantiales Restaurant 	70
Félix Candela
Cité de l’Océan et du Surf 	80
Steven Holl Architects
Notre Dame du Haut 	68
Le Corbusier
Seinäjoki Library 	74
Alvar Aalto

-- 65 of 210 --

Bennati Cabin 	Lake Arrowhead, California, USA
An early example of the A-frame vacation home, this two-bedroom cabin is
structured by fourteen equilateral, triangular wood frames, 24 ft (7.3 m)
on each side, placed 4 ft (1.2 m) apart. Rather than being positioned above
rectilinear walls as in a typical wood-framed house, here the roof reaches
down to the bottom of the enclosure. The common spaces of the cabin are on the
wider lower level, and two bedrooms with bunks are on the narrower upper level.
Pairs of 2-by-8-in (5.1 by 20.3 cm) horizontal beams attached to each 3-by-6-in
(7.6 by 15.2 cm) roof rafter support the floors and resist the outward thrust of
Shape

-- 66 of 210 --

the roof. Vertical windows, which extend the interior space horizontally, and
custom furniture integrated with the acute triangular frame enable the lower
corners to be inhabited. The wood building anchors to a stone base that
negotiates the topography and extends vertically through the house as the
fireplace chimney. A staircase clad in plywood aligns with the chimney.
In addition to providing an efficient shape for a wood structure, the section
defines the organization of the house and fulfills the mandates of local
aesthetic building ordinances, which require Alpine themes.
Rudolph Schindler 	1937
67

-- 67 of 210 --

Notre Dame du Haut 	Ronchamp, France
The section of Le Corbusier’s well-known pilgrimage chapels reveals material
and structural paradoxes. Both the south wall and the roof appear to be
massive but are hollow. The ceiling, over 7 ft (2.1 m) deep in some areas, is
formed by curved concrete girders and parallel purlins that span between the
girders. This structural system produces the convex underbelly defining the interior
of the church and gathers into a single rain scupper at the rear. The surfaces of the
south wall are supported by an internal concrete frame; its pyramidal apertures are
formed by thin shells of gunite. In contrast, the other perimeter walls, which appear
Shape 	Stack

-- 68 of 210 --

less massive than the south wall, are solid—composed of concrete columns and
stone salvaged from the chapel that previously occupied the site. The joint between
the south wall and the ceiling is mediated by an 8-in (20.3 cm) clerestory of glass,
illuminating the curvature of a roof that appears to float unmoored to the south wall.
Following the topography of the site, the floor slopes gently toward the altar.
Unlike those religious spaces that use a concave ceiling to gather and focus
an interior space, the convex, shaped section of Ronchamp pushes against the
periphery, while merging with three smaller chapels at the sides of the nave.
Le Corbusier 	1954
69

-- 69 of 210 --

Los Manantiales Restaurant 	Mexico City, Mexico
Los Manantiales Restaurant is one of the best-known examples of Félix
Candela’s thin-shell concrete structures. The building takes the form of four
intersecting hyperbolic paraboloids—surfaces that are curved along two
planes at once, which can be made by an array of straight wood formwork.
At the valley intersections, V-beams are thickened and reinforced with additional
steel, stiffening the base of the groin vaults. The outer edge of the structure
reveals the thin 1-5/8-in (4.1 cm) shell, which spans 106 ft (32.3 m) in parabolic
saddles at the perimeter of a 139-ft-diameter (42.4 m) space. The shell is
Shape

-- 70 of 210 --

19 ft 2 in (5.8 m) high at the middle and 32 ft 7 in (9.9 m) at the tallest
outer point and rests on inverted umbrella footings to distribute the load over
the site’s soft soil. The shape and all of the architecture of this building
is determined by its structural form. Although the building is a single space,
the roof articulates distinct seating areas at the perimeter of the plan.
At the eight bays, curtains of glass enclose the restaurant, provide
panoramic views out to the canals and park, and trace hyperbolic curves
as they intersect the shell of this shaped section.
Félix Candela 	1958
71

-- 71 of 210 --

Hunter College Library 	New York, New York, USA
This library is one part of a two-building complex, with the other building hous-
ing administrative offices and classrooms. The library contains a 120-by-180-ft
(36.6 by 54.9 m) reading room on its upper floor and bookstacks, offices, and
support spaces in a mostly underground lower floor. The rectangular plan is
spanned by six inverted umbrellas placed 60 ft (18.3 m) apart on center, extending
35 ft 5 in (10.8 m) from the lowest level to the top of the roof. These calyxes are tied
together to provide lateral bracing, support the perimeter glass walls, and define
the volume of the reading room. In addition, water collects in the calyxes and flows
Shape

-- 72 of 210 --

through drains internal to the cruciform columns. The umbrellas take the
shape of a hyperbolic paraboloid, composed of a thin concrete shell shaped by
the formwork’s straight lines of stock lumber. A suspended aluminum ceiling
grid supports a field of linear lights, which are a counterpoint to the curves of
the ceiling above. The east and south walls are lined with an external sun-
screen formed from terra-cotta flue tiles. In this shaped section the building’s
topographic ceiling follows directly from the geometry of its structural shell,
animating a rectilinear plan with an undulating volume of space.
Marcel Breuer 	1960
73

-- 73 of 210 --

Seinäjoki Library 	Seinäjoki, Finland
This library forms one side of a municipal campus center. Its plan is com-
posed of a rectangular bar of classrooms and support spaces merged with
a fan-shaped volume for bookstacks and reading areas. Located at the
intersection of the bar and the fan is the circulation desk. The cast-in-place
concrete ceiling and floor are both adjusted in section to modulate light and to
facilitate views within the interior. Above the outer perimeter of the fan of books,
the concave ceiling diffuses southern light into the library, while a gently
sloped ceiling distributes northern light from a clerestory above the central desk.
Shape

-- 74 of 210 --

A sunken reading area, typical of Aalto’s libraries, provides a sequestered
environment in the center of the stacks. This subdued experience is reinforced
by the darker middle section of the ceiling, whose concave surface receives
limited light. This sunken area is positioned to remain visible from the
circulation desk. The shape of the interior is not visible on the exterior, due
to a large roof cavity that contains upturned beams, which support the undu-
lating ceiling. In this shaped section the floor and the ceiling are modulated
in tandem to enhance the spatial qualities and performance of the program.
Alvar Aalto 	1965
75

-- 75 of 210 --

Church of Sainte-Bernadette du Banlay 	Nevers, France
This small church contains a grottolike nave above a ground floor of class-
rooms and support rooms. What appears from the outside to be a cast-
in-place, board-formed concrete monolith is revealed in the section to be
composed of two thin shells of concrete wrapped around thirteen parallel
structural frames. This suspended sanctuary, the outer edges of which
cantilever beyond the central structural plinth, is accessed from a stair that
emerges at the center of the space. With a floor deflecting both down and
up toward the altar, this is one of the few built examples of Claude Parent
Shape 	Incline 	Nest

-- 76 of 210 --

and Paul Virilio’s la fonction oblique, a critique of the modern plan intended
to provoke future social organizations predicated on inclined surfaces.
Heavily influenced by Virilio’s archaeological work on World War II bunkers,
the church is the intersection of two convex inclined volumes, offset in plan,
whose joint is marked by a central skylight that extends across the full
width of the nave. The central location of natural light, the direct entry into
the congregation from below, and the inflected floor all upend conventions
of the sectional organization of Western churches.
Claude Parent and Paul Virilio 	1966
77

-- 77 of 210 --

Bagsværd Church 	Copenhagen, Denmark
In plan, the chapel of the Church at Bagsværd is the central space in a
rectangular collection of rooms and courtyards, which are framed by perim-
eter aisles used for circulation throughout the church. Natural light enters
primarily through a large skylight located between the two uppermost folds of
the curved ceiling, as well as through the glass ceilings of the perimeter
aisles. The surface of this ceiling, which is at its lowest above the entry,
compressing space over the congregation, vaults skyward toward the
altar and accentuates lines of sight beyond the sacristy. A sequence of
Shape

-- 78 of 210 --

connected arcs evoking layers of clouds forms the sectional geometry of
the ceiling. The ceiling is composed of thin board-formed concrete shells,
which span 63 ft 8 in (19.4 m) between the two perimeter aisles and
support the external metal roof. The structural relationship between the
ceiling and roof inverts the typical hierarchy, in which interior surfaces
are supported by exterior structure. In this shaped section, the voluminous
quality of the interior stands in extreme contrast to the flat surfaces
of the exterior massing.
Jørn Utzon 	1976
79

-- 79 of 210 --

Cité de l’Océan et du Surf 	Biarritz, France
This museum adjacent to the beaches of Biarritz, France, takes both its subject
matter and architectural approach from the surrounding landscape. A concave
surface of 31-1/2-in-thick (80 cm), hollow-core structural concrete curves up
out of the site’s topography to define a rooftop public plaza while simultaneously
shaping the ceiling of the museum below. The exterior plaza is covered in cobblestones
and grass and is animated by a skate “pool” and two large, glazed volumes housing a
restaurant and a kiosk for surfers. Slipping below the raised edges of the plaza, visitors
enter a large, double-height exhibition space edged by service areas, offices, and an
Shape 	Nest

-- 80 of 210 --

auditorium. The single shaped and inclined surface of the roof creates two contrast-
ing spaces: one above, one below; one exterior, one interior; one expansive and open
to the sky, the other sheltered beneath the convex swell of the massive roof. The build-
ing’s exterior expression exhibits its own dualities of form: on the side farthest from
the ocean, the curving section of the plaza produces a defined edge, while the
seaward side blends seamlessly into the surrounding terrain as an inclined sur-
face. The cobblestone and grass materiality of the plaza extends the dynamic
space of this hybrid section toward the water as a public path and garden.
Steven Holl Architects 	2011
81

-- 81 of 210 --

Taichung Metropolitan Opera House 	Taichung, Taiwan
This opera house, containing a two-thousand-seat grand theater, an eight-
hundred-seat playhouse, and a two-hundred-seat black box theater, is
articulated by a continuous topological grid, using three-dimensional curved
forms to eradicate distinctions between horizontal and vertical surfaces.
Formed from fifty-eight catenoids and built by spraying concrete onto a
sequence of steel truss walls that rationalize the complex form, the primary
space-defining structure is horizontal only at brief points of tangency.
Programs are held on stacked horizontal floors that are nested within the
Shape 	Stack 	Hole 	Nest

-- 82 of 210 --

curved surfaces. The shaped sections of these curved surfaces are therefore
visible as walls and ceilings or as the perimeter of circulation spaces and
atrium voids, but rarely as floors. The facades are rendered as cuts through
the building diagram. The roughly 1-ft-thick (30.5 cm) structural curves of
this hybrid section are infilled with curtain wall or porous shotcrete, or left
open to render the inflected spaces as exterior voids.
Toyo Ito & Associates 	2016
83

-- 83 of 210 --

Shear induces a rift or cut
parallel to either the horizontal
or vertical axis of section.
This type of section is particularly
effective at inducing optical,
thermal, or acoustic connections
within an extruded or stacked
section without significantly
compromising the tectonic
efficiencies of repetition upon
which those types are based.
SHEAR

-- 84 of 210 --

Granoff Center for the Creative Arts 	98
Diller Scofidio + Renfro
The Mountain Dwellings 	92
BIG-Bjarke Ingels Group / JDS Architects
Barnard College Diana Center 	94
Weiss/Manfredi
Netherlands Institute for Sound and Vision 90
Neutelings Riedijk Architects
Apollo Schools–Willemspark School 	96
Herman Hertzberger
13 Rue des Amiraux 	86
Henri Sauvage
Fallingwater 	88
Frank Lloyd Wright

-- 85 of 210 --

13 Rue des Amiraux 	Paris, France
Filling three sides of a city block, this social housing project comprises seventy-
eight apartments on seven floors above two floors for collective programs or
utility spaces. Henri Sauvage’s use of the horizontal shear was innovative at
the time. Each floor steps back 3 ft 3 in (1 m), creating enhanced exterior
terraces and guaranteeing exposure to the sky for the apartments. Each apartment
has either three or four rooms; in both cases, all rooms are placed along the
building’s perimeter. Supported by a concrete structure clad in ceramic tile, the
pyramid-shaped building allows light and air into both the apartments and the
Shear 	Hole

-- 86 of 210 --

surrounding streets. A swimming pool lined with changing rooms is in the center of
the sheared section and is supported by a series of mechanical rooms for heat and
ventilation below. Small storage rooms for the apartments are located adjacent to
the central skylight for the pool. This building has served as the model for numerous
subsequent variations on the horizontally sheared section. In this type, dwell-
ings or other individualized units are often located on the upper side of a rake
facing the sky, while a collective social program not requiring natural light
often occupies the void between the rake and the ground.
Henri Sauvage 	1930
87

-- 87 of 210 --

Fallingwater 	Mill Run, Pennsylvania, USA
Frank Lloyd Wright’s famous vacation house in rural Pennsylvania is
accessed by a drive that crosses a small bridge and wraps around the
building, distinguishing the house from the hillside. Inside, the building
consists of a main open-plan living room floor and two floors for bedrooms
above. Concrete piers cast into the existing rocks form the building’s
foundation. The house is anchored to this foundation by load-bearing walls
clad in local stone. Concrete waffle-slab floors cantilever as far as eighteen
feet over the stream. A large site boulder emerges through the floor as the
Shear

-- 88 of 210 --

hearth in the living room. Ceiling heights vary within and across rooms,
some as low as 6-ft-4-in (1.9 m). Unlike more typical uses of horizontal
shear, the cantilevered trays do not replicate each other in plan, but rather
project in three different directions and have different lengths and widths.
These variations produce a calculated array of overhangs and terraces on
all sides of the house. In this sheared section, the cantilevers visually,
acoustically, and formally extend and embed the substance of the house in
the landscape, while simultaneously echoing the stacked rocks of the site.
Frank Lloyd Wright 	1939
89

-- 89 of 210 --

Netherlands Institute for Sound and Vision 	Hilversum, the Netherlands
This rectilinear volume contains a research institute and national archives
for Dutch television and radio. Limited to a height of 82 ft (25 m) above
ground, the building is divided into a thirteen-story block of offices and tech-
nical installations, five stories of archives below grade, and three floors of
exhibition space floating above a large central hall. Light travels from
the skylight and the stained-glass facades down through the atrium into
the slate-clad archive. Entered at grade, the space of the central hall
extends both down into a stepped canyon crossed by three bridges and
Shear 	Hole

-- 90 of 210 --

up into a ziggurat-shaped void adjacent to the exhibition floors. The descend-
ing and ascending spaces shear in perpendicular directions, torquing the
internal space. This sheared section is less notable for its impact on the
interiors within the sheared floors than for its shaping of the atrium. Carved
into the center of the building, the atrium paradoxically emphasizes the
programmatic division among three volumes while joining the assembly of
this sheared section into a legible whole.
Neutelings Riedijk Architects 	2006
91

-- 91 of 210 --

The Mountain Dwellings 	Copenhagen, Denmark
The Mountain Dwellings comprises a zone of apartments above a parking
garage. The apartments are accessed from the parking garage side, through
an inclined elevator that connects the parking levels to residential corridors
on each level. Each apartment is configured around its own large, L-shaped
courtyard, which is lined by built-in planters, providing some visual separation
among apartments. The north and west facades are covered in aluminum panels,
perforated for ventilation in the image of Mount Everest. Indebted to a long
history of buildings that place parking in the underbelly of a horizontally sheared
Shear 	Incline

-- 92 of 210 --

section of housing, this project has an extreme rake of 25 degrees that accommodates
480 parking spaces—far more than the number needed for its 80 apartments (the
building was intended initially as a parking structure). This horizontal shear also pro-
duces a high degree of exposure to the sky, which is capitalized on by the courtyards.
BIG-Bjarke Ingels Group / JDS Architects 	2008
93

-- 93 of 210 --

Barnard College Diana Center 	New York, New York, USA
Situated parallel to Broadway, this arts center encompasses studios, class-
rooms, offices, exhibition galleries, a black-box theater, a cafe, a dining
room, and a five-hundred-seat circular performance space. Four double-
height spaces are stacked diagonally, producing a visually continuous void
through the center of the building. This void is registered on the east
facade (facing Broadway) through the articulation of custom-fritted glass
panels. Separated by clear glass for acoustic reasons and fire mitigation,
these volumes each contain a distinct social program and collectively allow
Shear 	Hole

-- 94 of 210 --

visual links throughout the building as well as to the adjacent campus
lawn. Academic programs are distributed around the oblique void, with the
largest space—a circular performance hall—located under the horizontal
shear. On the side facing west, circulation extends into glass volumes that
cantilever outside the building’s footprint. This section combines the spatial
and optical effects of a hole section with the cumulative consequence of
a horizontal shear.
Weiss/Manfredi 	2010
95

-- 95 of 210 --

Apollo Schools–Willemspark School 	Amsterdam, the Netherlands
The Apollo Schools comprises two buildings designed as complementary
elementary schools. This section is taken through the Willemspark School,
looking east toward the Montessori School. Both schools are organized by
the same spatial diagram, in which a central space rises through a stepped,
sheared section, connecting to classrooms in each of the four corners.
Where the shear is not mediated by stairs, larger steps form seats, making
the shear a gathering point. This section replaces the typical school’s
generic classroom corridor with an animated auditorium at the heart of the
Shear 	Hole

-- 96 of 210 --

school, used for impromptu performances and organized daily activities.
Rounded skylights illuminate the central space, balancing the solidity of
walls designed to focus the learning environment inward. While allowing
views between floors, this sheared section simultaneously preserves privacy
within each of the classrooms by preventing diagonal views from entering
the heart of the teaching spaces.
Herman Hertzberger 	1983
97

-- 97 of 210 --

Granoff Center for the Creative Arts 	Providence, Rhode Island, USA
Defined by an emphatic vertical shear, this creative arts center combines
a recital hall, electrical shop, recording studio, and production studios
on its south side with a gallery, wood shop, multimedia room, and an
additional production studio on the north side. A ground-level circulation
corridor, wide enough to be a lounge, is lodged between the recital hall
and gallery, enabling views into multiple floors of the building. Mechanical
systems at the ceiling are mostly exposed, and cast-in-place concrete
floors span east to west, parallel to a 10-in-wide (25.4 cm) double-glazed
Shear

-- 98 of 210 --

0 	4 	8 	16 	32 FEET
dividing wall, allowing the glass to be free of dropped ceilings and columns.
This glass wall maintains acoustic separations among the programs
while intensifying optical exchanges in order to foster interdisciplinarity.
Retractable blinds are located between the panes of glass to control light
and privacy. Recognizing that a vertical shear creates circulatory disconti-
nuity, the design locates a large staircase at the rear of the building
to gather the multiple levels of the section into a collective area, complete
with landings that double as lounges.
Diller Scofidio + Renfro 	2011
99

-- 99 of 210 --

Holes are a pragmatic and
frequently used means to produce
a section, and range in scale
and quantity from a single small
opening between two floors
to multiple large atria organizing
whole buildings. Holes exchange
lost floor area for benefits
in section. They are a spatial
commodity that can be tactically
deployed for vertical effects.
HOLE

-- 100 of 210 --

Sendai Mediatheque 	112
Toyo Ito & Associates
Larkin Building 	102
Frank Lloyd Wright
Phillips Exeter Academy Library 	108
Louis I. Kahn
Ford Foundation Headquarters 	106
Kevin Roche John Dinkeloo and Associates
New York Marriott Marquis 	110
John Portman & Associates
Single House at Weissenhofsiedlung 	104
Le Corbusier
41 Cooper Square 	114
Morphosis

-- 101 of 210 --

Larkin Building 	Buffalo, New York, USA
This headquarters for a soap company contained four prominent floors of open
desks; a basement for parking and file storage; and a restaurant, kitchen, and
conservatory on its uppermost level. Accessed from the east side of the building
(seen on the right side of the drawing), the central atrium was 25 ft 3 in (7.7 m)
wide, 112 ft (34.1 m) long, and 76 ft 0 in (23.2 m) high. A double-skin glass
skylight capped the atrium, allowing the high-ceilinged (16 ft [4.9 m] floor to floor)
open-plan office floors to be naturally illuminated. The building was steel framed
with reinforced-concrete floors. The perimeter of each office floor was lined with
Hole 	Stack

-- 102 of 210 --

filing cabinets at the base and a double-layer glass clerestory above eye level. The
filing cabinets restricted visual access to the outside, redirecting views toward the
interior atrium. Air-conditioning was distributed in the hollow guardrails ringing
the atrium, cooling a hermetically sealed environment that protected employees from
the pollution of the surrounding industrial landscape. Staircases integrated
with vertical chases, drawing air into the mechanical system, were located at
the four corners of the building. The scale of the atrium balanced optical and
thermal performance, and its openness encouraged a sense of collective effort.
Frank Lloyd Wright 	1906
103

-- 103 of 210 --

Single House at Weissenhofsiedlung 	Stuttgart, Germany
Le Corbusier’s single-family home for a middle-class family, exhibited at the
1927 Weissenhof housing exhibition, serves as an early realization of the
Citrohan box, a prototype living unit organized around a double-height hole in
the center of the section. Embodying the structure of Le Corbusier’s “five points
of a new architecture,” the house rests on two rows of five concrete columns,
each spaced 8 ft 2 in (2.5 m) apart. The columns are exposed as pilotis at
ground level. On the upper floors one row of columns is encased in the exterior
wall; the other frames one side of the staircase. The third-floor plate is cut back
Hole 	Stack

-- 104 of 210 --

diagonally, forming an angled balcony that allows the parents’ bedroom, bath,
and boudoir on the mezzanine to overlook the double-height living room below.
A two-story glass wall made of two independent layers of operable windows
creates a thermal double skin and interstitial greenhouse. The top floor is split
into an open-air terrace, complete with a nonglazed ribbon window, and a
nested combination of bedrooms. The dividing partition between the bedrooms
serves as a storage closet for beds and linens. In this prototypical house
for the machine age, a hole section is used to organize modern domestic life.
Le Corbusier 	1927
105

-- 105 of 210 --

Ford Foundation Headquarters 	New York, New York, USA
Featuring an interior garden, the glazed atrium at the heart of the Ford
Foundation Headquarters strikes a balance between individual privacy and
collective enterprise. Because the program required substantially less
space than the permitted buildable volume, the Ford Foundation turned
excess space into a civic amenity. The 179-ft-high (54.6 m) atrium, asymmetri-
cally located in the southeast corner of the building, visually interconnects the
offices while providing views diagonally to the East River. Steel beams spanning
84 ft (25.6 m) hold the ten-story glass facades on the south and east sides,
Hole 	Stack 	Shear

-- 106 of 210 --

which open the garden to public view and fill the interior courtyard with light. Banks
of offices with fully glazed windows that allow the temperate greenhouse air to circulate
overlook the atrium on its north and west side. The executive suite, a collective dining
facility, and an expansive skylight cap the top of this holed section.
Kevin Roche John Dinkeloo and Associates 	1968
107

-- 107 of 210 --

Phillips Exeter Academy Library 	Exeter, New Hampshire, USA
At the heart of the Exeter library is a 70-ft-high (21.3 m) atrium framed on
all four sides by concrete structure. Capped by a monumental 16-ft-deep
(4.9 m) concrete brace-frame and wrapped in a timber-clad clerestory, this
central hole or atrium draws light into the middle of the 111-by-111-ft
(33.8 by 33.8 m) square library, illuminating the circulation and reference
floor below. Multistory circular holes on each side of the atrium reveal
the wood-clad balconies of each floor and the stacks behind the balconies,
which extend to the outer edges of the building. At the periphery, 210
Hole 	Stack

-- 108 of 210 --

built-in private carrels merge wooden furniture with the exterior brick skin,
creating a synthetic wall section in which materials indicate use. The profile
of the concrete floor slab integrates lighting fixtures, mechanical systems,
balconies, and staircases while accommodating the sizable structural load
of the collection. While this holed section animates a twentieth-century
library, brick piers produce a crenellated effect along the perimeter ambula-
tory, echoing the medieval legacy of libraries.
Louis I. Kahn 	1972
109

-- 109 of 210 --

New York Marriott Marquis 	New York, New York, USA
The Marriott Marquis is one of many hotels designed by John Portman that are
organized around an excessively large interior atrium. The building is primarily
structured by two vertical bars on the north and south sides, which are com-
posed of a steel frame and precast-concrete planks. A third vertical bar on the
west connects the parallel bars, and a series of five-floor stacks span the east facade,
which faces Times Square. The 470-ft (143.3 m) atrium is wrapped by 1,876 hotel
rooms. Repetitive bands formed by open corridors and hanging plants intensify the
vertiginous effect of the atrium. In the five cascading volumes facing Times Square,
Hole 	Stack 	Shear

-- 110 of 210 --

lounges provide views to the street and atrium below. Twelve glass elevators ascend
the atrium along a central concrete shaft, linking three floors of revolving restaurants
and lounges at the top of the building to the thick plinth below, which contains
ballrooms, a 1,500-seat Broadway theater, and many meeting rooms. At the hotel’s
entrance an internal street feeds to a bank of escalators that rise eight floors
to the 30,000-sq-ft (2,787 sq m) sky lobby at the base of the atrium. In this
holed section, the merits of Portman’s spectacular interior are qualified by the
internal environment’s disengagement from Times Square.
John Portman & Associates 	1985
111

-- 111 of 210 --

Sendai Mediatheque 	Sendai, Japan
In the Sendai Mediatheque structural columns puncture the floors, pro-
ducing holes for the section. Thirteen vertical, steel-lattice tubes provide
circulation of air, water, electricity, light, and people throughout eight levels
of the building. Built and assembled in floor-height segments, the tubes
are joined by steel rings embedded in each floor slab. The structure of the
floor plates, which are 15 3/4 in (40 cm) thick and resemble a honeycomb
pattern in plan, allows each floor to span between the irregularly spaced
tubes that paradoxically cut holes into the floors they support. While
Hole 	Stack

-- 112 of 210 --

structurally robust, the light lattice structure of the tubes maintains sight
lines both within individual floors and down through the stacked floor
plates. The tubes are clad in glass to mitigate the spread of smoke and fire.
Each floor serves a semiautonomous function, containing public meeting
spaces, a library, galleries, studios, cinemas, and offices, but the floors
are united by the holed section that in turn provides the iconic image
of the building.
Toyo Ito & Associates 	2000
113

-- 113 of 210 --

41 Cooper Square 	New York, New York, USA
This academic and laboratory building for Cooper Union comprises a rectilinear
stack animated by a complex, figural sectional void. While the majority of the
building is composed of a conventional structural-steel grid, canted concrete
piers at ground level facilitate a fluid relationship with the street and allow
visual access to public gallery and auditorium spaces below grade. Above, a central
atrium carves into the stacked floors of laboratories, offices, and classrooms rising
the full height of the building. This torquing atrium creates visual, social, and
circulational exchanges among floors while introducing daylight and augmenting
Hole 	Stack 	Shape

-- 114 of 210 --

air flow. Defined by a twisting lattice of steel pipes encased in glass-fiber reinforced
gypsum, the atrium is at once a hole and a nested figure, containing within its upper
levels sculptural stairs clad in translucent, back-lit panels. A monumental stair links
the entry to a double-height student lounge at the fourth floor that provides views
of the city. This stair serves as a site of both movement and gathering. It com-
bines a shaped ceiling and floor and functions as a distortion and extension
of the atrium. The figure of the atrium intersects with the perforated stainless-
steel panels of the west facade, linking the building to its urban context.
Morphosis 	2009
115

-- 115 of 210 --

INCLINE
Inclines are a means of continuing
a horizontal surface in section
by changing the angle of
an occupiable horizontal plane,
thus rotating the plane into
section. Unlike Stacks, Shears
and Holes, Inclines are not
based on the distinction between
plan and section. With Inclines,
section does not require the
sacrifice of a portion of the plan.

-- 116 of 210 --

Moesgaard Museum 	128
Henning Larsen Architects
V. C. Morris Gift Shop 	120
Frank Lloyd Wright
The Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum 	122
Frank Lloyd Wright
Kunsthal 	124
OMA
1111 Lincoln Road 	126
Herzog & de Meuron
Villa Savoye 	118
Le Corbusier

-- 117 of 210 --

Villa Savoye 	Poissy, France
The ramp at the center of Le Corbusier’s Villa Savoye orchestrates circu-
lation through the villa and holds a seminal position in the history of
architecture as the quintessential example of promenade architecturale.
Located on axis with the front door, this central ramp provides a continuous
walkable surface linking the ground floor to the exterior courtyard terrace of
the piano nobile and rooftop solarium. Yet sectional continuity comes with
discontinuity of plan. The 4-ft-1-in-wide (1.25 m) ramp produces 32 ft of plan
discontinuity on each side. The ramp disrupts the regular column grid and
Incline 	Hole 	Stack

-- 118 of 210 --

creates a vertical cut at the heart of the villa, dividing inside from outside.
Vertical glass infill between the sloped ramp planes draws daylight onto
the ramp and illuminates the center of the rectangular villa. The solid, cast-
in-place concrete of the ramps is juxtaposed with the ceramic infill of the
concrete floor slabs, where beams and columns form the primary structure.
Steep by today’s standards, the ramp of this inclined section is more
than a means of circulation: it is a catalyst for the conceptual, organiza-
tional, and spatial articulation of the house.
Le Corbusier 	1931
119

-- 119 of 210 --

V. C. Morris Gift Shop 	San Francisco, California, USA
The Morris Gift Shop, a precursor to Frank Lloyd Wright’s design for the
Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, was built into an existing retail structure.
The section indicates the insertion of the ramp, the tapered arched
entrance, the curved first-floor ceiling, the second-floor partitions, and the
acrylic, light-diffusing ceiling hung under the existing skylight. Wright’s
design for the small shop hinges on the figural shape of the circulation
ramp. The circular 4-ft-wide (1.2 m) ramp recenters the space toward the
half-glazed entry vestibule, and the hung bubble ceiling masks the
Incline 	Hole 	Stack

-- 120 of 210 --

misalignment with an existing skylight. As a seductive object, the ramp
entices shoppers to the main retail area on the second floor. Small apertures
that puncture the side walls of the ramp reveal objects for sale, turning
circulation into browsing. While the ramp provides continuity between the
first and second floors, it also segments the first floor by isolating the back
shopping space. This inclined section is an ornate stage for shopping set
within the existing shell: a building within a building.
Frank Lloyd Wright 	1949
121

-- 121 of 210 --

The Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum 	New York, New York, USA
The main gallery of the Guggenheim Museum is an exemplary demonstration of
an inclined section defining an entire building. Rising at a 3 percent grade and
stretching more than 1/4 mi (0.4 km) in length, the continuous path expands in
width as it moves upward, producing a conical void at the center of the museum
and an inverted conical form on the exterior. A skylight supported by concrete ribs fills
the 92-ft-high (28 m) atrium with daylight, while the continuous perimeter skylight
enabled by recessions in the exterior profile was intended to backlight paintings to
make them appear to float. The tapered concrete balcony and integral soffit conceal
Incline 	Hole 	Stack

-- 122 of 210 --

the air supply duct. The primary point of tension between the incline and level floor is
at the bottom, where Wright folded the ramp up against itself to form a base. An
exterior porte cochere separates the main gallery from the administrative wing. While
the administrative wing echoes the circular form of the main gallery, the inclined
section is confined to the gallery, as connection among the flat administrative
floors is made through a service core, with a small atrium providing limited
visible continuity. In the main gallery, the inclined section’s physical continuity
is complemented by the visual connectivity of the large atrium.
Frank Lloyd Wright 	1959
123

-- 123 of 210 --

Kunsthal 	Rotterdam, the Netherlands
Lodged against the edge of a dyke, the rectangular mass of this exhibit
and events hall is bisected in two directions by site circulation. An inclined
sidewalk connects the top of the dyke to the lower park, cutting an oblique
path through the center of the building, while a road passes perpendicularly
underneath that path. An abrupt entry is located at the joint between the
incline of the exterior path and the incline of the auditorium. The intersection
of inclined floors undermines the distinctions between above and below.
The building unfolds as a continuous circuit that intensifies the disjunctions
Incline 	Shear 	Stack

-- 124 of 210 --

produced by the bisecting site circulation. Reworking the unidirectional trope
of the spiral museum, here the inclined surfaces of the circulation loop
descend from the entry in the auditorium to a hall on the ground floor, ramp
up to a second-floor gallery, and then, at the back of the auditorium, continue
up elongated steps to a third-floor hall, which frames oblique views of
the roofscapes across the dyke. The discontinuities in plan created by the
inclined surfaces of this section are celebrated as they induce program-
matic and volumetric friction along the circulation loop.
OMA 	1992
125

-- 125 of 210 --

1111 Lincoln Road 	Miami, Florida, USA
By intensifying the inclined section of a parking structure, the design of 1111
Lincoln Road transforms a garage for three hundred cars into a dynamic, open
civic space, embracing the warm climate of Miami Beach. The new parking
structure complements the simultaneous transformation of the adjacent 1970s
SunTrust International Center from a bank into residences. Levels are linked through
a sequence of ramps that facilitate the smooth passage of a car. Unlike the section
of a typical parking structure, the floors of 1111 Lincoln Road are staggered to
accommodate not only parking but also double- and triple-height spaces in which
Incline 	Hole 	Stack

-- 126 of 210 --

temporary events are staged, including photo shoots, yoga classes, and various other
spectacles. Tapered concrete edges with small wire guardrails lighten the appearance
of the structure, while figural V-shaped columns accentuate the varying heights
of the floors. Nine different levels range from 8 to 34 ft (2.4 to 10.4 m) in height,
framing both narrow and expansive vistas over Miami. Retail spaces at the
ground level engage the pedestrian Lincoln Road Mall, a fifth-floor fashion
boutique animates the sculptural staircase, and a penthouse restaurant and
private residence at the top complete the promenade of this inclined section.
Herzog & de Meuron 	2010
127

-- 127 of 210 --

Moesgaard Museum 	Aarhus, Denmark
This museum of archaeology and ethnography is designed to be embedded in,
and to emerge from, the very landscape that is the source of much of its
collection. Visitors enter this artificial hill through its side into a foyer located
at the midpoint of a very large stair, which leads to galleries on three levels.
The dominant feature of the building is its ten-degree, oblique, inhabitable green
roof, which is contiguous on one side with the more gently sloping terrain.
The slope of the building provides panoramic views and an inclined surface for
picnics or sledding. The underside of this incline is legible as a continuous wood
Incline 	Hole 	Stack

-- 128 of 210 --

slat ceiling, which defines the major spaces within the building. This sloped
surface is recessed and leveled out near its base to provide optical and physical
links between inside and out. The building is a horizontal shear of stacked
galleries, which is both overlaid with and intersected by an inclined roof.
Henning Larsen Architects 	2013
129

-- 129 of 210 --

Nests produce sections through
interplay or overlap between
discrete volumes. While Stack,
Shear, Hole, and Incline work
primarily with flat plates, a Nest
positions three-dimensional
figures in specific relationships
for sectional consequences.
The spatial, structural, or
environmental performance of
the nest usually exceeds
that of the volumes operating
in isolation.
NEST

-- 130 of 210 --

San Paolo Parish Complex 	150
Studio Fuksas
Poli House 	148
Pezo von Ellrichshausen
United States Pavilion at Expo ’67 	138
Buckminster Fuller and Shoji Sadao
Prada Aoyama 	144
Herzog & de Meuron
De Effenaar 	146
MVRDV
Mont-Cenis Training Center 	142
Jourda Architectes
Center for the Arts in La Coruña 	152
aceboXalonso Studio
House N 	140
Sou Fujimoto Architects
Villa Moller 	132
Adolf Loos
Beinecke Rare Book and Manuscript Library 136
Gordon Bunshaft of Skidmore, Owings & Merrill
Moore House 	134
Charles Moore

-- 131 of 210 --

Villa Moller 	Vienna, Austria
Adolf Loos’s approach to domestic architecture through the clustering of rooms
in complex and staggered relationship to one another, referred to as Raumplan,
is an example of a nested architectural section. Rather than occupying floor
plates, rooms are afforded distinct spatial positions within the volume and
section of the house, enabled by the flexibility of wood stick framing. Rooms are tied
to one another and anchored to load-bearing exterior walls. Villa Moller comprises
a music salon, dining room, library, atelier, and five bedrooms, with entry and
service spaces in the ground floor. The masklike, symmetrical front facade hides the
Nest 	Shear 	Stack

-- 132 of 210 --

complexity of the interior sequence and sections. Though it is only four stories tall,
Villa Moller has eight level changes, which stage an intricate sequence of relation-
ships among stasis, movement, activity, and views. In particular, the dining room and
music salon are distinguished by three retractable steps within an opening between
the two rooms that frames the activity occurring in each. Perpendicular to this
pairing is the view from the built-in bench above the front door, which passes
obliquely down through the music room to the garden beyond. Staircases wind
through and engage the sequence of rooms, animating the nested section.
Adolf Loos 	1928
133

-- 133 of 210 --

Moore House 	Orinda, California, USA
Charles Moore designed this house for himself, nesting a series of unique
spaces within a tight 26-ft-8-in (8.1 m) square footprint. Two sets of four
wood columns capped by tapered wood funnels sit asymmetrically in the
square plan. These aedicules are open to the roof, capped with skylights and
painted white on the inside, illuminating the framed domestic spaces of the
sunken tub and the living room. Only a few nonstructural partitions break
up the interior space, enclosing a closet and water closet in the back. A
unifying roof made from standard dimensional lumber tops the four exterior
Nest 	Shape

-- 134 of 210 --

walls. Only half of each these perimeter walls is rooted in place, while the
remaining halves are composed of wood and glass panels that are hung
on tracks; these can slide over the static walls to open up all four corners of
the house. With no structure in the corners, the logic of this nested section
provides the structure of the house, as the eight interior columns lock into
a wood truss spanning the high point of the roof. Through the use of a
nested section, the house achieves a theatricality and complexity within
a small volume of space.
Charles Moore 	1962
135

-- 135 of 210 --

Beinecke Rare Book and Manuscript Library 	New Haven, Connecticut, USA
The rare book and manuscript library at Yale University demonstrates the capa-
city of inset nesting to modulate light and climate through a multilayered con-
struction. The outer box is composed of four steel Vierendeel truss walls, clad in
faceted stone and precast concrete. The grid formed by the trusses is inset
with 1-1/4-in-thick (3.2 cm) translucent marble panels that filter out ultraviolet
rays while providing indirect illumination. The stone container is juxtaposed with an
inner box composed of a steel structure and glass panels that provide precise
thermal and climatic control. This glass box allows the tower of fragile books to be
Nest 	Hole 	Stack

-- 136 of 210 --

placed on full view, yet within a highly controlled environment. An exhibition mezzanine
wraps around the nested volume. The walls transfer structural load to four points at
the corners, where pillars elevate the stone enclosure off the ground, making the outer
frame seem to float monumentally above the stone plaza in the heart of the campus. A
sunken courtyard provides daylight to underground offices and library facilities.
While the nested section produces the spectacle of this library, excavated space
below contains the primary support facilities for the display above, including
seminar rooms, offices, curatorial spaces, and the vast majority of the books.
Gordon Bunshaft of Skidmore, Owings & Merrill 	1963
137

-- 137 of 210 --

United States Pavilion at Expo ’67 	Montreal, Canada
This pavilion was commissioned at the height of the Cold War by the United
States Information Agency to stand opposite the Soviet Pavilion. The American
Pavilion contained a three-hundred-seat theater and multilevel exhibition
platforms designed by Cambridge Seven Associates to celebrate the country’s
cultural and aeronautical achievements. All exhibition spaces were nested inside a
geodesic steel-framed dome with a diameter of 250 ft (76.2 m) and a height of 206 ft
(62.8 m). A 40-in (101.6 cm) gap separated the outer triangulated surface of the
dome from an inner hexagonal surface, which was infilled with 1/4-in-thick (6.4 mm)
Nest 	Shape 	Stack

-- 138 of 210 --

transparent acrylic panels. A motorized, self-regulating shading system covered
one-third of the panels, working with air-conditioning to create a vast thermal
microclimate. Within the interior volume of 6.7 million cu ft (189,722 cu m) were a
series of concrete platforms supported by rolled-steel sections and 30-in-diameter
(76.2 cm) steel columns. These exhibition trays were accessed via a series of
escalators, one of which was 125 ft (38.1 m) long—at the time the longest ever
constructed. This unique space was a consequence of the radical difference
between the occupiable horizontal platforms and the huge translucent dome.
Buckminster Fuller and Shoji Sadao 	1967
139

-- 139 of 210 --

House N 	Oita, Japan
Sou Fujimoto’s design for this single-family house uses a series of three
nested boxes, each punctured by large rectangular apertures, to configure
the interior and exterior of the house. Each box plays a distinct role in the
architectural enclosure. The innermost box, made from lightweight wood
and plaster, separates the living and dining functions at the center from the
bedroom and ceremonial spaces around its perimeter. The middle box, con-
structed in concrete with glass windows, provides the weather and thermal
enclosure. The outermost concrete shell delineates the property boundary
Nest

-- 140 of 210 --

and creates a screen of privacy in the gardens for residents’ outdoor activities
while filtering sunlight. Moving outward from shell to shell, the thickness
of the walls increases from 5 7/16 in (13.8 cm) to 7 1/16 in (18 cm) to 8 11/16
in (22 cm), growing proportionally by structural necessity. Only kitchen and
bathroom, which are set between the outer and middle shells and bounded
by glass side partitions, challenge the successive logic of this building’s
nested section.
Sou Fujimoto Architects 	2008
141

-- 141 of 210 --

Mont-Cenis Training Center 	Herne-Sodingen, Germany
Built over the head of the abandoned Mont-Cenis coal mine, this civil-service
facility demonstrates how a nested section can generate temperature gradients
through microenvironments at an urban scale. Two rows of two- and three-story
structures, designed to support short-term training and educational facilities,
sit underneath a vast 123,000-sq-ft (11,427 sq m) glass envelope. Built from locally
manufactured glass and regionally harvested timber, this solar greenhouse floats on
50-ft-tall (15.2 m) timber poles and is spanned by laminated wood trusses carrying
100,000 sq ft (9,290 sq m) of photovoltaic panels that generate two and a half times
Nest 	Shape 	Stack

-- 142 of 210 --

the energy consumed by the complex. Motorized openings at the upper and lower
quadrants of the glazed box induce a controlled stack effect to modulate a temper-
ate interior microclimate year-round. Pools and vegetation provide cooling while
populating the gardens and courtyards of this campus-in-a-terrarium. Freed of the
requirement for extensive weather enclosure or insulation, the educational
structures were inexpensive to build. In this nested section the interstitial space
is neither exterior nor fully interior, but provides an inhabitable, passively condi-
tioned buffer zone, enhancing the performance of the buildings within.
Jourda Architectes 	1999
143

-- 143 of 210 --

Prada Aoyama 	Tokyo, Japan
The Prada flagship store in Tokyo combines an overall figural shape with inset
stacked floors and nested tubes to create a steel and glass shopping icon. A
structural exoskeleton made from 7-1/16–by–8-1/16-in (18 by 20.5 cm) steel
I-sections welded on site and encased in a fire-resistant layer of calcium
silicate form a grid of rhomboids, each 10 ft 6 in by 6 ft 6 in (3.2 by 2 m). Within
the diagonal frame, convex, concave, and flat glass pillows provide a consistently
varied texture to the building envelope, which comprises ten faceted sides. The
entire building is set into a concrete tub, where isolation mats stabilize the structure
Nest 	Shape 	Stack

-- 144 of 210 --

during earthquakes. Inside, seven regularly spaced concrete floor slabs span from
the exterior skin and interior circulation cores and conceal mechanical and electrical
distribution. Three horizontal tubes, aligned with groups of four rhomboids on the
facade, are nested in the floor plates. These tubes enclose areas for changing and
checkout and provide lateral stability. Extruded from the diagrid facade, yet
embedded within the figural building volume and bifurcating floors, these
nested spaces complicate distinctions between exterior and interior or from
floor to floor, producing an intricate fusion of skin, structure, space, and form.
Herzog & de Meuron 	2003
145

-- 145 of 210 --

De Effenaar 	Eindhoven, the Netherlands
The design for this youth music center bundles a set of discrete rectangular
volumes to create a multifunctional venue. Each volume, enclosed in reinforced
concrete, holds a particular function or program, from a small stage to
changing rooms to recording spaces and cafes. Pushed to the periphery of
the section, these boxes collectively form a single rectangle when seen in eleva-
tion. The residual space in the inside comprises the main performance venue.
The walls of the fifth floor double as structural beams spanning the open perfor-
mance space below, transferring loads to the north and south. Overlapping
Nest 	Shear

-- 146 of 210 --

and misaligned boxes create balcony spaces and projection rooms, linked together
by a supplementary catwalk. Circulating and egress stairs are appended to the
outside of the main volume, establishing an iconic twisting figure on an otherwise
undistinguished box, while enabling a tight nesting of volumes in section.
MVRDV 	2005
147

-- 147 of 210 --

Poli House 	Coliumo, Chile
Set on the side of a remote cliff, the Poli House is an enigmatic perforated
sculptural cube that evades quick apprehension of scale and use. 6-ft-6-in
(2 m) square punches in its concrete shell reveal a rich layering of structure,
skins, and nested volumes. This vacation house / cultural center is organized
as a cube within a cube, producing a 3-ft-3-in-wide (1 m) perimeter. Although this redun-
dancy of layers would typically intensify distinctions between the interior and the exterior,
here the thickness of that perimeter produces more complex readings. Calibrated for
shading and weather protection, exterior glazing is located on both sides of this perimeter
Nest 	Stack

-- 148 of 210 --

zone, making its space both exterior and interior. This occupiable perimeter houses all
the service spaces, including a kitchenette, bathrooms, and staircases. The furniture
can be stored in closets, with the perimeter freeing the remaining nested interior vol-
umes for a range of uses, from living room to bedroom to study. Linked by a series of
oversize apertures, these rooms spiral up counterclockwise around the central
three-story living space, creating a house with six distinct levels. The wood
boards used as formwork during construction were reused as interior cladding
for walls and furniture, blurring the distinction between skin and structure.
Pezo von Ellrichshausen 	2005
149

-- 149 of 210 --

San Paolo Parish Complex 	Foligno, Italy
The San Paolo Parish Complex uses nested enclosures to create structural
resiliency and to orchestrate lighting effects within a sequence of con-
centric volumes. The complex replaces a house of worship destroyed by an
earthquake. Standing 82 ft (25 m) high on a 98-ft-5-in–by–73-ft-10-in
(30 by 22.5 m) footprint, the outer volume provides the primary structural
system of a cast-in-place concrete box resting on the ground. Floating
just above head height, the inner lightweight steel box rendered in plaster
is suspended from steel beams that frame the top of the concrete box. The
Nest 	Hole

-- 150 of 210 --

inner space is tethered to the outer structure by trapezoidal tubes that draw
discrete zones of daylight toward the altar. Extensive skylights between the
two shells accentuate their material differences, while establishing contrast
between the darker inner church and the more generously illuminated
peripheral ring. The effect of this nested section is to reinforce the sacred
function of the minimally furnished sequence of spaces within the building.
Studio Fuksas 	2009
151

-- 151 of 210 --

Center for the Arts in La Coruña 	La Coruña, Spain
As this drawing shows, this arts facility was originally imagined as two inter-
twining institutions—a dance conservatory and a public museum—nested
within a single steel-framed, insulated glass box. Spaces related to the dance
conservatory, accessible only to students and staff, were located inside discrete
concrete volumes connected by a vertical circulation core. Pushed to the exterior,
these volumes read as recognizable figures caught within the building’s double skin.
The public museum was to be located on the floors formed by the tops of the dance
conservatory volumes. The two programs were to remain autonomous, a division
Nest

-- 152 of 210 --

reinforced by differences in materiality and illumination. Multicolored acoustic tubes
hung from the ceiling to absorb sound from museumgoers and to conceal mechanical
equipment and trusses. Dance studios lit by fluorescent bulbs and direct sunlight
floated between galleries illuminated by diffused light. However, after ten years of
construction and vacancy, the building opened with new tenants as the
National Museum of Science and Technology. At that point, adjustments were
made to combine the two separate spatial configurations into a single build-
ing, undermining the sectional bifurcation of programs in the original design.
aceboXalonso Studio 	2011
153

-- 153 of 210 --

Extrusion, Stack, Shape, Shear,
Hole, Incline, and Nest are
primary methods of operating
in section. For the sake of
clarity, they have been presented
as distinct modes, but they
rarely operate in isolation.
Indeed, buildings exhibiting the
most complex and intricate
sections contain all manner of
combinations and hybrids.
HYBRIDS

-- 154 of 210 --

Melbourne School of Design 	178
NADAAA / John Wardle Architects
Yale Art and Architecture Building 	158
Paul Rudolph
Iberê Camargo Foundation Museum 	168
Álvaro Siza
Villa Girasole 	156
Angelo Invernizzi
Museum of Image and Sound 	182
Diller Scofidio + Renfro
Star Apartments 	180
Michael Maltzan Architecture
Knowlton Hall 	164
Mack Scogin Merrill Elam Architects
Villa VPRO 	160
MVRDV
Casa da Música 	166
OMA
Università Luigi Bocconi 	170
Grafton Architects
VitraHaus 	172
Herzog & de Meuron
Seattle Central Library 	162
OMA / LMN Architects
Rolex Learning Center 	174
SANAA
Asakusa Culture and Tourism Center 	176
Kengo Kuma & Associates

-- 155 of 210 --

Villa Girasole 	Marcellise, Italy
The main living spaces of Villa Girasole rotate to maintain an ideal relationship
between the house and the sun over the course of the day, thanks to a highly
engineered set of intertwined architectural and sectional devices. A semicircu-
lar solid masonry base is built into the hillside, retaining the sloped landscape
to create a circular terrace above. Comprising three main levels, this base serves
as a garage, lower-level entrance, and open-air ambulatory. An eight-story open,
circular staircase, designed to resemble a lighthouse, nests into the base and rises
to connect the two wings of main living spaces in the upper villa. Constructed with
Nest 	Stack 	Hole

-- 156 of 210 --

a lightweight concrete frame clad in sheet metal, the entire upper level, including the
staircase, rotates on fifteen wheels, powered by two motors, turning a full rotation
in nine hours and twenty minutes. A thrust-block at the base of the 138-ft-11-in-high
(42.35 m) staircase anchors the pivoting tower, while the ground above is inscribed
as a formal garden to accommodate the circular motion. The angle of sunlight
is altered only by the sun’s changes in altitude, since the villa tracks its
horizontal movement. The hybrid and dynamic section of Villa Girasole thus
encompasses the sun by isolating the effects of its movements to section.
Angelo Invernizzi 	1935
157

-- 157 of 210 --

Yale Art and Architecture Building 	New Haven, Connecticut, USA
Designed and constructed during Paul Rudolph’s tenure as chair of the archi-
tecture department, the iconic Art and Architecture Building arrays 37 unique
floor levels around a central core of open, collective spaces anchored by a
series of striated-concrete towers. The section, which combines stacked,
sheared, and nested forms punctuated by holes, produces a variety of visual and
spatial overlaps and intersections, most notably among the expansive central
pinup spaces and galleries and the more peripheral and compressed studios and
offices. Staggered levels, bridges, and offsets multiply the interactions among
Stack 	Hole 	Shear 	Nest 	Shape

-- 158 of 210 --

adjacent spaces while allowing for campus views through large, steel-framed
glass windows from deep within the interior. Massive piers of heavily textured,
bush-hammered concrete provide structural support for horizontal platforms,
house mechanical services, and contain vertical circulation. At the upper
levels, the play of horizontal planes gives way to enclosed tubelike forms
that bridge the vertical masses to enclose the spaces below. Between these
volumes a collection of skylights and clerestories admit daylight, enlivening
the varied spaces of this complex combination of section types.
Paul Rudolph 	1963
159

-- 159 of 210 --

Villa VPRO 	Hilversum, the Netherlands
The Villa VPRO challenges the homogeneity of stacked office buildings through a
series of formal interventions. MVRDV’s design for this broadcasting company’s
headquarters sought to maintain the idiosyncratic spatial configurations of
VPRO’s thirteen original office villas as they were consolidated into a single new
construction. The project establishes a dialogue between the regularity of the square
building footprint, with five concrete floors supported on a rectilinear column grid, and
a series of moves that disrupt the generic form. The floor of the parking level curves
back into its ceiling, creating a figural shape that animates the three-story central
Hole 	Stack 	Incline 	Shear 	Shape

-- 160 of 210 --

spine. Multiple holes throughout the project interrupt continuity of plan and provide sec-
tional connections. Inclined planes link floors together, form a sunken courtyard connected
to a roof garden, and serve as the sloped floor for a theater. Floor plates are sheared to
create a stepped sequence of spaces and to distribute light and offer views. The spatial
diversity and interwoven circulation paths that result from these interven-
tions intensify the social interaction of the company. On all four elevations
infill and recessed glazing reveal the concrete floor plates and cast the
hybrid section as the iconic image of the building: the section as facade.
MVRDV 	1997
161

-- 161 of 210 --

Seattle Central Library 	Seattle, Washington, USA
The design of the Seattle Central Library, which occupies an entire downtown
city block, exemplifies the compatible intersection of different section types
at multiple scales in clustered relationships. The project is organized by a
stacking sequence that gathers similar functional areas within a continuous
skin. The stable programs of administration and staff areas, book storage, meeting
rooms, and parking are set within floor trays. These trays are offset vertically and slid
horizontally as independent units in all four cardinal directions, creating atriums,
exterior canopies, and self-shading overhangs. The most active spaces for reading and
Stack 	Nest 	Incline 	Shear 	Hole 	Shape

-- 162 of 210 --

socializing are lodged between the stacked and shifted trays. Local sectional
transformations are tailored to the unique functions of each tray. The four floors
of bookstacks are inclined and united as a continuous spiral, facilitating the
reorganization and expansion of the collection and turning browsing into an
architectural promenade. An inclined auditorium intersects the staff space,
providing visual continuity in alignment with the sloped urban site. A mesh
facade structured by 1-ft-deep (30.5 cm) steel tubes aids in the transfer of
lateral forces and creates a recognizable figure for the library.
OMA / LMN Architects 	2004
163

-- 163 of 210 --

Knowlton Hall 	Columbus, Ohio, USA
This 176,000-sq-ft (16,350 sq m) architecture school organizes a program-
matically diverse array of spaces within its figural campus footprint. Two
parallel ramped walkways run the length of the plan, beyond the length
required by circulation, linking and activating all the programs. The ramps
extend from the basement shop and auditorium past ground-floor galleries,
classrooms, and crit spaces; the second-floor ring of offices; the third-level
studios; and the top-level library and computer rooms, finally culminating
in an exterior rooftop garden. The ramps mark an area of discontinuity in plan
Incline 	Hole 	Stack 	Shear 	Nest 	Shape

-- 164 of 210 --

and continuity in section, providing an opportunity for the floor levels to
vertically shear. The concrete structure, clad in marble shingles, is willfully
carved away for glass-lined courtyards in and under the building mass.
Double-height spaces enliven the interior. Horizontal and vertical shears,
atriums, nested volumes, and, most important, inclined surfaces are all
deployed to facilitate social exchanges. As a result, the building serves as a
teaching instrument, demonstrating the pleasures and possibilities of space
animated through section.
Mack Scogin Merrill Elam Architects 	2004
165

-- 165 of 210 --

Casa da Música 	Porto, Portugal
Because shoe box–shaped concert halls provide superior acoustics but lack
architectural interest, OMA’s Casa da Música nests a rectangular concert hall
inside a padding of mixed programs occupying a faceted envelope. The main
concert hall of the Casa da Música was conceived as a void, a hole in the center
of the complex. Ancillary support and circulation spaces line the perimeter of the
hall, each space’s section dictated by function. To one side, the main ceremonial
staircase ascends a towering atrium. Smaller recording studios and recital halls are
given stepped floors and tapered sections. Below the belly, boxlike practice rooms,
Shape 	Nest 	Hole 	Stack 	Incline

-- 166 of 210 --

dance halls, and rehearsal venues nest among the structural frames that support the
void created by the concert hall. A multifaceted stone skin angles in as it meets the
ground, reinforcing the objecthood of this building that sits alone in the center of
its site. Apertures aligned with the ends of the acoustic box of the performance hall
are clad in double layers of curved glass, revealing to the city the activity within.
In this hybrid section, an extensive belowground parking facility, constructed as
an independent slab structure, mitigates vibration and creates the topographic
stone surface into which the building as shaped and curious object is set.
OMA 	2005
167

-- 167 of 210 --

Iberê Camargo Foundation Museum 	Porto Alegre, Brazil
This cultural building occupies a narrow site between a coastal highway and a
densely vegetated cliff. In this confined site, Siza situated a partly subterranean
linear plinth and a sculptural volume of white reinforced concrete. The plinth
contains various programs, including an archive, an auditorium, and parking
located underneath the road. Containing the primary exhibition space, the sculptural
volume is defined by a series of L-shaped, top-lit rectilinear galleries framing a
four-story atrium wrapped on the side opposite the galleries by a series of undulating
circulation ramps. Together, these form a continuous promenade that weaves between
Hole 	Incline 	Nest 	Stack

-- 168 of 210 --

interior and exterior. While the internal ramps nest against the sinuously shaped
outer wall, the external ramps reach beyond the face of the building in concrete
tubes, delineating an exterior entry court caught between the outer wall of the atrium
and the cantilevered arms of the ramps. Like Frank Lloyd Wright’s Guggenheim,
Siza’s building couples the inclined surfaces of a ramping circulation system
with the vertical organization of an atrium. In this hybrid section, however,
the space enclosed extends outside the main volume of the building, linking the
museum to its seaside site.
Álvaro Siza 	2008
169

-- 169 of 210 --

Università Luigi Bocconi 	Milan, Italy
By layering a gradient of variously permeable spaces, Grafton Architects’
design for Università Luigi Bocconi met the competition challenge of integrat-
ing a programmatically diverse academic building within Milan’s urban fabric.
The 700,000-sq-ft (65,032 sq m) building, which includes conference halls,
theaters, meeting rooms, and offices for a thousand professors, fills the
entire 262-ft-6-in–by–524-ft-11-in (80 by 160 m) site. The design of the
complex is carefully attuned to daylight, using an open weave of structure
to allow light to penetrate from the top and sides of the building. The raked
Stack 	Shape 	Hole

-- 170 of 210 --

auditorium sits partially below grade, above two stacked layers of parking.
Bands of faculty offices are hung perpendicularly to the auditorium with open
spaces between. Gaps in the shaped ceiling of the auditorium act as sun
scoops, drawing indirect light deep into the structure. In this hybrid section,
the glass-framed entrance is sheared in relationship to the street, animat-
ing views into the lobby, which is wedged under the rake of the auditorium’s
seats, and reinforcing the visual relationship between the university and
the city.
Grafton Architects 	2008
171

-- 171 of 210 --

VitraHaus 	Weil am Rhein, Germany
In this building, twelve volumes are stacked and nested to create a five-story-
tall conference and exhibition center dedicated to the display of Vitra furniture.
Each volume is a stretched extrusion of the iconic sectional profile of the
prototypical gable-roofed house, creating a domestic scale for the presentation
of furniture. The volumes are rotated and slid in relationship to each other. Where
they intersect, new forms arise inside the section. Sculptural curved staircases
provide vertical circulation, and a single elevator skewers the assembled volumes,
creating a unique point of vertical continuity. The volumes are structural tubes,
Shape 	Stack 	Nest

-- 172 of 210 --

made from 9-7/8-in and 11-3/4-in (25 cm and 30 cm) site-cast concrete; they
are open at the ends to frame views of the Vitra campus and the landscape
beyond. The ends of all the elevated volumes are cantilevered, extending 49 ft
(14.9 m) in the longest instance. The sides of the lowest volume appear to
deflect under the weight of the others and are angled to conform to the
back of a seat that accommodates visitors as they wait for entry. With its
stacked, gable-shaped units, the building produces not only an intricate
interior sequence but a faceted exterior atrium.
Herzog & de Meuron 	2009
173

-- 173 of 210 --

Rolex Learning Center 	Lausanne, Switzerland
Located in the middle of an open site, this campus center for the École polytech-
nique fédérale de Lausanne contains an array of social spaces, libraries, cafes,
and meeting halls within a single, largely horizontal volume. The floor is a
2-ft-thick (61 cm) concrete slab, formed into a curved shell that lifts above the
ceiling of a subterranean parking structure, allowing the grounds of the campus to
extend below and through the building. A 29-ft-6-in–by–29-ft-6-in (9 by 9 m) grid of
slender steel columns supports a steel and glulam framed ceiling above the undulating
slab. This building can be seen as a hybrid of three section types. Its rectangular,
Extrusion 	Shape 	Hole 	Incline 	Stack

-- 174 of 210 --

546-ft-3-in–by–398-ft-7-in (166.5 by 121.5 m) floor plate is extruded, typically, to a
10-ft-10-in (3.3 m) internal ceiling height, with a slightly higher extrusion for certain
programs, such as performance halls. That extruded horizontal space is defined by
two arched zones that delaminate from the ground and allow a clustering or puddling
of programs on their shaped surfaces. This extrusion is then punctured by
fourteen curvilinear holes, which distribute light and views obliquely through
the slab. The cumulative effect of this hybrid section is the unprecedented
spatial quality of a continuous free plan warped into the vertical axis.
SANAA 	2010
175

-- 175 of 210 --

Asakusa Culture and Tourism Center 	Tokyo, Japan
This eight-story structure containing services for tourists is directly adjacent
to the primary entry of Tokyo’s historic Asakusa shrine. The building evokes
a stack of wooden houses placed one on top of another to generate the vertical
form of a tower. The unique form of each of these volumes, framed in structural
steel, is shaped to reflect the nature of its program—with a double-height
space for entry, sloping floors for an auditorium, and stacked meeting
spaces expressed on the exterior as variously angled and horizontal planes.
The spaces between the shaped ceiling of one volume and the floor of the
Stack 	Shape 	Nest 	Hole

-- 176 of 210 --

next house technical equipment and storage, allowing the floor plans to
remain largely unencumbered. These interstitial service zones are treated
as recessed spandrels between each pair of volumes, creating a clear dis-
tinction between levels. While the stacked volumes, with their independent
geometries and varying plan configurations, create a sense of stratification,
a continuous screen of cedar fins unifies the exterior of this stacked and
shaped section while providing sun shading and syncopated views of the
city beyond.
Kengo Kuma & Associates 	2012
177

-- 177 of 210 --

Melbourne School of Design 	Melbourne, Australia
Continuing a tradition of schools of architecture that embody pedagogy, the
School of Design at the University of Melbourne combines a diverse range of
sectional strategies, structural systems, and formal and material plays. At the
ground level, a library and fabrication lab flank a broad internal promenade
visually and spatially linked to the campus. Above, classrooms, studios, and
research spaces are organized in two main wings around a central elevated atrium
that acts as drafting, exhibition, and event space. This multistory void is ringed
by circulation zones incorporating work surfaces and seating areas that provide
Hole 	Nest 	Shape 	Incline 	Stack

-- 178 of 210 --

an extension of the studios, as well as areas for impromptu collaboration. Two
prominent architectural figures nest within the atrium space. The first is a
series of robust ramps that provide the primary vertical circulation and expose
their steel structure on their undersides. The second is a wood-clad volume
containing studio space for visiting critics. This sculptural volume extends
the faceted geometries of the coffered, light-diffusing ceiling from which
it hangs. The building combines inclined, nested, shaped, stacked, and holed
sections to produce a vibrant and instructive learning environment.
NADAAA / John Wardle Architects 	2014
179

-- 179 of 210 --

Star Apartments 	Los Angeles, California, USA
This mixed-use building’s alignment of program, structure, and section is
legible in its massing. An existing single-story building was reworked
to contain street-level retail spaces and a common entry to 102 apartments
located on four new floors above, which are occupied by formerly homeless
individuals. These units were prefabricated in wood and stacked atop a
terraced concrete platform, which is held above the existing building on
concrete columns. The space between the new platform and the preexisting
roof is shaped to provide space for a variety of outdoor communal programs,
Stack 	Hole 	Shear 	Shape

-- 180 of 210 --

including a basketball court, gardens, and an exercise walkway loop. Three
inclined volumes containing egress stairs are expressed externally as
oblique figures appearing to dramatically hoist the apartments in the air.
The modular apartments are stacked to allow for staggered exterior terraces
and walkways. The building combines stacked, shaped, sheared, and holed
sections to produce a rich combination of exterior and interior spaces for
low-cost urban housing and community living.
Michael Maltzan Architecture 	2015
181

-- 181 of 210 --

Museum of Image and Sound 	Rio de Janeiro, Brazil
Located along Rio de Janeiro’s Copacabana Beach, this museum interlaces
linked floors for exhibition and display with floors for retail and restau-
rants through an atrium defined by the vertical shear of those levels. In
the rectangular plan, social and exhibition programs are located between
two linear bars of circulation, one interior and one exterior. A performance
hall is positioned below grade, and an open-air cinema inhabits the roof.
On the facade continuous exterior paths and elongated stairs extend the
historic Roberto Burle Marx–designed street promenade up the side of the
Shear 	Stack 	Incline 	Hole

-- 182 of 210 --

building, transgressing divisions between interior and exterior and allowing
direct access to programs above the ground level. The figures of this ver-
tical circulation provide the building’s image. Along this vertical sequence
a portion of the facade’s skin is composed of custom open masonry block,
choreographing views out of the museum and allowing light into the museum.
Through an intricate combination of incline, stack, vertical shear, and hole,
this section amplifies the social and cultural vitality of Rio de Janeiro.
Diller Scofidio + Renfro 	2016
183

-- 183 of 210 --

In the work of LTL Architects,
we foreground the section
not only as a representational
technique, ripe with the
ability to demonstrate structure,
interior space, and form,
but also as a key locus of design
invention. If the plan still
absorbs much architectural
interest, serving as a means
to control function, organization,
and movement, we argue
that the section is the critical
means for engaging social,
environmental, and material
LTL IN SECTION

-- 184 of 210 --

questions. Designing and thinking
through section establishes
a relationship among architectural
form, interior space, and site,
where the consequences
of scale are tangible and visceral.
As a cut into that which cannot
be seen, the section embodies
and reveals territories for
architectural experimentation
and exploration.

-- 185 of 210 --

Sport Bars 	New York, New York 	1997
This project collapses the distinctions among machines, bodies, and building
in an urban health club and sports bar by linking discrete activities in section.
Individual exercise machines are sutured into corresponding architectonic
systems: the rock-climbing wall is the facade; weather membrane doubles as
resistance membrane; elevator counterweights align with weight machines; plumb-
ing lines couple swimming and bathing. By organizing these systems around three
vertical shafts or holes that extend into the sports bar below, we offered sedentary
patrons views of both televised sporting events and the activities in the gym above.
Stack 	Hole 	Incline

-- 186 of 210 --

Video Filmplex 	New York, New York 	1997
In this speculative project that examines the culture of filmgoing, we high-
lighted sectional operations in nesting a series of shaped spaces, organized
on inclines to enable unusual adjacencies between disparate programs.
A video store occupies the interstitial space formed by the sloping of the
theater floors. Restrooms are sandwiched between two stacks of theaters,
allowing films to be watched even during bathroom breaks. The two stacks
are sheared vertically, allowing us to design the facade as a continuous
public space, linking the two sides of the Video Filmplex into one complex.
187	Shear 	Incline 	Nest 	Stack

-- 187 of 210 --

New Suburbanism 	Prototypical American Suburb 	2000
This proposal embraces yet reconfigures the suburban desires for mini-
mansions and big-box stores. We developed new sectional matings to accom-
modate the pursuit of the American dream while mitigating horizontal sprawl.
Dwellings are stacked atop big-box stores’ roofs, now turned into suburban
fields. Both systems share structural and mechanical infrastructures, using section
for new efficiencies. The residential neighborhood above maintains its autonomy
from the commercial and parking zone below, despite their proximity. Physical and
visual access is possible only by commuting around the block on inclined roads.
Stack 	Nest 	Hole

-- 188 of 210 --

Great Egyptian Museum 	Giza, Egypt 	2002
For this massive museum of 4.3 million sq ft, designed to house and exem-
plify the grand history of Egyptian art and culture, we used section to weave
together ground and sky. A canopy of solar collectors and glass floats above
a striated landscape of inhabitable pylons. Inverted glass-clad wedges
drop from the sky, while battered stone pylons rise up from the desert plain.
The varied sectional exchanges of these two figures provide an extensive
repertoire of exhibition and display opportunities that integrate building,
object, and landscape.
189	Shape 	Nest 	Stack 	Hole

-- 189 of 210 --

Tourbus Hotel 	Between Munich and Venice 	2002
Located on the highway between two destination cities for tourists, this
hotel exhibits a range of hybrid section types, intensifying the idiosyncratic
organizational and social qualities of the European bus tour. Five stacked bars
of rooms, sheared horizontally for access to sun and visually activated by holes
along the corridor, are positioned above an open lobby that is part leisure landscape
and part cruise ship deck. We organized programmatic adjacencies of the lobby
though vertical shear and inclined sections. Ramps extend the lobby up through the
rooms above, while oversized elevators link bus parking to the stack of programs.
Incline 	Hole 	Stack 	Shear 	Nest 	Shape

-- 190 of 210 --

Bornhuetter Hall 	Wooster, Ohio 	2004
For reasons of efficiency, security, acoustic control, and organizational
hierarchy, residence halls are typically developed as stacked sections of
discrete floors of rooms. To enhance social and visual exchanges within these
constraints, we designed an exterior entry courtyard, contained within the
building’s skin, as the heart of the project. Cantilevered study rooms are
nested within this volume, embedding private study within the collective
setting. The daily activity of coming and going from the residence hall
becomes a theatrical public event.
191	Nest 	Stack

-- 191 of 210 --

Park Tower 	New York, New York 	2004
For this speculative tower, we exploited the properties of an inclined section to
produce a drive-up skyscraper for zero-emissions vehicles, linking the stacked
floor plates of the typical high-rise through a continuous spiral. Beginning
with the logics of the switchback parking ramp, we intertwined a multilevel
garage and a sandwich of inhabitable space, combining ubiquity of vehicular
access with the pleasures of high-rise urban living. As the tower rises, this
double-helix configuration mutates to accommodate a variety of sectional
conditions, including a multistory atrium and voids offering light and views.
Incline 	Hole 	Shear 	Stack 	Nest

-- 192 of 210 --

The Grid and the Superblock 	New York, New York 	2007
Faced with the interruption of the pattern of the Manhattan grid by two early
twentieth-century superblocks in downtown New York City, we asked how
the very idiosyncrasies of these anomalous structures could sponsor a new
urbanism animated in section. By extending the east-west street grid over
these monoliths as a series of elevated housing bridges, we activated the
massive rooftops as a raised urban ground, newly perforated by light courts
and linked by inclined surfaces. While most of New York City remains spa-
tially stratified, this proposal attempts to foster a fully multilevel urbanism.
193	Incline 	Stack 	Hole 	Nest

-- 193 of 210 --

The Buffet at the MGM Grand 	Las Vegas, Nevada 	2009
In designing this six-hundred-seat, all-you-can-eat dining facility we operated
primarily through section to animate the dining experience within a standard
extruded casino floor plate. We shaped the inserted floor and ceiling to define
smaller areas within the overall space. The high backs of the banquette seats
break up the large horizontal plan, while matching folds in the undulating
ceiling reinforce the spatial definition of a series of nested volumes. A gap
between these two folded surfaces creates a consistent horizontal cut across
the dining area, preserving views of the serving stations and outside pool.
Shape 	Nest 	Hole

-- 194 of 210 --

Spliced Townhouse 	New York, New York 	2010
For this renovation of an existing prewar town house, we integrated six
distinct floor levels in formerly separate apartments to create a spatially
unified dwelling. Rather than attempting to erase these misalignments, we
exposed and intensified the effects of this vertical shear while providing
continuous access through a new steel and oak staircase. Partly canti-
levered and partly suspended, the stair occupies the joint between the
disparate floor plates, stitching together the various levels of the building
while promoting visual interaction between spaces offset in section.
195	Shear 	Hole 	Stack

-- 195 of 210 --

Arthouse 	Austin, Texas 	2010
To activate the existing building’s stacked section and entice visitors to move
from this contemporary art center’s lobby to its main second-floor gallery, we
suspended a staircase from the roof through the full height of the building
through holes cut in the floors. The vertical extensions of the twenty-one stair
treads are inclined in two axes, with the slope derived from the geometry
of the stair nosing. The logic of a minor detail informs the overall form in
section. Due to these slopes, the stair’s width expands as one ascends from
the street level opening up to the large second-floor gallery.
Hole 	Stack

-- 196 of 210 --

CUC Administrative Campus Center 	Claremont, California 	2011
The conversion of an existing maintenance building into an open-office admin-
istrative center was limited by its single-story extruded section. Nevertheless,
we capitalized on the relatively high ceiling and the expansive column-free
space to nest an array of individual meeting spaces and collective bleacher
seating. We inserted a shaped ceiling of custom linear baffles throughout
the building to unify the whole space. The cloudlike topography of baffles is
adjusted to define social spaces and occlude views of mechanical systems,
while still permitting natural light from skylights to pass.
197	Shape 	Nest 	Hole

-- 197 of 210 --

New Taipei City Museum of Art 	New Taipei City, Taiwan 	2011
In this competition proposal for a museum of art, we organized the program
as a single prismatic volume accessed from below via a continuous lobby.
Combining aspects of both atrium and grand staircase, the lobby spirals
up through the eight stacked floors of the building, shifting in response to
external forces of view and light, as well as internal programmatic obligations.
While the lobby forms a legible figure in plan at any given level, it is constantly
changing and complex in section, creating a dynamic public promenade with
aspects of shaped, inclined, and hole sectional typologies.
Hole 	Incline 	Shape 	Stack 	Nest

-- 198 of 210 --

Living and Learning Residence Hall 6 	Washington DC 	2012
We used the hole’s sectional capacities to disrupt the homogeneity of the
dormitory type to meet Gallaudet University’s DeafSpace standards. By
inserting a void into the design of the repetitive stacked slab of this residence
hall for deaf students, we created a four-story atrium, linking the four floors.
A main circulating staircase provides physical continuity. Large gaps
between the void of the atrium and the inserted staircase permit visual
exchanges that are key to enhancing communication and quality of life
for the deaf residents.
199	Stack 	Hole

-- 199 of 210 --

Liberal Arts College Campus Center 	Northeastern United States 	2014
For this prototype for a campus center, we used incline and a unifying hole
to intensify the relationship between collective space and traditional academic
rooms. A central atrium organizes the required offices and classrooms at its
perimeter. The atrium’s floor is inclined and shaped to allow for programmatic
specificity, diversity, and flexibility, engendering social exchanges along paths
of travel. We designed the shaped ceiling and nested interior spaces for greater
thermal performance, creating a gradient of temperature zones within the interior
volume. The atrium extends the field of the campus up and through the building.
Incline 	Hole 	Nest 	Stack 	Shape

-- 200 of 210 --

Office Building 	New York, New York 	2015
In the competition design for the new offices of a philanthropic organization,
we used a sequence of double-height volumes as sectional foils to the logic
of efficient office plans. These five distinct spaces act as holes within the
stacked floor plates, providing joints that form common spaces, libraries, and
meeting rooms between levels. By integrating staircases into these spaces,
we created the possibility of a continuous public promenade through the
foundation, fostering communication and enabling unexpected encounters
and exchanges among departments.
201	Stack 	Nest 	Hole

-- 201 of 210 --

50'
50'
50'
100'
50'
100'
150'
50'
100'
150'
50'
100'
50'
100'
p. 44 	48 	134 	140 	118 	66 	148 	88 	54 	74
80 	56 	76 	68 	124 	78
160 	172 	146 	98 	94
168 	122 	178 	86
90 	152 	144 	60 	102
182 	112 	166
62 	114 	138 	106
156
Sections by Height

-- 202 of 210 --

50'
50'
50'
100'
50'
100'
150'
300'
450'
350'
500'
50'
200’
100'
250'
400'
50'
100'
72 	104 	70 	174 	120
142 	132 	96 	164 	136
46 	108 	150 	180
170
158
128
58 	82 	92
126 	176
162 	52 	110

-- 203 of 210 --

Index of Architects
Alvar Aalto
Seinäjoki Library 74
aceboXalonso Studio
Center for the Arts in La Coruña 152
BIG-Bjarke Ingels Group / JDS Architects
The Mountain Dwellings 92
Lina Bo Bardi
São Paulo Museum of Art 58
Marcel Breuer
Hunter College Library 72
Gordon Bunshaft of Skidmore, Owings & Merrill
Beinecke Rare Book and Manuscript Library 136
Félix Candela
Los Manantiales Restaurant 70
Le Corbusier
Single House at Weissenhofsiedlung 104
Notre Dame du Haut 68
Villa Savoye 118
Diller Scofidio + Renfro
Granoff Center for the Creative Arts 98
Museum of Image and Sound 182
Sou Fujimoto Architects
House N 140
Studio Fuksas
San Paolo Parish Complex 150
Buckminster Fuller and Shoji Sadao
United States Pavilion at Expo ’67 138
Grafton Architects
Università Luigi Bocconi 170
Henning Larsen Architects
Moesgaard Museum 128
Herman Hertzberger
Apollo Schools–Willemspark School 96
Herzog & de Meuron
1111 Lincoln Road 126
Prada Aoyama 144
VitraHaus 172
Steven Holl Architects
Cité de l’Océan et du Surf 80
Angelo Invernizzi
Villa Girasole 156
Junya Ishigami + Associates
Kanagawa Institute of Technology Workshop 48
Toyo Ito & Associates
Sendai Mediatheque 112
Taichung Metropolitan Opera House 82
Philip Johnson
Glass House 44
Jourda Architectes
Mont-Cenis Training Center 142
Louis I. Kahn
Phillips Exeter Academy Library 108
Salk Institute for Biological Studies 56
Kengo Kuma & Associates
Asakusa Culture and Tourism Center 176
Adolf Loos
Villa Moller 132
Michael Maltzan Architecture
Star Apartments 180
Ludwig Mies van der Rohe
S. R. Crown Hall 54
Charles Moore
Moore House 134
Morphosis
41 Cooper Square 114
MVRDV
De Effenaar 146
Expo 2000 Netherlands Pavilion 62
Villa VPRO 160
NADAAA / John Wardle Architects
Melbourne School of Design 178
Neutelings Riedijk Architects
Netherlands Institute for Sound and Vision 90
Pier Luigi Nervi
Palace of Labor 46
OMA
Casa da Música 166
Kunsthal 124
OMA / LMN Architects
Seattle Central Library 162
Claude Parent and Paul Virilio
Church of Sainte-Bernadette du Banlay 76
Pezo von Ellrichshausen
Poli House 148
John Portman & Associates
New York Marriott Marquis 110
Kevin Roche John Dinkeloo and Associates
Ford Foundation Headquarters 106
Paul Rudolph
Yale Art and Architecture Building 158
SANAA
Rolex Learning Center 174
Henri Sauvage
13 Rue des Amiraux 86
Rudolph Schindler
Bennati Cabin 66
Mack Scogin Merrill Elam Architects
Knowlton Hall 164
Álvaro Siza
Iberê Camargo Foundation Museum 168
Starrett & Van Vleck
Downtown Athletic Club 52
Jørn Utzon
Bagsværd Church 78
Weiss/Manfredi
Barnard College Diana Center 94
Frank Lloyd Wright
Fallingwater 88
Larkin Building 102
The Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum 122
V. C. Morris Gift Shop 120
Peter Zumthor
Kunsthaus Bregenz 60
204

-- 204 of 210 --

Drawing Credits
Erica Alonzo
46*
Laura Britton
44 80* 82* 150*
Nerea Castell Sagües
54 76* 80 94* 106* 120* 122* 148 168
Debbie Chen
62* 70 78* 86 96* 110* 134 166* 168*
Erica Cho
104* 124* 180*
Kenneth Garnett
60 78 88 94 102 136 182
Kevin Hayes
76* 126* 136* 140*
Alec Henry
56 134* 162
Krithika Penedo
72* 74 78* 86 96* 126* 142*
Rennie Jones
56* 74 86 102 110* 140
Van Kluytenaar
94* 108* 128* 158* 178*
Anna Knoell
86 102 108 124 134 146 150
Zhongtian Lin
44 48 62* 66 70* 74 82* 92* 108*
110* 112* 128 136* 140 144 156*
160* 162 164 172* 180*
Lindsey May
54* 62 74 90 92 96 102 110 112
120 152* 160*
Asher McGlothlin
136
Cyrus Peñarroyo
52* 60* 68* 72 74 90* 98 114 132*
138* 150 152* 170* 174* 176*
Anika Schwarzwald
56 68 72 88 118 120 126 132 140
Hannah Sellers
86 94
Abby Stone
66* 118* 146* 148* 152* 164*
Yen-Ju Tai
138
Regina Teng
48* 58* 60* 74* 104* 144* 172
Antonia Wai
98* 102* 114* 158* 162* 164 166*
176 178* 182*
Chao Lun Wang
88* 102*
Tamara Yurovsky
54* 56 162*
Weijia Zhang
128 146
The sixty-three drawings in this book are the work and interpretation of LTL Architects, executed
within the offices of LTL Architects. Work for this publication has been partially supported by
Princeton University School of Architecture and by Parsons School of Design at The New School.
No unpaid intern labor was used in the production of this work.
Each of the sixty-three drawings in this book was produced through a multilayered process involv-
ing research, the careful examination of photographs and drawings, the production of digital
models of the buildings, and the translation of those models into sectional perspectives composed
of only lines. LTL Architects would like to thank the following people for their contributions to this
book: Cyrus Peñarroyo and Alec Henry fulfilled crucial management responsibilities in the design
and development of the book as a whole; Alec Henry also assisted in adjustments across all
the drawings, as did Erica Alonzo, Kenneth Garnett, Jenny Hong, Christine Nasir and Corliss Ng.
This book would not have been possible without the dedicated and precise efforts of many talented
individuals. Below we recognize the people who worked on the drawings found on the listed page
numbers. Although it was not uncommon for a number of people to be involved in each drawing
over the course of its development, an asterisk denotes the completion of substantial aspects of
the drawing’s development.
205

-- 205 of 210 --

Acknowledgments
This book is the result of many years of collaborative work that has relied
on the generosity and support of institutions, firms, colleagues, friends,
and families. We acknowledge the patience and multiple talents of the
staff of LTL Architects, who have been essential to its development,
participating in the early discussions and final critiques. Throughout this
book’s development, we have been encouraged and supported by peers who
have generously given of their time and insights to inform the discourse on
section. In particular we would like to thank Stan Allen, Stella Betts, Dana
Cuff, David Leven, Arnold Lewis, Beth Irwin Lewis, Guy Nordenson, Nat
Oppenheimer, Peter Pelsinski, Jonsara Ruth, Karen Stonely, Enrique Walker,
Saundra Weddle, Robert Weddle, Sarah Whiting, and Ron Witte, whose
keen observations at formative stages of this project have enriched and
strengthened this publication. We offer our gratitude to colleagues who
have given of their time and resources to ensure the accuracy and clarity
of the drawings of their work, including Gerard Carty, Elizabeth Diller,
Michael Maltzan, Michael Manfredi, Chris McVoy, Charles Renfro, Shoji
Sadao, Ricardo Scofidio, Nader Tehrani, Marion Weiss, and Robert Wennett.
We are grateful to all the architects and engineers whose collective
work has built the discourse of architecture from which the argument
and sections for this publication are drawn. In the creation of the
section-perspective drawings for the sixty-three projects that make up
the main portion of this publication, we are grateful to the assistance
and generosity of the following individuals and entities: the Alvar Aalto
Museum; aceboXalonso Studio; the Avery Architectural and Fine Arts
Library at Columbia University; Institute Lino Bo and P. M. Bardi; Bjarke
Ingels Group; the Marcel Breuer Digital Archive, Syracuse University
Libraries; R. Buckminster Fuller Collection at Stanford University Library;
Cité de L’architecture et du Patrimoine; Diller Scofidio + Renfro; Studio
Fuksas; Grafton Architects; Henning Larsen Architects; Architectuurstudio
HH; Steven Holl Architects; Toyo Ito & Associates, Architects; Jourda
Architectes Paris; Louis I. Kahn Collection at the Architectural Archives
of the University of Pennsylvania; Kengo Kuma and Associates; Fondation
Le Corbusier; Michael Maltzan Architecture; Morphosis; the Charles Moore
Foundation; the Ludwig Mies van der Rohe Archive at the Museum of
Modern Art; MVRDV; NADAA; Neutelings Riedijk Architects; OMA; Pezo Von
Ellrichshausen; John Portman & Associates; Kevin Roche John Dinkeloo
and Associates Records in the Manuscripts & Archives of the Yale
University Library; Robert A. M. Stern; Paul Marvin Rudolph Archive at
the Library of Congress; Rudolph M. Schindler Archive at the Architecture
& Design Collection in the University Art Museum at the University of
California, Santa Barbara; Mack Scogin Merrill Elam Architects; Weiss/
Manfredi; and the Frank Lloyd Wright Foundation Archives at the Avery
Architectural and Fine Arts Library at Columbia University.
We thank Princeton Architectural Press for its long-standing support and
encouragement for the completion of this book. Special thanks goes to
editors Megan Carey, who offered valuable insight and guidance in the
early stages of the project, and Sara Stemen, for her precise feedback and
patience in bringing the publication to fruition. Our gratitude extends as
well to Kevin Lippert for his continued commitment to the discourse of
architecture through the cultivation of books.
Finally, we offer heartfelt gratitude to our families for encouraging and
enabling the completion of this work—Daina Tsurumaki, Toshi Tsurumaki,
Chris Tsurumaki, Beth Irwin Lewis, Arnold Lewis, and Martha Lewis.
206

-- 206 of 210 --

Image Credits
p. 7 Unite d’Habitation image © F.L.C. / ADAGP, Paris / Artists Rights
Society (ARS), New York 2016
8 Commerzbank image © drawn by BPR for Foster + Partners, courtesy
of Foster + Partners
8 Limerick County Council image courtesy of Bucholz McEvoy
Architects
10 Bow-Wow House image courtesy of Atelier Bow-Wow
11 Chicago Convention Center image courtesy of Art Resource for MoMA
11 Menil Collection museum image courtesy of Fondazione Renzo Piano
12 Maison Dom-ino image drawn by LTL Architects
12 T-House image courtesy of the Estate of Simon Ungers
13 Ontario College of Art and Design image courtesy of aLL Design
13 Tower House image courtesy of GLUCK+
14 Pantheon image drawn by LTL Architects
14 Villa Foscari image drawn by LTL Architects
14 Berlin Philharmonic image © 2016 Artists Rights Society (ARS), New
York / VG Bild-Kunst, Bonn
14 Yoyogi National Gymnasium image courtesy of Tange Associates
15 Kimbell Art Museum image courtesy of the University of Pennsylvania
Architectural Archives
15 Agadir Convention Center image drawn by LTL Architects
15 Seattle Art Museum: Olympic Sculpture Park image courtesy of
Weiss/Manfredi
16 Unity Temple image © Frank Lloyd Wright Foundation, The Frank Lloyd
Wright Foundation Archives
16 Villa Baizeau image drawn by LTL Architects
16 Beekman Penthouse Apartment image courtesy of the Library of
Congress
17 Lower Manhattan Expressway image courtesy of the Library of
Congress
18 Cité Napoléan image drawn by LTL Architects
18 Très Grande Bibliothèque image © OMA
18 Galeries Lafayette image courtesy of Ateliers Jean Nouvel
18 Simmons Hall image courtesy of Steven Holl Architects
19 Villa Savoye and Palais des Congres images © F.L.C. / ADAGP, Paris /
Artists Rights Society (ARS), New York 2016
20 Jussieu and Educatorium images © OMA
20 Museum of Memory image courtesy of Estudio Arquitectura Campo
Baeza
20 Harpa image courtesy of Henning Larsen Architects
21 Fun Palace image courtesy of Canadian Centre for Architecture
21 Heidi Weber Museum image © F.L.C. / ADAGP, Paris / Artists Rights
Society (ARS), New York 2016
21 Climatroffice image courtesy of Foster + Partners
21 Tokyo Opera House image courtesy of Ateliers Jean Nouvel
21 Le Fresnoy Art Center image courtesy of Bernard Tschumi Architects
22 Eyebeam image courtesy of MVRDV
22 Wall House image courtesy of FAR frohn&rojas
23 Gordon Strong Automobile Objective Building image © Frank Lloyd
Wright Foundation, The Frank Lloyd Wright Foundation Archives
24 Leicester Engineering Building image courtesy of Canadian Centre
for Architecture
24 Oita Prefectural Library image © Arata Isozaki & Associates
24 Hyatt Regency San Francisco image courtesy of The Portman
Archives
24 City Museum of Antwerp image courtesy of Neutelings Riedijk
Architects
25 American Library Berlin image courtesy of Steven Holl Architects
25 City Museum of Antwerp image courtesy of Neutelings Riedijk
Architects
25 Technical University Delft Library image courtesy of Mecanoo
Architecten
25 Museum aan de Stroom image courtesy of Neutelings Riedijk
Architects
33 Plug-in City image courtesy of the Archigram Archive, © Archigram
33 Chicago Central Area Transit Planning Study image courtesy of
Graham Garfield Collection
34 UNESCO Headquarters image courtesy of Fondazione MAXXI
35 Yokohama Terminal image courtesy of Foreign Office Architects
35 Eyebeam image courtesy of Diller Scofidio + Renfro
36 Building 2345 image courtesy of Höweler + Yoon
36 Nature-City image courtesy of WORKac
37 Market Hall image courtesy of MVRDV
37 Abu Dhabi Performing Arts Center image courtesy of Zaha Hadid
Architects
37 Norwegian National Opera and Ballet image courtesy of Snøhetta
37 Vanke Center image courtesy of Steven Holl Architects
43 Glass House photo by Wikimedia user Edeltiel licensed under CC BY SA
43 Palace of Labor photograph by Wikimedia user pmk58 licensed
under CC BY SA
43 Kanagawa Institute of Technology photo © Ahmad Setiadi
51 S. R. Crown Hall photograph by Joe Ravi licensed under CC BY
51 Salk Institute photo by Doug Letterman licensed under CC BY
51 Sao Paulo Museum of Art photo by Wikimedia user Morio licensed
under CC BY SA
51 Kunsthaus Bregenz photograph by Boehringer Friedrich licensed
under CC BY
51 Expo 2000 photo © Hans Jan Durr
65 Notre Dame du Haut photograph by Francois Philip licensed under
CC BY
65 Hunter College Library photo courtesy of Special Collections
Research Center at Syracuse University Libraries
65 Seinajoki Library photo courtesy of Hanna Kotila
65 Church of Sainte-Bernadette du Banlay photo © Damien Froelich
65 Bagsværd Church photo by Erik Christensen licensed under CC BY SA
65 Cité de l’Océan et du Surf photo © Jonathan Chanca
85 13 Rue des Amiraux photo by Remi Mathis licensed under CC BY SA
85 Fallingwater photo courtesy of the Library of Congress
85 Mountain Dwellings photo by Flickr user SEIER+SEIER licensed under
CC BY
85 Barnard College Diana Center photo by Flickr user Forgemind
Archimedia licensed under CC BY
101 Larkin Building photo © Frank Lloyd Wright Foundation, The Frank
Lloyd Wright Foundation Archives
101 Single House at Weissenhofsiedlung photo by Wikimedia user
Shaqspeare licensed under CC BY
101 Ford Foundation Headquarters photo © Vincent Chih-Chieh Chin
101 Phillips Exeter Academy Library photo by Flickr user Pablo Sanchez
licensed under CC BY
101 Sendai Mediatheque photo © Takao Shiraishi
101 41 Cooper Square photo by Wikimedia user Beyond My Ken licensed
under CC BY SA
117 Villa Savoye photo by Flickr user jelm6 licensed under CC BY
117 V. C. Morris Gift Shop photo courtesy of the Library of Congress
117 Exterior of The Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, New York © SRGF,
NY. Photo by Jean-Christophe Benoist licensed under CC BY.
117 Kunsthal photo © Janvan Helleman
117 1111 Lincoln Road photo by Phillip Pessar licensed under CC BY
117 Moesgaard Museum photo © Mathias Nielsen
131 Villa Moller photo by wikimedia user Szojak licensed under CC BY SA
131 House N photo © Kazunori Fujimoto
131 Mont-Cenis Training Center photo © Oliver Hoffmann
131 Prada Aoyama photo by Wikimedia user Wiii licensed under CC BY SA
131 Poli House photo © Sarah Kramer
131 La Coruña Center for the Arts photo © Jose Carlos Melo Dias
155 Yale Art and Architecture Building photo by Sage Ross licensed under
CC BY SA
155 Villa VPRO photo © James Leng
207

-- 207 of 210 --

About the Authors
Paul Lewis, Marc Tsurumaki, and David J. Lewis are the founding
principals of LTL Architects in New York City and professors of architecture
at Princeton University, Columbia University, and Parsons School of Design
respectively. The firm is the recipient of numerous awards, including a
National Design Award, and its work is in the permanent collections of the
Museum of Modern Art, the San Francisco Museum of Modern Art, and the
Carnegie Museum of Art.
208

-- 208 of 210 --

155 Seattle Central Library photo by Bobak Ha’Eri licensed under CC BY
155 Casa da Música photo © Nerea Castell
155 Iberê Camargo Foundation Museum photo by wikimedia user Ricardo
RMX licensed under CC BY SA
155 Università Luigi Bocconi photo by Paolo Gamba licensed under CC BY
155 VitraHaus photo by Wladyslaw Sojka licensed under CC BY
155 Melbourne School of Design photo © Joe Lewit
155 Rolex Learning Center photo © Jonas Klock
155 Star Apartments photo by Laurie Avocado licensed under CC BY
155 Museum of Image and Sound rendering courtesy of Diller Scofidio +
Renfro
191 Bornhuetter Hall photo © Rudolph Janu
194 MGM Buffet photo © Michael Moran
195 Spliced Townhouse photo © Michael Moran
196 Arthouse photos © Michael Moran
197 Administrative Campus Center photo © Michael Moran
199 Living and Learning Residence Hall 6 photo © Prakash Patel
Throughout: Detailed sections of Frank Lloyd Wright buildings redrawn
by LTL Architects and used with permission of Frank Lloyd Wright
Foundation, Scottsdale, AZ
Published by Princeton Architectural Press
A McEvoy Group company
37 East 7th Street, New York, New York 10003
www.papress.com
© 2016 Princeton Architectural Press
All rights reserved.
No part of this book may be used or reproduced in any manner without
written permission from the publisher, except in the context of reviews.
Every reasonable attempt has been made to identify owners of copyright.
Errors or omissions will be corrected in subsequent editions.
Editor: Sara Stemen 	Design: Lewis.Tsurumaki.Lewis
Special thanks to: Janet Behning, Nicola Brower, Abby Bussel,
Erin Cain, Tom Cho, Barbara Darko, Benjamin English, Jenny Florence,
Jan Cigliano Hartman, Lia Hunt, Mia Johnson, Valerie Kamen,
Simone Kaplan-Senchak, Stephanie Leke, Diane Levinson,
Jennifer Lippert, Sara McKay, Jaime Nelson Noven, Rob Shaeffer,
Paul Wagner, Joseph Weston, and Janet Wong of Princeton
Architectural Press —Kevin C. Lippert, publisher
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data:
Names: Lewis, Paul, 1966– author. | Tsurumaki, Marc, 1965– author.
| Lewis, David J., 1966– author.
Title: Manual of Section / Paul Lewis, Marc Tsurumaki, David J. Lewis.
Description: First edition. | New York : Princeton Architectural Press, 2016
| Includes index.
Identifiers: LCCN 2015047210 | ISBN 978-1-61689-255-5 (alk. paper)
ISBN 978-1-61689-555-6 (epub, mobi)
Subjects: LCSH: Architectural sections. | Architecture, Modern—20th
century—Designs and plans. | Architecture, Modern—21st century—
Designs and plans.
Classification: LCC NA2775 .L49 2016 | DDC 724/.6—dc23
LC record available at http://lccn.loc.gov/2015047210
This book
is dedicated to:
Kim Yao
Sarabeth Lewis Yao
Maximo Lewis Yao
—Paul Lewis
Carmen Lenzi
Kai Luca Tsurumaki
Lucia Alise Tsurumaki
—Marc Tsurumaki
Quinn Arnold Lewis
Jonsara Ruth
—David J. Lewis

-- 209 of 210 --



-- 210 of 210 --

